Central Bank of Barbados 
Tom Adams Financial Centre, Spry Street, Bridgetown 
P.O. Box 1016 
Telephone: (246) 436-6870: Fax. (246) 436-7836 
E-Mail Address: info@centralbank.org.bb  
Website: www.centralbank.org.bb 
Mr. Cleviston Haynes, Governor (Ag), Central Bank of Barbados 
Remarks delivered by 
Rotary Club of Barbados South Installation Ceremony 
at the 
Accra Beach Hotel 
June 30, 2017 
Thank you, President Hiranand Thani for that kind introduction. 
Honorary Rotarian Your Excellency, Ambassador for the Embassy of Japan in Barbados Teruhiko 
Shinada and Mrs. Shinada 
Sgt-at-Arms Edmond Bradshaw, 
Past District Governor, David Edwards, and your Partner in Service, Donna 
Partner in Service of President Hiranand, Nisha 
Immediate Past President Trevor Sealy and your Partner in Service, Andrea 
Vice President, Mr.  John Jones 
I also recognise  
Past District Governor, Milton Inniss 
Assistant District Governor, Mr. Peterson Downes and your Partner in Service, Lisa 
President Elect Paul Ashby of the Rotary Club of Barbados and your Partner in Service Gillian 
President  Elect  Michael  McClean  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Barbados  West  and  your  Partner  in 
Service, Lisa 
Rotarians and Guests 
1 
Members of Media 
Good Evening 
It is an honour to participate in this Installation Dinner of the Rotary Club of Barbados South. As 
a new Board takes over the mantle of leadership of this Club that has provided laudable service 
to  our  island  and  its  people  for  more  than  three  decades,  let  me  express  my  personal 
appreciation to those who have served before and offer congratulations and best wishes to the 
new Board. I am sure that, during the coming year you will maintain the fine traditions to which 
this Club has become accustomed, upholding your motto of Service Above Self. 
When Vivian-Anne contacted me to solicit my presence here at this Dinner this evening,  I did 
not  hesitate  in  agreeing  to  be  here  even  though  the  terms  of  my  invitation  made  it  patently 
clear  that  she is  a  firm believer  in  the  concept that  there  is no  such thing  as  “a  free  dinner”. 
However, given my respect for the work your Club has undertaken in this island, I consider that 
a short speech is a small price to pay, and affordable too, as it does not require any coin of the 
realm. 
In  addition,  my  ready  acceptance  reflects  the  realization  that  your  Club  and  the  Bank  that  I 
currently  have  the  privilege  to  lead  share  common  values  related  to  improving  the  economic 
circumstances for our citizens.   Indeed, I believe that it is true to say that,  like your Club, the 
Bank has earned the respect and appreciation of the public for  its heightened awareness and 
demonstration  of  its  corporate  social  responsibility  through  its  programmes  of  supporting 
worthy causes in the community, as far as its slender resources would allow.  
On a more personal level, over the years I have become acquainted with your work through my 
sister-in-law,  Pat,  one  of  your  faithful  members,  and  who,  I  noted  did  not    get  a    medal  for 
perfect  attendance,  from  time  to  time  has  enlisted  the  support  of  my  wife  and  daughter  to 
assist in some of your volunteer activities. Their experiences have sensitised them to the needs 
of those less fortunate and created a sense of satisfaction that their efforts were contributing 
to  help  others  whose  circumstances  may  have  prevented  them  from  independently  fulfilling 
their  basic  needs.  Whether  the  specifics  that  give  rise  to  these  conditions  are  known  or 
unknown, I am sure that similar feelings enrich your members on an on-going basis. 
As  I  look  around  this  room,  I  can’t  help  but  notice  that  the  audience  comprises  several 
Barbadians  who  have  demanding  careers,  families  and  otherwise  full  lives.  And  some  whose 
careers have long ended! Yet all of you give dedicated service to this Club and by extension to 
your  country.  This  service  is  doubtlessly  a  recognition  of  the  biblical  injunction  “Everyone  to 
whom much was given, of him much will be required….” 
2 
Clearly,  you  have  made  a  commitment  to  serving  others.  Such  commitment  allows  you  as 
individuals and the Club that you represent to make a difference in the lives of others. That is 
why you come together here each week in fellowship with your fellow Rotarians, and why you 
participate selflessly in fund-raising activities and the delivery of your programmes and services. 
And lest anyone does not understand what commitment truly means, let me share with you the 
simple  explanation  given  to  me  on  my  wedding  day,  of  all  days,  on  the  difference  between 
involvement  and  commitment.  Take  the  breakfast  dish  of  ham  and  eggs,  the  chicken  was 
involved  and  lived  to  lay  many  more  eggs.  The  pig  was  committed!  You  may  take  whatever 
moral from that story that you wish, but for me it is that half measures will not suffice when 
you are committed. 
Tonight  therefore  I  want  to  share  a  few  thoughts  on  how  I  see  the  role  of  this  Club  during 
difficult economic times. 
At the outset, let me say that your Club by its charter has an important contribution to make to 
the national development of Barbados. By your actions you recognise that there are persons in 
our  society  who  need  a helping  hand.  These  are  persons  who,  because of  circumstances  into 
which they were born or through personal misfortune, are unable to enjoy the quality of life to 
which  we  all  aspire.  Just  as  the  island  is  susceptible  to  natural  catastrophes,  including 
hurricanes because of our geographical location, so too are these persons especially vulnerable 
to the economic shocks that confront us from time to time.  
As  a  country,  however,  we  have  to  ensure  that  we  have  mechanisms  to  help  such  persons. 
Protecting  the  less  fortunate  in  society  is  a  must  as  we  seek  to  create  economic  opportunity 
and avoid serious social and economic displacement, dislocation or disruption. 
This is true everywhere and various world leaders including Mahatma Ghandi, Jimmy Carter and 
Pope Francis have spoken eloquently about the importance of a society looking after its most 
vulnerable members. Indeed Pope Francis notes that    
“It  is  not  enough  to  offer  someone  a  sandwich  unless  it  is  accompanied  by  the 
possibility of learning how to stand on one’s own two feet. Charity that leaves the poor 
person as he is is not sufficient. True mercy, the mercy God gives to us and teaches us, 
demands justice, it demands that the poor find the way to be poor no longer.”  
Every  post-Independence  Government  in  Barbados  has  espoused  the  tenet  of  protecting  the 
vulnerable and has demonstrated adherence by making the provision of social services and the 
maintenance of the basic social safety net a priority.  
It is no secret that Barbados currently faces economic challenges. Indeed, government’s recent 
budgetary measures, by their sheer magnitude, represent a substantial fiscal adjustment effort 
 3 
that seeks to restore macroeconomic stability, engender confidence and place the economy on 
a sustainable growth path. 
As  an  import-dependent  country,  foreign  exchange  is  critical  to  sustain  economic  activity. 
Unfortunately,  the  foreign  reserves  have  fallen  below  the  levels  to  which  we  have  become 
accustomed  in  the  recent  past,  raising  concern  among  the  public  about  the  trajectory.  This 
situation  is  reversible  but  increased  foreign  exchange  inflows  together  with  a  dampening  of 
demand for foreign exchange are now needed. 
At the same time, the taxes we collect to finance public services and facilitate the distribution 
of resources to the less fortunate have historically  been less than necessary to meet the costs 
of  public  administration,  social  services  and  infrastructure  development.  Education,  health, 
sanitation,  public  housing  and  public  transportation  are  all  delivered  to  the  public  at  below 
costs. These investments in people and infrastructure have enabled Barbados to be ranked as 
having a high level of human development, the highest in the CARICOM area. 
These  services  have  been  paid  for  in  part  by  a  progressive  income  tax  system  that  requires 
those with access to greater means to carry a heavier burden. Traditionally, however, we have 
borrowed as matter of policy to cover the gaps between revenue and expenditure and facilitate 
improved living conditions. Over time the costs of financing the accumulated deficits that arose 
from  this  strategy  have  begun  to  absorb  a  substantial  share  of  the  revenue  government 
collects, coincident with reduced access to private sector financing. 
From  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  adjustment  is  therefore  required.  However,  placing  the 
public  finances  on  a  sustainable  path  requires  a  stable  revenue  base  to  fund  expenditures 
necessary  for  enhancing  socioeconomic  conditions.  We  need,  inter  alia therefore,  to  improve 
the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  both  our  tax  collection  effort  and  the  delivery  of  public 
services.  This  is  particularly  necessary  given  that  one  of  the  outcomes  of  the  current  fiscal 
imbalance  is  that  the  State  has  found  itself  unable  to  sustain  the  level  of  funding  being 
requested for some social services.  
Government has been reviewing the scope and scale of activities in which it is engaged. Some 
persons advocate the need for cuts in public expenditures in preference to new or higher taxes, 
with  public  enterprise  reform  at  the  centre  of  the  adjustment.  Reforms  require  us  to  make 
difficult choices as to how we will allocate available resources and where we will seek increased 
efficiency. We should not ignore the possibility, therefore, that such reforms may require some 
or  all  of  us  as  citizens  to  participate  more  directly  in  the  funding  of  services  that  we  receive 
from  government  in  the  future.  Already  some  adjustments  have  been  made,  the  most 
prominent of which has been the decision to ask students at the University of the West Indies 
to pay some of their tuition costs. 
 4 
In my recent press briefing, I stressed the need for an  approach to fiscal consolidation  that is 
orderly,  in  part  to  make  sure  we  can  safeguard  the  vulnerable.  But  during  an  adjustment 
period,  protection  of  the  vulnerable  is  especially  important  and  charities  and  service 
organisations  like  the  Rotary  will  be  essential  in  designing  and  executing  projects  that  help 
those most in need.  
You already have an impressive array of existing programmes that are playing an important role 
in addressing basic needs, mitigating the worse aspects of poverty, fostering the development 
of individuals whose enterprise can contribute to their own upliftment. The wide scope of your 
programmes caters to several demographics, potentially enabling the Club to render assistance 
to the same individual at different stages of his or her life.  
The demands on the incoming executive will be great but I am sure that utilising your network 
you will rise to the challenge. Your work, combined with that of civil society, the private sector, 
and the government can help us overcome our  current challenges. Working together, we can 
and will make a difference.  
I  encourage  you  therefore  to  maintain  and  even  expand  your  programmes  to  provide  that 
assistance to those in need. I know that developing programmes and undertaking projects that 
bring  about  the  change  and  improvements  is  often  a  difficult  undertaking,  especially  where 
there is competition for scarce resources. But this is where the Rotary Club has excelled in the 
past. 
I encourage you to continue to offer programmes that prepare students for the work-place that 
help them to be more productive and engaged.  I can tell you that based on the Central Bank’s 
own experience with its own summer internship programme, these students gain exposure to 
the different facets of the work experience and are better prepared to transition into fulltime, 
long term employment. Let us remember that these young people have the potential to move 
beyond being workers and to become innovators and entrepreneurs. If they can build on the 
opportunities they are given and become leaders, not only in their professional lives but in their 
communities, then we can say that the value of your contribution has been immeasurable. 
I  encourage  you  to  continue to  support the  arts  as  you  have  with  initiatives  like  your  Best  of 
Youth Evening. This is something we at the Bank are also committed to because we, as you also 
clearly  do,  recognise  that  our  artistes  play  a  major  role  in  defining  Barbadian  culture  and 
identity.  
I encourage you to continue to promote leadership by recognising and rewarding persons who 
demonstrate  those  attributes,  and  who  attempt  and  achieve  positive  change  in  their 
communities and in the wider Barbadian society. This type of recognition invariably encourages 
 5 
others  to  do  the  same,  which  means  it  will  lead  to  more  citizens  making  positive  decisions, 
becoming voices in our society, and developing positive influencers.  
Most of all, I encourage you and all of your members to continue the long Rotary Club tradition 
of  putting  service  above  self  because  as  you  have  shown,  when  you  do  this,  you  can  and  do 
make  a  difference  in  all  facets  of  life.  Let  your  stewardship  be  defined  as  one  in  which  you 
made a tangible difference to people’s lives, and to our country.  
If you succeed in your efforts, you will go a long way to helping fulfil Pope Francis’ vision that 
the poor find the way to be poor no longer. 
Thank you.  
  6 
