François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  The  future  of  the  finance  industry  -
between austerity and innovation
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Süddeutsche
Zeitung Finance Day 2017, Frankfurt am Main, 22 March 2017.
 I am grateful to Marine Dujardin and Banque de France and ACPR staff for their assistance in
preparing these remarks.
It is a great pleasure to be with you today and I’d like to thank you sincerely for inviting me.
I  am  here  in  Frankfurt  as  a  committed  European  and  as  a  friend  of  Germany;  and  not  just
because I travel here at least once a fortnight for the meetings of the ECB Governing Council! On
a more personal level, I am French but my roots are in Saarland. My family has lived there since
the end of the 18th century and its porcelain manufacturing company Villeroy & Boch is part of
the German “Mittelstand”.
But today, to discuss the future of the finance industry, I’m going to be talking in my capacity as a
member of the Governing Council and President of the French supervisory authority (the ACPR,
which I’m sure some of you know). First I would first to say a few words on the Eurosystem’s
monetary policy and our latest decisions. Then I’ll share with you my thoughts on how to respond
to the current challenges facing the finance industry. This is not a side issue for central bankers,
as we are now in charge of financial stability as well as price stability. Moreover, a robust and
profitable financial sector is one of the prerequisites for the proper transmission of our monetary
policy.
1. Where do we stand in the euro area with respect to monetary policy?
I am fully aware of the heated debate here in Germany surrounding our monetary policy.
A debate that is fully legitimate, but let us try to keep it rational, and avoid getting emotional. “Mehr
Licht!” (more light!) if you allow me to quote Goethe’s last words. This is exactly what I would like
to do today: to shed light on our reasons and our progress.
As you know, the ECB was shaped according to the model of the Bundesbank, and I do believe
that the Eurosystem’s collective monetary policy is very much aligned with the German values
that I fully share and admire: independence, respect of the Treaties, price stability and a long-
term approach. As price stability is the mission entrusted to us by the European Treaties, we
have a duty to make it our primary focus. Price stability means an inflation rate of close to, but
below, 2% over the medium-term. This has been our definition since 2003, and it is a definition
that most central banks in developed countries share – what Jean-Claude Trichet rightly terms
as “a great convergence". So our inflation targeting in the euro area is nothing new or specific;
and our present monetary policy is not some uncontrolled Latin flight of fancy.
In practice, the euro area experienced a remarkable period of price stability up until the crisis. But
as of 2013, inflation dropped well below the 2% mark. Our mandate meant we had to react in
order to bring inflation back to healthier levels for our economies. And we are clearly progressing
towards our objectives. Our monetary policy works; the measures we have put in place since
2014 have already been successful.
First,  [slide  2]  we  have  warded  off  the  mortal  danger  of  deflation,  and  inflation  is  gradually
recovering in the euro area. Headline inflation peaked at 2% last month, up from –0.2% in April
2016. The sharp – and partly temporary – uptick at the beginning of this year is mainly due to the
rebound  in  energy  and  food  prices,  as  underlying  inflation  remains  below  1%  (and  1.2%  in
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Germany). However underlying inflation is expected to rise gradually to 1.8% in 2019. We are
reasonably confident that both headline and underlying inflation will converge, close to our target
in 2019; and this convergence, which is not often stressed, is a key element in our forecasts, as
it is crucial to the mid-term sustainability​ of the inflation path.
Second, our accommodative monetary policy has ensured very favourable financial conditions:
lending to firms and households has continued to grow in the euro area, although at a reasonable
pace – +2.3% for firms and +2.2% for households in January 2017 – and borrowing costs have
significantly  declined.  Third,  [slide  3]  the  economic  recovery  is  firming  and  broadening.
Fortunately, this appears to be a worldwide trend: our G20 communiqué
in Baden-Baden last week started with the words “We met at a time when the global economic
recovery  is  progressing",  while  also  stressing  that  significant  risks  and  uncertainties  remain.
Euro  area  monetary  policy  has  played  its  part  in  this  recovery,  and  the  latest  ECB  staff
projections  foresee  higher  GDP  growth  for  the  region,  at  1.8%  in  2017.  The  euro  area
unemployment rate dropped to 9.6% in January of this year, its lowest level since 2009. And the
recovery  is  also  broadening  across  euro  area  countries,  including  in  France:  despite  some
temporary political uncertainty generated by the upcoming elections, France’s economic outlook
is improving. The country has also not been inactive over the past few years when it comes to
reforms:  pensions  have  been  reformed,  corporate  charges  have  been  cut  considerably,  and
labour laws have been made more flexible. Like you, I would like France to pick up the pace of
reform; I say it frequently in my own country. But you shall not regard your French neighbour as
“unreformable”. These reforms are crucial, as monetary policy can obviously not be the
only game in town, and less and less so as we progressively close the output gap.
Now,  the  question  that  comes  to  mind,  especially  here  in  Germany,  is:  given  this  progress,
should we stop pursuing an accommodative monetary policy? At this stage, the answer is clearly
no.  Without  monetary  stimulus,  the  recovery  in  inflation  would  not  yet  be  self-sustained  or
durable  throughout  the  euro  area. That  is  why  we  are  maintaining  an  accommodative  stance
while  adapting  its  intensity.  Regarding  this  intensity,  we  decided  to  cut  our  monthly  asset
purchases by €20bn – from €80bn to €60bn – starting next month.
We  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to  launch  a  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing
operations  (TLTROs)  after  the  last  one  today. And  we  –  including  Mario  Draghi  and  myself  –
clearly stressed the limits of negative interest rates. 
Let  me  add  the  following:  I  often  read  comments  describing  our  debate  within  the  Governing
Council as a “predetermined” one, between the hawks on one side and the doves on the other. I
don’t think this is accurate: in all our monetary policy decisions, what I believe matters is to take a
pragmatic approach, based on a thorough assessment of the present economic environment in
the euro area and of the specific structure of its financing channels.
This is why our forward guidance now is this one, based on our current information. But what we
clearly  did  is  to  give  the  financial  and  economic  sectors  visibility  over  our  monthly  purchase
volume for the whole of 2017.
2. What are the challenges facing the finance industry and how should we tackle them?
A  healthy  financial  sector  is  key  for  a  robust  economic  recovery.  I’d  like  to  remind  you  of  the
significant progress that has been made in this area since the financial crisis. We shouldn’t judge
the European financial sector only on the basis of its difficult cases, or those “trailing at the rear”.
On  average,  the  sector  is  now  far  more  resilient  than  before  the  crisis.  This  is  the  result  of
considerable work carried out to strengthen regulation and to harmonise supervision in the euro
area, notably with the Banking Union which is a significant step forward. It also comes from the
industry’s  remarkable  efforts:  European  banks  are  now  in  a  much  stronger  position  than  a
decade ago, in terms of capital, liquidity or risk-taking. Regarding their capital for instance, the
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Common Equity Tier 1 ratio of significant euro area banking groups has risen from less than 7%
in 2008 to more than 14% today. Overall, banks are now less risky, and investors should take
into account this progress by reducing their expected rates of return: banks’ cost of equity should
go down.
However,  while  solvency  has  improved,  there  is  still  one  challenge  facing  European
banks: profitability [slide 4]. The average return on equity varies significantly across countries –
and  France  ranks  among  those  with  the  most  solid  in  the  euro  area  –  but  on  average  it  has
stagnated at around 5%. This situation raises three questions, about three possible factors: low
rates, non-performing loans and the digital transformation.
The first factor, and the one most frequently mentioned, although sometimes to excess, is the
low  interest  rate  environment.  Insurers  and  pension  funds  with  a  high  level  of  fixed  rate
guarantees may suffer. As for banks, their net margins have been squeezed by the low interest
rates and the flattening of the yield curve. However this question needs to be examined from all
angles [slide 5]. Monetary policy has also had offsetting effects: lending volumes have picked up
again;  banks  have  booked  significant  capital  gains;  the  cost  of  risk  has  fallen  as  borrower
solvency  has  improved;  the  cost  of  funding  including  market  and  ECB  financing  has  become
cheaper. All  in  all,  the  overall  impact  of  our  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  on  bank
profitability is expected to be modest for the period 2014–17. Furthermore, nominal interest rates
are slightly on the rise since the turning point in August 2016, and nominal rates are the ones –
not real ones – which matter for bank profitability, as well as the slope of the yield curve.
The second factor putting pressure on profitability is the level of non-performing loans [slide
6]. This is not a widespread issue: the average NPL ratio is 5.4% in the European Union as of
September 2016, and in many countries, including France and Germany, it is below 4%. But it is
a challenge which seriously affects specific banks in certain countries, mainly Italy and Portugal.
So this challenge is manageable, but it needs to be actually managed: the quicker the better.
Recent initiatives by Italian authorities are a step in the right direction, with the active involvement
of European supervisory authorities.
Third  factor:  the  digital  transformation.  It  is  true  that  digitalisation  is  disrupting  traditional
customer relationship models. But it also creates opportunities: for instance, more diverse and
accessible financial services, more complete customer satisfaction, greater valorisation of data.
Yet, in order to succeed in the digital transition, financial companies need first to place innovation
at the heart of their strategic management; and second to examine ways of transforming their
business models, mainly in Retail. Obviously these are difficult choices that need to be made by
the companies themselves. The strategic way forward is not up to regulators, and will not be
uniform. That said, let me share some thoughts with you.
On the income side, the response could be twofold: diversifying the range of services – both
proprietary and via partnerships – that are offered to customers; and adjusting existing pricing
policies,  with  fewer  flat-rate  prices  and  more  pricing  by  use.  On  the  costs  side,  the  digital
transition involves preparing for shifts in jobs and in skills, through enhanced dialogue with social
partners.  Moreover,  it  calls  for  major  IT  investment  aimed  at  providing  services  that  remain
aligned with customer needs, reducing structural costs and improving regulatory compliance. IT
systems will need to be – and this is far from simple – more secure so that they provide strong
protection against cyber-risks, but at the same time more flexible and open to interconnectivity. 
Our duty as regulators in this revolution is obviously not to discourage innovation, but to ensure a
level playing field with FinTechs – taking into account their lifecycle according to a “proportionality
principle”  –  and  still  more  tomorrow  with  bigger  data  platforms,  be  they  GAFAs  or  their
equivalents.  This  level  playing  field  will  have  to  apply  for  capital  or  liquidity  requirements,  for
prudential supervision as well as for data protection: if you play the same game, you have to obey
the same rules.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition to adjustments to business models, cross-border bank consolidations in the euro area
would also help tackle this efficiency issue. The Banking Union provides both the justification and
the framework for such a financial integration – we still lag far behind the American market in this
respect. Cross-border consolidations on a sound and safe basis would make banks better able
to  diversify  their  risks  across  the  euro  area,  and  channel  savings  more  effectively  towards
investments across borders.
As regulators, we obviously have a part to play in helping the finance industry adapt.
We should strive to reduce uncertainties as much as possible.
One source of uncertainty today is the regulatory framework. Nearly ten years after the crisis, our
priority must be to stabilise the rules. The main elements of the Basel III package have already
been  approved  in  2010–11  and  have  largely  entered  into  force.  But  there  are  still  ongoing
discussions regarding the measurement of risk on bank balance sheets. The objective, as you
know, is to reduce the unwarranted variability of results between banks and across jurisdictions.
And  as  the  German  G20  reiterated  last  week,  the  completion  of  reforms  must  not  result  in  a
“significant increase in overall capital requirements”. We have not yet reached an agreement.
Thanks to our mobilisation and that of our European partners, we have avoided a bad agreement.
For the coming months then, our objective is to reach a good one.
Another source of uncertainty is Brexit. With article 50 about to be triggered, we obviously cannot
prejudge the outcome of the future negotiations. But it is essential to bear one principle in mind:
in the single market, you cannot separate access and rules. In financial services in particular,
you can hardly expect to have a European passport if you don’t accept the single market’s rules.
Let us be clear: we are saddened by Brexit, and we are not the ones who have decided to have a
so-called “clean Brexit". But if this is the case, then there can be no cherry-picking, no “Europe a
la carte”, no “Rosinenpickerei”.
It has been nearly ten years since the global financial and economic crisis. We have come sa
long way, but there are still challenges ahead of us for the ten years to come. Yet the challenges
for the financial industry are gradually changing in nature: they could shift from adapting to the
regulatory or monetary policy environment to reflecting on new business model strategies. In this
regard,  the  expected  strengthening  of  the  economic  recovery  will  hopefully  make  the  path
smoother. Austerity – or rigour – will remain necessary, but innovation will be the game changer.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 2
  5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 3
  6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 4
  7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 5
  8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 6
  9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
