Benoît  Cœuré:  Bond  scarcity  and  the  European  Central  Bank's
asset purchase programme
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Club de Gestion Financière d’Associés en Finance, Paris, 3 April 2017.
Accompanying slides
 I  would  like  to  thank  Fabian  Eser  and  Niels  Krieghoff  for  their  contributions  to  this  speech.  I
remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.
I am grateful for the opportunity to speak here today at the Club de Gestion Financière.
In my remarks today I would like to address a topic that has received growing attention in recent
months, namely the low level of short-term yields of the euro area’s safest sovereign bonds and
their apparent disconnect with those of overnight index swaps (OIS).
On the face of it, this is not the sort of topic that you would choose to discuss over breakfast. But
despite  its  technical  character,  I  intend  to  explain  that  such  a  disconnect  evidences  ongoing
structural  change  in  the  euro  area’s  bond  market  and  could  bear  consequences  for  the
transmission of our monetary policy.
In what follows I will argue that a confluence of factors – some of them of a temporary and some
of them of a more permanent nature – is likely to have contributed to this disconnect. One of
these factors, as I will show, is probably related to the ECB’s asset purchase programme (APP),
which raises the legitimate question of whether our purchases hamper the smooth functioning of
financial markets.
My answer today will be that we see no such evidence, but that the Governing Council continues
to monitor very carefully the developments in euro area bond and repo markets.
Let me start with the facts, however.
As  you  can  see  on  slide  2,  OIS  rates  and  German  government  bond  yields  with  a  two-year
maturity have been intimately connected in the past. The reason is that swap dealers tend to use
positions in safe government bonds to hedge interest rate risk on swaps. And with securities
issued by the German government generally perceived as bearing very little credit risk, we would
expect them to be related to swap rates. This is true for all tenors by the way and is not specific
to the two-year rate that I am showing as an example on this slide.
Now, why then have yields of high credit quality bonds – and I refer to German bonds merely for
ease of exposition – why have they gradually decoupled from swap rates since about the middle
of last year?
To facilitate and substantiate my answer, I would first like to show you on slide 3 a chart on the
evolution of the spread between overnight index swaps and German Bunds for the 10-year tenor.
You can see three things here:
first, unlike the two-year tenor, the spread has been relatively stable over the past two years,
although also here we have recently observed a slight downward trend; but the scale and
scope  are  much  more  moderate,  so  this  suggests  that  maturity-specific  factors  must
currently be at play;
second,  you  can  see  that  there  was  a  sharp  and  sudden  drop  in  that  spread  in  January
2015; incidentally, that drop occurred around the announcement of the ECB’s APP;
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
and third, the current level of the 10-year spread is far from being unusual from a historical
perspective; in the summer of 2011, for example, spreads widened sharply on account of a
sudden reversal in risk sentiment that brought the Euro Stoxx 50 down by nearly 30% in a
matter of few weeks.
When we look at these last two episodes, it is probably easy to see that the swap spread – in
one way or another – is likely to be related to differences in the relative supply and demand of
government securities and interest rate swaps. Indeed, the supply of swaps is very ample and
practically  only  constrained  by  the  amount  of  credit  risk  which  can  be  taken  by  market
participants when entering into these contracts.
Government  bonds,  by  contrast,  are  in  more  limited  supply.  So,  when  investors  pile  into
government bonds because they are looking for safe and liquid assets, such as in the summer of
2011, demand temporarily increases, pushing up prices and driving down yields.
Announcements of central bank asset purchase programmes make this point even clearer: the
sharp drop in the swap spread around the announcement of the APP in January 2015 reflected a
re-pricing  by  investors  of  the  future  net  supply  of  Bunds  to  the  market  –  after  the  ECB’s
purchases – and the associated duration risk to be borne by private investors.
The current situation in the short-term segment of the bond and swap market resembles many of
the aspects I just alluded to. Specifically, we think that the recent spread widening is by and large
the result of a growing supply and demand imbalance that has contributed to the fall in short-term
sovereign bond yields to the low levels we are currently seeing.
In what follows I will discuss in more detail: (i) the factors that we think have contributed to recent
developments and (ii) what they may imply for policy. In doing so, I will also try to explain why we
observed an immediate reaction of the 10-year swap spread to the announcement of the APP,
while movements at the short end only seem to come to the fore as the implementation of the
APP gradually proceeds.
The demand for short-term safe government bonds
I see three main reasons for the growing demand for short-term safe bonds: regulatory factors,
flight to safety as well as the direct and indirect effects of the APP.
In the short run, these factors can all affect market prices if the supply of these bonds is inelastic.
I will come back to this later.
Regulation
Regulation is the first factor that could have contributed to the strong increase in the demand for
safe and short-dated assets, although not for the reasons one might think of at first.  Regulation,
as you know, does not happen overnight. It is a long and often strenuous process. But in recent
years several new regulations have come into force.
1
For example, a number of liquidity regulations affecting banks such as the net stable funding ratio
(NSFR) and the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) require banks to hold a sufficient quantity of high-
quality liquid assets. So, it is natural to think that these regulations would bump up demand for
government bonds. But it is not so trivial. Indeed, there is currently well over €1.5 trillion in excess
liquidity  in  the  euro  area  banking  system. And  because  central  bank  reserves  count  as  high-
quality liquid assets, these regulations are unlikely to be the main driver of demand by banks for
high-quality liquid safe bonds in large quantities. Central bank reserves and very safe government
bonds of short duration are in many ways close substitutes.
By implication, therefore, it seems likely that mainly regulations other than the LCR, the NSFR or
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  leverage  ratio  (LR)  have  created  incentives  to  hold  an  increasingly  larger  share  of
government bonds, which in particularly seem to affect actors other than banks.
Solvency II, for example, has made it more attractive for insurers to hold cash-like securities,
such as AAA-rated bonds, rather than holding cash in a bank account.
Also, the mandatory posting of collateral for uncleared derivatives, as governed by the European
Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR), entered into force at the beginning of the year, and from
1 March 2017, all in-scope counterparties are obliged to post variation margins with a phased-in
implementation for initial margins from 1 September 2017 through to 1 September 2020.
Collateralising  financial  transactions  that  weren’t  collateralised  before  will  naturally  create
additional demand for safe and liquid government bonds. Central counterparty (CCP) data, for
example,  suggest  that  a  significant  share  of  assets  pledged  as  collateral  for  meeting  initial
margins consists of government bonds. However, as yields on bonds have fallen relative to the
remuneration  on  cash,  more  cash  is  used  for  initial  margins  than  used  to  be  the  case.  This
elasticity  of  bond  collateral  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  when  trying  to  assess  the  impact  of
central clearing or bilateral margining of derivatives transactions on collateral demand.
Taken  together,  regulatory  factors  can  to  some  extent  explain  why  some  investors  seem
relatively  price-insensitive  with  regard  to  their  demand  for  safe  short-term  government  bonds.
This  can  best  be  seen  by  those  who  do  have  an  economic  alternative:  euro  area  banks  with
access to the deposit facility. Recall that German three-month and six-month bills currently trade
around –1%, well below the rate on the deposit facility. The fact that banks still hold sovereign
bills strongly points to a non-pecuniary motive.
Flight to safety
Let me now turn to the second factor: flight to safety.
I  showed  you  earlier  that  it  is  typical  for  spreads  between  swaps  and  quasi-credit  risk  free
sovereign bonds to widen on account of risk aversion. As for the summer 2011 case, one would
normally expect such flight to quality to be temporary, with the spread eventually returning to its
pre-crisis  level  after  some  time.  So  flight  to  quality  would  tend  to  amplify,  at  times,  the  more
secular trends arising from regulation.
This, however, is not what we have observed recently at the short end of the curve. For example,
after the UK referendum on EU membership in June 2016, the two-year German sovereign bond-
OIS  widened  as  investors  sought  safety  in  short-term  German  sovereign  bonds  or  equivalent
safe assets. By the way, swap rates also fell in this instance as markets expected the ECB to
ease  its  monetary  policy  stance  further.  But  while  OIS  rates  cheapened  again  as  investors
understood  that  policy  rates  would  remain  unchanged,  German  sovereign  bond  yields  never
really recovered from the Brexit-induced fall. You can see this on slide 4.
This is puzzling at best, but it could mean that Brexit was merely a catalyst for a more general
re-evaluation by markets of the amount of short-term government bonds available to investors,
possibly related to expectations of central bank purchases or in anticipation of perceived political
risks, such as the US election, which was just a few months away.
Events in recent months also have proved surprisingly persistent. Market intelligence generally
pointed to the re-emergence of perceived political risks in the euro area as a prime reason for the
renewed marked drop in short-term yields of German bonds in February. You can see on slide 5
that this drop indeed coincided with a widening of sovereign credit spreads.
But again, doubts on the importance of the flight-to-safety nature also remain here. For example,
over the most recent period of spread widening, stock markets worldwide rallied, also in those
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
euro area Member States where political risks are perceived to prevail. Here in France stocks
have gone up by nearly 7% since early February, barely a sign of increased risk aversion.
There  are  therefore  legitimate  doubts  about  whether  recent  developments  in  bond  markets
reflect  a  general,  widespread  flight  to  safety  across  different  asset  classes.  Instead,  portfolio
rebalancing seems to have been specific to euro area bond markets, with some bond investors
shifting  out  of  markets  where  political  risks  are  perceived  to  be  large  and  into  traditional  safe
haven markets, thereby contributing to a widening of short-term swap spreads.
The direct and indirect effects of the APP
Let me now turn to the ECB’s asset purchase programme.
Here it is helpful to distinguish direct effects from the purchases on yields from indirect effects.
Direct effects relate to those effects that can be attributed to the ECB, through its purchases,
reducing directly the amount of short-term bonds available to private investors.
Indirect effects, by contrast, are those that may arise because of the excess liquidity that our
purchases create. You can see this on slide 6.
As I said earlier, euro area banks can, in principle, store their liquidity safely in the ECB’s deposit
facility. By contrast, non-euro area banks and other investors have no access to our facilities.
And often they cannot place large amounts of unsecured cash with banks either, due to their risk
control frameworks. As a result, investors without access to the Eurosystem’s deposit facility are
typically  forced  to  park  excess  liquidity  in  the  most  liquid  and  safest  available  storage  facility,
most often in bonds issued by the safest sovereigns. So, these investors tend to be fairly price-
inelastic.
We find evidence for such a mechanism, for instance, in the fact that especially non-euro area
investors are increasingly holding a larger share of bonds issued with an original maturity of up to
two years. You can see on slide 7 that when we started the APP in March 2015, non-euro area
investors were holding around 70% of these bonds – already an appreciable amount. In the third
quarter of last year – the latest available data – they held nearly 90%.
The liquidity holdings by such investors are, of course, not invariant to our asset purchases. After
all, non-euro area residents are large sellers of securities to the Eurosystem. Should they wish to
keep their exposure in euro, they may decide to park, possibly temporarily, the receipts from our
purchases  in  high  credit  quality  short-term  sovereign  bonds.  Expectations  of  increasing  long-
term interest rates globally may have further contributed to keeping the duration of such liquidity
holdings short, so as to limit exposures to duration risk. This mechanism can thus be considered
an indirect, technical implication of our monetary policy measures.
Moreover, the structure of euro area financial markets implies that business models that typically
attract  more  holdings  of  excess  liquidity,  such  as  investment  banks,  clearing  and  depository
institutions  and  custodians,  are  predominately  located  in  core  euro  area  countries.  Also,  the
capacity or willingness of banks in financial centres to accept additional deposits or reserves at
attractive rates might diminish over time as excess liquidity grows.
2
All  this  could  contribute  to  a  recycling  of  excess  liquidity  into  government  bonds  in  these
jurisdictions. And these effects might be highly non-linear, as the previous slide 6 suggests. This
also  means  that  establishing  a  direct,  causal  relationship  between  excess  liquidity  and  swap
spreads is inherently difficult.
Let me now turn to the potential direct effects of our asset purchases.
By definition, our asset purchases reduce the amount of assets available in the market. As you
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
know, the Eurosystem aims to distribute its purchases in a market-neutral manner. However,
before the Governing Council in December decided to allow purchases also below the rate on
our deposit facility, actual purchases of German short-term bonds and of those from other safe
jurisdictions were often limited as bonds tended to trade more expensively.
This suggests that direct effects were likely to have been only of a limited nature throughout most
of  the  programme.  You  can  also  see  this  from  the  very  loose  relationship  between  our  total
purchases of German bonds and the two-year swap spread on the left side of slide 8.
Of  course,  we  cannot  rule  out  that  the  shift  in  the  maturity  composition  of  our  public  sector
purchase  programme  (PSPP)  since  the  removal  of  the  lower  floor  for  purchases  –  and  the
associated change in the market’s expectations of the future availability of short-term bonds –
have accelerated the fall in rates at the front end of the curve in recent weeks.
But when we announced on 8 December 2016 that purchases below the deposit facility would in
principle be allowed, the short end of the yield curve, where such purchases could be expected
to  be  more  intense,  reacted  only  little,  as  you  can  see  on  the  right  side  of  slide  8,  which
compares the German curve shortly before and after the announcement.
So, unlike the announcement effect on the 10-year tenor that I showed you at the beginning, the
announcement of 8 December seemed to contain limited news for investors. This could mean
that  investors  had  already  priced  in,  to  a  large  extent,  the  possibility  that  we  would  allow
purchases below the DFR. Indeed, in the weeks before our 8 December meeting we had seen a
marked widening of the two-year swap spread that you can see if you go back to slide 4. But
because this period coincides with the aftermath of the US election, we cannot be entirely sure if
it was the anticipation of our policies, flight to safety or a combination of both that contributed to
the widening of spreads.
However, what I can rule out is that the intensity of our purchases has played a decisive role on a
day-to-day basis, as the daily purchase amounts have been fairly constant. Interestingly, when
we started purchases of sovereign bonds with yields below the deposit facility rate, yields at the
short end actually increased. Over the past three weeks, too, we have seen short-term yields
increasing despite continued Eurosystem purchases.
The supply of short-term safe government bonds
Let me now briefly turn to the other side of the coin – the supply of safe assets.
Typically,  debt  management  offices  have  some  flexibility  in  their  issuance  behaviour.  But  for
some of them the funding plans are relatively stable. This means that supply often tends to be
inelastic in the short term and a sudden build-up of demand can cause an increase in prices.
Moreover, we have witnessed a more general decline in the supply of safe and liquid government
bonds in recent years that may increasingly put pressure on yields as demand soars. This is
particularly true for bonds with a maturity of less than five years.
There are three factors behind this observation:
First,  as  you  can  see  on  slide  9,  the  financial  crisis  has  led  to  a  downgrade  of  several
sovereigns, thereby significantly reducing the quantity of global and euro area bonds rated AAA.
Moreover, the amount of euro area short-term public debt of the highest credit quality is much
smaller,  relative  to  the  economic  size  of  the  monetary  area  as  measured  by  GDP,  than,  for
instance, in the United States.
Second, more recently, net issuance of some AAA-rated sovereigns, such as Germany and the
Netherlands,  has  been  negative.  In  other  words,  consolidation  of  public  finances  of AAA-rated
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
sovereigns has led to a gradual decline in the stock of outstanding safe and liquid bonds. This
you can see on slide 10.
And  third,  because  interest  rates  are  at  historically  low  levels,  we  have  also  seen  sovereigns
shifting issuance towards longer maturities with a view to locking in low financing costs for a
longer period. In Germany, for example, while the share of bonds with maturities between two
and  five  years  accounted  for  more  than  17%  of  the  total  outstanding  back  in  2012,  today  it
amounts to only 11%.
In sum, we see growing demand chasing declining supply. In this environment, it is not surprising
to  see  prices  go  up  and  yields  down.  What  is  important  for  policymakers,  however,  is  to
understand  whether  these  conditions  are  likely  to  prevail  and  whether  they  could  affect  the
transmission of monetary policy or bear risks for financial stability.
Spillovers from the repo market and securities lending
Before I give tentative answers to these questions, allow me to briefly address another market
segment, which is different but related. Historically, not only did safe bond yields and OIS rates
trade  closely  together,  the  same  was  also  true  for  rates  on  repurchase  agreements  (repo).
Recently,  repo  rates,  too,  have  come  to  trade  significantly  below  OIS  rates,  which  raises  the
question of whether repo rates might be contributing to the drop in short-term bond yields.
It is well known that repo markets are widely used for cash market intermediation to finance long
positions and as a means to borrow securities to deliver into short positions. So, at face value,
price actions in one market could spill over to the other. But identifying the direction of spillover is
not always easy.
For  example,  there  is  evidence  of  a  spillover  from  repo  markets  to  bond  markets  in  the  US:
declines  in  the  supply  of  collateral,  for  example  as  a  result  of  central  bank  asset  purchase
programmes, lead to a decline in Treasury special collateral rates, which also passes through to
Treasury market prices.  Interestingly, the authors find that these impacts are larger for short-
term securities.
3
So  bonds  that  trade  special  in  the  repo  market  should  also  trade  at  a  premium  in  the  cash
market. But this is not what we always observe in the euro area.
Indeed, for the euro area it has proven difficult to establish a robust link between developments in
the repo and the cash bond market. Although swap spreads are the largest at the short end of
the curve, Bund specialness in the repo market is concentrated at the medium to long end of the
curve. This is shown on slide 11.
This suggests two things: first, scarcity at the front end of the Bund cash market, as signalled by
the wide swap spread, does not seem to have led to a rise in the specialness premium of short-
dated bonds in the repo market of equal proportion. Second, the specialness of medium to long-
term bonds in the repo market has not translated into a similar spread widening between Bunds
and OIS in the cash market.
One way to make sense of these developments is to look at how bonds are channelled back into
the (repo) market.
For example, it could be that holders of short-term German government bonds – mainly non-euro
area investors, as I mentioned earlier – are generally willing to provide them in sufficient quantity
in the repo market. This might explain why short-term Bunds tend to trade less “special”.
At the same time, PSPP purchases in Germany have long been concentrated in medium to long-
term maturities due to the restriction not to conduct purchases below the DFR. As early as April
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
2015,  securities  purchased  under  the  PSPP  have  been  made  available  for  lending  in  a
4
decentralised and cash-neutral manner by Eurosystem central banks.
But I think it is fair to say that the initial restriction on lending bonds only against other securities
was too penalising and is likely to have contributed to the growing specialness premium in that
segment of the yield curve where the Eurosystem was intervening most heavily last year.
The Governing Council’s decision of last December to open the facility also for lending against
cash,  up  to  a  maximum  of  €50  billion  currently,  was  therefore  an  important  step  towards
alleviating market pressure. We have seen a swift pick-up in the usage of lending against cash
collateral and the requests to borrow securities tend to be concentrated in those ISINs which also
trade “special” in the repo market.
So, over time we would expect that our new cash collateral facility will help reduce tensions. At
the same time, it is no panacea. Our securities lending facilities are generally only available to
banks.  That  means  that  non-bank  investors  that  also  have  a  strong  demand  for  short-term
German government bonds are not able to borrow these bonds directly from the Eurosystem.
And  bond  scarcity  due  to  regulatory  constraints  and  low  or  negative  net  supply  of  bonds  has
become a structural, standing feature of this market.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
We have recently observed a widening of the spread between yields of two-year sovereign bonds
of core jurisdictions and the OIS curve. We think this is likely to reflect a confluence of factors,
namely regulatory factors, flight-to-safety flows as well as the direct and indirect effects of our
purchase programmes.
The relative contributions of each of these components are inherently difficult to assess. But the
combination of growing excess liquidity and the need of investors without access to our deposit
facility  to  park  these  holdings  in  a  safe  and  liquid  storage  vehicle  are  likely  to  have  been  a
measurable  driver  of  recent  developments.  The  direct  impact  of  the  Eurosystem’s  purchases
below the DFR is probably more limited.
Whether or not these developments should be a source of concern for policymakers depends
largely on how persistent these effects will likely prove, as well as their implications for market
functioning, and ultimately the transmission of monetary policy. Temporary blips can be safely
ignored. But a silent and lasting decoupling of the short end of sovereign curves from our key
policy rates warrants close monitoring by policymakers.
For monetary policy, the prevailing financial conditions should remain consistent, as they have
been so far, with the monetary policy stance intended by the Governing Council. For financial
stability, very depressed funding rates may incentivise sovereign bond holders to engage in more
risk-taking, and banks to tilt their funding structures towards less stable wholesale funding.
These risks have not materialised so far. Now, how likely are they to materialise? In other words,
how persistent could current conditions prove?
Some factors, such as regulatory demand for safe assets, are of a structural nature. They can
be  expected  to  persist.  Other  factors,  which  have  driven  short-term  sovereign  bond  yield  to
record lows, are likely to be of a more temporary nature. In this regard, there is hope that the
perceived political uncertainty, which has triggered flight-to-quality flows, will gradually dissipate
and that investors rebalance their short-term fixed income again towards other bond markets.
To the extent that our asset purchases have contributed to this development, the reduction of our
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
monthly purchase pace from €80 billion to €60 billion as of today will provide some relief. At the
same time, increasing liquidity in the hands of investors without access to the deposit facility will
continue creating demand for safe assets. For the time being, these factors are therefore likely to
continue exerting a certain degree of downward pressure on short-term bond yields.
What I can say with reasonable confidence today is that, as I suggested at the beginning of my
remarks, so far we see no evidence that the current constellation of interest rates bears risks for
the smooth functioning of markets, nor to financial stability or the transmission of our policy.
The Governing Council will continue to monitor carefully these developments.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
See also CGFS (2013), “Asset encumbrance, financial reform and the demand for collateral assets”, Report
submitted by a Working Group established by the Committee on the Global Financial System, Paper No 49.
Germany’s role as a financial centre pre-dates the financial crisis. See, for example, Cabral, I., F. Dierick and J.
Vesala (2002), “Banking integration in the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 6.
See d’Amico, S., Fan, R. and Kitsul, Y. (2014). “The scarcity value of Treasury collateral: Repo market effects of
security-specific supply and demand factors”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper No. 2014–60.
See Securities lending of holdings under the expanded asset purchase programme (APP) .
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
