The Imperative of Strong Corporate Governance for Financial Stability 
Address by Dr. Alvin Hilaire, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago 
Launch of Financial Stability Report June 13, 2017 
1.         The global financial crisis of 2007/09 brought into sharp  relief the dangers that weak 
governance  in  financial  institutions  can  pose  for  economic  stability.  It  is  well  known  that  a 
major catalyst for the crisis in late 2007 was the subprime mortgage market debacle that rapidly 
spilled over into more general liquidity and eventual solvency problems in the United States. The 
contagion  effects  were  virtually  instantaneous  and  quite  dramatic—moving  from  mortgage 
lenders in the US to other financial firms and then quickly spreading across the globe to usher in 
a  full  blown  global  economic  downturn.  As  intriguing and  intertwined  as  they were,  the  purely 
economic  and  financial  components  behind  the  nuclear  bomb-type  mushrooming  of  the 
situation—overleveraging,   closely   interlinked   capital   markets   etc.—were   just   part   of   the 
problem.  It  quickly  became  apparent  to  most  observers  that  weaknesses  in  governance  of 
financial institutions played a significant part in actively encouraging or at minimum  facilitating 
behaviors  that  turned  out  to  be  destabilizing.  Some  analysts  held  the  view  that  the  governance 
framework—including  the  laws,  codes  of  conduct,  regulation  and  supervision—was  deficient 
and  needed  to  be  substantially  beefed  up;  another  school  of  thought  posited  that  the  apparatus 
itself  was  basically  sound  but  implementation  of  established  principles  was  deficient.  However 
one  cuts  it,  the  consequences  of  the  financial  crisis  were  vast  in  terms  of  lost  output, 
unemployment,  financial  instability,  and  bailout  costs  to  taxpayers  across  the  world,  and 
meaningful  efforts  were  subsequently  devoted  to  explicitly  strengthening  financial  sector 
governance. 
2.         At the company level, incentive systems can  foster practices that progressively sow the 
seeds for failure unless there is consistent and diligent oversight by Boards, shareholders and 
depositors.  Broadly  speaking,  corporate  governance  refers  to  “a  set  of  relationships  between  a 
company’s management, its board, its shareholders, and other stakeholders…The presence of an 
effective  corporate  governance  system,  within  an  individual  company  or  group  and  across  an 
1 
     economy  as  a  whole,  helps  to  provide  a  degree  of  confidence  that  is  necessary  for  the  proper 
functioning  of  a  market  economy.”1  For  financial  institutions  in  particular,  a  solid  “set  of 
relationships”  is  crucial  given  the  pervasive  role  that  these  institutions  play  in  all  facets  of  an 
economy  and  people’s  lives.  Also  to  be  taken  into  account  is  the  growing  complication  of 
financial transactions in a climate where technology allows for rapid movements of funds, while 
abrupt  changes  in  market  sentiment  can  lead  to  large  scale  deposit  runs.  Public  trust  and 
confidence  are  therefore  essential  and  good  corporate  governance  helps  to  set  a  basis  for  that 
assurance. 
3.                The  international  experience  over  the  last  few  years  has  led  to  major  advances  in 
strengthening  the  governance  framework  for  financial  institutions.  The  magnitude  and  reach 
of the global financial crisis prompted a great deal of soul searching and introspection on the part 
of governments and regulators as to what went wrong and how to forestall similar meltdowns in 
the  future.  In  zeroing  in  on  the  potential  governance  fragilities  that  were  unearthed,  major 
legislative changes were enacted; regulation and supervision were reinforced and backstopped by 
more  substantial  penalties  for  violations;  and  collaboration  among  regulators  was  significantly 
enhanced  at  domestic  and  international  levels.  By  way  of  example,  in  the  US  the  Dodd-Frank 
Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act  (Dodd-Frank  Act)  was  passed  in  2010  to, 
among  other  things:  i)  address  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  US  financial  system  in  part  via  the 
creation  of  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council;  ii)  end  too-big-to-fail  bailouts  of  large, 
complex  financial  institutions;  iii)  increase  transparency  and  regulation  for  certain  complex 
financial   instruments;   and   iv)   strengthen   protections   for   consumers   and   investors.2    More 
generally,  the  Group  of  20/Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development 
(G20/OECD)’s  Principles  of  Corporate  Governance  were  progressively  strengthened.  At  the 
same  time,  the  creation  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  in  April  2009  marked  an 
important  step  in  the  intensification  of  international  coordination  on  financial  governance  and 
1  Bank for International Settlements, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “Principles for 
Enhancing Corporate Governance” October 2010 available at  http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs294.htm 
2  Regrettably, just last week a new Bill was passed in the US House of Representatives that, if approved 
into law, could significantly roll back many of the safeguards in the Dodd-Frank Act. 
2 
     stability matters.3  Established since 1983, the Caribbean Group of Banking Supervisors has also 
found  its  work  intensifying  in  the  arena  of  governance,  especially  in  light  of  the  growing 
incidence of cross-border financial mergers, acquisitions and investments. 
      4.         As  major  central  banks  were  catapulted  into  the  role  of  picking  up  the  pieces  in  the 
wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  more  scrutiny  is  being  paid  to  governance  in  central  banks 
themselves  worldwide.  The  always  influential,  but  often  laid-back,  posture  of  major  central 
banks  (and  regulators)  was  dramatically  transformed  as  the  financial  crisis  unfolded:  first, 
because  regulated  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  were  at  centre  stage  of  the  crisis;  and 
second,  because  in  attempting  to  restore  order,  some  of  the  leading  central  banks  engaged  in 
novel  and  unusual  transactions  on  a  scale  that  was  virtually  unprecedented.  Naturally,  the 
exercise  of  such  power  has  led  to  more  careful  examination  of  how  central  banks  conduct 
themselves.  A  practical  expression  of  this  can  be  found  in  the  work  of  the  Central  Bank 
Governance   Forum,   which   was   launched   under   the   aegis   of   the   Bank   for   International 
Settlements to foster the good governance of central banks as public policy institutions.4  A 2009 
report  commissioned  by  this  Forum  entitled  Issues  in  the  Governance  of  Central  Banks 
highlights  the  complexity  and  diversity  of  central  banking  functions  across  jurisdiction  while 
emphasizing  that  adherence  to  broad  governance  principles  is  essential  for  all  central  banks. 
Such principles include: i) clear and well specified objectives to carry out their monetary policy 
and financial stability functions; ii) appropriate powers and resources, as embedded in legislation 
and  operationalized  in  decision  making  processes;  and  iii)  close  alignment  of  objectives  and 
incentives,  especially  by  way  of  transparency  about  such  objectives,  procedures  and  the 
stewardship of resources in order to assure accountability. 
5.         Meanwhile,  episodes  of  market  manipulation  and  collusion  also  put  the  spotlight  on 
the presumed integrity of well-established statistical indicators.  It is a cold fact that dishonesty 
and  lack  of  integrity have  not  only manifested  themselves  at  the  individual  company level  but 
also in instances of collusion among companies or among like-minded traders to manipulate and 
3  The FSB was established as a successor to the Financial Stability Forum (FSB) and brings together a 
number of the major central banks, international financial institutions and international financial standard 
setting bodies. See  http://www.fsb.org/. 
4  http://www.bis.org/cbgov/. 
3 
mislead markets. The information advantage that the manipulators then gain is often a source of 
substantial  profit.  A  few  well  publicized  examples  come  to  mind:—the  widespread  plot  by 
multiple  prominent  banks  to  rig the  London  Interbank  Offered  Rate  (Libor);  collusion  by some 
banks to manipulate the price of silver; and reports that an early (2 second!) lead in getting data 
on  a  consumer  confidence  index  led  to  major  profit  advantages  for  a  select  group  of  firms. 
Investigations into such instances bring out the difficulty of uncovering manipulation especially 
in  the  absence  of  continuous  watchfulness  or  verification.  Just  two  weeks  ago  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  conceded  that  despite  efforts  by  authorities  and  firms  to  strengthen  financial 
institutions’ governance, a further series of high profile misconduct cases had come to light. As a 
result,   the   FSB   concluded   that   more   work   was   needed   to   promote   ethical   conduct   and 
compliance with both the letter and spirit of applicable laws and regulations, which was critical 
to public trust and confidence in financial systems.5
 
6.         Turning to Trinidad and Tobago, our financial sector plays a crucial role in mobilizing 
deposits from savers and channeling such funds into investments. The country has a relatively 
sophisticated  financial  system  that  reaches  all  aspects  of  national  life:  assets  of  the  financial 
system  account  for  216  per  cent  of  GDP.  As  a  result,  the  average  citizen  takes  careful  note  of 
matters  relating  to  the  health  of  the  banks,  credit  unions  and  insurance  companies  that  they 
interact with regularly.  At 44 per cent of total financial system assets, commercial banks  play a 
dominant  role,  while  insurance  company  assets  are  also  sizeable  at  15  per  cent.  The  banks, 
nonbank  financial  institutions,  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  are  regulated  by  the 
Central  Bank.  A  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  oversees  mutual  funds  and  securities 
activities, while the Commissioner of Cooperatives currently supervises the credit unions which 
provide  a  vital  intermediation  function  for  a  large  segment  of  the  population.  With  an  open 
external  current  and  capital  account,  the  domestic  financial  sector  is  closely integrated  with  the 
rest of the world. As a result, financial problems abroad do spill over into the domestic economy. 
Given  their  collective  size,  influence  and  international  connectedness,  it  is  critical  for  local 
financial  entities  to  rigorously  follow  strong  governance  practices;  failure  to  do  so  would  add 
another source of deep vulnerability to their own operations and potentially to the wider financial 
system. 
5  http://www.fsb.org/2017/05/fsb-sets-out-next-steps-on-work-to-strengthen-governance-frameworks-to- 
mitigate-misconduct-risks/ . 
4 
   7.         Episodes   of   financial   failure   in   Trinidad   and   Tobago   can   be  linked   in   part   to 
governance  issues.  Like  all  other  jurisdictions,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  had  its  share  of 
financial  company  failures.  Most  would  have  been  precipitated  by  a  worsening  in  economic 
conditions  which  unmasked  not  only  fragilities  in  business  practices  but  also  risky  investment 
patterns and insufficient controls. Among other instances, in the mid-1980s, 5 nonbank financial 
institutions  that  were  heavily  involved  in  funding  real  estate  development  financed  by  offering 
depositors  above-market  interest  rates  were suspended  by the Central  Bank.   In  the late ‘80s to 
early  ‘90s  the  indigenous  commercial  banks  confronted  severe  economic  difficulties  which 
required Central Bank support, and eventually merged operations in 1993. Most recently, in 2009 
the collapse of CL Financial Limited (CLF) and related companies represented a major financial 
shock not only to Trinidad and Tobago but also to the rest of the Caribbean; CLF’s insurance and 
banking subsidiaries were at the heart of the imbroglio.   In all of these episodes, confidence was 
put  to  the  test  due  to  the  fear  of  contagion  while,  to  varying  degrees,  public  resources  were 
utilized in the search for solutions.  But challenges create opportunities: as  in the US  born crisis 
(with  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  and  stepped-up  surveillance),  and  in  Jamaica  (with  its  significant 
upgrading of legislation following its own financial crisis in the late ‘90s), the financial problems 
in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  prompted  improvements  in  legislation,  oversight  and  self-regulation  of 
financial institutions. 
8. 
    Nonetheless, 
  the 
  current 
 two-layer 
  governance 
  framework—at 
  the 
legislative/supervisory and individual company levels—needs to evolve further.   The main bits 
of  legislation  that  spell  out  governance  requirements  for  financial  institutions  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago  are  the  Companies  Act,  which  requires  directors  to  …”act  honestly  and  in  good  faith 
with a view to the best interests of the company”, the  Financial  Institutions Act,  Insurance Act, 
Cooperative Societies Act and the Moneylenders Act. Bolstering these are Guidelines issued by 
the  Central  Bank  to  its  licensees  (banks,  nonbanks  and  insurance  companies)  on  Corporate 
Governance  and  on  determining  appropriateness  of  persons  to  hold  key  positions  in  the 
organization  (“Fit  and  Proper  Guidelines).  The  governance  framework  for  credit  unions  is  less 
well defined, with more discretion left to individual credit unions on how to establish governance 
mechanisms and criteria for appointments to directorships and top management positions. Some 
financial  associations  also  set  out  voluntary  codes  that  they  encourage  their  membership  to 
5 
  follow:  for  example  the  Bankers  Association  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  (BATT)  has  its  Code  of 
Banking Practice, while the Association of Trinidad and Tobago Insurance Companies (ATTIC) 
outlined  a  Code  of  Ethics.  A  few  years  ago  several  financial  and  nonfinancial  companies  in 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  came  together  and  set  out  a  comprehensive  Corporate  Governance  Code 
(2013).  Among  other  things,  this  Code  put  forward  best  practices  on  board  composition, 
monitoring  and  performance,  audits  and  risk  management,  and  transparency  and  accountability 
in promoting increased disclosure. All of these efforts to improve financial sector governance in 
Trinidad and Tobago are laudable and move in the right direction. They do however, need to be 
supported  by  addressing  remaining  legislative  gaps—for  example  in  updating  the  Insurance 
Act—and by concrete actions on implementation! 
    9.         At the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago steps are in train to reinforce governance 
internally and in the oversight of licensees. Consonant with efforts in these areas by all central 
banks, in Trinidad and Tobago the Central Bank is moving towards increasing transparency and 
strengthening  procurement  and  other  procedures.  In  October  2016  for  the  first  time  the  Bank 
published on its website its 5 Year Strategic Plan,6   in which projects for advances in governance 
play a key role,  and in April 2017 the Bank launched its internal Whistleblower program. With 
respect  to  governance  in  licensees,  the  Bank  is  collaborating  intensely  with  legislators  and 
industry  participants  towards  passage  of  a  new  Insurance  Act  that  would  not  only  improve 
supervisory powers, but would put more onus on boards and managers of insurance companies in 
the  areas  of  risk  assessment,  oversight  and  compliance.  The  Central  Bank’s  interactions  with 
licensees  is  also  adapting  in  the  direction  of  greater  focus  on  good  governance  as  Inspection 
teams  engage  more  actively  and  regularly  with  their  Boards,  internal  and  external  auditors  and 
risk managers. 
10.            Ultimately,  financial  entities  must  police  themselves  and  assure  that  their  corporate 
culture is founded on resolute commitments to the highest standards of integrity, transparency 
and  proper  controls.  It  merits  reiterating that  while  legislation,  supervision  and  codes  of  ethics 
and good practice help, in the final analysis it is up to individual institutions to embrace a strong 
governance  culture.  In  this  regard,  boards,  depositors  and  shareholders  must  embrace  the 
6  http://www.central-bank.org.tt/strategic_plan. 
6 
responsibility  of  forging  the  right  environment,  keeping  abreast  of  developments,  and  being 
ready  to  act  to  preserve  that  environment.  Here,  let  me  take  the  liberty  of  borrowing  from  the 
work  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  to  offer  7  main  principles  for  financial 
institutions:7
 
i) 
The  board  has  overall  responsibility  for  the  institution,  including  approving  and 
overseeing  management’s  implementation  of  the  strategic  objectives,  governance 
framework and corporate culture. 
ii) 
Board  members  should  be  and  remain  qualified,  individually  and  collectively,  for 
their positions. 
iii) 
Senior  management  should  carry  out  and  manage  the  institution’s  activities  in  a 
manner  consistent  with  the  business  strategy,  risk  appetite,  remuneration  and  other 
policies approved by the board. 
iv) 
Institutions  should  have  an  independent  risk  management  structure—risks  should  be 
identified, monitored and controlled on an ongoing basis. 
v) 
The  internal  audit  function  should  provide  independent  assurance  to  the  board  in 
promoting an effective governance process. 
vi) 
The  institution’s  remuneration  structure  should  support  sound  corporate  governance 
and risk management. 
vii)       The governance of the institution should be adequately transparent to its shareholders, 
depositors, other relevant stakeholders and market participants. 
While these principles were developed for banks, they are of general applicability to all financial 
institutions  and  can  be  tailored  to  cater  for  differences  in  size  and  complexity  of  operations. 
Taking one specific example, credit unions in Trinidad and Tobago  should utilize these guiding 
principles in their own operations and can seek to formalize them as the credit union legislation 
is being upgraded. 
11.          In  conclusion,  concerted  vigilance  is  essential  to  ensure  that  governance  is  well 
established  and  indeed  remains  well  entrenched  among  financial  institutions.  It  is  clear  that 
throughout the world, the movement of money through financial institutions is a high value and 
7  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “Guidelines: Corporate Governance Principles for Banks,’ 
Bank for International Settlements, July 2015.  http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d328.htm. 
7 
     often  high  risk  activity,  complicated  further  by  unethical  practices  often  driven  by  perceived 
opportunities for quick riches. As we have seen, the cost of failure can be very high and may not 
be  confined  to  a  single  entity  or  country.  It  is  impossible  to  prevent  all  financial  company 
failures, and a dynamic economic environment should actually cater for a certain number of exits 
and entries over time as depositors’ and investors’ needs change. At the same time, explicit and 
unwavering  focus  on  strong  corporate  governance  can  go  a  long  way  towards  minimizing 
problems,  including  those  emanating  from  large  global  or  regionally  integrated  financial 
institutions.   Lessons from turbulent times, here and elsewhere, have resulted in a growing body 
of  literature,  experiences  and  avenues  for  collaboration  that  can  be  usefully brought  to  bear  on 
how  to  progressively  strengthen  governance  among  financial  institutions  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago. 
 8 
