Encik  Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour:  ASEAN  -  advancing  its  potential,
hurdles and the way forward
Closing remarks by Mr Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 4 August 2017.
 Thank  you  for  having  me  here  today  to  deliver  the  closing  remarks  for  the  ASEAN@50
Conference. I am also honoured that you have chosen Sasana Kijang to be your meeting point
for this Conference. I’m sure that all of you have greatly benefited from the two thought-provoking
panel  discussions  earlier,  that  drilled  down  the  measures  required  for ASEAN  to  achieve  its
economic promise.
ASEAN  proudly  welcomes  its  golden  jubilee  next  week.  This  momentous  occasion  not  only
celebrates our achievements thus far, but also marks the gravity of the work ahead of us. We will
continue  to  galvanise  all  sectors  of  society  –  public,  private  and  civil  –  to  ensure  ASEAN’s
achievements are not just reflected on paper, but more importantly, can be seen, felt and heard.
ASEAN  stands  out  as  a  dynamic  region  –  with  diverse  strengths  that  continues  to  benefit  its
growing population of 625 million people. In 2015, ASEAN contributed to more than 7 percent of
world exports. Our strong trade performance has contributed to increased employment by about
70 million over the past 17 years – enabling better livelihoods of households. Millions have been
lifted out of poverty with the significant rise of ASEAN’s GDP per capita, from USD1,054 in 1996
to USD4,000 in 2016. Our economy is the seventh-largest in the world and the region’s growth
continues to surpass that of advanced economies. Such progress has enabled and nurtured our
own regional champions, many of which have moved ahead to do even more for the ASEAN
people.
Indeed,  ensuring  that  the  gains  from ASEAN’s  development  are  equitably  shared  by  all  is  no
small  feat.  It  requires  more  than  just  government  action.  It  entails  close,  continuous  and
committed partnerships with the private sector.
Advancing the ASEAN potential
(a) Significance of private sector
Public-private  partnership  is  part  of  the ASEAN  DNA.  Policymakers  acknowledge  the  private
sector’s significant role in driving shared prosperity among ASEAN. This is evident in the way
financial institutions; airline companies; telecommunication; retail; and other private players have
been  expanding  their  businesses  beyond  domestic  boundaries,  creating  greater  employment
opportunities and improving living standards in the region.
In the aviation industry, for example, our regional low cost carriers have significantly increased
interconnectedness  among  ASEAN  countries.  The  economic  spillovers  from  this  increased
connectivity cannot be ignored. By opening up access to Lombok, for example, these low cost
carriers have contributed to a surge in tourists, marking the fastest growth of tourist arrivals in
Indonesia.  This  has  incentivised  the  Indonesian  government  to  provide  more  infrastructure
development, including solar power plants, water treatment facilities and roads.
This is only one of the many other success stories from our regional home-grown champions. It
is my hope that we keep nurturing more, and that their footprints in ASEAN bring even greater
benefits to our people.
(b) Role of Financial Integration
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  private  sector’s  role  in  enhancing  shared  prosperity  in ASEAN  must  be  facilitated  by  an
enabling environment for efficient cross-border business transactions. This has been achieved
through  greater  financial  integration  in ASEAN  including  deeper  banking  integration;  smoother
capital mobility; and efficient payment and settlement systems. ASEAN central banks have made
significant strides towards this end, but by no means will we coast on by. We will continue to
champion financial integration that benefits all. 
An Asian Development Bank study in 2013 has shown that banking integration mobilises savings
towards  more  productive  investment,  thereby  increasing  productivity  and  accelerating  growth.
This  study  also  showed  that  smoother  capital  mobility  will  facilitate  more  competitive  and
productive  cross-border  lending  and  borrowing,  while  promoting  financial  sector  and  capital
market  development.  Lastly,  an  efficient  cross-border  payment  and  settlement  systems
promotes cost-effective transactions by reducing the cost of doing business.
Hurdles faced by ASEAN
Like it or not, the path to achieving the strategic objectives of the ASEAN Economic Community
(AEC) 2025 will be filled with hurdles. The pace of convergence within ASEAN would be shaped
by members’ different levels of development. It is harder for countries with resource constraints
to shoulder the high costs involved in undertaking structural and institutional changes, which are
required for effective integration.
In overcoming such hurdles, I stand proud in acknowledging that ASEAN adopts a gradual and
phased-in approach that ensures a win-win situation for all. To illustrate this, let me share with
you  an  anecdote  from  ASEAN’s  financial  integration  experience  under  the  AEC.  The  core
principles  of  our  framework  are  inclusiveness  and  readiness.  For  example,  under  the ASEAN
Banking  Integration  Framework,  two  or  more  ASEAN  countries  can  liberalise  their  banking
sectors if they are mutually ready. But what if a member is not ready? Do we leave them behind?
The answer is, no, we do not. Instead, ASEAN countries help each other by providing capacity
building to those who need them the most. This pragmatic approach is unique, but it allows us to
continue pursuing integration without compromising national priorities.
The way forward for ASEAN
Close cooperation among member states and appropriate safeguards are therefore crucial to
ensure integration creates a more resilient ASEAN. This can be made possible through greater
collaboration  between  private  and  public  sector  to  develop  innovative  solutions.  This  is  where
ASEAN  Business Advisory  Council  (ABAC)  plays  an  important  role  to  further  strengthen  this
partnership.
ABAC has been active in promoting this partnership and providing consultation to assist ASEAN
integration  initiatives.  For  example, ABAC’s ASEAN  Business Award  –  It  not  only  recognises
businesses  that  contribute  to  the  growth  and  prosperity  of  the  region,  but  also  brings  to  the
spotlight  small-and-medium  sized  enterprises  that  have  the  potential  of  becoming  global
economic  players  in  their  respective  industries.  In  addition,  it  also  serves  as  a  platform  to
disseminate AEC-related information.
Moving  forward,  greater  investment  by  the  private  sector  in  human  capital  development  and
innovation is critical for us to maintain the current momentum. The return on investment on these
two  areas  will  be  visible  in  the  reduction  of  the  development  gap  among  ASEAN  countries.
Public-private  partnerships  to  address  this  gap  is  essential  to  foster  sustainable  economic
growth and achieve a globally competitive ASEAN.
ASEAN has come a long way in fostering cooperation and collaboration to achieve current levels
of development and integration. The principle of ‘prosper-thy-neighbour’ is the defining mantra of
the  ASEAN  movement  and  has  been  integral  to  our  achievements  so  far.  Therefore,  let  us
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
develop mutual understanding on the varying degrees of economic development and strategically
address the needs of each member country.
Let  me  conclude  with  a  quote,  by  the  author  Virginia  Burden:  “Cooperation  is  the  thorough
conviction  that  nobody  can  get  there,  unless  everybody  gets  there”.  I  believe  the  spirit  of
cooperation and dynamism will accompany us on our journey towards building a more vibrant
ASEAN Economic Community by the year 2025.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
