John McDermott: Looking at the stars
Speech  by  Dr  John  McDermott, Assistant  Governor  and  Head  of  Economics  of  the  Reserve
Bank of New Zealand, to HiFX, Auckland, 26 July 2017.
 I would like to thank Jamie Culling for his help in the preparing this speech, along with assistance
from Sarah Drought and other Bank colleagues.
Introduction
Thank you for inviting me to speak with you today; it is a pleasure to be here. Today I’m going to
talk to you about the ‘stars’ I look at in the New Zealand economy. When looking at the stars, it is
not a desperate attempt to adopt astrology to aid my understanding of the economy. Rather, I am
looking at the trends in our economy. I will expand on this in a moment.
1
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand has operated a flexible inflation-targeting framework for nearly
30  years.   Over  time,  the  practice  of  inflation  targeting  has  become  more  systematic  and
transparent. Transparency improves the understanding of our goals and policy intentions, which
makes policy more effective and allows for more rational evaluations of the Bank’s decisions.
Today’s speech adds to this transparency by outlining how we think about the trends of the New
Zealand  economy,  and  how  knowing  these  trends  helps  us  implement  the  flexible  inflation
targeting framework.
Our  inflation  targeting  framework  focuses  on  keeping  future  annual  CPI  inflation  outcomes
between 1 percent and 3 percent on average, over the medium term, with a focus on keeping
future average inflation near the 2 percent target midpoint. Key to this is the notion that there is an
equilibrium  level  at  which  the  economy  could  operate  that  would  be  consistent  with  inflation
remaining stable at 2 percent.  In practice, the economy faces a range of shocks (such as a rise
in  the  price  of  our  exports,  or  an  increase  in  net  immigration)  that  push  output  away  from  its
equilibrium. This would not be such an issue if there were no frictions in the economy and prices
could adjust seamlessly – prices and wages would rise and fall across sectors, as required to
re-allocate resources efficiently and move output back to its equilibrium level.
2
But the world is not so simple. Many frictions exist in the economy, which prevent or slow the
adjustment  in  prices  and  output.   For  example,  wages  and  prices  are  typically  only  reset
periodically,  and  labour  is  often  not  quickly  transferable  across  sectors  and  locations.  These
frictions  create  a  role  for  monetary  policy  in  stabilising  the  rate  of  inflation  over  the  business
cycle, while also seeking to moderate the swings in output away from its equilibrium level.  To do
this, the Bank influences interest rates across the economy, to stimulate or dampen output, and
move inflation back towards its target level. The Bank lowers the Official Cash Rate (OCR) when
inflation  is  weak,  which  encourages  households  and  businesses  to  bring  forward  spending,
thereby  stimulating  output  leading  to  higher  inflation.  Conversely,  when  inflation  is  too  strong,
higher interest rates encourage savings and a delay in spending plans, which dampens output
growth leading to lower inflation. In addition, changes in interest rates may alter the exchange
rate and hence the relative price of domestic and foreign goods.
3
4
When we model the economy, the concept of a frictionless economy is represented, somewhat
imperfectly,  by  a  collection  of  interrelated  and  unobservable  trends  of  key  macroeconomic
variables.  These trends are the anchors around which we aim to stabilise the economy, and
thereby inflation over the medium-term. While the Bank cannot influence many of these trends,
estimating  and  understanding  them  is  crucial  for  monetary  policy  to  be  set  appropriately. As
such, we devote a significant amount of time and effort to it.
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  our  economic  models,  these  unobserved  trends  are  conventionally  denoted  with  the
superscript  ‘star’  (*).  Three  particularly  important  trends  are:  r*  -  the  neutral  interest  rate;  Y*-
potential output; and e*- the equilibrium real exchange rate.
Another important unobservable variable is core inflation, or π*. Core inflation, along with future
expectations of it, is a key variable we can influence. Although we target headline inflation, there
are components of inflation we cannot control, such as commodity prices (e.g. oil), and changes
in central and local government charges (e.g. changes in GST). Core inflation is useful because
by filtering out temporary or unusual features, it provides a better guide to future medium-term
inflation.
The framework we use, assessing output relative to trend and the OCR relative to the neutral
interest rate, is an approach adopted by many of the flexible inflation-targeting central banks.  As
such,  numerous  central  bank  publications  refer  either  directly  to  one  of  the  trends  mentioned
6
above, or imply the concept of trends in their framework.
5
In a number of speeches and publications over the past few years we have explained our thinking
behind the important trends, or ‘stars’ if you like. This speech draws on recent work to provide an
update on how we think about the trends in the New Zealand economy.
r* - The Neutral Interest Rate
7
First, we look at the neutral interest rate, r*.  While there are a range of interest rates of different
maturities and different levels of risk, each with their own trend, the benchmark neutral rate we
estimate is the nominal neutral Official Cash Rate (OCR).  The neutral interest rate is the rate of
interest where desired savings equal desired investment, and can be thought of as the level of
the  OCR  that  is  neither  contractionary  nor  expansionary  for  the  economy. , 
  To  put  this
another way, an OCR above neutral provides a headwind for output and inflation, while an OCR
below neutral provides a boost to output and inflation.
9 10
8
Because the neutral OCR rate is unobservable, the Bank uses a range of models, surveys, and
financial  market  prices  to  help  form  our  estimate  of  neutral.  We  also  care  about  real  interest
rates,  and  use  a  suite  of  models  for  inflation  expectations  (which  also  have  a  wide  range  of
measures) alongside our neutral interest rate.
11
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Over time, the neutral interest rate has been slowly falling; a trend that has been seen in many
countries around the world. Economic theory tells us that changes in neutral real interest rates
reflect  changes  in  real  economic  factors  such  as  population  growth,  productivity  growth,
preferences for savings, and world conditions.
 A combination of these factors appears to have
been contributing to the fall in neutral, both in New Zealand and abroad.
12
13
Currently, we estimate that the neutral interest rate has moved below 4 percent, with the median
of the indicator suite currently sitting around 3 ½ percent (figure 1). Given the neutral rate is an
unobservable  long-run  variable;  it  is  very  difficult  to  estimate  precisely.  The  estimates  in  the
models  from  our  indicator  suite  currently  range  between  2.6  and  4.6  percent,  highlighting  the
significant uncertainty around our estimate. Overall, a neutral rate of around 3 ½ percent implies
that  monetary  policy  is  stimulatory  at  present,  given  an  OCR  of  1.75  percent.  Upcoming
projections  will  incorporate  an  assumption  of  a  3.5  percent  neutral  rate  into  our  modelling
frameworks. We have been factoring in this on-going decline in the neutral interest rate for some
time, so the overall impact on the outlook for interest rates over our projection horizon from this
particular update will be modest.
Y* – Potential output
The neutral interest rate and the economy’s potential output are interrelated, with both factors
sharing common drivers. Potential output, or Y*, is the level of output that is sustainable, and is a
useful  conceptual  tool  in  gauging  aggregate  output  consistent  with  stable  inflation.
  In  our
14
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
framework, the difference between the actual level of output and the level of potential output – the
output gap (figure 2) – is a key influence on inflation.
In the short-run, frictions such as stickiness of nominal wages and other prices can prevent the
economy  from  achieving  its  potential  output  when  it  is  hit  by  a  shock.  When  an  economy  is
running  ahead  of  its  potential,  a  positive  ‘output  gap’  is  said  to  exist,  where  pricing  pressure
increases in order to ration demand on scarce resources (such as capital and labour), boosting
general inflation. The longer output is away from its potential, the greater the adjustments costs
incurred  as  output  converges  back  to  potential.  Sustaining  growth  and  minimising  these
adjustment  costs  is  highly  desirable,  given  how  much  recessions  hurt  social  and  economic
outcomes.
15
Neither  potential  output  nor  the  output  gap  can  be  directly  observed.  Ultimately,  estimating
potential  requires  determining  whether  movements  in  observed  output  are  temporary  cyclical
movements, or permanent changes to the economy’s structure. To estimate potential output, we
use a production function approach that combines the inputs of production — labour and capital
— along with total factor productivity.
16
We have a range of uncertainty with respect to the output gap; around ± 2 percent of potential
output.  Given  the  challenges  in  estimating  potential  output  in  real  time,
  we  cross-check  the
results  from  this  approach  against  a  number  of  other  potential  output  estimates,  including
estimates  from  time-series  models,  and  fully-estimated  structural  models.
  Moreover,  the
estimate for the output gap is checked against a range of measures, including indicators from
17
18
19
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  labour  market  and  business  surveys.
  Given  the  important  role  that  the  potential  output
estimate  (and  thereby  the  output  gap)  plays  in  influencing  inflation  pressure,  these  estimates
garner  considerable  discussion  and  scrutiny  as  part  of  the  policy  process,  and  are
judgementally-adjusted as necessary.  
19
Potential output growth in New Zealand is currently estimated to be 2.9 percent per annum (figure
3). The current strength of potential output growth has been driven by growth in the labour supply
(especially  strong  net  immigration  flows)  and  the  capital  stock.  There  has  been  almost  no
contribution from productivity growth in recent years.
 This is not unique to New Zealand, and is
a  heavily-debated  topic  internationally.  There  are  multiple  ideas  behind  waning  productivity
growth. Firstly, there could simply be less innovation now than in the past.
 Or, it may be the
case that we just have not utilised recent innovations yet.
 Alternatively, measurement errors
may be at play; for example, it is hard to measure efficiency gains from use of the internet or ICT
services.
e* – Equilibrium real exchange rate
24
20
21
22
23
Of all the prices within our economy, the real exchange rate is one that is not subject to short-run
rigidities.  Indeed,  the  real  exchange  rate  can  and  does  move  rapidly  over  time,  as  economic
developments such as a rise in the terms of trade (figure 4) – the ratio of our export prices to
import  prices  –  are  quickly  reflected  in  its  relative  price.  The  fast-moving  nature  of  the  real
exchange rate means it plays an important role in absorbing shocks to our economy.
 But while
part  of  the  movement  in  the  real  exchange  rate  over  time  reflects  persistent  fundamental
developments  (such  as  structural  improvements  in  the  terms  of  trade  or  changes  in  relative
productivity), much of the movement in the real exchange rate reflects deviations away from its
25
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
medium-term  equilibrium  level,  e*.  This  feature  of  the  exchange  rate  to  ‘overshoot’  or
‘undershoot’  its  equilibrium  stems  from  the  fact  that  currencies  can  react  to  incoming  news
instantly, while other prices (besides interest rates) are slower to adjust. These deviations may
result in mis-allocation of resources between tradable and non-tradable goods.
26
There are various definitions of the equilibrium real exchange rate, which tend to focus on the
drivers of the exchange rate over a given time horizon.
 The medium-term notion of equilibrium
tends to be based on the value of the real exchange rate that would be consistent with internal
balance (output at potential) and external balance (the current account sustainably financed).
One of the several models that the Bank uses is the macro-balance model, which assesses the
degree to which the exchange rate is currently too high or too low in order to stabilise the net
foreign liabilities (NFL) to GDP ratio at its current level.
 This model indicates that the current
level of the real exchange rate is consistent with NFL remaining at about 60 percent of GDP,
given the Bank’s medium-term outlook for key economic variables (such as the terms of trade).
However, it yields no further reduction in NFL-GDP from its current level. A lower New Zealand
dollar would be needed to lower NFL-GDP and our external vulnerabilities further. Indeed, from a
growth  point  of  view,  a  lower  real  exchange  rate  would  help  rebalance  growth  towards  the
tradables sector, especially as not all traded industries are benefiting from the current high terms
of trade.
π* – Core inflation
27
28
As noted earlier, monetary policy typically has little influence on many underlying trends in the
economy. But it does influence inflation, and expectations about future inflation, even if we cannot
influence  every  price.  A  useful  concept  for  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  central  bank  is  core
inflation, which abstracts from one-off or highly volatile price movements, like large changes in
the price of an individual product (e.g. oil). This is important because while idiosyncratic price
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
movements  can  materially  affect  headline  CPI  inflation,  they  may  not  reflect  fundamental  or
persistent sources of inflation pressure. Consequently, central banks often use core inflation as
an important measure of inflation over which it has some control.
  Specifically,  core  inflation
abstracts  from  noise  and  provides  a  clearer  picture  of  how  far  inflation  is  from  our  objective
under  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement.  Because  inflation  is  affected  by  factors  outside  of  the
Bank’s control, and people’s expectations need not coincide perfectly with the Bank’s medium-
term objective, we monitor a range of core inflation measures to gauge current inflation pressure.
29
The measures of core inflation we examine include, among others, model-based measures and
exclusion-based  measures.
  The  model-  and  exclusion-based  measures  reflect  the  current
central  tendency  of  price  movements,  while  other  measures  focus  more  directly  on  future
(beliefs about) inflation outcomes. Our sectoral factor model reflects, in part, both concepts of
core inflation.
30
31
The  sectoral  factor  model  is  our  preferred  measure  of  core  inflation  because  it  best  predicts
where headline inflation will converge to in the future once the transient noise dissipates, and is
smoother  than  our  other  (relatively)  more  volatile  core  inflation  measures.
  Based  on  this
measure,  core  inflation  is  currently  estimated  to  be  1.4  percent  (figure  5),  and  has  broadly
tracked sideways over the past year. So while inflation pressures have lifted from the lows seen
in early 2015, they still appear to be relatively moderate. Revisions to this measure occur from
time to time, but the sectoral factor model is only one measure in our suite of inflation indicators,
so changes to a single measure are unlikely to materially alter the overall assessment of inflation
pressures at any particular period.
Conclusion
32
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
To set monetary policy we need to know where the key macroeconomic factors (such as interest
rates, output, and the exchange rate) are tracking relative to their equilibrium levels, denoted by
our  ‘stars’.  These  stars  are  unobservable  and  complex  to  estimate,  so  we  use  a  range  of
techniques to help form our view of their values over time
Like  the  night  sky,  our  stars  keep  moving.  To  respond  to  an  evolving  macroeconomic
environment  and  set  monetary  policy  appropriately,  we  keep  track  of  the  changes  in  the
underlying state of the economy. Regularly explaining our view of the stars helps financial market
participants and others better understand our analytical framework and policy decisions.
 
References
Adler, G., Duval, M. R. A., Furceri, D., Sinem, K., Koloskova, K., & Poplawski-Ribeiro, M. (2017).
Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity. International Monetary Fund.
Archibald, J., & Hunter, L. (2001). What is the neutral real interest rate, and how can we use it?
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 64(3), 15-28.
Armstrong, J. (2015). The Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s output gap indicator suite and its real-
time properties. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note AN2015/08. Reserve Bank of New
Zealand.
Armstrong, J., & Karagedikli, O. (2017). The role of non-participants in labour market dynamics.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note. AN2017/01. Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Armstrong, J., Kamber, G., & Karagedikli, O. (2016). Developing a labour utilisation composite
index for New Zealand. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note. AN2016/04. Reserve Bank
of New Zealand.
Barro,  R.,  &  Sala-i-Martin,  X.  (2003).  Economic  Growth,  Second  Edition.  MIT  Press.  ISBN:
9780262025539.
Bascand,  G.  (2017).  New  Zealand’s  net  foreign  liabilities:  What  lies  beneath,  and  ahead?. A
speech delivered to MOTU, at the Royal Society of New Zealand, Wellington on 17 July 2017.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Berkmen,  S.  P.,  Gelos,  G.,  Rennhack,  R.,  &  Walsh,  J.  P.  (2012).  The  global  financial  crisis:
Explaining  cross-country  differences  in  the  output  impact.  Journal  of  International  Money  and
Finance, 31(1), 42-59.
Bernanke,  B.  S.  (2005).  The  global  saving  glut  and  the  US  current  account  deficit  (No.  77).
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists.
BoE. (2017) Inflation Report. May 2017. Bank of England
Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A. (2014). The second machine age: Work, progress, and prosperity
in a time of brilliant technologies. WW Norton & Company.
Chetwin, W., & Wood, A. (2013). Neutral interest rates in the post-crisis period. Reserve Bank of
New Zealand Analytical Note AN2013/07. Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Conway,  P.  (2016). Achieving  New  Zealand’s  Productivity  Potential.  Productivity  Commission
Research Paper 2016/1. Productivity Commission.
FOMC. (2017). Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee. May 2-3, 2017.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Gordon, R. J. (2016). The rise and fall of American growth: The US standard of living since the
civil war. Princeton University Press.
Graham, J., & Steenkamp, D. (2012). Extending the Reserve Bank’s macroeconomic balance
model of the exchange rate  Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note AN2012/08. Reserve
Bank of New Zealand.
Jarocinski, M., & Lenza, M. (2016). How large is the output gap in the euro area. ECB Research
Bulletin, 24(1).
Kamber,  G.,  &  Wong,  B.  (2016).  Testing  an  Interpretation  of  Core  Inflation  Measures  in  New
Zealand.  Reserve  bank  of  New  Zealand  Analytical  Note  AN2016/06.  Reserve  Bank  of  New
Zealand.
Karagedikli, O., Ryan, M., Steenkamp, D., & Vehbi, T. (2013) What happens when the Kiwi flies?
Sectoral Effects of the Exchange Rate Shocks. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper
DP2013/05. Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Kato,  T.  (2009).  Impact  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  and  Its  Implications  for  the  East Asian
Economy.  In  keynote  speech,  Korea  International  Financial  Association,  First  International
Conference, Seoul, Korea.
Kirker, M. (2010). What drives core inflation? A dynamic factor model analysis of tradable and
non-tradable prices. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper DP2010/13. Reserve Bank
of New Zealand.
Lewis,  M.  (2016).  Inflation  expectations  curve:  a  tool  for  monitoring  inflation  expectations.
Reserve Bank Analytical Note, AN2016/01. Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Lienert, A., & Gillmore, D. (2015). The Reserve Bank's method of estimating "potential output".
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note AN2015/01. Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
McDonald,  C.  (2012).  Kiwi  drivers:  the  New  Zealand  dollar  experience.  Reserve  Bank  of  New
Zealand Analytical Note AN2012/02. Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Okun,  A.  M.  (1963).  Potential  GNP:  its  measurement  and  significance  (pp.  98-103).  Yale
University, Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics.
Parker, M. (2016). Price-setting behaviour in New Zealand. New Zealand Economic Papers, 1-20.
Pescatori, A., & Turunen, J. (2015). Lower for longer: Neutral Rates in the United States. IMF
Working Paper. WP/15/135.
Price, G. (2013). Some revisions to the sectoral factor model of core inflation. Reserve Bank of
New Zealand Analytical Note AN2013/06. Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Ranchhod, S. (2013). Measures of New Zealand core inflation. Reserve Bank of New Zealand
Bulletin, 76(1). Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
RBA. (2017). Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board. 4 July 2017.
Reserve Bank of Australia.
Richardson, A., & Williams, R. (2015). Estimating New Zealand’s neutral interest rate. Reserve
Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2015/05.
Steenkamp,  D.  (2016).  Factor  substitution  and  productivity  in  New  Zealand.  Reserve  Bank  of
New Zealand Discussion Paper DP2016/12. Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Summers, L. H. (2014). US economic prospects: Secular stagnation, hysteresis, and the zero
lower bound. Business Economics, 49(2), 65-73.
Svensson, L (1999) ‘Inflation targeting: Some extensions’. Scandinavian Journal of Economics
101(3), pp 337–361.
Williams, J. (2016). Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World. FRBSF Economic Letter. 2016-23.
Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
University Press.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989 came into force on 1st February, 1990.
See Parker (2016) for a discussion of firms’ price setting behaviour in New Zealand.
At its core, flexible inflation targeting highlights the objective of monetary policy – stable inflation – whilst also
permitting flexibility in the short-run trade-off between inflation control and economic stability.
The frictionless economy referred to here is broadly consistent with a New Keynesian perspective outlined in
Woodford (2003).
See Svensson (1999).
See, for example, RBA (2017); BoE (2017); FOMC (2017); Jarocinski & Lenza (2016).
In much academia and policy research, r* will denote the real neutral interest rate, which is the nominal neutral
interest rate minus expected inflation. Here, I am referring to nominal rates, assuming inflation expectations are
stable.
Richardson & Williams (2015) provide detail on estimation of the neutral interest rate.
For further detail on the definition of the neutral rate, see Chetwin & Wood (2013).
Savings in this context could be thought of as domestic or foreign savings, if referring to a closed or open
economy, respectively.
Lewis (2016) uses various surveyed measures of inflation expectations and yield curve modelling techniques to
develop a framework for monitoring inflation expectations.
For example, a sustained fall in productivity growth lowers the returns to investment, making it less desirable to
invest. If the desire to invest falls and the desire to save remains unchanged, a lower neutral rate will be
required to reconcile savings and investment plans. For further discussion of factors that can affect the neutral
rate, see Archibald & Hunter (2001), and Williams (2016).
For  a  discussion  on  the  lower  neutral  rate,  see  Pescatori  &  Turunen  (2015);  return  on  investment,  see
Summers (2014); the “global savings glut” hypothesis, see Bernanke (2005); demographics, see Barro & Sala-
i-Martin (2003).
This definition of potential output follows Okun (1963). Potential output here refers to the goods market. A related
concept  in  the  labour  market  is  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  (NAIRU).  Like  the  other  trend  variables
presented here, it is unobservable and subject to uncertainty.
For example, Kato (2009) and Beckman et al. (2009) both discuss the effects of the Global Financial Crisis on
Asia and developing economies, respectively.
For details surrounding our estimations of potential output, see Lienert & Gillmore (2015).
Challenges arise on a number of fronts, including that potential output can vary substantially over time and that
data revisions to GDP in particular can result in substantial revisions to our estimates of potential output in “real-
time” versus ex-post.
For details on our estimation of the output gap, see Armstrong (2015).
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
For a discussion of labour market flows and dynamics, see Armstrong & Karagedikli (2017) or Armstrong,
Kamber, & Karagedikli (2016).
For  discussion  on  New  Zealand’s  productivity  performance,  see  Steenkamp  (2016)  or  Conway  (2016).
Steenkamp produces aggregate TFP estimates for New Zealand, while Conway outlines why New Zealand has
struggled to lift productivity in recent decades.
For example, OECD (2016) shows that government R&D budgets are receding in many countries.
There  is  debate  as  to  whether  the  slowdown  in  innovation  is  permanent,  or  whether  it  is  temporary  as
breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence and robotics loom. See Gordon (2016), or Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A.
(2014).
Particular  internet-based  services  (e.g.  Google  searches  or  Wikipedia)  are  largely  not  reflected  in  GDP
measurements, as there is often no price attached to their use. See Box 1 in Adler, et al. (2017) for further
information.
The real exchange rate is the nominal exchange rate, measured on a trade-weighted basis, adjusted for the
relative prices between New Zealand and our trading partners. This captures the fact that New Zealand faces
many  exchange  rates,  and  a  weighted  measure  of  individual  bilateral  exchange  rates  is  necessary  to
summarise the country’s exchange rate position.
For discussion on the role of the exchange rate as a shock absorber, see: Karagedikli, et al. (2013).
The drivers of New Zealand’s exchange rate are examined in McDonald (2012).
Graham & Steenkamp (2012) outline the macroeconomic balance model.
For discussion on recent developments in New Zealand’s NFL, see Bascand (2017).
For discussion surrounding drivers of core inflation in New Zealand, see Kirker (2010).
A number of core inflation measures are discussed in Ranchhod (2013).
“The sectoral factor model provides a measure of core inflation that distinguishes between price movements in
the two major sectors of the economy, and hence helps to identify where inflationary pressures are coming
from.” (Price, 2013, pg. 2).
For further details on the econometric assessment of the sectoral factor model, among others, see Kamber  &
Wong (2016).
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
