    
 
Insurance supervision at the PRA 
 
Speech given by 
Sam Woods, Deputy Governor, Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive Officer, 
Prudential Regulation Authority 
   London Business School 
20 March 2017 
   I am grateful to Dan Curtis for his help in preparing this speech. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  1 
  Good morning.  
 The UK has a world-leading insurance sector which provides a wide range of vital services to the real 
economy and society.  It promotes growth and employment, has proved its mettle in turbulent times and the 
country can be proud of it.  
 A necessary precondition to such success is world-class insurance supervision.  That is what we aim to 
deliver at the PRA. Like insurers, our job is to be forward-looking and prudent about risk. Where we differ 
from private firms is that we do this motivated solely by the public interest.   
 The recent debate about insurance regulation – while timely and important – must seem to some like a 
cacophony of acronyms, statistics, models and assumptions. But strip this back and you’ll see there is an 
essential, irreducible human core to it all.  Some of the oldest and most vulnerable in our society have 
invested their life savings into long-term annuity contracts.  By pooling and transferring many kinds of  
risks – from cyber to marine – insurers provide cover which is essential for economic activity.  And by 
protecting for critical illness or personal accident, insurers commit to being there when you need them most.  
 So when we talk about promoting insurers’ safety and soundness, and protecting their policyholders, this is 
what we have in mind.  
 The PRA has squeezed much into its short life since it began supervising insurance companies in 2013, not 
least the enormous undertaking of implementing Solvency II, and knitting insurance supervision into the 
wider Bank, where there are obvious connections with areas like monetary analysis.  
 And today, the Bank of England’s Independent Evaluation Office has published its thinking on the PRA 
objective which is unique to insurance, of contributing to the protection of policyholders. 
 All this makes now the ideal time to refresh our approach to insurance supervision. 
 I will begin by taking stock of insurance regulation. These are the rules and standards which apply across the 
board, and have been recently the subject of ongoing and lively debate.  Now that Solvency II has applied, 
how do we take it forward?   
 From there I would like to explore our approach to insurance supervision – the day-to-day business of 
understanding, assessing and challenging the 4691 firms we are responsible for. In particular, how do we at 
the PRA think about policyholder protection?  
                                                       
1 This is a consolidated view of insurance groups – there are approximately 600 insurance entities, including solos that are part of 
groups.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
  And what is the point of all this? Our aim is to maintain a resilient insurance sector which does not pass risks 
back to policyholders when they crystallise.   
 Solvency II: a stocktake 
 For the uninitiated, Solvency II is a new regulatory regime for insurance companies across the EU, 
introduced on 1 January 2016 after years of wrangling.  There is now a lively debate about how the new 
regime is working out here in the UK. It seems that almost every day the specialist press contains new 
opinion pieces from industry insiders or consultants about how Solvency II is constraining their business or 
turning out not to be as bad as feared. There is also the important review by the Treasury Select Committee, 
at which I gave evidence recently. And very occasionally others outside the magic circle of insurance 
enthusiasts (of which I count myself one) take a passing interest. Inevitably, on a subject as complex as 
Solvency II, there will be a wide range of opinions. And I think that a degree of constructive tension between 
regulator and regulated firms is a sign of a healthy and properly functioning relationship. But in any debate it 
pays to consider both sides. 
 So what does the insurance industry think about Solvency II? Unsurprisingly, there is a range of views. Lord 
Turnbull, former board member at Prudential, was unequivocal in his comment that Solvency II was “an 
absolutely dreadful piece of legislation”. Others,  particularly those working in general insurance, are more 
sanguine - for instance John Parry of Lloyd’s of London told the TSC that “in terms of Solvency II…damaging 
competitiveness or returns on capital, no, we have not seen that”.   
 Written submissions from the industry to the TSC generally reveal two themes. First, having just consumed 
this sizeable piece of new regulation, the industry has no desire whatsoever to sit back down at the 
regulatory table and consume another, radically different, meal. By my reckoning, only one submission to the 
TSC calls for a fundamental change of regime. And second, that while the PRA has done a reasonable job in 
steering everyone across the implementation line, it has in the view of some parts of the industry been  
over-zealous in places. I’ll comment on each of these themes in turn. 
 Solvency II indigestion 
 I very much agree that having another big meal at this stage would be most unwise. However, I acknowledge 
that the size and variety of the Solvency II meal has left all of us facing some degree of indigestion. When 
faced with live market conditions and commercial realities, some aspects of the regime have been found 
wanting.  So I agree with most industry commentators that it is in nobody’s best interests – not firms, 
policyholders or regulators – to make wholesale changes. But that does not mean that we cannot make a 
series of tweaks and improvements to the overall system, by way of a digestif. 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
  For example, there has been considerable criticism of the Risk Margin - a new feature of Solvency II which 
aims to allow for uncertainty in liability valuations - and I agree that its current design and implementation 
does not achieve the intended goals.  The concept of a risk margin is a sensible one, but its current 
implementation in Solvency II is flawed. Because the root causes of the problems are baked into European 
legislation, we need to fix them at source, and are actively and constructively engaged with our European 
colleagues to design a more sensible solution.  
 Some firms would like us to ‘break glass’ and implement a unilateral quick fix here in the UK. But I think that 
would be a mistake at this stage, not least because in the short-term there is a mechanism available to firms 
to mitigate the impact on business written before the introduction of Solvency II, namely the Transitional 
Measure on Technical Provisions, or TMTPs. We have allowed all firms that applied and qualified to use this 
measure. And data reported to us by firms indicates that the TMTP benefit across the life industry at the 
inception of Solvency II almost entirely offset the aggregate Risk Margin. I will also reiterate a point I’ve made 
previously, which is that when we consider whether or not firms are in a position to pay dividends, one of the 
main quantitative yardsticks we use is capital levels after the benefit of transitionals2. In other words, we 
regard transitionals as creating high quality capital. 
 Given the substantial benefit arising from TMTPs, it is important for both firms and the PRA that their level 
remains appropriate over time. And there is a mechanism to ensure just that, whereby firms may apply for a 
recalculation following a material change in their risk profile, or every two years. Our goal is that the 
maintenance of TMTPs should be as straightforward as possible and not onerous for any of those involved. 
The PRA recently closed a consultation3 on proposals for this process and we expect to issue a supervisory 
statement on the subject later in 2017.  
 Another industry complaint is about the quantity of data firms must report, and the compressed timetables for 
doing so.  It is a plain fact both that the volume of reported data is higher than under the previous regime and 
that regulatory returns are due to the PRA more quickly. I view both of these things as a significant 
improvement, which will enable better delivery of the PRA’s objectives of policyholder protection and firm 
safety and soundness. To be frank, the situation we sometimes faced as regulators in the past, where firms 
were unable quickly to tell us their asset exposures, and solvency reviews sometimes occurred 18 months in 
arrears, was unacceptable, particularly given the fast pace at which serious economic and financial crises 
can develop in the modern interconnected world. However, I keep an open mind about whether we have 
struck the right balance – there may be a case for lowering the burden, if it turns out that some of the new 
reporting doesn’t deliver supervisory benefits commensurate with its cost. We are also investigating the 
potential for publication of selected statistics to provide an overview for market participants.  
                                                      
2 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/861.aspx  
3 CP47/16, issued December 2016, consultation closed 15 March 2017, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Pages/publications/cp/2016/cp4716.aspx  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 4 
 
4 
 On 16 November 2016, the Bank published its first edition of a new quarterly Statistical Release for the UK 
banking sector4. We are considering the potential for issuing something similar for the UK insurance sector, 
derived from the data insurers submit to us. We plan to engage with industry soon to discuss what format 
and content would be of most use and interest, with a first release potentially in the autumn.  
A third topic of rumbling discontent relates to how easy insurers find it to invest in illiquid assets, and then to 
receive appropriate regulatory recognition. In my view, there are two quite separate issues at play here. The 
first is a certain ‘clunkiness’ in the design of the Solvency II Matching Adjustment (MA), a feature of the 
regime which gives insurers a capital benefit if they can match asset cashflows with liability cashflows. The 
rules were written on the assumption that insurers generally match annuities with simple securities, such as 
liquid corporate or sovereign bonds. This assumption was broadly true when the rules were agreed several 
years ago, but more recently insurers have increasingly turned their attention to other classes of investments 
that, generally speaking, have appropriate characteristics for meeting long-term insurance liabilities. But 
those types of investments often fail to meet certain rather prescriptive rules.  
Some in the industry argue that we have the flexibility to ignore some elements of the rules. I don’t think that 
is right. The directive is quite clear that cashflows from MA-eligible assets must be “fixed”, not “predictable” 
or some other more flexible term. Now, it is not our job to unpick the law. But we should apply it sensibly. 
And I think there is plenty of evidence that that is what we are doing, whether in our approach to certain 
assets (for instance in allowing pairing of variable cashflow assets with derivatives, and restructuring of 
assets like equity release mortgages) or in the fact that we have allowed infrastructure assets in sectors like 
healthcare, social housing and telecoms infrastructure to achieve MA-eligibility. Now, given a completely free 
hand I would probably make modest design changes to the MA, perhaps with slightly greater flexibility 
around the definition of “fixity” and a greater allowance for unexpected credit defaults. But I contend that we 
are implementing the regime we have today intelligently, with appropriate recognition of asset and liability 
matching leading to a £59bn reduction in capital requirements for the industry. 
But the MA design itself is not the only reason that we at the PRA sometimes pause when firms discuss new 
investment opportunities with us. By their very nature, illiquid bespoke loans require very specific skills in 
terms of structuring, valuation and ongoing risk management. In particular, experience has taught us that the 
risk firms face from making such loans is related to how skilfully firms can manage any impairment process. 
These are not traditional areas of expertise for most UK insurers and, in my view, firms must clear a high bar 
in order to demonstrate that they have adequate systems and controls in place to manage these types of 
risks and exposures. We recently consulted on this topic5 and look forward to further engagement with 
industry. 
As a final word on this subject, when we have asked insurers directly about the impediments to investing in 
infrastructure assets, the number one problem raised is the lack of suitable investment opportunities, and not 
the regulatory framework. Perhaps they are just being polite but it seems to me that, when faced with the 
                                                      
4 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/regulatorydata/capital/2016/sep/bsrcrelease1609.pdf  
5 CP48/16, http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Pages/publications/cp/2016/cp4816.aspx  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
  cold reality of taking on these risks, insurers have often simply concluded that the yields available are 
insufficient compensation for the risks incurred.  
An over-zealous approach from the PRA? 
I now turn to the other general theme from TSC submissions – whether or not we at the PRA have 
implemented Solvency II over-zealously. Or put another way, have we ‘gold–plated’ the directive? You will be 
unsurprised to hear that I say not. As I said earlier, it is only natural that there will be tension between the 
regulator and firms, because our objectives may be consistent but they are different. But rather than ask you 
to take my word on trust, let me provide some practical examples and attempt to explain how and why we 
have acted in the ways we have.  
First, consider the challenge that the Association of British Insurers (ABI) made in its written evidence to the 
TSC6, that the Senior Insurance Managers Regime (SIMR) that we have introduced “extensively ‘gold plates’ 
pillar 3 requirements of Solvency II”. The SIMR is designed to ensure the individual accountability of senior 
managers and directors of insurers for their own conduct, for overseeing the business conduct of key 
individuals reporting to them, and for the ongoing safety and soundness of their firms and the protection of 
their policyholders. As such, it is a key tool that the PRA uses to deliver its objectives. The SIMR is 
consistent with the provisions of the Bank of England and Financial Services Act 2016. So whilst the ABI is 
correct in its assertion that SIMR is not required by the Solvency II directive, it is the consequence of UK 
legislative choices and not simply an invention of the PRA.  
Second, there is the thorny topic of approvals under Solvency II and, in particular, internal model approvals. 
The industry is quite right to point out that the overhead to gaining model approval is considerable. In some 
cases, weight rather than page length would have been a more appropriate measure of application size. But 
remember that firms with approved internal models in effect set their own regulatory capital requirements. 
Once we grant model approval, the PRA has only a very limited ability to adjust a firm’s Solvency Capital 
Requirement. And as my colleague David Rule previously commented7 “even acting in good faith, business 
pressure may create the risk that model changes generating lower capital requirements are favoured over 
time, and therefore that solvency standards might deteriorate”. In designing our approach, we were also 
mindful of the FSA’s experience in approving internal models for banks under Basel II, where promised 
future improvements tended not to materialise. It should therefore come as a surprise to no-one that we 
approach model approval diligently, sceptically and rigorously.  
Third, and relating to model approvals, is the issue of the PRA’s own internal views on model calibration. We 
have previously commented on our use of quantitative indicators8, or QIs, but I think it is worth repeating that 
they are indicators and not pass/ fail standards. In particular, the standard for model approval is that firms 
must meet the tests and standards laid out under the Solvency II directive, and that is the basis for our 
                                                      
6 http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/treasury-committee/eu-insurance-
regulation/written/47301.pdf  
7 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/921.aspx  
8 SS17/16, http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/publications/ss/2016/ss1716.pdf. CP20/16, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/publications/cp/2016/cp2016.pdf  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
  assessments. We do not operate QIs as a minimum standard, but rather as an indication of the sort of 
calibration level we would expect to see for standard portfolios. Models falling outside of our QI ranges (both 
above and below) attract increased scrutiny.  
Take as an example our QIs for corporate bonds. We feel that it is hard to argue that a model calibrated 
below the levels of credit spread increase we saw as recently as 2008-2009 meets the one-in-200-year 
standard required by the Directive. And so we set our QIs accordingly. But modelling credit risk is a complex 
business, subject to nuance and considerable expert judgement. Indeed, reasonable, knowledgeable experts 
might perfectly well disagree on some of the key assumptions. For those reasons, we have actually 
approved internal models with credit components that do not meet our QIs, where the firms in question 
demonstrated that their exposure is atypical and hence warrants a non-standard calibration, or provided  
off-setting conservatism in other aspects of the model.  
PRA’s approach to insurance supervision 
I’d like to turn now to some broader thoughts about what it means for the PRA to supervise insurance 
companies. I’ve previously spoken9 about the history of insurance regulation in the UK and won’t re-hash 
that here, since I’ve not yet reached the age where it is acceptable simply to repeat myself. Happily, 
according to our longevity QI I should have plenty of time for that further down the track. But I would like to 
provide some insights into why and how the PRA operates in the way it does.  
The UK insurance industry is the fourth largest in the world. It employs 300,000 people in the UK, provides 
cover for nearly 27 million households10, and has £2.4 trillion11 of assets.  
It is therefore unsurprising that Parliament has given the PRA a General Objective of delivering safety and 
soundness of insurers, as well as banks. But for insurers only, Parliament has also given us an additional 
Insurance Objective – of equal weight to our General Objective – which is to contribute to securing an 
appropriate degree of policyholder protection. Now that sounds like rather a mouthful, but fortunately the 
Bank’s Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) has today published a thorough evaluation of the PRA’s 
approach to its Insurance Objective.  
The Bank set up the IEO in 2014 to help Court evaluate the Bank’s performance. Early last year, Court 
asked the IEO to consider whether we are doing enough of the right sorts of things to deliver the Insurance 
Objective. The IEO’s report includes a number of interesting findings, which I welcome and find consistent 
with my own observations from my time as Executive Director of Insurance Supervision.  
In particular, the IEO found that there is a lot of activity going on in pursuit of policyholder protection. This 
comes as no surprise to me. The PRA’s insurance supervisors, actuaries and other professionals have in my 
                                                      
9 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech877.pdf  
10 Source: ABI factsheet https://www.abi.org.uk/~/media/Files/Documents/Publications/Public/2016/KeyFacts/ABI-
UKInsuranceAndLongTermSavings-KeyFacts.pdf  
11 As at 2016Q2, based on insurers’ reporting to the PRA 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
  experience a strong public-service ethos. They are strongly motivated to protect insurance policyholders, 
which is for some a more human motivation than safety and soundness.  
However, the IEO found that we could do more to explain what we mean by “policyholder protection”. Some 
of this is straightforward, such as ensuring staff have clear legal analysis and understand where and when 
the PRA should and should not act, and we confirm in our response to the IEO’s report that we will improve 
that analysis and training where required. But the IEO also raises some deeper questions about how much 
protection the PRA should seek to deliver, for which sorts of policyholders, and with what confidence. And it 
is those deeper questions that I intend to consider briefly in the remainder of my comments today.  
Insurers are subject to what is known as “twin peaks” regulation in the UK. In addition to supervision from us 
in the PRA, the Financial Conduct Authority also supervises insurers. And the IEO report makes it clear that, 
in the context of securing policyholder protection, the FCA has the primary role. The key word of the PRA’s 
objective is “contribute”. We should only act when there are prudential concerns, whereas the FCA acts on 
wider matters of fairness. To give an example: the PRA might intervene to prevent an insurer from selling 
new policies if it had inadequate financial resources, but it would be for the FCA to consider whether those 
policies contained unfair terms and conditions. In most circumstances the split of responsibilities is clear, but 
we need to be sure we are sufficiently explicit about the limits of the PRA’s role in respect of areas such as 
with-profits business, corporate restructurings and firms that close to new business and go into run-off.  
Another important consideration for us is whether the PRA should seek to protect all policyholders equally. 
The insurers we supervise received £260bn of gross written premium in 2016.  Some might say that the PRA 
acts as though “all policyholders are equal, but some are more equal than others”. But in my view there is no 
need to obfuscate in this manner and we should be quite clear that while the regulatory standard set in 
Solvency II is uniform, we do not in supervision attempt to cover all policyholders equally. It is in my view 
entirely appropriate that we should direct more of our resources towards policyholders who will suffer greater 
financial hardship if their policies do not pay out as promised, or those for whom there is the greatest 
asymmetry of information between company and customer, or who face  the highest possibility of being 
unable to replace cover if it is lost.  
For example, five million households have life insurance and two million have personal pensions.  Some of 
the oldest and most vulnerable people in our society are reliant upon income provided by insurers under very 
long-term annuity contracts, into which they have invested their life savings. While the FSCS plays a vital 
role, the financial harm caused by the failure of an insurer in this space would be considerable and it is quite 
right that the PRA devotes significant resources to supervision of this sector, and that we have a very low 
appetite for any firm being unable to honour its promises.  
In contrast, there is a range of other insurance contracts for which the consequences of firm failure are less 
severe, and hence with limited resource to spread around the PRA’s supervisory approach can be somewhat 
less intense. For example, there are various classes of property insurance, such as mobile phone, for which 
an argument could be made that the PRA should restrict itself to a lower level of supervision. Our resourcing 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
  model already works to some extent in this way, but the IEO has challenged us to think more deeply about 
this question. 
Another interesting area is insurance bought by commercial or corporate customers. In these cases, the 
information asymmetry between buyer and seller is lower, or sometimes reversed, and contracts are typically 
renewable annually, meaning that there are lower concerns about customers being locked into long-term 
policies. In circumstances where buyers often choose their cover provider based on third-party measures of 
financial strength (such as opinions from rating agencies or insurance brokers), there is a case to be made 
that the need for the regulator is reduced. Indeed, many in the London Market have made this very point 
(somewhat less subtly!). But before anyone excitedly hears this as confirmation that the PRA will no longer 
regulate certain types of insurer, remember that we have a statutory objective to contribute to protecting 
policyholders of all stripes. So the debate is about ‘how’, not ‘whether’.  
In fact, the PRA’s resourcing model already works to focus our resources on those areas of most concern. 
We categorise each regulated firm according to its size and the potential harm customers would suffer 
should it fail. The majority of firms we regulate are assigned the lowest category, reflecting the low level of 
risk they pose to our objectives. Firms in higher categories receive more supervisory and specialist 
resources, and decisions for those firms are approved at more senior levels within the PRA’s decision –
making framework. The IEO have challenged us to look at this system again and we will do so. Our 
Executive Director for Insurance Supervision, David Rule, will take forward discussion of all of these issues 
with the Prudential Regulation Committee. We will then revise our Approach to Insurance Supervision 
document to explain any changes we decide to make.  
In doing this we will of course need fully to factor in our third objective, to facilitate effective competition – 
which was also recently reviewed by the IEO12. Although this is a secondary objective, it is given a high 
priority in the PRA and is also quite rightly a topic in which the Treasury Select Committee takes a strong 
interest. Our competition work spans banking and insurance, but there has been much more public debate 
about the former. We have, however, been pursuing our objective assiduously on the insurance side – to 
pick out some examples of steps we have taken to facilitate competition: 
  we have created a very proportionate regime for the 40% of firms we regulate who are not covered by 
Solvency II; 
   we have given around 85% of Solvency II firms in the UK the opportunity to avoid around 70% of the 
quarterly reporting burden they would otherwise face; 
   we are working with HMT, HMRC and the London Market to introduce a new structure for  
insurance-linked securities; and 
                                                       
12 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Documents/ieo/evaluation0316.pdf  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 9 
 
9 
   we have authorised 19 new insurance companies and Lloyd’s managing agents in the first three years of 
the PRA’s existence.  
Conclusion 
 Financial regulation and supervision can sometimes be a dry business. And in insurance in particular, some 
of the more arcane aspects of the regulatory framework can rapidly turn off everyone except us and the 
industry. 
I have therefore spent some time looking into individual policyholder cases, to remind myself about what is 
going on at the frontline. One in particular made a powerful impression on me. A young man got in touch with 
an insurance company to claim on his critical illness cover. The reason for the claim was that his 4-year old 
son had brain cancer. The cancer was in a difficult place, and the best-case outcome from a forthcoming 
operation was grim. The worst-case was the grimmest of all. The father was calling to claim on the policy in 
order to help cover the ancillary costs to the family while the NHS took forward this procedure. The company 
did the right thing, and it had enough money to do the right thing. 
I and others were only exposed to this case in a wholly anonymised way, for data protection reasons. 
Despite this I have never been in a meeting where so many people wept.  
This is what policyholder protection is really about. It’s not about the Risk Margin, the view to ultimate, the 
Matching Adjustment or corporate bond spreads. It’s about making sure that insurance companies are there 
to help when disaster strikes. That’s why we take this part of our job so seriously. 
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
 