 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Governor’s opening remarks at the presentation of 
the Inflation Report – February 2017 
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
         Belgrade, 22 February 2017 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Welcome to the presentation of the February Inflation Report. 
I would like to begin just as I will conclude – by summing up last year. Namely, 2016 ended with year-
on-year inflation of 1.6%, the fiscal deficit of 1.4%, the current account deficit of 4%, the NPL level of 
17%,  foreign direct  investment  of EUR  1.9  bln and the  customary  inflow  of remittances  of 2.6 bln.  
Why am I starting off like this? It is because the fiscal deficit of 1.4% was lowered by 2.3 percentage 
points relative to the year before, the current account deficit fell from 4.7% to 4%, and the level of 
NPLs  fell  by  4.6  percentage  points  to  17%  compared  to  the  end  of  the  last  year  –  these  being 
preliminary results. All these are reasons which underpin our decision to start this year with the new 
target of 3.0±1.5%. The results from 2016 justify our decision to lower that target. I expect this will 
be the best confirmation that Serbia ranks among the countries running low and stable inflation.      
Inflation is expected to move within the target tolerance band as of early this year, on account of the 
effects of past monetary policy easing, the recovery of domestic demand and global oil prices, and a 
gradual rise in inflation abroad. The key risks to the projected inflation path are related primarily to 
the  international  environment,  notably  the  diverging  policies  of  the  leading  central  banks  –  the 
Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank, as well as uncertainties associated with movements 
in oil prices. The Federal Reserve raised its rate in December and it became probable that the pace of 
rate hikes would be faster than expected. On the other hand, the European Central Bank’s decision 
to extend its quantitative easing programme until at least end-2017 signals the continuation of the 
Bank’s monetary accommodation, expected to moderate adverse effects of the Fed’s policy.  
What  I  wish  to  highlight  is  that  today  Serbia  is  more  resilient  to  all  external  shocks  thanks  to  the 
improved macroeconomic fundamentals, such as the narrowing of internal and external imbalances 
set in place by fiscal and structural adjustments. In particular, the fiscal deficit was slashed from 6.6% 
in 2014 to 1.4% of GDP in 2016, bringing down the share of public debt in GDP. This helped achieve 
the three-year objectives of the fiscal consolidation programme, a year earlier than planned. At the 
same  time,  fully  covered  by  foreign  direct  investment  for  the  second  year  in  a  row,  the  current 
account deficit declined from 6.0% in 2014 to 4.0% of GDP in 2016. 
The influence of external factors and the increased resilience of our economy are also evident in the 
FX market – through maintenance of relative stability of the dinar exchange rate, which is no longer 
news  for  anyone.  Depreciation  pressures,  emerging  late  last  and  early  this  year,  were  in  part 
generated by uncertainties in the international financial market and in part by the seasonally higher 
demand in foreign currency for the purchase of energy products. In an effort to ease excessive short-
term volatility of the exchange rate, the National Bank of Serbia intervenes in the FX market and will 
continue to do so, regardless of the direction of pressures. This means intervening on both sides. In 
so doing, we do not target any particular level of the exchange rate nor do we intend to influence its 
trend.  
 1 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues,  
As  is  well known  to you,  the  task of  the  National Bank  of  Serbia  is to  preserve  not  only  price,  but 
financial stability as well. The Bank has been striving to strengthen the capacity of banks to resolve 
the NPL issue and to encourage the development of the NPL market. As a result of measures taken 
under  the  NPL  Resolution  Strategy,  the  share  of  NPLs  in  total  loans  declined  significantly  – 
according  to  preliminary  data,  from  21.6%  at  end-2015  to  17.0%  at  end-2016,  their  lowest  since 
2011.  This  only  serves  to  confirm  once  again  that  a  systemic,  interinstitutional  and  coordinated 
approach yields results in this area.  
While my associates from the Directorate for Economic Research and Statistics will present in detail 
our assessments of macroeconomic developments and our latest projections, I would like to highlight 
several key messages.  
The National Bank of Serbia will continue to keep a close eye on and to assess the developments and 
trends in the domestic market and the international environment. As so far, we shall use all available 
instruments to ensure that inflation stays low and stable in the medium run. This is the best way in 
which  a  central  bank,  while  at  the  same  time  maintaining  financial  stability,  can  contribute  to 
economic growth. 
Growth is expected to accelerate  to 3.0%  this and 3.5%  next year,  driven, as so far, by investment 
and  exports  (which  posted  an  exceptionally  high  growth  rate  in  2016).  Household  consumption  is 
likely to provide an increasing contribution, mostly owing to the recovery in the labour market.  
As  exports  significantly outpaced  imports in 2016, the  trade  deficit  narrowed by  21%  compared to 
the year before. Reflecting further improvement of the investment ambience, the inflow of foreign 
direct investment was high and project-diversified – most notably in export-oriented sectors. It came 
close to EUR 1.9 billion in 2016 and was more than sufficient to cover the current account deficit.  
Furthermore,  thanks  to  all  results  of  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  an  international  financial 
institution issued the first long-term dinar security. Namely, in December last year the EBRD issued a 
three-year dinar bond, which will be traded on the Belgrade Stock Exchange. The dinar proceeds will 
be  on-lent  to  local enterprises, notably SMEs. This move  underpins the  dinarisation process, which 
remains among our strategic commitments.  
Finally, please remember these figures, they are very simple. We ended last year with year-on-year 
inflation  of 1.6%,  the  fiscal  deficit  of  1.4%,  the  current  account  deficit  of  4%,  and  the  NPL  level of 
17%. We intend to further improve these results which have exceeded the expectations of many.  
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues,  
Thank you for your attention. I will now give the floor to my colleagues. 
 2 
