Amando  Tetangco:  The  Philippine  banking  system  -  the  past,  the
present and the future
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2017  Annual  Reception  for  the  Banking  Community,
Manila, 10 January 2017.
 It is a tradition that we host this reception at the beginning of the year, when we commemorate
the anniversary of central banking in the Philippines.  For the information of those among us who
are too young to remember, the Central Bank of the Philippines or the CBP opened for business
for the first time on January 3, 1949; that’s 68 years ago.
And  while  the  country’s  central  monetary  authority  is  now  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  —
whose 24th anniversary we will celebrate on July 3, 2017 – we maintain the tradition of holding
this annual event at the beginning of the year.
To us, this is the perfect time to reflect on the past, the present, the future and how we can make
things work even better, moving forward as one community.                    
2016 has been described as a year like no other – it started off with a bang, with China’s stock
market on a seeming free fall that shook global markets; we saw for the most part of the year
global anxiety over the timing, pace and magnitude of the US Fed policy rate decision; by mid-
year, the unexpected Brexit results shocked us; then came the surprise victory of US President-
elect Donald Trump.  2016 ended with the world uncertain over global politics and policies and
how these would impact on economies and people.
Indeed, 2016 brought volatility, uncertainty and other threats to growth and stability.     
In the Philippines, strong fundamentals borne out of the continuing pursuit of a reform agenda, 
kept  our  economy  going…  and  growing.  And  once  again,  we  achieved  convergence  of  low
inflation  (below 2%) and healthy growth.  The Philippine economy grew by a 7.0 % in the first
three quarters of 2016, giving us the distinction of being among the fastest growing economies in
Asia. And it is broad-based growth we can be proud of:  it was supported by a strong services
sector,  a  resurging  industry  and  manufacturing  sector,  a  rebounding  agriculture  sector,  and
robust consumption and capital formation. 
Our external position also provided additional support to the economy. The peso remained in line
with  regional  movements,  while  our  current  account  continued  to  register  a  surplus.  Our
international reserves as of end 2016 stood at US$81 billion, adequate to cover over 9 months’ of
imports of goods and payment of services, as well as to cushion us from unexpected external
shocks.
The Philippine banking industry played a significant role in helping sustain the pace of growth of
our  economy.  Bank  lending  continued  to  expand  by  double-digit  rates  and  went  mostly  to
productive sectors. 
As of November 2016, consolidated bank loans reached P7.4 trillion, almost 19% (18.5%) higher
than the year-ago level.  Indeed, the banking sector kept pace with the growth of our economy.
Total assets of the banking industry reached P13.2 trillion, over 12% (12.4%) growth from the
November 2015 level, while deposits increased by more than 13% (13.5%) to P10.1 trillion, an
all-time high. 
Significantly, asset quality improved further with non-performing loans at 2.0% while capitalization
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
remained comfortably above the minimum required under national and international standards.
And the banks continued to report profits.
In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Philippine  banking  sector  not  only  survived  2016,  it
continued to thrive.
And more than these, our stress tests indicated that our banks can withstand extreme shocks in
both credit and market risks.
Third party analysts also have positive reviews concerning our banking industry. For instance,
the Philippines is the only banking industry within Asia Pacific that was given positive outlook by
Fitch Ratings in 2016.   Meanwhile, Moody’s recognized our banking industry as the only one
within ASEAN  that  has  a  stable  outlook  on  all  rating  factors  —  operating  environment,  asset
quality and capital, profitability, funding and liquidity.
Indeed, our banking sector is sound, stable, and continues to be a source of strength for our
economy.  The Philippine economy has recorded 71 quarters of uninterrupted growth. Our banks
helped nurture this virtuous cycle for our economy.
Let us therefore congratulate the leaders of our banking industry for making this happen.  Let us
also thank other institutions that support our banking system.
Of course you and I know that it was not easy getting here. Together, the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas and the banking sector worked together to continue to strengthen our banking system,
raise  risk  management  standards,  and  align  governance  standards  with  international  best
practices.
The process of collaboration has been challenging but our performance does speak for itself.
Today, we find ourselves in a strong position to ride out the waves of change. Nevertheless, we
are fully aware that past success does not guarantee immunity from future challenges.
Ladies and gentlemen, there  is  irrational  exuberance,  just  as  there  is  radical  uncertainty,  with
periods of calm in between.  This is our present reality and we must constantly work for balance
and re-balance, managing the pace and the content of foreseeable change in our own spheres of
responsibility. As  market  stakeholders,  we  must  see  change  in  the  factors  that  reshape  the
markets and their participants. The core agenda of the BSP and the past 12 years provide a rich
canvass from which we can draw some highlights.
We shifted to a risk-based supervisory framework so that we can assess the behavior of bank
management against standards of safety and soundness; obviously, mere paper compliance is
not  acceptable.  This  behavioral  focus  was  enriched  by  other  complementary  reform  strands
such as the governance standards of the Board of Directors and bank Senior Management, the
amendment to the compliance framework, as well as several other reforms on risks related to
credit, market, operations, and IT management.
We introduced higher bank capital thresholds so that banks can navigate a more interconnected
and sophisticated financial market system.
The  BSP  likewise  enhanced  its  cooperation  and  coordination  efforts.  The  Financial  Stability
Committee (FSC) was set up with a mandate to conduct effective macro-prudential surveillance
of  the  financial  system,  detect  signs  of  instability,  and  coordinate  policy  responses  with  other
regulatory agencies.
With the sovereign elevated to investment grade, the Philippines needed to re-position to better
manage cross-border commerce. In this connection, we thank Congress for its full support of
initiatives  liberalizing  foreign  entry  into  the  banking  system.  This    eventually  became  law,
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
specifically RA10574 and RA10641. On the latter, we are happy to report that nine banks have
entered the Philippine banking industry thus far, with six more banks  expressing interest.
Moreover,  to  guarantee  that  our  monetary  policy  actions  are  better  transmitted  into  market
pricing, we introduced the Interest Rate Corridor last year. Having market rates better aligned
with the BSP policy rate ensures a better transmission of monetary policy into the real economy. 
This  has  also  set  the  stage  for  the  progressive  roll-back  of  high  reserve  requirements  as  we
develop the sophistication of our policy instruments.
Meanwhile,  the  emergence  of  fintech  in  a  market,  driven  by  the  needs  of  millennials  is  also
expediting a shift in products and the delivery channels for services. The BSP facilitated this thru
innovative and responsive regulatory changes of its own.
While  all  these  changes  were  happening  in  the  banking  system,  our  continuing  focus  on
developing  a  more  inclusive  financial  system  resulted  in  more  concrete  gains  –    in  terms  of
providing  access  to  financial  services,  consumer  finance  education  and  stronger  consumer
protection. The intentional parallel thrust ensures that the growth of the banking system would be
truly 
international
commendations for these efforts and initiatives.
responsive.  And  we  have 
received  awards  and 
responsible  and 
Indeed,  we  have  seen  a  sea  change,  a  significant  transformation  in  the  banking  sector.  As
governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas for 11 1/2  years now,  I have had the privilege of
managing, with you as partners, the content and the pace of change for the banking industry,
seeing it evolve to where it is today, and moving it forward to help secure a better future for our
economy, for our people.
As  we  prepare  to  handle  the  challenges  of  this  new  year,  allow  me  to  call  on  stage  my
colleagues in the Monetary Board. Their collective wisdom enables us to craft policies that have
secured for us the stability of the past and the present, and the promise of an exceptional future.
It is an honor working with them. 
May I call :
MBM Alfredo Antonio
MBM Felipe Medalla 
MBM Armando Suratos
MBM Juan D. De Zuñiga  and
MBM Val Araneta.
Indeed, time flies. I end my second term as Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas on July
2,  2017.  I  take  this  opportunity  therefore  to  thank  the  leaders  of  our  banking  industry  and  the
BSP’s partner institutions for working with us through the worst of times, the best of times, and
all the time in between.
Together,  we  have  nurtured  a  vibrant  and  dynamic  banking  sector  that  is  sound,  stable  and
globally competitive. Indeed, it is a banking industry we can all be proud of.  
  Ladies and gentlemen, let us offer a toast.  To blessings of peace and prosperity for everyone,
for our people and our country. Mabuhay ang Pilipinas, Mabuhay po tayong lahat!  Cheers!  
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
