        PRODUCTIVITY AND STABILITY FOR SUSTAINABLE GROWTH 
 ADDRESS BY DR MARIO VELLA 
GOVERNOR, CENTRAL BANK OF MALTA 
DELIVERED DURING THE IFS ANNUAL DINNER 
18 NOVEMBER 2016 
Dear President and Members of the Committee of Institute of Financial Services (IFS) Malta, 
personally  and  on  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta  and  of  its 
Senior Management, I thank you for the opportunity to address this distinguished audience. 
Dear Minister. Ladies and gentlemen. 
This annual event brings together key stakeholders in this country’s economic development 
and growth, and in the development of the social, educational and cultural conditions without 
which economic development and growth are not possible. It is now an established tradition 
that  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  seizes  the  opportunity  of  the  Annual  Dinner  of  IFS 
Malta to make a number of factually grounded remarks about some matters in the remit of 
the Central Bank. 
The  traditional  presence  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  at  this  event  is  of  vital  importance 
because it provides the stakeholders present with a more dynamic view of the whole, in the 
light of the statutorily distinct roles of the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank. 
Before  sharing  some  thoughts  with  you,  I  would  like  to  commend  IFS  for  its  ongoing 
commitment  to  responding  to  the  changing  needs  of  the  marketplace  and  its  pursuit  of 
excellence in the provision of financial services education. 
It  is  encouraging  to  hear  that  the  Institute  has  had  a  successful  year  and  that  you  are 
working  on  new  initiatives  to  promote  even  higher  professional  standards.  This  is  most 
welcome, as education and professional development are fundamental to the sustainability 
of our financial sector and its continued success. 
Your  strategic  partnerships  with  the  University  of  Malta  and  overseas  professional  bodies 
such  as  the  European  Banking  &  Financial  Services  Training  Association  (EBTN),  the 
London Institute of Banking and Finance, and the Global Association of Risk Professionals 
Page 1 of 8 
 (GARP)  -  whose  representatives  are  with  us  tonight  -  reflects  the  Institute’s  excellent 
reputation. That a Committee member of IFS-Malta has been elected to the highest decision 
making body of a European association for a third consecutive term confirms the Institute’s 
integrity and professionalism. 
The  Central  Bank  has  always  worked  closely  with  IFS  and  will  continue  to  support  its 
activities. This year, we also cooperated with the IFS during the  European Money Week to 
promote  financial  literacy  to  underprivileged  youths  and  participated  in  the  successful  IFS 
Malta  Annual  Seminar  on  pension  reform.  I  look  forward  to  even  more  cooperation  in  the 
future. 
Mr  President,  well  done  and  thank  you  for  taking  a  proactive  stance  towards  raising  the 
standards of financial services education. I wish you and your Committee every success in 
your future endeavours. 
Malta’s recent economic performance: 
Against a backdrop of weak growth in Europe as a whole, economic activity in Malta remains 
robust.  Following an exceptional increase of 6.2% last year, real GDP expanded at a more 
than respectable average annual rate of just over 4% during the first half of 2016. 
The expansion in output is being driven by domestic demand, especially by strong growth in 
private  consumption  and  investment.    Exports  of  services  are  also  performing  well,  indeed 
significantly better than the export of goods. 
Growth  is  being  driven  by  private  market  services,  encompassing  a  mix  of  traditional  and 
new  sectors,  including  tourism  and  distribution,  aviation  and  professional  services.    The 
utilities,  which  were formerly loss-making, have now returned to profit, reflecting the use of 
cheaper energy sources and efficiency gains. 
Manufacturing  is  holding  its  own,  with  pockets  of  success  and  others that  continue to face 
strong competitive pressures.  At the same time, following vigorous growth last year, growth 
in value-added in construction has eased. 
Growth  in  output  depends  upon  and  feeds  into  a  dynamic  labour  market.    According  to 
administrative  records,  which  are  available  up  to  April  2016,  annual  employment  growth 
consistently  exceeded  4%  in  recent  quarters.    The  Labour  Force  Survey  paints  a  similar 
picture,  with  employment  gains  averaging  around  3%  during  the  first  half  of  the  year.  
More recently,  registered  unemployment  has  continued  to fall  to  record  low  levels  over  the 
summer. 
Notwithstanding such a dynamic economic performance, price pressures remain contained, 
with inflation fluctuating in a narrow range around 1% since the beginning of the year. 
The external balance, traditionally in deficit, has now been in surplus for a number of years, 
reflecting  growth  in  services  exports.    The  fiscal  deficit  narrowed  to  1.4%  of  GDP  in  2015 
Page 2 of 8 
 and  should  continue  to  decrease  further  this  year.    Indeed,  in  the  foreseeable  future  the 
budget  deficit  is  planned  to  fall  to  zero,  while  the  government  debt  to  GDP  ratio  should 
decrease to less than 60% of GDP. 
This healthy economic performance and fiscal consolidation efforts have been well noted by 
the credit rating agencies.  Indeed, last month, Standard & Poor’s raised Malta’s long-term 
sovereign  rating  to  ‘A-‘  with  stable  outlook.    Earlier,  Fitch  had  raised  their  outlook  from 
neutral to positive. 
In  sum,  the  Maltese  economy  is  going  through  an  unprecedented  period  of  strong  growth, 
low  unemployment, restrained  inflation,  a  positive  external  balance  and diminishing  budget 
deficit and debt ratios. 
Over the medium term, this performance has resulted in the convergence of Malta’s real per 
capita  income  with  the  EU  average.    Real  GDP  per  head  went  up  from  81%  of  the  EU 
average in 2004 to 89% in 2015. 
The conditions that determine performance: 
It is worth examining the conditions that have made this performance possible to ascertain 
the extent to which it is sustainable or otherwise. 
Some  of  the  growth  can  be  attributed  to  cyclical  factors.    For  example,  Malta  is  benefiting 
from  the  European  Central  Bank’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.    For  reasons 
unrelated  to  the  domestic  situation,  but  reflecting  a  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation  in  the 
euro  area,  the  ECB  is  using  both  conventional  and  unconventional  measures  to  stimulate 
aggregate demand. 
Hence interest rates are extremely low: consider that the domestic 10-year bond yield is now 
below 1%.  Such low rates stimulate aggregate demand.  One could also argue that, in the 
absence  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  measures,  the  euro  would  also  be  much  stronger 
than it is today.  This would have had adverse implications for external competitiveness and, 
hence, Maltese exports. 
Over the last two years, the economy also benefited from exceptionally strong government 
investment  -  with  a  key  role  played  by  EU  funds  -  as  the  administration  made  sure  that 
available entitlements were absorbed to the fullest extent possible. 
This  capital  spending  has  both  a  temporary  and  a  permanent  effect.  While  the  projects 
themselves  are  under  way,  investment  boosts  aggregate  demand  as  seen  in  the  levels  of 
activity  in  the  construction  sector.    Once  the  projects  are  completed,  the  additional  capital 
stock  that  has  been  put  in  place  enhances  efficiency  and  allows  the  economy  to  continue 
growing into the future. 
This  brings  me  to  a  crucial  concept  in  the  analysis  of  Malta’s  underlying  economic 
performance: potential output.  Potential output can be understood in many ways.  Intuitively 
Page 3 of 8 
 it  can  be  seen  as  the  maximum  output  an  economy  can  produce  without  generating 
imbalances  that  show  up  in  inflation.    Potential  output  is  a  conceptual  measure.    It  can  be 
estimated, but not observed. 
The Central Bank devotes much effort to estimating Malta’s potential output growth and its 
underlying  determinants.    Growth  in  potential  output  can  be  largely  ascribed  to  structural 
reform measures  that  bring  about changes  in  the factors  of  production, namely  labour  and 
capital,  and  the  way  they  are  combined,  or  productivity.    We  estimate  that  the  potential 
growth rate of the Maltese economy has more than doubled from below 2% at the time of the 
global financial crisis to over 4% today. 
This  partly  reflects  a  steady  increase  in  the  labour  supply,  coming  from  higher  female 
participation  in  the  work  force,  measures  to  increase  the  effective  retirement  age  and  the 
influx  of  foreign  workers,  mainly  from  EU  countries.    Apart  from  the  increase  in  labour 
supply,  the  quality  of  human  capital  has  also  improved.  At  the  same  time,  a  pick-up  in 
investment,  partly  driven  by  developments  in  the  energy  sector,  has  boosted  the  capital 
stock.  However, there is ample scope for improvement of labour productivity in the coming 
years. Indeed it is critical that it must improve. 
A sound and stable financial system is an essential pre-condition for strong and sustainable 
economic  performance.  The  performance  of  the  domestic  financial  system,  especially  the 
core domestic banks, which have the strongest linkages to the domestic economy, remained 
sound  with  strong  capital  ratios,  high  liquidity  and  remained  very  profitable  despite  the 
challenges of a prolonged low interest rate environment. 
Asset quality continued to improve, as non-performing loans, especially to the non-financial 
corporate  sector  declined  by  almost  12%,  mostly  reflecting  improved  creditworthiness  and 
an  increased  commitment  by  borrowers  to  honour  their  loan  commitments.  As  a  result  the 
Non-performing Loan ratio declined to 6.5% by mid-year and is expected to decline further to 
below  6%  later  on  this  year.  While  banks  have  continued  to  adopt  a  prudent  stance  by 
increasing provisions, and while such loans are generally covered to a significant extent by 
collateral, nevertheless they need to build further coverage and exercise restraint in dividend 
distribution to shareholders to preserve further the soundness of the banking system. 
In  this  regard,  the  authorities,  namely  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Malta  Financial  Services 
Authority through the Joint Financial Stability Board, have taken policy measures to ensure 
that  by  preserving  its  soundness,  the  overall  banking  system  remains  supportive  of 
economic growth. During 2016, the authorities introduced the Other Systemically Important 
Institutions  capital  buffer,  to  preserve  capital  in  those  banks  that  are the  most  systemically 
important  for  the  domestic  economy.  We  have  also  launched  the  Countercyclical  Capital 
Buffer, although this has been currently set at 0% as credit growth has not been excessive 
relative to economic growth or contributing to asset price inflation. 
Page 4 of 8 
 Other  decisions  to  maintain  the  soundness  of the  banking  system  relate  to  addressing the 
stock  of  NPLs,  which  is  incidentally  also  high  on  the  agenda  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism.  In  this  regard  the  authorities  launched  a  consultation  process  with  the 
stakeholders involved, to amend Banking Rule 9 which involves measures addressing credit 
risks arising from the assessment of the quality of asset portfolios of credit institutions. 
In  a  nutshell,  the  proposal  aims  to  establish  a  concrete  plan  with  those  banks  with  NPLs 
higher than 6% to reduce such NPLs below that level over a period of 5 years, where failure 
to  adhere  to  this  plan  will  require  the  institution  to  shore  up  its  resilience  through  the 
accumulation of an additional capital reserve. 
Meanwhile, on a European level, the European authorities are pushing for the establishment 
of  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS),  which  is  a  necessary  ingredient  to 
complete the architecture of the Banking Union project. This is because a common deposit 
insurance  fund  inspires  the  same  level  of  confidence  to  depositors  throughout  the  entire 
Banking Union, creating a consistent and common framework for supervision, resolution and 
depositor protection. 
Moreover, this joint safety net within the Banking Union is expected to prevent the creation of 
competitive distortions, thus facilitating cross-border banking and hence strengthen financial 
integration.  However,  in  this  regard,  there  is  still  some  way  to  go for  agreement  among  all 
Member States, as risk reduction measures, particularly through asset quality reviews of the 
less significant institutions and addressing the banking-sovereign debt loop, need to be also 
implemented.  Malta is committed to taking the EDIS file forward during its presidency. 
Risks:  
Going  forward,  we  expect  economic  growth  to  moderate,  while  remaining  robust  and  well 
above the euro area average.  We consider that risks around this scenario are balanced.  On 
the upside, there is the potential for private consumption to grow even more rapidly in a low 
interest  rate  environment  especially  if  labour  productivity  increases  to  permit  higher  wage 
settlements. 
The  downside  risks  relate  mostly  to  the  external  situation.    Malta  is  one  of  the  most  open 
economies  in  Europe,  heavily  dependent  on  international  trade for  its  long-term  prosperity.  
Slower than expected growth in key trading partners, geopolitical tensions in our immediate 
neighbourhood and a resurgence of protectionism threaten this prosperity. 
Another  dimension  of  risk  relates  to  inflation.    I  have  already  explained  that  the  Bank 
believes that Malta’s potential economic growth rate has risen in recent years, implying that 
the economy can grow more rapidly than it used to without fuelling inflation.  Nevertheless, 
output currently exceeds potential. 
Page 5 of 8 
 Should  such  a  situation  persist,  we  would  normally  expect  to  see  upward  pressures  on 
prices  and  costs.   We  have  not  observed  them  yet,  as  wage  growth  has  remained  largely 
contained and foreign inflation is subdued. 
The labour market situation, however, is tightening, which could lead to an intensification of 
wage  pressures.    This  underlines  the  need  to  achieve  better  results  in  labour  productivity 
growth  to  support  wage  demands  without  loss  of  competitiveness.  In  addition,  global  oil 
prices are now rising after having reached a trough towards the beginning of this year. 
Challenges ahead: 
The  Central  Bank  of  Malta’s  prime  responsibility  is  to  ensure  price  stability.    From  this 
perspective the challenge is to ensure that the Maltese economy continues to expand at  a 
sustainable pace, without overheating. 
It is vital that we avoid the formation of asset price bubbles.  The recent global financial crisis 
has  shown  the  huge  costs  that  can  arise  when  asset  prices  depart from  their fundamental 
values, eventually jeopardising the financial system and the economy as a whole. 
At  the  Central  Bank  we  are  keeping  a  very  watchful  eye  on  the  price  developments  in  the 
property  market.    Earlier  this  year  we  have  published  work  by  our  Economic  Research 
Department exploring property price misalignment with fundamentals based on an index of 5 
separate  indicators.    It  shows  that  at  the  end  of  2015  house  prices  were  still  below  their 
equilibrium fundamental value but nevertheless price trends in this regard will continue to be 
closely monitored. 
There are, however, other asset classes which need close observation to avoid formation of 
asset bubbles.  In the current low interest  rate environment investors’ search for yield may 
stimulate  excessive  risk-taking  behaviour.    More  investors’  education  is  needed  to  ensure 
that  there  is  better  appreciation  of  the  risks  of  unrated  corporate  debt,  especially  where 
markets are somewhat thin. 
At  the  same  time,  we  have  to  recognise  that,  as  members  of  the  euro  area,  the  monetary 
policy tool is no longer available at  the national level.  This means that action needs to be 
taken in those policy domains where we do enjoy some freedom of manoeuvre, that is, fiscal 
policy, macro-prudential policy and structural reforms. 
Policy recommendations: 
On the fiscal front, the recent developments I have just highlighted are encouraging. I would 
stress  the  importance  of  meeting  our  fiscal  targets  in  terms  of  structural  adjustment  and 
reduction in the debt ratio. 
Apart from compliance with domestic and European fiscal rules,  it is important for Malta to 
build  up  sufficient  fiscal  buffers  to  allow  us  to  counter  eventual  adverse  economic  shocks 
with  fiscal  policy  if  needed.  In  this  regard,  judicious  control  of  government  expenditure  is 
Page 6 of 8 
 essential,  bearing  in  mind  that  some  important  government  revenue  streams  may  be  past 
their peak and need to be replaced through new initiatives. 
Enhancing  labour  productivity  is  critical  -  forgive  me  for  possibly  boring  you  by  repeating 
myself  but  I  am  sure  you  will  agree  with  me  that  better  bored  than  sorry.  This  requires 
ongoing investment in our labour force, in our people. 
In terms of the general business environment, it is important to ensure that Malta remains an 
attractive  location  for  investment,  especially  foreign  direct  investment.    We  need  to  keep 
costs  competitive,  not  only  labour  costs  but  also  the  costs  of  ancillary  services  including 
energy, transport and finance, as well as transaction costs generally. 
Permit  me,  at  this  point,  to  stress  the  importance  of  containing  the  asymmetries  of 
knowledge facing investors, especially foreign direct investors. The Central Bank is doing its 
utmost and intends to boost its efforts and the quality of these efforts by providing top quality 
and  highly  reliable  public  domain  quantitative  and  qualitative  information.  Our  research 
capability is one of our top priorities. This enhancement of our capability to produce reliable 
knowledge  will  benefit  all  discerning  stakeholders  including  the  policy  maker  (who  we  are 
statutorily  committed  to  advise)  and  the  potential  investor  (who  abhors  any  vacuum  of 
knowledge concerning the target location). 
Promoting  a  healthy  business  environment  also  requires  action  to  reduce  excessive 
bureaucracy,  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  our  judicial  system  and  to  ensure  that  our  legal 
and regulatory frameworks remain appropriately flexible. 
At the Central Bank of Malta we have taken initiatives to help the business environment by 
launching the Credit Register and by promoting the setting up of the Development Bank to 
give better access to credit for SME’s and to infrastructure investments on the Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) model. 
We are also piloting changes to pre-insolvency procedures in an effort to curb unnecessary 
liquidations  and  save  businesses  that  deserve  a  second  chance  through  financial 
restructuring.    We  are  also  leading  efforts  to  amend  legislation  to  achieve  more  efficient 
contract  enforcement  procedures  to  address  the  long  duration  of  NPL’s  on  bank  balance 
sheets.  These  initiatives  will  help  us  climb  the  admittedly  steep  ladder  of  international 
rankings measuring business efficiency. 
The  great  efforts  of  other  public  sector  organisations,  led  by  the  Office  of  the  Principal 
Permanent  Secretary  and  Malta  Enterprise,  to  radically  streamline  business  enabling 
procedures  across  the  board,  are  critical  if  we  are  to  succeed  to  radically  upgrade  the 
business  environment.  I  insist  on  the  word  “radical”  because  only  a  radical  upgrade  (an 
upgrade from the very roots of the system) will make a difference. 
We need  to  enhance  competition. It  is  essential to  ensure that  consumers  and  businesses 
can acquire the goods and services they need at fair prices.  Within the banking system, we 
believe  that  there  remains  scope  for  payment  services  charges  to  respond  to  more 
Page 7 of 8 
 competition  and  for  further  pass-through  of  the  current  low  interest  rates  to  customers, 
although it is encouraging that we have seen reductions in recent months. 
Fast  economic  growth  does  not  come  without  some  pain  and  costs.    Infrastructure 
development has not kept up the pace and translates into practical problems. There are no 
easy  solutions  to  such  problems.    Building  infrastructure  takes  time  and  adopting  urban 
development  policies  is  inevitably  complex,  especially  in  a  very  small  island  where  every 
space is somebody’s back yard. 
At an international level, as an extremely open economy, we need to take a resolute stand 
against  policies  that  close  borders  to  trade  and  to  international  flows.    As  a  small  open 
economy we need to defend open borders and globalisation.  
However we need to acknowledge that the benefits of globalisation have been very unevenly 
distributed,  even  in  the  most  developed  economies  where  many  wage  earners  have  not 
seen  a  real  increase  in  wages  for  decades  and  have  lost  their  jobs  and  security.    This  is 
what  populism  feeds  on  whilst  certainly  not  offering  solutions  intended  to  ensure  social 
justice. 
Economic growth is only a means to the ultimate end of providing a higher standard of living 
and confidence about the future for all citizens.  But it is an absolutely necessary means. 
Page 8 of 8 
