Vítor Constâncio: Interview with Euronews
Interview with Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, and Euronews,
conducted by Ms Efthymia Koutsokosta on 15 September and published on 20 September 2017.
 After almost a decade of crisis and uncertainty in the Eurozone, optimism is on the rise.
But still unemployment is high and divergences among member states are always there.
What should be done so that the euro delivers on its promise to increase the wealth of
the societies? To discuss this I am joined here by the Vice-President of the European
Central Bank Mr Vitor Constancio. Mr Constancio: welcome to Global Conversation.
So, do you share this optimism, is it justified or there are risks that can really revive the
crisis once again?
It’s  important  to  underline  that  growth  has  converged,  meaning  that  the  rates  of  growth  of  all
countries are now very close together and that’s the best situation from that point of view since
the beginning of the monetary union. 
But is the Eurozone still attractive for the member states? And I am saying that because
after the crisis there are a lot of people saying that this currency is not designed for all,
but for only a few strong member states.
We  were  initially  eleven  countries,  then  12  in  2001  and  then  in  2007,  2011,  2014,  2015  other
countries joined which shows that during the crisis there were several countries still very much
attracted  to  the  idea  of  the  stability  and  the  openness  that  the  monetary  union  offers  to  all
countries. 
But we see some countries such as Hungary or Poland not willing to join.  
I won’t discuss the position of any particular country or government, it’s their view but there is a
presumption  in  the  treaty  –  and  that’s  what  Mr  Juncker  highlighted  in  his  speech  –  there  is  a
presumption  in  the  treaty  that  all  member  countries  are  supposed  eventually  to  join  except
countries that are still members and have an opting out clause like the UK which is now leaving
the EU altogether and Denmark. All the others, according to the treaty, are presumed to join one
day. 
There are also other proposals on the table concerning for example a minister, a finance
minister of the EU or the Eurozone or a Eurozone budget. Why is a minister needed right
now in the EU right now? 
The idea of a finance minister is more recent and presumably is connected with the introduction
of such functions at the central level of the euro area in order to have someone in charge and
responsible for managing that additional capacity and the stabilization function in the monetary
union. 
Does this mean that the member states give some powers to this minister?
Yes  of  course.  But  already  the  stability  and  growth  pact  implies  with  all  its  reforms  over  the
years, implies a lot of coordination and rules that have to be complied by the countries. That sort
of sharing of sovereignty in some aspects of fiscal policy is already there and what would be now
presumably  at  stake  is  the  creation  of  some  more  instruments  to  help  stabilize  potential
recessionary periods in the euro area in the future. 
But let me tell you about EU growth. Ok, things are going better, maybe the economy
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
goes better, maybe some wages are going up, maybe unemployment is falling but not
everywhere. There are for example the countries of the South still struggling to survive
with crisis, to create growth: Italy, Portugal, Greece. And we see other countries, the
strongest ones which are in a better shape. How you tackle this? 
Well, in the first place, all these countries that you mentioned and also Spain are growing and in
the case of Spain and Portugal they are growing above the average of the euro area right now. 
But people don’t feel that.
Not  yet.  But  in  the  first  place  it’s  being  felt  in  the  reduction  of  unemployment  also  in  those
countries. Growth has returned to all countries. And so, the degree of divergence has stopped,
which  has  been  ongoing  since  the  crisis.  And  of  course  we  need  to  strengthen  these
movements,  and  that’s  why  at  the  European  level  we  need  new  initiatives  to  deepen  and
strengthen the functioning of the monetary union. 
What about Italy? Is Italy the sick child of the euro area? Because of course Italy is a very
particular  case,  with  a  huge  exposure  to  non-performing  loans  and  a  banking  system
quite vulnerable. 
The main consequence of having too high non-performing loans is on profits because all those
loans  are  not  providing  the  revenue,  so  the  NPL  question  is  very  important  to  indeed  restore
conditions  of  improved  profitability  so  that  they  can  then  offer  new  credits  to  support  the
recovery. 
But despite the recovery of the eurozone, all these positive messages, we have many
challenges  ahead.  One  of  this  is  brexit.  What  could  be  the  biggest  risk  of  this
negotiation, of this divorce? 
In economic terms, one has to consider the size of the UK economy and the size of the EU to
see that the consequences and the disruption would be much more significant for the smaller
part in that negotiation than for the EU as a whole. I don’t expect and no one is expecting that a
brexit will mean that there would be no trade between the two parts. That won’t happen. There
will not be a total disappearance of trade.
Mr  Constancio,  you  are  in  this  position  since  2010.  So,  you  experienced  the  hardest
times of the Eurozone. What was your personal most difficult moment? 
Well,  it  was  the  start  of  the  phase  of  the  crisis  when  Greece  came  to  a  situation  where  the
revelation  about  the  budget  deficit  created  a  situation  of  non-access  to  the  financial  markets.
That was in 2010.
Could you say that the end was close? 
Well, I wouldn’t say that especially with hindsight but during those moments, indeed it was the
first big shock of the crisis. Then we had many other vicissitudes later on, some related with
Greece, some related with other countries, 2015 was also a difficult moment but the beginning
and the big shock and the surprise of what could imply was indeed the more difficult moment. 
Mr Constancio many thanks for being with us. 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
