Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: Value-Based Intermediation (VBI) -
propelling Islamic finance
Address by Mr Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Value-Based  Intermediation  (VBI)  Dialogue,  Kuala  Lumpur,  24
August 2017.
 Over the years, finance has lifted the lives of many, enabled businesses to grow and helped to
fund the construction of public infrastructure that we now depend on. Yet, as the global economy
transforms  and  society  evolves,  the  question  as  to  whether  the  financial  sector  is  sufficiently
serving the needs of the real economy continues to be debated. The evidence from the global
financial  crisis  underlines  the  need  for  the  financial  sector  to  restore  its  balance  with  the  real
economy. There is a need to rethink, reassess and re-strategise the role and contribution of the
financial  industry.  Undoubtedly,  there  is  an  increasing  expectation  for  the  financial  sector  to
deliver greater impact to the economy and society.
I am pleased to be here with you today and be part of this important milestone in our Islamic
finance journey. The issuance of the Value-Based Intermediation (VBI) Strategy Paper by Bank
Negara Malaysia marks the next step to realising the full potential of Islamic finance. On behalf of
the  Bank,  I  wish  to  thank  all  of  you  who  have  devoted  time  and  effort  to  work  with  us  in  this
important  initiative.  Your  input  has  been  valuable  in  designing  the  strategies  and  approach  to
advance VBI as a key thrust in propelling the Islamic finance industry further forward.
Today, I would like to share some of my thoughts on the concept of value-based intermediation. I
will begin by giving an account of the achievements of our industry within the past decades. I will
then touch on the role of VBI as a catalyst for growth with positive impact and the call for Islamic
finance to lead the way in realising the visions and objectives of VBI.
Islamic finance in Malaysia has evolved and grown by leaps and bounds over the last 30 years.
Today,  we  have  a  well-developed  and  regulated  Islamic  finance  industry.  There  are  diverse
industry players, both local and foreign. Prior to 2000, there were only two Islamic banks and two
takaful operators in the country with total market share and takaful penetration rate of less than
5%. Islamic banking assets have now grown to capture more than a quarter of the total banking
system while the takaful sector has increased its penetration rate to 14.6% of the population.
This is indeed very good progress. In the sukuk segment, Malaysia is also the market leader with
market share of more than 50% in sukuk outstanding since year 2000.
On the Bank’s part, the Islamic Financial Services Act 2013 was introduced to modernise our
regulatory and legal framework in adapting to changing needs of the industry. The issuances of
12 Shariah Standards set clear Shariah parameters to facilitate innovation beyond credit-based
products. There are more than 100 competitive financial products ─ ranging from basic financial
services  to  wealth  management;  corporate  finance;  and  investment  banking.  Meanwhile,
investment  accounts  have  spurred  greater  investment  intermediation  activities.  Since  its
inception two years ago, investment accounts have grown to account for 12% of total Islamic
deposits and investment accounts in 2016. Its offering has been further intensified through the
operationalisation of the Investment Account Platform which has the potential to mobilise capital
to various productive ventures effectively.
The  development  of  the  Islamic  finance  sector  is  seen  not  only  in  the  headline  numbers,  but
more importantly in addressing social and environmental concerns. Islamic finance has taken the
lead in the space of ethical finance where concepts, such as Sustainable, Responsible, Impact
Investing  (SRI),  have  been  embraced  in  pursuit  of  values  beyond  financial  motivation.  An
important  pioneering  example  in  the  Islamic  capital  market  is  the  issuance  of  SRI  sukuk  by
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Khazanah that brings greater social impact through the promotion of quality education. Just last
month,  the  first  Green  Sukuk  has  also  been  issued  in  the  country  to  promote  clean  and
sustainable power supply.
While  we  have  come  a  long  way,  now  we  need  to  think  of  ‘what’s  next’?  From  the  Bank’s
perspective, we believe that the way forward to propel the Islamic finance industry to the next
level of growth ─ if I may, a ‘game changer’ ─ should give equal weight to both economic value
creation and upholding ethical values. That is why we have embarked on VBI, which is a holistic
approach  for  our  industry  players  to  deliver  the  intended  outcomes  of  Shariah  that  generate
positive and sustainable impact to the economy, community and environment. While VBI shares
similarities with concepts such as Ethical Finance, ESG (Environmental, Social and Corporate
Governance) and SRI, the distinguishing factor is the central position of Shariah in determining
Islamic finance’s underlying values, moral compass and priorities.
There are four underpinning thrusts of VBI ─ entrepreneurial mindset; community empowerment;
good  self-governance;  and  best  conduct.  Through  the  embodiment  of  these  principles  in  the
business strategies of Islamic banks, there would be greater appreciation on the need to create a
positive impact on stakeholders, as called for by Shariah and Islam itself.
The adoption of VBI is expected to further strengthen the element of self-discipline within Islamic
banks.  A  common  moral  outlook  for  the  ultimate  good  leads  to  greater  accountability  and
integrity, resulting in strong consideration on the impact of any decisions made. Islamic banks
would be driven to continuously improve their offerings and treatments toward customers and
employees,  which  include  fair  and  transparent  disclosure.  The  more  sustainable  banking
practices  that  would  be  developed  based  on  VBI  concepts  encourage  the  creation  of  new
business opportunities and provide the foundation for more sustainable returns for Islamic banks
over the long term.
Customers, particularly businesses and entrepreneurs would benefit from the opportunity to be
more involved, in the design of more innovative products and services, that are best tailored to
meet  their  needs  and  circumstances.  Business  propositions  from  new  sectors  such  as  the
SMEs,  would  also  benefit  from  VBI-based  practices  where  financing  applications  would  be
assessed by Islamic banks based on their potential value creation, not just their credit scores.
Society  at  large  also  stands  to  gain  from  reduced  negative  externalities  as  any  activities  that
damage  the  community  and  environment  would  be  reduced  overtime.  The  practice  of  Islamic
banks in giving back to society, such as by integrating waqf and sadaqah within Islamic financial
transactions, can also create positive socioeconomic impact in communities. VBI should not be
mistaken for corporate social responsibility (CSR). In fact, VBI goes beyond the concept of CSR
with a pervasive approach to reconfiguring the way Islamic banking works.
Globally,  we  can  also  see  value-based  concepts  being  demonstrated  in  the  banking  sector,
where value-based practices have emerged to restore the role of finance in acting for the greater
good. TeamBank in Germany for instance, capitalises on the concept of fairness in its dealings
with customers to market its EasyCredit as its primary product proposition. The success of this
strategy  has  positioned  TeamBank  as  the  country’s  third  largest  consumer  finance  provider.
Equally  commendable  is  Westpac  Banking  Corporation,  the  first  Australian  bank  that  has
incorporated environmental filters in its day-to-day business decisions.
In Malaysia, I believe Islamic financial institutions are now at the right stage of development to
drive  this  important  change.  It  is  expected  that  Islamic  banks  would  take  the  lead  in  the  VBI
initiative and to embrace the new principles in their business strategies and operations. Given the
universal  nature  of  VBI,  the  application  and  adoption  of  similar  strategies  by  financial  groups
which comprise conventional financial institutions would be the next phase of this evolution as we
move  forward.  In  time,  I  believe  that  the  underpinning  thrusts  of  VBI  will  also  be  expanded  to
enhance its relevance to the takaful industry.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Realising the tangible impact of VBI is more of a journey than a fixed destination. However, it is
encouraging to note that a number of our Islamic banks have already started applying principles
of VBI in one way or another. What is needed now are strategies to realise the full potential and
amplify  the  impact  of  VBI  in  creating  positive  outcomes  for  shareholders  as  well  as  broader
stakeholders in Islamic finance. I would like to suggest three critical areas that require immediate
attention, for this momentum of change to be sustained.
First, VBI calls for a “transformation of the mind”, a change in how we think and how we act. It
takes a long view to recognise returns beyond profits where social and environmental gains are
also  equally  valued.  This  will  represent  a  major  paradigm  shift  in  many  institutions.  For  this,
strong and visionary leadership that sets the tone from the top, starting from the board and senior
management,  is  certainly  crucial.  Far-sighted  leadership  to  transform  culture,  systems  and
people will be central to this paradigm shift. To facilitate the process, the recently issued Strategy
Paper  on  VBI  will  be  complemented  with  an  implementation  guidance  that  is  currently  being
developed by the Bank in collaboration with the industry.
Second,  VBI  will  require  greater  stakeholder  activism  through  increased  transparency  on  its
adoption. This is a new initiative and it is imperative that our efforts go hand in hand with creating
greater  awareness  and  understanding  of  key  stakeholders.  The  public  sector  and  advocacy
groups play an important role. But customers and business ventures should also play their roles
wisely and use the power of their wallets to make informed choices. To catalyse this change, a
value-based  scorecard  will  be  introduced  to  realign  behaviours  and  expectations  towards  the
desire  to  impact  the  community  and  the  environment  in  a  positive  way.  The  scorecard  will
capture  important  dimensions  of  qualitative  performance  that  are  geared  towards  creating
sustainable outcomes by Islamic financial institutions.
The third critical area is adopting a collaborative approach to implementing VBI which will be key
to mobilising change. For VBI to work, the desired collaboration has to bring in not just our market
players,  but  also  other  non-financial  stakeholders,  to  pool  critical  skills  and  infrastructure  that
reside beyond our terrain. By expanding our network, we will be better able to deliver far greater
values that otherwise could not be achieved if we were to depend on limited capabilities within
the financial industry alone. With stronger collaboration, I believe there will be much more that
each  individual  can  learn  from  one  another.  In  this  context,  the  Community  of  Practitioners
comprising  committed  Islamic  banks,  will  be  instrumental  in  pioneering  advancements  in  VBI.
The Community of Practitioners will serve as the nucleus for other collaborative efforts. Networks
to  be  formed  will  comprise  a  diverse  group,  from  ventures  and  corporates  to  knowledge  and
advocacy  institutions.  Through  the  exchange  of  knowledge  and  experiences,  as  well  as
coordinated actions to address implementation issues, the Community of Practitioners can help
accelerate  the  execution  and  amplify  the  benefits  of  VBI.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  panel
members that will take part in the Panel Discussion today, which also includes representatives
from  the  Community  of  Practitioners.  We  can  certainly  gain  greater  insights  from  the  panel
members who will elaborate further on the VBI approach and provide interesting perspectives on
its implementation. 
In  conclusion,  while  the  Malaysian  Islamic  financial  sector  has  made  great  strides  since  its
inception over 30 years ago, the next growth frontier in Islamic finance is in realising its potential
to create greater socio-economic impact. Instilling values in the financial sector strengthens trust
of the people which benefits the public at large. The VBI initiative is envisaged to shape proactive
behaviour  amongst  industry  players.  For  the  Islamic  finance  industry,  the  move  towards
embracing  VBI  is  another  hallmark  in  our  journey  to  manifest  the  larger  aspiration  of  Islamic
finance. Islamic banks, with its natural affinity towards social justice are well-positioned to lead
this  agenda  and  become  the  prominent  and  leading  agent  of  positive  change.  However,  the
momentum of VBI is only sustainable through collective endeavours that prompt a shift in our
paradigm and change in our actions. It is only with our strong commitment that we can translate
the VBI vision into reality.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
