Yannis Stournaras: Prospects of the Greek economy and the role
of supervisors in regulating the banking system
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the International Forum of
Independent Audit Regulators (IFIAR) Inspection Workshop, Athens, 8 February 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I am deeply honoured to be here today and have the opportunity to share with you my thoughts
on  the  impact  of  ongoing  developments  in  the  Greek  economy  in  general  and  the  domestic
banking sector in particular. Before I move on, please allow me to highlight the importance of
financial stability as a necessary condition for achieving the goals of prosperity and sustainable
growth;  these  are  common  goals  between  market  participants  and  central  bankers.  This  pre-
condition becomes really important, as our macro-prudential environment becomes stricter with
the  passing  of  each  year.  Regardless  of  any  single  initiative  or  project,  the  general
macroeconomic  framework  and  key  financial  stability  conditions  are  absolutely  necessary  in
order to achieve overall positive performance. These simple facts have become abundantly clear
over the past few weeks in Greece, as we all look forward to reaching an agreement between the
Greek Government and the institutions as soon as possible and bringing the second review of
the current economic adjustment programme to a successful conclusion.
I  will  briefly  outline  some  of  the  most  significant  developments  that  have  been  made  in  the
domestic economy. These developments were accompanied by positive changes in the Greek
banking sector and, in particular, by a series of ongoing initiatives to achieve higher asset quality.
In this context, it is worth adding some thoughts to the ongoing discussion between banks and
supervisors,  in  terms  of  the  medium-term  impact  of  IFRS  9  implementation.  Finally,  a  few
remarks  about  cooperation  between  banking  and  audit  regulation  as  well  as  the  issue  of
mandatory auditor rotation are quite relevant for our discussion.
Following  a  deep  and  prolonged  recession,  Greece  is  currently  on  the  road  to  recovery.  The
rebound of economic activity in the second and third quarters of 2016 supports an expectation of
positive growth rate for the year as a whole, for the first time since 2014, and much stronger
growth in 2017.
As  you  are  aware,  the  economic  adjustment  programmes  that  have  been  implemented  in
Greece since 2010 aimed to address the large twin deficits (i.e. fiscal and current account) and
structural  weaknesses  from  which  the  economy  had  suffered  for  decades.  So  far  there  have
been remarkable achievements:
Unprecedented  fiscal  consolidation:  Over  the  period  2013–16,  the  primary  deficit  was
eliminated  and,  for  the  first  time  since  2001,  substantial  general  government  primary
surpluses were recorded.
Gains  in  external  competitiveness:  The  external  deficit,  which  exceeded  15%  of  GDP  in
2008, was eliminated, underpinned by a substantial increase in labour cost competitiveness
vis-à-vis our trading partners and an increase in the share of exports to 32% of GDP today
from 19% in 2009.
Structural reforms, notably in the labour market, but also in the goods and services markets
and in public administration.
Unlike in other Member States that also experienced similar crises, the Greek crisis did not come
from the banking sector. In an adverse international economic and financial environment, Greece
was hit by a serious sovereign debt crisis that required three economic adjustment programmes
that included, inter alia, substantial structural reforms and severe austerity measures. The sharp
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
deterioration of the macroeconomic environment that led to a loss of more than 25% of GDP
over these years bears testimony to the fact that the Greek crisis is more far-reaching and lasted
longer  than  initially  foreseen.  In  this  adverse  macroeconomic  environment,  unemployment
increased to historic high (post-war) levels, and disposable income dropped substantially.
At the outset of the crisis, deteriorating macroeconomic conditions and sovereign downgrades
blocked  access  to  international  capital  and  money  markets,  thus  creating  very  tight  liquidity
conditions and pressures to the financial sector.
As a consequence, banking sector developments were unprecedented including a large-scale
deterioration of Greek banks fundamentals and of asset quality. The extent of the deterioration
can be described in terms of losses due to the restructuring of Greek government bonds held by
the private sector (Private Sector Involvement – PSI): Greek banks suffered losses of about €38
billion in 2011, which was close to 170% of their total Core Tier I (CT1) capital at that time.
Due  to  the  liquidity  squeeze,  the  role  of  banks  as  intermediaries  was  undermined,  and  the
channels for financing the real economy were severely disrupted. In addition, substantial deposit
outflows took place from September 2009 to July 2015, primarily relating to the uncertainty of
depositors  regarding  economic  and  financial  developments.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  the
difficulties of credit institutions to provide liquidity to the real economy were further exacerbated
by procyclicality, as their capital base had to be used as a buffer against unexpected risks. As a
consequence, even higher capital adequacy ratios had to be met, rendering it even more difficult
for banks to finance the real economy.
The protracted recession, coupled with austerity measures, resulted in a significant increase of
non-performing  loans  and  impairment,  thus  undermining  profitability. As  a  result,  the  banking
system began to experience losses from the first quarter of 2010, and their capital base started
to erode. Despite efforts to support operating profitability, the high level of loan-loss provisions
resulted in successive negative results until the end of 2015.
Moreover,  due  to  the  unfavourable  macroeconomic  environment,  there  has  been  a  significant
credit contraction since the end of 2010. The cumulative reduction of the outstanding credit to the
private  sector  was  about  €54bn  (or  more  than  20%)  during  the  period  December  2010  –
December 2015. The demand for credit by both enterprises and households has dropped, due to
the  increased  business  risk  and  households’  uncertainty  about  their  future  finances  and  debt
servicing capacity. In addition, the imposition of capital controls in late June 2015 has hampered
economic activity. The effects seem to have been less severe than initially anticipated, due to a
positive  contribution  of  net  exports  and  a  lower-than-expected  decline  in  consumer  spending.
However, substantial adverse effects have been observed in the business environment.
Against this backdrop, the Bank of Greece has taken prompt and effective action to safeguard
financial  stability.  The  banking  sector  has  undergone  a  profound  restructuring  through
consolidation and recapitalisation, enabling it to withstand the crisis and the flight of deposits. As
a result, it now has adequate capital, loan loss provisions and collateral. Hence, the necessary
(though  not  sufficient)  conditions  are  in  place  for  the  banking  sector  to  address  the  major
challenge posed by the high stock of non-performing loans.
The authorities’ response to tackling non-performing loans is based on three pillars:
First,  enhancement  of  the  supervisory  framework  for  the  management  of  non-performing
loans  (NPLs).  The  Bank  of  Greece,  in  cooperation  with  the  ECB’s  Banking  Supervision
(SSM),  has  issued  supervisory  guidelines  for  the  internal  management  of  NPLs  and  has
recently agreed on NPE operational targets with banks for the period Q3 2016 – December
2019, entailing a reduction of NPEs by 38%. The Bank of Greece monitors on a quarterly
basis the implementation of NPE targets and related key performance indicators through an
enhanced prudential reporting framework. Moreover, the Bank of Greece has issued a Code
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of Conduct governing the relations between credit institutions and borrowers in arrears.
Second, establishment of a secondary market for NPL servicing and sales. The licensing
and supervisory framework for independent credit servicing firms has been established, thus
allowing the Bank of Greece to issue the first license at the end of 2016, while there are
many more in the pipeline. The sale of loans has also been largely liberalised and a current
assessment initiative could lead to further relaxation of requirements and documentation for
NPL credit servicing firms
Third, removal of legal, judicial and administrative impediments to NPL management. In this
respect,  the  household  insolvency  framework  has  been  improved,  the  legal  proceedings
have  been  simplified  and  accelerated,  and  secured  creditor  rights  have  been  enhanced.
That said, some impediments remain, such as the legal protection of bank and public sector
employees  involved  in  the  restructuring  of  NPLs;  the  design  of  an  efficient  out-of-court
settlement framework; and the tax treatment of provisions and write-offs.
As  a  result  of  these  actions,  the  stock  of  non-performing  loans  gradually  decreased  in  the
second  and  the  third  quarters  of  2016,  reflecting  among  others,  a  shift  of  banks  towards  the
offering of long-term loan restructuring. Looking forward, banks are expected to accelerate the
restructuring  of  viable  underlying  business  and  resume  their  intermediation  role  in  financing
investment.
The improvement in their operating environment and in their asset quality marked the return of
banks to operating profitability in the course of 2016. At the same time banks proceeded with the
implementation of their restructuring plans, which entailed the divestment of foreign subsidiaries
and the shedding of non-core activities.
Moreover,  banks  have  reduced  substantially  their  dependence  on  ELA  funding  by  the
reinstatement  of  the  waiver  for  Greek  bonds,  the  regaining  of  access  to  secured  interbank
funding, the slight increase of deposits and gradual deleveraging. In tandem, the capital controls
framework has been gradually relaxed with an emphasis on facilitating the conduct of business
activities. Further improvement in liquidity crucially hinges upon economic developments and the
restoration of depositors’ confidence.
It is now quite obvious that the domestic banking sector has experienced profound changes in
the  way  it  is  structured,  monitored  and  supervised.  Some  of  these  changes  were  costly  and
painful: for instance, resolving more than a dozen banks, or the completion of three rounds of
recapitalisation, with substantial dilution of private and public equity shareholders.
On the other hand, these initiatives helped both systemic banks and less significant institutions in
Greece  to  build  significant  capital  reserves  and  buffers.  Moreover,  on  account  of  the  ongoing
crisis  the  Greek  banking  sector  has  undergone  a  series  of  stress  tests.  In  fact,  since  the
beginning  of  the  current  decade,  Greek  banks  have  undergone  six  stress  tests,  four  of  them
accompanied by full-blown asset quality reviews. These exercises have been cumbersome to
say the least: precious resources have been spent.
However,  this  has  had  some  major  advantages:  First,  credit  losses  have  been  calculated
repeatedly and the possibility of having unanticipated losses is now smaller than ever. Second,
accountability of bank executives is now linked to specific quantitative and qualitative drivers and
a comprehensive monitoring framework is being implemented. Finally, buffers against potential
additional loan losses were specified as a result of a mandatory adverse scenario, and banks
have raised high-quality regulatory capital to support these buffers.
As we all know, eleven months from today, a new accounting standard, IFRS 9, will change the
way banks deal with credit losses, as well as their daily routine in terms of loss calculation in a
number  of  assets.  We  welcome  this  development;  as  we  have  repeatedly  stated,  it  will  bring
accounting losses closer to loss calculation according to supervisory methodology.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
IFRS 9 represents a breakthrough in the way banks manage and report the asset side of their
balance sheet, and could also have a material impact on regulatory capital requirements as well
as their pricing methodology. It can also serve as a catalyst in the ongoing debate about hidden
losses in European bank books vis-à-vis banking systems in other countries.
However, it is important to keep in mind here that the IFRS represent a remarkable case of EU
global leadership. In fact, it is arguably the single most prominent example of the EU successfully
leading the way in international financial reform in the past two decades, with its initial adoption of
IFRS in 2005 followed by an increasing number of jurisdictions in the ensuing years. There is little
doubt that the delays associated with these reforms would have been significant without the initial
impetus from the EU, with a relevant decision taken at the political level in 2000 and enshrined in
EU legislation in 2002. Against this background, the EU has a stake in the continued success of
the IFRS project.
It is not surprising that Greek banks’ provisioning policies have radically changed since the AQR
methodology was implemented and total losses were recalculated according to anticipated loss
drivers.  Let  us  recall  that  the  Bank  of  Greece  was  heavily  criticised  back  then  simply  for
frontloading  three-year  or  lifetime  losses  in  domestic  and  foreign  banking  books.  Ex-post
performance apparently indicated our projected losses did not differ much from actual reported
credit losses in subsequent years.
European  banks  in  general  and  Greek  banks  in  particular,  are  currently  preparing  for  their
transition  to  the  new  framework.  There  are  no  grounds  for  anticipating  any  delays  in  these
preparations.  Domestic  banks  in  particular  have  accumulated  significant  experience  towards
these goals. Moreover, it is worth noting that the largest part of their credit exposures has been
tested according to IFRS 9-equivalent methodology. This can be seen as one of the benefits of
having an Asset Quality Review exclusively designed for Greek banks like the one completed in
2015. In any case, we should all be in a better position to evaluate the medium-term impact of
IFRS 9 implementation soon, as the SSM will complete a full review on that matter, ahead of the
2018 stress tests and the methodology supporting that exercise.
Finally, allow me to add a few remarks about issues associated with the cooperation between
banking and audit regulation, as well as the issue of mandatory auditor rotation.
I  believe  that,  so  far,  the  debate  over  mandatory  auditor  rotation  has  mainly  consisted  of  two
competing arguments. On the one hand, proponents of mandatory rotation are concerned about
the risks that long-term auditor-client relationships pose to the auditor’s mindset. By limiting that
relationship,  rotation  would  improve  audit  quality  by  helping  ensure  that  auditors  remain
professionally  skeptical  and  do  not  become  overly  trusting  of  their  clients’  assertions.  That  is
more  or  less  the  key  idea  behind  requirements  stated  in  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding
(MoU), as agreed last year, and it is incorporated within a number of changes in the corporate
governance structure of Greek banks.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  more  or  less  obvious  that  the  know-how  acquired  by  an  auditor
concerning the specific business, financial and operational aspects of a company would be lost
with each rotation. Banks should hence support external auditors in understanding all key issues
as soon as possible.
European  banks  in  general,  and  Greek  banks  in  particular,  are  increasingly  reflecting  upon  a
series of key challenges for banking and audit regulators alike. The growth and diversity of non-
performing exposures across Europe, the width and complexity of derivative products and the
rapid differentiation of shadow banking instruments and markets, present key risks for regulators
in view of major changes in banks’ business models.
The recent financial crisis not only exposed weaknesses in banks’ risk management, control and
governance processes, but also highlighted the need to improve the quality of external audits of
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
banks.  External  auditors  can  contribute  to  financial  stability  by  delivering  quality  bank  audits,
thereby increasing market confidence in banks’ financial statements. Quality bank audits are also
a  valuable  input  in  the  supervisory  process  as  our  recent  experience  with  the Asset  Quality
Review has demonstrated.
We  strongly  believe  that  building  effective  relationships  between  prudential  supervisors  and
external auditors, and between prudential supervisors and audit oversight bodies, can enhance
banking supervision. It is also important to maintain effective communication between prudential
supervisors  and  external  auditors,  as  this  provides  significant  insights  and  valuable  market
perspective. These are forms of cooperation we have repeatedly relied upon over the past few
years for a number of issues and I must admit that they have enhanced our understanding of the
strengths and weaknesses of each institution we supervise.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I believe that we have come a long way towards addressing a number of challenges and tasks.
For  us,  the  ultimate  goal  in  meeting  these  challenges  is  to  shape  the  banking  system  into  a
position  where  it  can  undertake  effectively  its  main  task,  namely  the  financing  of  the  real
economy.  Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  the  improvement  of  the  Greek  banking  sector
landscape, the restoration of confidence and the elimination of certain risk factors are positive
elements that are expected to be a prime driver for growth of the Greek economy. Moreover, all
the changes to the institutional framework that we just discussed are key to ensuring that the
growth potential of the Greek economy will be sustainable and will not be threatened by any form
of structural weakness.
   5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
