Simon Potter: The Foreign Exchange Global Code - lessons learned
and next steps
Remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 2017 FX Week Conference, New York City, 12 July 2017.
 I  would  like  to  thank  Christina  Getz  and  Jamie  Pfeifer  for  their  excellent  assistance  in  the
preparation of these remarks and colleagues in the global central bank and FX community for
numerous insightful comments and suggestions.
Good morning.  It is a pleasure to return to FX Week USA, and I would like to thank FX Week for
the invitation.  Foreign exchange (FX) market participants play important roles in their interactions
with the New York Fed. They act as FX trading counterparties of the New York Fed and they
provide information on market conditions to support the Desk’s monitoring of financial markets
and transmission of policy. I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak with you today.  Before
I  begin,  I  would  also  like  to  note  that  my  comments  today  reflect  my  own  views  and  not
necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  or  the  Federal  Reserve
System. However, remarks on the expectations for FX counterparties reflect the policies of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
At this event two years ago, I highlighted the important role the FX market plays in facilitating the
flow of capital across the globe in support of international trade and investment. It is a critical
market that is relied upon by households, corporations, financial institutions, asset managers,
sovereigns and many others. In 2015, I called on the industry to help strengthen the foundation of
the market and to uphold its integrity.  Today, I am pleased to say that the industry answered that
call and there has since been significant industry engagement on work to promote the integrity
and  effective  functioning  of  the  FX  market. After  more  than  two  years  of  work,  the  FX  Global
Code   (the  Code  or  Global  Code)  has  been  published  to  serve  as  a  single,  global  set  of
principles  for  the  FX  market.    The  Code  is  accompanied  by  a  set  of  adherence  principles  to
promote its widespread adoption, and includes a set of illustrative examples to further describe
various practices.  In addition, a new, formalized Global Foreign Exchange Committee (GFXC)
was launched to engage an even broader set of regions than past efforts and to continue a more
defined work program across jurisdictions for upholding the Global Code.
1
In my remarks today, I will share reflections on the Global Code, including some lessons learned
in its development and the various steps underway to help promote and support its adoption. I will
then discuss the Global Foreign Exchange Committee’s (GFXC) objectives, which include the
ongoing  evolution  and  maintenance  of  the  Code.    Finally,  I  will  spend  some  time  discussing
particular  areas  where  the  market  is  evolving  and  where  the  GFXC  is  currently  soliciting
additional input, including on “last look.”
Development of the Code and its principles
The  Foreign  Exchange  Working  Group  (FXWG),  led  by  Guy  Debelle  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia,  was  established  under  the  auspices  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)
Markets  Committee  in  July  2015.   It  was  tasked  with  facilitating  the  development  of  a  single,
global set of principles for the FX market and accompanying tools to promote adherence to those
principles.  I had the pleasure of leading the work stream to write the Code, while Chris Salmon
of  the  Bank  of  England  led  the  effort  to  create  tools  to  promote  adherence.  The  work  of  the
FXWG was supported by the Market Participants Group (MPG), led by David Puth of CLS, which
included members from all corners of the FX industry. 
2
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
As made clear in the foreword, the Code is not regulation—it is a set of voluntary, global best
practices.  The development of successful best practices requires active engagement from a
diverse spectrum of market participants, which we were fortunate to have throughout this effort. 
The FX Global Code is intended for all FX market participants engaged in the global wholesale
market.  This  includes  sell-side  institutions,  certain  market  infrastructures,  and  buyside
institutions as well.   The spectrum of buy side institutions active in FX is particularly complex
and  varied,  encompassing  hedge  funds,  high  frequency  trading  firms,  asset  managers  and
corporates among others.  The size and complexity of their FX market activities and the nature of
those activities may differ significantly. Hearing the viewpoints of many different institutions was
critical to delivering a relevant Code for this diverse landscape, recognizing that while the Code
applies to all, the details of precisely how it applies may differ.  I found that the series of frank
debates and discussions that we—market participants and central bankers alike—had over the
past two years was an important process in itself, and not just a means to an end.  The result
was multiple drafts of the Code and, ultimately, a product that more clearly articulated principles
and defined terminology.  
The  55  principles  within  the  Global  Code  focus  on  promoting  transparency,    fairness  and
mitigating  risk  across  six  primary  areas–Ethics,  Governance,  Execution,  Information  Sharing,
Risk Management and Compliance, and Confirmation and Settlement.  I would like to highlight a
few of these principles to provide a sense of the Code’s content, and use these examples to
illustrate some of the fundamental building blocks of a fair, transparent, and efficient market. 
The Code begins with principles on ethics. The very first principle states that Market Participants
should  strive  for  the  highest  ethical  standards.  While  this  is  a  basic  concept,  the  principle  is
fundamental  and  underpins  each  and  every  principle  that  follows.    Market  participants  should
both have  the  right  tools to make the right choices and  want to  make  the  right  choices.    The
various principles on governance then build upon that ethical foundation. They highlight some of
the  key  structures  that  a  firm  should  have  in  place  to  support  responsible  behavior  by  its
individual employees and as an organization overall. 
The principles within the execution section were those that occupied the most hours of focus
during the last two years.  Principle 8, for example, is the first execution principle and is quite
short:  “Market  Participants  should  be  clear  about  the  capacities  in  which  they  act.”   Although
short, this principle generated very active discussion.  Reaching consensus on how to describe
various  roles  in  the  market  was  unexpectedly  challenging.  Terms  relating  to  these  roles,  like
principal  and  agent,  may  be  used  differently  across  different  regions  and  by  different  entities.
Moreover, they may have legal definitions, and the Code is not intended to interfere with legal
definitions.
Within the Code, acting as an ‘agent’ is described roughly as executing orders on behalf of a
client  without  taking  on  market  risk  in  connection  with  that  order.    Acting  as  a  ‘principal’  is
described as taking on one or more risks in executing a client order.  In doing so, a principal may
have discretion in the execution of a trade and, if so, that discretion should be communicated
clearly and exercised fairly and in such a way that is not designed or intended to disadvantage
the client.  These concepts are echoed in the various principles that follow, which highlight more
specific recommendations based upon the roles market participants take on and the types of
transactions in which they engage.  Labels aside, the fundamental recommendations regarding
roles recognize the importance of clear communication of roles, the importance of fairness and
the strong expectation that discretion not be used in a manner designed to disadvantage a client.
Clarity  of  terminology  was  again  important  during  the  development  of  Principle  11  on  pre-
hedging.    The  Code  is  very  specific  in  how  it  describes  pre-hedging.  It  is  defined  as  “the
management  of  the  risk  associated  with  one  or  more anticipated  client  orders,  designed  to
benefit the client in connection with such orders and any resulting transactions.”  The principle
then lays out circumstances in which such pre-hedging may or may not be appropriate.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The principles on information sharing cover topics where there had seemed to be a lack of clarity
within  the  market.    The  principles  emphasize  the  importance  of  appropriately  identifying  and
managing  confidential  information.    They  describe what may constitute confidential information
and when such information should or should not be shared and with whom. They also provide
guidance  as  to  how  market  participants  might  communicate  market  color  appropriately  and,
critically, without compromising confidential information. 
It is important to recognize that the FX market is not entirely about trading and execution—risk
management, compliance, and confirmation and settlement are central to FX transactions, and
they comprise the final two sections of the Code. 
Within  the  section  on  risk  management  and  compliance,  principles  focus  on  recognizing  and
understanding the risks faced and employing tools to mitigate those risks where possible.  In this
context, the Code highlights that it is important for each institution to evaluate these risks based
on  the  role  it  plays  in  the  market.    Two  areas  we  focused  significant  time  on  during  the
development  of  the  Code  were  prime  brokerage  and  electronic  trading  platforms.    The  Code
notes that market participants who provide credit intermediation and/or market access to other
market  participants  should  (a)  take  that  activity  into  account  in  their  risk  assessment  and  (b)
engage in dialogue with the participants they are providing access to about responsible behavior
in the market.  
Finally,  the  last  section  includes  various  confirmation  and  settlement  principles  that  reduce
operational risk related to FX transactions where possible.  These principles encourage smooth,
efficient, and timely settlement of FX trades and highlight various steps to help support that aim.
Adoption of the Code
The FXWG central banks had a clear mandate from the BIS governors to not just develop the
Code, but to also develop means to promote its adherence and ultimate effectiveness.  Central
banks and the industry can take steps to support the Code’s widespread adoption in the market
across all types of market participants—from FX dealers, regional banks, asset managers, and
corporations,  to  hedge  funds,  high  frequency  trading  firms  and  others,  such  as  FX  trading
platforms and algorithmic service providers.  As I noted earlier, while the Code is not a set of
rules, nor is it regulation, support for the Code and its principles is central to achieving its goals. 
With that in mind, I would like to turn now to the Statement of Commitment that was developed
alongside the Code, talk about steps the New York Fed itself is taking, and then touch upon some
of the industry measures underway to support adoption.
The Statement of Commitment was developed and appended to the Code to provide a standard
tool  by  which  an  institution  may—on  a  voluntary  basis—demonstrate  its  commitment  to  the
principles  of  the  Code.    The  Statement  of  Commitment  provides  that  an  institution  is  an  FX
market  participant  and  has  reviewed  the  Code.  By  using  it,  an  institution  acknowledges  the
principles as reflecting good practice and exhibits a commitment to conducting that institution’s
activities  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  Code.    The  Statement,  like  the  Code  itself,
acknowledges that market participants vary by size, complexity and nature of activities, and that
diversity should be reflected in the steps they may need to take for adoption and adherence.
Central banks, similar to FX market participants, are committed to the Code’s adoption as well. 
Following  its  publication,  BIS  central  bank  governors expressed their support  for  the  Code  by
noting that central banks “are strongly committed to supporting and promoting adherence to the
Code. They confirm that they intend to adhere to the principles of the Code, and will expect the
same of their regular FX counterparties, except where this would inhibit the discharge of their
policy functions. Additionally, members of central bank sponsored foreign exchange committees
will be expected to adhere to the Code.”  
Consistent with this support, and in light of our interest in the integrity and effective function of the
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
FX market, the New York Fed will be focusing on adherence to these best practices.  We are
currently assessing our own FX market activities relative to the Code and evaluating what steps,
if any, we must take to be able to make our own Statement of Commitment.  In addition, we have
revisited our own counterparty policy in light of the Code. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York
policy  on  counterparties  for  market  operations  had  already  noted  that  counterparties  were
expected  to  operate  in  accordance  with  best  practices  promulgated  by  the  New  York  Fed-
sponsored Treasury Market Practices Group and the Foreign Exchange Committee.  However,
that policy was recently revised to emphasize adherence to the Code in light of its publication. 
Finally, adherence to the Code is also being integrated into the membership framework for our
sponsored  Foreign  Exchange  Committee.  These  steps  illustrate  our  desire  to  transact  and
engage with entities that are behaving with integrity.
Central banks have an important role to play in supporting best practices, such as the Global
Code.  It is, however, ultimately incumbent upon the industry to support and promote adoption of
the Code across the marketplace.  I’d like to highlight a variety of initiatives underway to support
this adoption.
First, outreach and education regarding the Code is critical and has been underway via events
like  this  and  ongoing  engagement  with  industry  associations.    Central  bank  colleagues  and
industry market participants here and abroad have been active in reaching out locally to raise
awareness of the Code.  New and updated education tools are already in development to help
further promote the Code.  As awareness permeates the market, these efforts will support better
understanding and adoption of the Code.
Second,  industry  market  participants  have  expressed  a  desire  for  a  mechanism,  such  as  a
public  register,  to  make  public  their  Statements  of  Commitment.  Discussions  with  industry
suggest that multiple public registers may likely be established over time. I look forward to seeing
how this work evolves. 
It will be important to understand how the Code is being adopted across the industry.  To this
end,  the  GFXC  is  also  developing  a  survey  to  help  assess  how  the  Code  is  being  applied
following its publication.  This survey can provide a baseline that we can measure against over
time, and can help to assess how the Code is filtering into the market, going forward. 
GFXC, evolution of the Code and last look
Over  the  past  two  years,  the  industry  has  been  very  heavily  engaged  in  Global  Code  efforts
through  the  MPG  and  the  regional  foreign  exchange  committees  (FXCs).  The  past  two  years
have  shown  that  the  work  of  central  banks  and  industry  in  partnership,  at  a  global  level,  is
productive in developing and supporting best practices.  As such, while both the FXWG and MPG
have fulfilled their mandate to develop the Code, this spirit of central bank-industry partnership
will be maintained, as will the Code itself, in the future by the newly formalized GFXC. 
The GFXC reflects a significant expansion of cross-border and public-private sector efforts. It is a
forum  that  brings  together  central  banks  and  market  participants  via  the  FXCs—currently
representing  sixteen  regions—to  encourage  collaboration  and  communication  on  FX-related
issues, to exchange views on trends and developments in the FX market, and to promote and
maintain  the  FX  Global  Code.    In  addition,  the  work  to  develop  the  Code  has  led  to  the
development  of  central  bank-sponsored  FXCs  in new  regions,  some  of  which  have  already
launched and others that are forthcoming.  FXCs, including the one sponsored by the New York
Fed, will play important roles both within their own region and in their global engagement via the
GFXC.
One of the key objectives of the GFXC is to keep abreast of the evolution of the market, and work
to ensure that the Code’s principles remain relevant.  One area of evolution is electronic trading. 
Before concluding, I want to spend some time discussing the GFXC’s request for feedback on
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
particular aspects related to the use of last look in electronic FX trading.
As you might suspect, Principle 17 on last look likely consumed the most time and energy of any
of  the  principles  in  the  Code.    In  many  areas  within  the  last  look  principle  there  was  broad
consensus as to what constitutes good practice. What was clear from this process was that
market participants seemed to define last look in different ways and apply it in different ways as
well.  Last look is described in the Code as a practice in which a market participant receives a
trade request and has the opportunity to accept or reject that trade request against its quoted
price.  The Code notes that if utilized, last look should be used as a risk mechanism to verify
validity  and/or  price.    The  principle  focuses  on  the  importance  of  transparency  and  fairness. 
Market participants should be clear about whether and, if so, how last look might apply to their
client trade requests to allow clients to make an informed choice regarding their execution.
In one particular area—that of trading during the last look “window”—there was a definite diversity
of views.  On the one hand, some market participants argued that such trading activity would
always be detrimental to the client as it could move the market in a direction that is not to the
client’s advantage.  On the other hand, some market participants felt that such trading activity
could increase their ability and willingness to conduct client trades presented by clients without
necessarily placing the clients at a disadvantage.  Some expressed the view that they prefer only
to use dealers that don’t trade during the last look window, while others preferred having different
options. 
Given  this  range  of  input,  the  principle  highlights  that  last  look  should  not  be  used  for  the
purposes of information gathering without an intention to accept the trade request.  Further, it
notes the risk associated with trading activity during the last look window. The principle provides
that  “trading  activity  that  utilizes  the  information  from  a  Client’s  trade  request,  included  any
related hedging activity, is likely inconsistent with good market practice because it may signal to
other  Market  Participants  the  Client’s  trading  intent,  skewing  market  prices  against  the  Client,
which (1) is not likely to benefit the Client, and (2) in the event that the Market Participant rejects
the Client’s request to trade, constitutes use of Confidential Information in a manner not specified
by the Client.”  
In light of the breadth of opinions expressed during the development of this principle, the GFXC
has decided to reach out to the broader market for further input on this narrow topic of trading
during the last look window.  The GFXC poses two questions. First, it asks whether respondents
agree with the characterization of trading activity during the last look window and whether there
are  examples  where  such  activity  can  benefit  the  client  within  the  context  of  how  last  look  is
described in the Code.  Second, it asks whether respondents believe the language related to
trading during the last look window should be modified.
Many of you are very knowledgeable about these topics and we hope you will take the opportunity
to share your insights on these questions.  The GFXC is not only seeking views at the tails, but
also those more in the middle of the spectrum as well. Importantly, all perspectives are welcome.
Conclusion
The  request  for  feedback  is  an  opportunity  to  engage  at  an  industry  level  in  supporting  the
resilience of this critical and fundamental market—one that represents far more than the sum of
its parts and players.  As I said in 2015,  “the transactions that take place [in the FX market] are
the  lifeblood  of  a  global  economy  that  comprises  many  different  national  currencies.”   At  that
time, I called upon the industry to take action and I am impressed by what I have seen through
the work in developing the Code and in the spirit in which it has been received so far.  But that
work isn’t over—it never is. 
3
Best  practices  do  not  work  without  the  ongoing  commitment  of  those  in  the  industry,  those
making  the  choices  each  day.    No  Code,  and  in  fact  no  law  or  regulation,  can  force  all
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
participants  in  a  market  as  broad  and  diverse  as  FX  to  maintain  a  marketplace  that  values
openness,  resilience,  high  ethical  standards,  and  competition.  But,  that  fact  is  no  reason  to
forego  striving  for  such  a  marketplace.  Developing  the  Code  has  been  one  way  of  working
toward that goal. I hope that you all continue your focus on these issues and  do  your  part  to
support  a  resilient  global,  wholesale  FX  market.    I  encourage  you  to  adopt  the  Code  as  a
benchmark  for  your  firm’s  activities  in  the  wholesale  FX  market  and  use  the  Statement  of
Commitment  to  demonstrate  that  adoption  to  your  fellow  participants.    As  we  state  in  the
foreword  of  the  Code,  the  goal  is  an  FX  market  that  is  a  “robust,  fair,  liquid,  open  and
appropriately  transparent  market  in  which  a  diverse  set  of  Market  Participants,  supported  by
resilient infrastructure, are able to confidently and effectively transact at competitive process that
reflect available market information and in a manner that conforms to acceptable standards of
behaviour.”
Many thanks for your time and continued active engagement.
1
2
3
The FX Global Code is available at www.globalfxc.org/index.htm.
For more information about the FXWG see: www.bis.org/about/factmktc/fxwg.htm.
2015 FX Week USA speech available at: www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2015/pot150714.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
