Benoît Cœuré: Cyber resilience for pan-European financial market
infrastructures
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank, at the High-Level Meeting on Cyber Resilience, Frankfurt am Main, 19 June 2017.
Introduction
 It is a pleasure to welcome you here today to this strategic high-level meeting on cyber resilience
for pan-European financial market infrastructures.
The  aim  of  bringing 
infrastructures, critical service providers and public authorities is threefold:
together  high-level  representatives 
from 
large  European  market
First we would like to gain a deeper understanding of the cyber threat landscape in Europe.
The  European  Union  Agency  for  Network  and  Information  Security  (ENISA)  will  make  a
presentation on the cyber threat landscape and its relevance for the financial sector.
Second,  we  will  share  with  you  the  Eurosystem’s  cyber  strategy  for  financial  market
infrastructures and also explain ECB Banking Supervision’s approach to the issue of bank cyber
resilience.
Third, we would like to hear your views on how we can all collaborate in a trusted environment to
enhance the cyber resilience of financial market infrastructures.
More specifically, we would like to assess with you how much interest there is in creating a high-
level  cyber  resilience  forum  for  pan-European  financial  market  infrastructures,  critical  service
providers and competent authorities.
Before we start, let me briefly set the scene.
The evolving cyber threat landscape in Europe
Besides the undeniable advantages of information and communication technology, the increase
in users and data on digital platforms, in cloud computing and across networks has also created
greater opportunities for cybercrime.
There are a variety of agents involved: criminals, hacktivists or nation states.
They may have different motives: financial gain, espionage, disruption and destabilisation.
But what they all have in common is that they are steadily increasing their level of sophistication
and exploring ways of attacking.
A sound operational risk management and IT security framework are the first line of defence.
But  resilience  to  cyberattacks  means  more  than  that.  Unlike  critical  failures,  the  likelihood  of
cyberattacks  cannot  be  mitigated.  A  paradigm  shift  is  necessary.  We  have  to  accept  that
cyberattacks are inevitable and that attackers are persistent. Consequently, we have to establish
how – in case of persistent attacks – we prioritise our operations and resources, protect our key
assets  and  restore 
it  also
encompasses governance, company culture and business processes.
functionalities.  Cyber  resilience  goes  beyond 
technology, 
Given the extensive interlinkages and interdependencies in the financial system, it is obvious that
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
markets’  overall  cyber  resilience  depends  not  only  on  the  resilience  of  each  individual  market
actor  but  also  on  that  of  interconnected  market  infrastructures,  participants  and  service
providers.
The Eurosystem cyber strategy for financial market infrastructures
Following the increase in both the frequency and severity of cyberattacks over the last few years,
legislators,  regulators  and  standard  setters  have  issued  legislation  and  guidance  on  cyber
security at national and international level and at cross-sectoral as well as sector-specific level.
Let me briefly mention three initiatives.
First, in 2016, the EC adopted the Directive on security of network and information systems
(the NIS Directive).
Its aim is to bring the cybersecurity capabilities of operators of essential services to the same
level  of  development  in  all  the  EU  Member  States  and  to  ensure  an  efficient  exchange  of
information and good cooperation on the topic throughout the EU.
Second, at international level, the G7 countries have drawn up a set of fundamental elements
of cybersecurity for the financial sector,  as  well  as  three  further  recommendations  on  the
effectiveness of cybersecurity assessments, third-party risks, and coordination with other critical
sectors.
Third,  with  a  key  focus  on  financial  stability,  the  CPMI-IOSCO  published  a  principles-based
“Guidance on cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures” in June 2016.
Supplementing the “Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures”, it provides additional detail
related to the preparations and measures that financial market infrastructures should undertake
to enhance their cyber resilience.
In  recognition  of  the  escalating  cyber  threats,  the  legislative  and  regulatory  guidance  and  the
required  paradigm  shift,  the  Eurosystem’s  overseers  have  launched  a  strategy  for  cyber
resilience in relation to financial market infrastructures. This strategy – which will be explained in
more detail at agenda item 3 – is built on three pillars.
The first pillar refers to the cyber resilience of individual financial market infrastructures.
The second pillar refers to the resilience of the financial sector as a whole.
The third pillar  highlights  the  importance  of  establishing  a  forum  which  brings  together
market actors, competent authorities and the cybersecurity service providers.
This brings me to the third and final objective of today’s meeting.
Creation of a high-level cyber resilience forum
Tackling cyber risk is not for regulators or market actors in isolation.
Rather it is a collaborative endeavour that must be undertaken together.
Hence, I invite you to seriously consider the creation of a high-level cyber resilience forum for
pan-European  financial  market  infrastructures,  critical  service  providers  and  competent
authorities.
I  am  convinced  that  there  is  cross-fertilisation  and  collective  learning  to  be  gained  from  such
collaboration and I am looking forward to a fruitful meeting today.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
