Karnit Flug: Israel's macroeconomic situation in recent years
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the annual conference of the Israel
Economic Association, Tel Aviv, 6 June 2017.
 Summary
Private consumption has led growth in the economy in recent years, covered for the
slowdown in exports and in investments against the background of moderate global
growth,  and  supported  a  significant  improvement  in  labor  market  data,  with  an
emphasis on weaker population groups.
Growth based on consumption comes with risks if it is based on factors that are not
sustainable,  but  the  main  factor  in  increased  consumption  in  recent  years  was
increased income from labor.
The rapid increase in consumer credit in recent years requires closer monitoring by
regulators, increased caution on the part of the public and credit providers, and an
informed examination of repayment capabilities when providing or taking out credit.
Growth that is led by consumption generally leads to lower long-term growth.  Low
investment leads to a smaller increase in the stock of capital and in the adoption of
technologies  that  accompany  that  investment,  and  lower  exports  lead  to  the
economy being less able to exploit its relative advantages.
The good current state of the economy, thanks partly to the rapid increase in private
consumption,  makes  it  necessary  for  us  today  to  focus  on  dealing  with  the
challenges  we  face—improving  human  capital  and  workers’  skills,  improving  the
business activity environment, and investing in infrastructure.  All these will ensure
improved productivity and a better standard of living in the long term.
In recent years, private consumption has become an important component of Israeli economic
growth, and this has various implications.  Today I would like to discuss Israel’s macroeconomic
situation in recent years, and particularly the significance of the fact that growth is being led by
private consumption, and the long- and short-term implications of this phenomenon.
In  recent  years,  GDP  in  Israel  has  grown  by  higher  rates  than  in  most  other  advanced
economies,  but  the  growth  rate  of  per  capita  GDP  is  similar  to  that  of  the  other  advanced
economies.  In the past year-and-a-half, growth data have been affected by what economists call
“noise” (mainly volatility in the import of vehicles), but excluding that noise, the growth of GDP
has  accelerated,  and  it  currently  stands  at  about  4  percent  in  annual  terms.    This  is  an
impressive  rate,  particularly  if  we  take  into  account  that  world  trade,  which  reflects  global
demand for our exports, increased by an average of about 3 percent since the global economic
crisis, compared with an average of 7.56 percent in the years preceding the crisis.
Israel’s  relatively  good  economic  performance  was  supported  by  accommodative  fiscal  and
monetary  policies:  low  interest  rates,  the  Bank  of  Israel’s  foreign  exchange  purchases,  and  a
relatively high cyclically adjusted deficit.  All these supported activity against the background of
relatively weak global economic activity.
The  good  performance  of  the  economy  is  reflected  in  the  very  strong  labor  data.    The
unemployment rate is at a low, the employment level is at a high, and it is interesting to note that
these  data  are  also  reflected  in  the  improved  state  of  the  weaker  population  groups.    For
instance,  the  improvement  in  the  unemployment  and  employment  data  in  the  past  year  was
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
particularly great among population groups with low levels of education.  Wages are continuing to
increase, and in the business sector, the rate of increase of real wages accelerated in the past
year to about 3.5 percent.  In some industries and professions, there is an apparent significant
lack  of  workers,  which  weighs  on  the  ability  to  continue  expanding  economic  activity.    The
combination of increased wages and increased employment is reflected in the relatively sharp
increase in income from labor.
Against the background of these developments, private consumption increased by 4.3 percent in
2015 and 6.3 percent in 2016, and was the main factor contributing to economic growth in recent
years.    The  rapid  increase  occurred  in  all  components  of  private  consumption—services
consumption, which constitutes about one-third of private consumption, and goods consumption,
where the increase in vehicle purchases was prominent.
What is motivating private consumption?
A series of studies conducted by the Research Department over the years examined the factors
affecting private consumption in the short and long terms:
       -  Income from labor and financial income are decisive factors in determining the level of
private  consumption  in  the  short  and  long  terms,  with  elasticities  of  about  0.3  and  about  0.2
respectively.
        -  The rapid increase in home prices in recent years also contributed to increased private
consumption, through the wealth effect.
       -  Asset prices, particularly those of financial assets, have the greatest effect on the change
in private consumption in the short term.
       -  Change in current income does not affect private consumption in the short term, other
than a change in income from transfer payments.
       -  The intensity of the replacement effect of the interest rate is not great.
How have the variables affecting private consumption developed in recent years?
There has been a real increase of about 6 percent per year on average in income from labor, as
a result of an increase in employment and in wages.  There was an increase in home prices and
in the value of financial assets.  Outstanding consumer credit (nonhousing credit to households)
increased by 25 percent over the past three years, as interest rates declined.  Together with the
lower  prices  on  imported  consumer  goods,  against  the  background  of  the  appreciation  of  the
shekel in recent years, which led to a rapid increase in the import of consumer goods, these all
supported the rapid increase in consumption.
Is the growth in private consumption a phenomenon that is unique to the Israeli economy?
Apparently not.  Before the global economic crisis, global growth was relatively balanced, in that it
was led not only by private consumption, but also by other uses, chiefly investment.  In the years
after the exit from the “pit” of the crisis, since 2012, in most countries growth has been led by
private  consumption,  while  investment  has  been  stagnating.    It  is  worth  noting  that  the  first
quarter of 2017 looks to be different. In most economies, including Israel, the figures for the first
quarter are unusual in the sense that investment was again a significant factor in contributing to
growth.  However, it is obviously too soon to determine that this quarter indicates a change in
trend or a turnaround.
Of course, there are positive aspects to the fact that private consumption increased relatively
rapidly.  Beyond the fact that it has led to an increase in the standard of living in the short term,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the increase in private consumption also covered for the more moderate growth of exports and
investments,  which  was  at  least  partially  a  result  of  exogenous  factors.    With  the  help  of
macroeconomic policy, the increase in private consumption thus contributed to smoothing the
business cycle.  It enabled the economy to continue growing and to lead to a clear improvement
in  labor  market  data  as  I  outlined  earlier.    However,  the  fact  that  growth  was  led  by  private
consumption also comes with risks.
Those  risks  mainly  have  to  do  with  the  question  of  whether  such  growth  is  sustainable,  or
whether it comes with a risk of a sharp turnaround.  The answer to that question has to do with
the sources upon which the economic growth rests.  As long as growth relies to a greater extent
on increased consumer credit, a sharp increase in the future debt servicing burden may put the
ability to continue consuming in the future at risk.  As long as the increase relies more on an
increase in asset prices—the “wealth effect”—and as long as this turns out to be temporary, the
turnaround in prices may lead to a turnaround in private consumption as well, and therefore in
activity.  A study conducted by Arnon Barak of the Bank of Israel Research Department, which
was  published  this  week,  shows  that  in  recent  years,  the  main  factor  leading  the  increase  in
private  consumption  (according  to  a  long-term  comparison  estimated  in  the  study)  is  the
increase in income from labor.  The increase in financial asset prices and in home prices made
less  of  a  contribution  than  income  from  labor.    Household  debt  figures  show  that  despite  the
increase in outstanding mortgages and consumer debt, the debt to GDP ratio and the debt to
disposable  income  ratio  increased  only  moderately.   At  the  macro  level,  therefore,  the  risk  is
moderate.    However,  the  rapid  increase  of  consumer  credit  in  recent  years  requires  closer
monitoring on the part of regulators, extra caution on the part of the public and credit providers,
and an informed examination of repayment capabilities when providing or taking out credit.
The interim conclusion, therefore, is that given the relatively weak state of the global economy,
the growth of private consumption contributed to maintaining a strong growth rate and a robust
labor market.  The fact that most of the increase in consumption relies on an increase in income
from labor makes it more stable, but we must be particularly attentive to the part of the increase
that is supported by increased credit and asset prices.
So  if  the  economy  is  growing  solidly,  the  labor  market  is  strong,  and  the  engine  of  growth  is
private consumption, is there something that needs to concern us?
The question is whether growth that relies mainly on private consumption in a small and open
economy can persist and be strong enough to reduce the gap in the standard of living relative to
the other advanced economies.  In this context, it is important to remember a number of facts in
relation to the two main uses that have been weak in recent years:
Investment in the primary industries contributes not only to activity in the short term, but also to
future  production  capacity,  and  investment  in  machinery  and  equipment  means  adopting  the
technologies inherent in that equipment, meaning that investment contributes to future growth by
increasing production capacity and through its contribution to an increase in productivity.
Exports make it possible for a small and open economy to exploit its relative advantages and the
economy of scale.  Export industries in general, and also in Israel, are therefore characterized by
relatively high productivity.
How have investments and exports developed in recent years?
Investment as a share of GDP in Israel is low by international comparison, despite the fact that
national  savings  is  not  low,  as  we  showed  in  the  Bank  of  Israel  Annual  Report  for  2016. 
Therefore, not only are we not close the gap in capital per worker relative to other economies, the
gap  is  even  growing.    By  the  way,  the  investments  that  increased  in  2016  were  mainly  in
residential construction and in the electronic components industry, but not in the other industries,
such that the increase in investments made a relatively small contribution to a broad increase in
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
production capacity.  A factor that is complementary to private sector investment is government
investment  in  infrastructure.    Despite  some  increase  in  the  past  two  years,  the  level  of  this
investment remains lower than it was at the beginning of the decade.  As a result, the stock of
capital in the economy is lower than the average in the other advanced economies.
Exports as a share of GDP also declined in recent years, affected by the weakness in world
trade and the strengthening of the shekel.  This fact is not harbinger of good news in terms of the
dynamics of productivity.  In this context, we can examine what happened to labor productivity in
Israel over time.  Despite its low level at the point of departure in 1995, its pace of growth was
lower  than  what  could  have  been  expected  given  the  fact  that  in  general,  the  increase  in
productivity is greater in economies that begin from a lower point, if only because of their ability to
adopt  technologies  that  exist  in  countries  at  the  technological  forefront.    The  fact  that  the
productivity gap has not been closed is particularly disappointing given that growth in productivity
in the other advanced economies has also been relatively low in recent years.
Other than the composition of growth and the insufficient level of infrastructure, I have discussed
other reasons for the low level of productivity at various opportunities.  The main reasons are
unsuitable human capital, as shown by the PIAAC tests examining the cognitive skills of the adult
population  in  Israel—such  as  problem  solving  skills  in  a  digital  environment—the  problem  of
excessive and inefficient bureaucracy, and the fact that the economy is not sufficiently open to
international competition in various aspects, such as the attitude toward competitive supply from
abroad or relatively high non-tariff barriers.
The  question  of  the  implications  of  growth  led  by  consumption  over  the  long  term  has  been
discussed by various international entities in recent years, and the main conclusions from their
studies are similar to the analysis we have conducted.  Such growth tends to be weaker, and it
also  generally  leads  to  lower  future  growth.    The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  export  industries,
which tend to be an engine of innovation and productivity, are not contributing their part in pushing
productivity  forward,  and  the  low  level  of  investment  contributes  less  to  increased  production
capacity and to increased productivity derived from the adoption of technologies inherent in new
capital.
The strategy that will support more balanced growth, which for its part will contribute to stronger
and more prolonged growth, must therefore include the following components:
       -    Improved human capital and workers’ skills—Providing content and abilities that will
enable successful integration in the labor market for all parts of the population, including broad
technological education at various levels;
       -    Improved business activity environment and removal of barriers that hinder
competition from abroad
              -   Investment  in  infrastructure—Such  investment  will  make  a  particularly  large
contribution in Israel in view of the low level of infrastructure, particularly that of public transit.
The  good  state  of  the  economy,  in  part  thanks  to  the  rapid  increase  in  private  consumption,
actually requires us now to focus on dealing with the challenges so that we can ensure continued
improvement in the standard of living in the long term.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
