Peter Praet: Interview in De Standaard
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
De Standaard, conducted by Mr Pascal Dendooven and Ms Goele De Cort on 3 July 2017 and
published on 8 July 2017.
 It looked like a reversal last week. ECB President Mario Draghi’s speech in Sintra had an
impact on the markets, interest rates increased and the euro strengthened, the markets
took it as a signal that an end to the ECB’s stimulus is in sight.
I see it more as an evolution in our communications. In essence, we said that the economy is
doing better and that growth is looking good. And since the last meeting of the Governing Council
the positive news has continued. The tone was rather optimistic regarding growth, and rightly so.
But, and this has to do with our mandate, the underlying inflationary pressure remains subdued.
This  is  why  we  also  stress  that  we  should  be  patient  and  persistent  regarding  our  monetary
policy.
Proof that your policy of quantitative easing has worked?
Some  people  said  that  this  policy  would  create  hyperinflation  whereas  others  thought  that,  at
best, it would have no effect. Low interest rates would supposedly not lead to more investment
and growth, but they have in fact had a very favourable impact. Not only in the real estate market
but also elsewhere. It was also said that people would start to save more and spend less in order
to compensate for the loss of interest income and to secure their retirement. But the saving rate
has remained stable. Only investment was more sluggish than we had hoped, but that is picking
up now. Surveys among SMEs show that they no longer find it so difficult to obtain loans.
Nothing new, in your view, but a sharp market reaction nonetheless. Have markets not
become overly focused on messages from the ECB? Is that still a healthy situation?
It’s true that in the short term there was a clear reaction. People also had the impression that it
was a sort of “coordinated” action by different central bankers but that wasn’t the case.
Our message was very nuanced. The thing is, deflationary pressures were considerable in 2015.
At that time, we faced negative shocks to the economy. There was a sense of urgency. That no
longer applies.
Now indeed inflation is picking up, but that is a process that is a long way from completion. From
an inflation perspective, we cannot be satisfied yet.
We need patience and persistence. We need to be patient because inflation convergence needs
more time to show through convincingly in the data. And we need to be persistent, because our
baseline for future inflation remains crucially contingent on very easy financing conditions which,
to a large extent, depend on the current accommodative monetary policy stance.
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) says that we should increase interest rates so as to
keep some ammunition in reserve in case we encounter difficult times again. But if we increase
interest rates and tighten policy too quickly, we could jeopardise the recovery and end up further
away than ever from our (inflation) target.
The ECB has pumped more than €2 trillion into the market. How confident are you that all
those funds can be absorbed in an orderly manner?
The  ECB  Governing  Council  will  discuss  the  conclusions  for  monetary  policy  and  what  this
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
means for quantitative easing. I can’t say anything about that yet. We do say that we still need a
long period of accommodative policy before we are ready.
As the economic prospects brighten, higher expected returns on business investment will make
borrowing conditions increasingly attractive. This will reinforce accommodation and make sure
that  inflation  sustainably  converges  towards  our  objective  of  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the
medium term.
Growth  is  picking  up  and  unemployment  is  going  down,  but  wages  are  not  really
increasing. Doesn’t that totally contradict traditional economic theory?
Wages are also a reflection of the past. Wage increases are partly based on current inflation
rates  and  they  are  relatively  low  at  the  moment.  Let  us  also  not  forget  that  the  level  of
unemployment is still high. That merely underlines that the process of reflation is a long one that
remains highly dependent on accommodative monetary policy.
But  will  the  wages  still  evolve  in  the  same  way  as  before,  now  that  all  kinds  of  new
factors  are  emerging  such  as  computerisation,  flexible  jobs,  etc?  Are  the  ECB’s
instruments still reliable?
Well, how do you measure the impact of China on international competition, of e-commerce, of
automation?  We  have  many  internal  discussions  about  that,  about  whether  something  in  the
inflation  process  has  broken  down.  The  Phillips  curve  (which  shows  that  wages  rise  when
unemployment falls) is not broken, but it is flatter and the process is slower. Wage inflation is on
the way, but we need to be patient about these things.
Wages  are  not  increasing  very  much  and  most  of  the  newly  created  jobs  offer  less
attractive terms of employment.
Some labour market developments are positive but others negative. People aged over 50 are
returning to the labour market; that came as a surprise to us. And we also see an increase in
labour  market  potential  owing  to  migration,  especially  from  central  and  eastern  European
countries.  Because  of  migration  from  those  countries,  Germany  still  has  a  significant  labour
supply despite having a high level of employment.
Some of those central and eastern European countries, such as Poland, Hungary and the Czech
Republic, are now experiencing stronger wage inflation. That will spread. The more people who
are employed, the bigger the increase in disposable income, the more that is spent.
On the other hand, we see that youth unemployment is particularly high in a number of countries
and that getting young people into jobs is not easy. Another factor influencing wage inflation is
that  more  people  are  working  as  self-employed.  We  are  increasingly  seeing  a  dual  labour
market. Even in the civil service. On the one hand, you have insiders with an attractive job and a
high degree of protection and on the other, the new employees who do not have the same terms,
work under more flexible contracts and can be let go more easily.
Of course you might say: so what’s the problem? That is part of market reform, it’s good for the
economy.  Don’t  forget  that,  in  this  way,  quite  a  few  people  can  avoid  long  periods  of
unemployment. Those new jobs create earnings and stop people from losing their skills. On the
other hand, there are also risks if the labour market reforms lead to a dual labour market, not only
from an ethical standpoint but also because economic growth is not “inclusive”. For that reason, I
see a role for the government in correcting the negative redistribution effects of reforms.
 It’s a fixed component in President Mario Draghi’s speeches: governments also need to
introduce structural reforms, monetary policy cannot do everything. Has Belgium made
sufficient use of the low interest rates to introduce the necessary reforms?
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
I don’t like commenting on government policy, and certainly not on that of my own country. But
speaking in general terms, I can say that the pension reforms were good decisions in countries
such  as  Italy  and  Belgium.  Belgium  has  also  undertaken  a  small  measure  of  labour  market
reform.
The  point  is  that  it  should  also  be  possible  to  do  so.  In  Belgium  the  debate  on  the  reform  of
corporate tax, for example, has been going on for quite some time. There is still a heavy reform
agenda. Much still needs to be done and not everyone agrees on how to go about it.
The  risk  is  that  the  appetite  for  reform  will  wane  as  the  economy  improves.  People  have  a
tendency to lean back and take a break.
Is that what’s happening in Belgium now?
Not  only  in  Belgium.  There  is  a  sort  of  honeymoon  atmosphere.  Times  have  been  hard  and
people would like to take a break from reforming and enjoy the improvements for a while. There’s
a kind of reform fatigue. But not everyone is enjoying the recovery because unemployment is still
too high and there are differences in contracts between insiders and outsiders, etc.
But it has to happen, because monetary policy can’t fix everything. France is a good example.
The financial situation there was not much different to that in Germany. There was no banking
crisis  in  France.  But  growth  has  been  weaker  in  France  than  in  Germany,  because  German
industry was able to adapt, to focus on new markets – first China, then the United States. They
have more SMEs that are export oriented, whereas French industry is much more dependent on
a number of national champions. This shows that there are limits to what monetary policy can
do.
Critics are saying that the ECB’s low interest rate policy is reducing the incentive to
reform.
Governments should have made more use of the low interest rates. But the fact that there has
been too little reform isn’t because low interest rates are making it easier for them to muddle
through.  Rather,  it’s  because  they  aren’t  managing  to  sell  the  reforms.  I  talk  to  politicians
regularly and they all know what needs to be done. But they are also afraid that they won’t get
elected again afterwards.
I  hope  that  the  general  public,  through  seeing  better  and  better  results,  will  start  to  grasp  the
importance of reforms.
Will the [rise of the far left] PTB party in Wallonia have a major impact?
Yes, I’ve seen it. But take Macron: he’s been able to build a movement because there was a
window  of  opportunity  to  go  for  reforms.  But  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  interest  rate.  In
France the public voted for Macron because they want changes, but we have yet to see which
ones will actually get through.
In Belgium the Government also started out with reform ambitions.
Yes, indeed. Lots of governments have good intentions. The OECD has commented positively
on that recently.
Above all, reform means getting people on board. I sometimes take a taxi and I often talk to the
taxi driver. Many of them have paid huge sums for a licence, which they intend to sell later to
guarantee themselves a pension. It’s only logical that the taxi drivers will fight for their jobs. If you
suddenly  changed  the  rules  to  try  to  break  the  taxi  market  open,  it  would  really  cost  a  lot  of
money. Let’s assume that in the Paris region alone there are more than 30,000 taxis. The costs
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
for  a  licence  can  be  as  high  as  €200,000.  If  you  want  to  buy  out  those  rights,  you’re  already
talking about billions. Those are amounts that are suddenly macroeconomically relevant.
This  is  what  you  also  see  with  labour  market  reforms.  The  incumbents,  the  insiders,  are
protected when there are reforms, while the newcomers who want a job have to be more flexible.
Belgium has been held up as a champion of reform. Were you surprised?
A bit. At the same time it is good to acknowledge that there have been reforms. Nevertheless we
know  that  there  are  still  huge  challenges.  Belgium  is  still  some  way  behind  Germany,  where
there’s money left over and they don’t know what to do with it.
Which reforms are needed most urgently now?
There  are  several.  Reforms  to  pensions,  the  labour  market  and  justice  for  example  are
recognised as being crucial in Italy. Education and training are also crucial in my view. Flanders
has a good education system, but training for jobs on the shop floor could be better.
Should we be worried about automation and robotisation?
Productivity growth has been the source of wealth since time immemorial. But there are other
ways of countering negative redistribution effects than blocking progress. That’s what we have
the government’s redistribution policies for.
There  are  also  things  that  robots  can’t  do.  Human  interaction  will  remain  important  in  many
service jobs. These are currently often quite badly paid jobs, such as waiting tables or caring for
the  elderly  in  retirement  homes.  There  is  a  reason  why  these  professions  are  known  as
“bottleneck jobs”.
Whether their wages will rise if demand increases further? I don’t know. In any case in the future
it will be not just about having the right skills on the labour market, but also about the necessary
EQ and empathy, the soft skills. A robot can’t offer that.
In the recent bank rescue in Italy, Italian taxpayers have been left to pick up the bill,
despite all the bail-in principles. Was Europe looking the other way?
It’s not a case of good or bad, we are still in a transition phase. The most important thing is for
the banking sector to adapt. I can understand the decision to use tax money to solve problems
from the past. But the sector has to adapt and restructure.
There are still a lot of bad loans in the sector, we have yet to see whether the adjustments will
have been sufficient.
Banking  union  is  essential.  The  resolution  component  is  too  slow.  There  can  be  flexibility  for
solving historical problems, but the sector needs to adapt.
Do you agree with the late Luc Coene that there’s one big bank too many in Belgium,
without mentioning Belfius specifically?
I don’t know. Luc was a very good friend of mine. He had a very clear solution to any problem. I
think there’s also room for diversity in the banking market. In Belgium what you see is that many
of those in the market are targeting home loans, resulting in intense competition there. Diversity
means  that  big  banks  have  to  look  abroad  more  for  profit.  You  don’t  necessarily  need  fewer
banks, it’s just that they shouldn’t all target the same thing.
Something else: fifty years ago you were the tender age of eighteen, during the Summer
of Love. It’s said that you were a real hippie in those days. How much is left of the ideals
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
from back then?
(Laughs)  That  is  so  long  ago.  1967! Actually  I  was  in  Woodstock  again  recently,  as  I  had  a
conference not far away. So I gave my wife a call: “Guess where I am now?"
What can I say? Belgium was also new to me at the time, when I went to Brussels to study at the
age of seventeen. That was difficult, because I didn’t know anyone at all. The second year was a
relief.
It was mostly fun. A time of liberal thought, of freedom and tolerance for different ideas. Before
that it was very different.
It was a time when the consumer society was making headway, nobody was very worried that
they wouldn’t be able to find a job. People were interested in each other and took time to greet
each other, like bikers still do now. You see that a lot less these days.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
