Philip R Lane: International policy trilemmas
Remarks  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  London  Irish
Business Society, London, 31 January 2017.
“International Policy Trilemmas”
 The implications of global and regional integration for policymaking have been much studied in
recent  decades.    Indeed,  I  spent  2002–2008  as  Director  of  the  Institute  for  International
Integration  Studies  (IIIS),  which  aimed  to  provide  multi-disciplinary  perspectives  on  the  myriad
1
policy challenges associated with cross-border integration .
In  relation  to  economic  policy,  three  so-called  trilemmas  capture  the  tensions  in  determining
policy choices in an integrated world economy.   First, the Mundell-Fleming trilemma postulates
that  only  two  of  the  following  three  choices  are  simultaneously  feasible:    an  independent
monetary policy; a stable exchange rate; and unrestricted international capital mobility . Among
the advanced economies that largely adhere to the principle of unrestricted capital mobility, we
see  countries  with  independent  monetary  policies  and  floating  exchange  rates  and  we  see
countries opting for a shared monetary policy through the elimination of national currencies in the
form of the European monetary union.  For some major emerging economies, restrictions on
international capital mobility are imposed in order to target both a stable exchange rate and some
independence in domestic monetary policy.
2
Second, as proposed by Dirk Schoenmaker, the financial trilemma has it that only two of the
following three options are possible:   financial stability; independent national financial policies;
and cross-border financial integration . A restrictive approach to cross-border financial trade can
enable a country to combine the maintenance of financial stability with purely domestic financial
sector  policies,  while  liberalisation  in  financial  services  trade  typically  requires  considerable
cross-border policy collaboration if financial stability is to be achieved, especially during periods
of financial turmoil.
3
Third,  as  developed  by  Dani  Rodrik,  the  political  economy  trilemma  lays  out  the  restrictive
4
choices between: deep economic integration; democratic politics; and national policy autonomy .
At  a  strategic  level,  the  institutional  development  of  the  European  Union  has  been  directed  at
providing  sufficient  democratic  foundations  to  underpin  enhanced  integration  across  various
policy  dimensions,  through  Treaty  reforms,  inter-governmental  mechanisms  such  as  the
European Council and an enhanced role for the directly-elected European Parliament.  However,
the  Brexit  decision  now  compels  Europe  to  also  develop  mechanisms  to  foster  collaboration
between two entities (the EU and the UK) that will no longer be bound together by a common
multi-layered institutional framework.
While  the  trilemma  framework  is  perhaps  too  stark,  it  is  analytically  helpful  to  recognise  the
genuine tensions across inter-linked policy dimensions. Let me focus in on the monetary policy
and financial trilemmas.  In relation to monetary policy, Brexit does not alter the status quo, which
no commitment on either side to stabilise the value of Sterling against the euro and the Bank of
England and the European Central Bank each pursuing an independent monetary policy. 
In relation to financial stability policies, much has already been written as to the prospects for
post-Brexit financial services trade between the UK and the EU.  In relation to the clearing of
euro-denominated  trades  in  the  UK,  President  Draghi  has  recently  pointed  out  that  “it  will  be
important  to  find  solutions  that  at  least  preserve,  or  ideally  enhance,  the  current  level  of
supervision and oversight. ”This is important both in relation to the ECB’s role as a supervisor of
clearing member banks and as the central bank of issue for the euro. 
5
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
More  broadly,  the  maintenance  of  financial  stability  necessarily  requires  considerable  bilateral
and multilateral collaboration across major central banks. During the global financial crisis, this
included a network of currency swap lines to facilitate access to foreign-currency liquidity, while
fora such as the Bank for International Settlements and the Financial Stability Board enable the
sharing of analysis and information across jurisdictions. Similarly, there is a significant degree of
coordination  in  banking  regulation  through  the  Basel  Committee.      Still,  there  are  inevitably
differences  of  degree  in  terms  of  the  scale  of  coordination  within  the  EU  relative  to  that
achievable  through  global  institutional  frameworks.    Let  us  see  if  some  intermediate-level
arrangements  between  the  UK  and  the  EU  will  be  delivered  through  the  upcoming  EU-UK
negotiations.
1
2
3
4
5
This work now carries on under the umbrella of Trinity Research in Social Sciences (TRiSS),  which  is  the
successor institution to the IIIS.  The work of the IIIS is archived at www.tcd.ie/iiis.
Maurice Obstfeld, Jay C. Shambaugh and Alan M. Taylor (2005), “The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs Among
Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies and Capital Mobility,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(3), 423–438.
Dirk Schoenmaker (2011), “The Financial Trilemma,” Economics Letters 111, 57–59.
Dani Rodrik (2011), The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World Economy, WW Norton.
Letter from the ECB President to Ms Perevenche Beres, MEP, on the legal framework for central counterparties,
11 January 2017. 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
