       SPEECH DELIVERED AT THE LETSHEGO BANK LAUNCH GALA EVENT  
   Mr. Ipumbu Shiimi  
Governor  
     25 July 2017 
      1 
The Chairperson of Letshego Bank Namibia, Mr Shepherd, and fellow Directors, 
The Chief Executive Officer, Madam Ester Kali, 
Management, Staff and Stakeholders of Letshego Bank Namibia, 
Captains of Industry, 
Invited guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 1.  I  am  delighted  and  deeply  honoured  to  join  you  at  the  Letshego  Banking  Launch 
Gala  under  the  theme  “Letshego:  Celebrating  growth,  diversification  and 
improving life”. 
 2.  This  celebration  comes  at  a  time  when,  as  a  country,  despite  the  challenges  we 
face,  Namibia  continues  to  benefit  from  a  stable,  resilient  and  inclusive  financial 
system as reported in the latest Financial Stability Report issued in April 2017. 
 3.  On 28 October 2010, during the Governor’s Annual Address, I talked about the four-
point  agenda  which  became  a  rallying  point  for  enhancing  Financial  Inclusion.  The 
four-point agenda I talked about then was not merely a list of things that the Bank of 
Namibia would do to enhance Financial Inclusion, but a blueprint which we, together, 
as  Regulators  and  Financial  Institutions  should  implement  to  broaden  the  financial 
2 
 system.  These  four  agenda  points  served  as  corner  stone  of  the  Financial  Sector 
Strategy launched by the Minister of Finance on 2012, which has an expiry date of 
2021. 
 4.  At the time we pledged reform in the following 4 areas; Regulatory Framework and 
Consumer  Protection,  Consumer  Literacy,  Access  to  Financial  Services  and  Local 
Ownership of Commercial Banks. Since it is almost 5 years since the launch of the 
Financial  Sector  Strategy  and  nearly  7  years  since  the  day  of  my  speech,  it  is  
befitting that we pause and take stock of the progress made in realizing this pledge. 
  First, Regulatory Framework and Consumer Protection  
5.  The cornerstone of our Regulatory Framework has always been centered  on smart 
regulations  that  allows  the  financial  sector  to  innovate  and  flourish,  while  ensuring 
consumer  protection  and  ultimately  the  stability  of  our  financial  system.  We  have 
always advocated for fairness, in favour of both the financial service providers and 
consumers  of  such  services.  In  order  to  ensure  fair  treatment  of  consumers  by 
banking institutions,  in 2013,  the Guidelines for Lodging Complaints  and a Code of 
Good  Banking  Practices,  which  guide  consumers  on  how  to  lodge  complaints 
against  commercial  banks  and  commercial  banks  on  how  to  deal  with  such 
complaints, respectively,  haves been developed jointly by the Bank of Namibia and 
the  Banker’s  Association  of  Namibia.  In  2014,  the  Credit  Bureau  Regulations  were 
3 
 issued to regulate the operations of credit bureaus in Namibia. Prior to 2014, there 
was  no  regulatory  framework  to  regulate  and  protect  consumers  against  unfair 
treatment  by  credit  bureaus.  The  Regulations  provide  for  a  dispute  resolution 
mechanism in the event of disputes arising between consumers, credit bureaus and 
credit providers. 
 6.  More 
importantly, 
the  Financial  Services  Adjudicator  Bill  which  will  handle 
complaints  against  financial  institutions  has  been  developed  and  tabled  in  the 
National Assembly. The Adjudicator will cater for consumer concerns related to both 
banks and non-bank financial institutions under one roof. 
 7.  Bank of Namibia and NAMIFISA are also currently working on the Consumer Credit 
Bill  which  will  regulate  all  consumer  credit  related  issues  and  consolidate  outdated 
laws regulating credit such as the Credit Agreements Act of 1980 and the Usury Act 
of 1968.  
  The second issue is Financial Literacy and Capability. 
8.  The importance of Financial Literacy cannot be overemphasized. There is a saying 
that  knowledge  is  power.  It  is  thus  important  that  we  empower  our  consumers  of 
financial  services  with  the  knowledge  in  order  for  them  to  make  informed  financial 
decisions.  The financial  literacy  of the average  Namibian  above  the  age  of 16  was 
 4 
calculated as 42.75% in 2013. Indicating that we have some kilometers to travel to 
make the majority of Namibian more financially literate.  
 9.  On this front, the collective efforts  of the partners of the Financial Literacy Initiative 
under the Ministry of Finance have done a lot of work to educate consumers and this 
work should be intensified to close the gap. The FLI is currently planning a follow-up 
survey this year which will show us how much progress we have made since the last 
survey in 2013. 
 Access to Financial Services and Products 
10. Access to quality financial services and products has been identified as a catalyst for 
economic  growth  and  poverty  alleviation,  both  in  developing  and  advanced 
countries. The potential of the financial sector to contribute meaningfully to economic 
growth  and  social  progression  of  any  economy  depends  on  the  full  participation  of 
individuals  and  firms  in  that  sector.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  a  number  of  initiatives 
have  been  introduced  in  our  financial  sector  to  ensure  access  to  financial  services 
and products.  
 11. The  ultimate  aim  of  such  interventions  are  to  enhance  access  to  banking  and 
financial services for the previously excluded members of our society. High fees and 
charges contributes to the exclusion of the majority of the society from participating 
 5 
in  the  formal  financial  system.  For  this  reason,  two  targeted  interventions  were 
introduced to deal with the issue of high fees and charges in order to allow access 
for more individuals and business: 
  The Introduction of the Basic Bank Account (BBA) with minimal charges aimed to 
benefit  low  income  earners  of  the  society  was  one  pragmatic  intervention.  All 
commercial  banks  have  introduced  this  type  of  an  account,  meeting  the  set 
standards. The number of active basic bank accounts has increased from 59 022 
in 2012 to 385 224 by December 2016.  
  The other intervention was the Standards on Cash Deposit Fees which removed 
all cash deposit fees charged by banking institutions to all accounts of individuals 
and  accounts  belonging  to  businesses  with  a  turnover  of  N$1  million  or  less 
which become effective from 31 March 2015. 
 12. Coupled  with  the  above  interventions,  the  Bank  of  Namibia  has  joined  hands  with 
other  institutions  such  as  the  Development  Bank  of  Namibia  to  work  on  the  SME 
Financing  Strategy  for  Namibia.  The  Strategy  comprises  of  three  complimentary 
facilities  namely:  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme,  Venture  Capital  Fund,  and  Coaching 
and  Mentoring  Programme.  This  Strategy  is  at  an  advanced  stage  and  once  
implemented it is expected to significantly improve access to finance for Small and 
Medium Enterprises in Namibia. 
  6 
Local Ownership of Commercial Banks 
13. Lastly, in line with the aspirations of the Namibia Financial Sector Strategy and the 
Financial  Sector  Charter  which  advocates  for  some  degree  of  localization  of  the 
financial sector, the Bank has proposed changes to the ownership  structure of new 
banking  institutions  in  the  draft  amendment  Banking  Institutions  Bill  which  is  under 
the  consideration  of  the  Minister  of  Finance.  The  amendments  will  mean  that  new 
entrants will be subjected to minimum participation of local ownership. 
 14. Existing banking institutions have also agreed to increase local shareholding. Other 
encouraging  avenues  of  fostering  local  ownership  include  the  listing  on  the  local 
stock market and selling of existing shares to employees. Our expectations are that 
within  the next  two  years  the  remaining  banks  should follow-suit  to  by  either  listing 
on the Namibia Stock Exchange or through private placements.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
15. I  am  delighted  to  note  that  Letshego  Namibia  has  shown  a  strong  commitment  to 
become  a  strong  player  in  the financial  sector  in  Namibia.  Equally,  it  is pleasing  to 
learn that Letshego Namibia is considering to list of the NSX, a move which will open 
doors  for  the  ownership  of  the  group  to  many  Namibians  and  at  the  same  time 
improving the Namibian capital markets. This is indeed a commendable step. Going 
forward, I want to strongly urge Letshego Namibia to continue to ensure fairness to 
7 
 its  customers  as  this  too  will  contribute  to  further  development  of  Namibia. 
Furthermore, I’m encouraged by Letshego’s decision to transition from consumption 
credit  to  a  more  productive  credit  as  the  later  will  help  contribute  to  the  production 
capacity  of  our  economy  and  contribute  to  the  stability  of  your  bank  and  ultimately 
sustainable economic development in Namibia. 
 16. Ladies and Gentleman  
17. On  28  October  2010,  I  ended  my  speech  with  the  Chinese  adage  “A  Journey  of  
thousand  miles  begins  with  the  first  step”  I  believe  we  have  taken  the  first  step 
toward financial inclusion. We have travelled about 500 miles of that journey, we still 
have  some  more  miles  to  get  there,  but  getting  there  we  shall.  Getting  there, 
however, requires that all of us should continue to work  hard as a team to create a 
sustainable  and  an  inclusive  financial  sector  for  our  children  and  their  children’s 
future. I believe, Letshego is one of the trailblazers on this journey,  we look forward 
to continue travelling with you. 
 I thank you for your kind attention 
 Iipumbu Shiimi.  
 8 
