Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Le Monde and La Stampa
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in  Le  Monde  and  La  Stampa,  conducted  by  Ms  Marie  Charrel  (Le  Monde)  and  Mr Alessandro
Barbera (La Stampa) on 3 July 2017 and published on 7 July 2017.
 Optimism is back in the euro area. Are we at the beginning of a “golden decade”?
It’s true that in the space of one year the situation has improved considerably. The euro area can
be said to have entered a phase of economic expansion. The recovery has finally arrived. It has
spread to virtually all sectors and countries. This is excellent news. But it would be unwise to let
our guard down, because this recovery is of a cyclical nature and builds on significant support
from monetary policy. There is still much to do to make it long-lasting. Structural growth needs to
be strengthened in each country and the euro area must be made more resilient to shocks.
Emmanuel  Macron’s  election  in  France  has  rightly  relaunched  the  discussions  on
strengthening the euro area. Which area of work must be prioritised?
The priority is reform in each country. That goes for France and Italy, among others, but also for
Germany. For example, the rates of economic growth have now largely converged in the various
euro area countries, but their per capita income levels still differ widely. This is a problem for the
euro area. Once each of the Member States has done its share of the work, they will then be able
to strengthen their joint structures. In the end, I think that this calls for stronger institutions, such
as a finance ministry that is allocated a common budget, but let’s be careful not to put the cart
before the horse.
How can the Germans be convinced to move towards this common budget?
There will be no single budget policy, as the Member States do not want one. Pooling the budget
is  simply  a  tool  that  allows  joint  projects  to  be  financed.  To  make  progress  in  this  area,  it  is
necessary  to  sweep  away  the  preconceptions  that  paralyse  the  discussions  between  the
Member  States.  In  Germany,  for  example,  people  think  that  Berlin  alone  paid  for  the  other
countries during the crisis, which is not true. In France, the thinking is that Europe is dominated
by Germany, which is also not the case. And in Italy, the euro is held responsible for the country’s
problems, when the Italian economy’s weaknesses, such as lacklustre productivity growth, pre-
date  the  single  currency.  Such  biases  will  not  go  away  until  the  economies  have  converged
sufficiently.
Why does making the labour market more flexible appear to be the keystone of reforms
to be carried out in France?
Reforming the French labour market has become extremely symbolic in Europe: it is considered
everywhere as proof of France’s willingness to reform. That’s what makes it essential. The new
French Government fully understands this. However, this can only be a first step. The notorious
“flexicurity”  includes  the  word  “security”.  Making  the  labour  market  more  flexible  can  unleash
potential, but doing so also requires safeguarding workers’ careers and reforming their training.
There is also the problem of the mismatch between France’s output and foreign demand, as
shown by its external deficit, which is one of the highest in the euro area. This deficit is not the
result of an overly rigid labour market, but rather of a skills mismatch. Education and training
must therefore be at the heart of the reforms of the French economy.
Should inspiration be taken from the Italian “Jobs Act” reform, which introduced a single
labour contract?
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Each country has its own unique features, but it’s true that, with the “Jobs Act”, Italy went further
than France. What is more, this reform is starting to bear fruit.
Several plans are also on the table for eurobonds, these European bonds whereby the
risks are more or less shared among the member countries. What is the current thinking
on these?
Discussions  are  under  way,  in  particular  within  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board.  But  it  is
unrealistic to imagine, as is too often the case in France, that technical fixes can solve political
problems.  Prior  to  any  reform  of  the  euro  area,  discussions  need  to  take  place  on  the  joint
projects and their democratic basis. Public debt, whether French or European, constitutes the
taxes of tomorrow and beyond. Who will vote for these taxes? The national parliaments or the
European  Parliament? And  what  will  they  finance?  These  are  very  political  choices.  With  the
economic upswing and the return of confidence in Europe, the time has come to embark on this
joint reflection.
Doesn’t the coming increase in interest rates pose a threat to the countries with weak
public finances?
The increase in long-term interest rates is the result of consolidating growth. Governments and
financial players must prepare themselves for it. They are aware of that.
Do  the  divisions  within  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  over  the  withdrawal  of
exceptional monetary policy measures weaken its credibility?
The European treaties chose for monetary policy to be steered by a governing council precisely
to  allow  for  the  expression  of  different  viewpoints.  This  range  of  opinions  is  an  antidote  to
groupthink. What’s essential is to come to a consensus at the end of the discussion, which is
nearly always what happens. There is no disagreement over the current monetary policy stance.
How can one avoid the reduction of monetary support causing panic on the markets?
The choices available to the ECB are too often caricatured by its observers. Some fear that we
might traumatise the financial markets if we turn the dial of monetary policy by a millimetre, while
others prescribe a forced march towards normalisation. The reality is quite different. As early as
last December, we scaled back our asset purchases without undermining the support given to
the economy. So, I would argue that we have already adjusted our monetary policy, and this was
made  possible  by  the  continued  improvement  in  the  economic  situation.  This  adjustment  has
been done in a very careful way, as a number of factors continue to weigh on inflation. If needed,
the Governing Council will continue to adjust its instruments both qualitatively and quantitatively.
But when this is needed, it should do so carefully and flexibly, and based on what matters for us
within  the  framework  of  our  mandate:  the  inflation  outlook.  We  must  be  transparent  in  our
communications on these developments. Otherwise we run the risk of a more abrupt adjustment
for the markets when the decisions are actually taken.
But inflation today is very close to the objective of 2%...
We base our decisions on facts, but make no mistake – without monetary support, inflation today
would not be approaching 2%. That gives us reason to be careful. The underlying inflationary
pressures are still weak. Another issue that we are monitoring closely is the impact of the ECB’s
negative deposit rates on the banking sector and its capacity to support the economy. Banks’
profitability and the growth in credit show that fears over negative side-effects are not justified at
present. In the light of these observations, there is no reason to change our strategy.
Some economists argue that low rates are contributing to speculative bubbles forming,
in particular in the housing market. Are they wrong?
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
We monitor financial stability very closely. Our assessment is that there are currently no bubbles
at euro area level. There’s a simple reason for this – financial asset bubbles have historically
been associated with an increase in bank credit and the size of banks. Today, the flow of credit
to the economy is picking up but remains moderate. What is more, the size of the banking sector
is limited by regulation.
What  about  bubbles  in  unregulated  financial  institutions  in  the  “shadow  banking”
sector?
The increase in credit in this sector is happening quickly, and we have a limited number of tools
with which to constrain it. It’s an area of concern for the future.
By being so cautious, isn’t the ECB at risk of finding itself out of ammunition when the
next crisis hits?
The main danger for the euro area is having to tackle the next slowdown without the necessary
tools. Today, the euro area economy is exceeding its cruising speed, mainly due to the support
of monetary policy. Without reforms, however, growth will peter out sooner or later. So it’s critical
that the euro area prepares for future shocks by recovering fiscal room for manoeuvre. The most
indebted countries, which include France and Italy, should take advantage of the current upturn to
consolidate  their  public  finances.  The  French  Government’s  commitment  to  bring  the  public
deficit below the 3% threshold this year is a positive step. It prepares the country for the future
and enables it to regain credibility in Europe.
Is the lure of protectionism a threat to the global economy?
At  the  global  level,  this  temptation  is  very  strong.  And  that’s  a  serious  problem.  The  global
economy needs cooperation. We were only able to overcome the 2007 crisis through a collective
commitment, in particular from the G20 and the Financial Stability Board, to resist protectionism
and  respect  common  financial  standards.  Going  back  on  that  commitment  would  hurt  growth
and employment. In this context, Europe has a responsibility to defend the values of openness
and  free  movement  that  it  embodies,  without  being  naive.  For  example,  the  free  trade  deals
agreed  with  Canada,  and  soon  to  be  agreed  with  Japan,  contain  guarantees  that  uphold  the
European  values  of  respect  for  social  standards,  public  services  and  the  environment.
Protectionism should not be confused with protection.
Is that enough to protect those who lose out as a result of globalisation?
The tools to deal with this issue are mainly available at national level. But Europe is probably the
best-equipped  region.  Some  years  ago,  Chancellor  Angela  Merkel  highlighted  that  Europe
accounts for 7% of the world’s population and 25% of its GDP, but 50% of its social expenditure.
European countries’ responsibility, first and foremost, is to ensure that their social systems are
sustainable  and  work  well  by  securing  their  funding. And  this  doesn’t  exclude  European-level
mechanisms.
Is common unemployment insurance an example of this?
Personally,  I‘m  not  sure.  Harmonising  workers’  rights  seems  to  me  to  be  a  difficult  goal  to
achieve. But tools available at European level, such as the Globalisation Adjustment Fund, could
be better used. Currently, too few workers have access to it. In addition, the best way to protect
workers is to provide them with training. This priority is not visible enough in European budgets.
Is Italy the sick man of the euro area?
I wouldn’t say that. I’m optimistic for the Italian economy over the short term. It is benefiting from
accelerating economic growth in the euro area. Reforms such as the “Jobs Act” are bearing fruit
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
and the banks’ non-performing loan problem is now being dealt with proactively. On the other
hand, the country’s long-term growth prospects remain lower than those of the euro area as a
whole, and that’s a problem. But I must highlight that it’s a problem that already existed before the
euro was introduced. Today, this is making it harder to reduce the public debt, but doing so is
vital for Italy’s future.
Does the Italian economy really benefit from the euro?
Yes, of course! The single currency, like banking union, is very beneficial for Italy. Today in Italy
there’s a kind of mistrust of Europe, which is particularly worrying given that it is one of the EU’s
founding  Member  States,  where  the  Community  values  have  always  been  strong.  One  of  the
major challenges in the months to come will be for Italy to reclaim the European project. It’s vital
that it does so. Europe needs Italy to stand up for it. A well-functioning Franco-German alliance is
also necessary, but it isn’t enough on its own. Italy is a key component of the European project.
Today, we need it to act as a positive force and be supportive of the euro.
The Italian banks Veneto Banca and Banca Popolare di Vicenza were wound up using
public funds. Is this a failure for banking union?
No. Quite the contrary, in fact. The ECB, in its role as banking supervisor, identified the problems
ahead  of  time  and  put  pressure  on  the  banks  to  strengthen  their  capital,  which  they  did  on
several occasions, and to find a buyer. Once these options were exhausted, the ECB declared
that these two banks were failing or likely to fail, in order to trigger the mechanism for winding
them down. The decisions regarding their liquidation and the use of public funds do not fall under
our  remit,  but  everything  was  done  in  accordance  with  European  rules.  Of  course,  there  are
lessons to be learnt, but let‘s not lose sight of the bigger picture. From now on, it will be possible
to close down banks when they are no longer viable. This is a massive cultural shift in Europe –
for a long time the assumption had been that all banks had to be kept afloat, including those that
were no longer viable. This mindset contributed to the weakness of the European banking sector,
which currently has too many institutions. It will have to consolidate.
Will the Brexit negotiations harm investment in the euro area?
Brexit is bad news for everyone, but it was the British people’s choice, and its economic impact
is  far  less  significant  for  us  than  it  is  for  them.  Political  uncertainty  is  diminishing  on  the
Continent, which helps boost investment, but in the United Kingdom the opposite seems to be
the case. It is for the British people to choose their destiny outside of the European Union, but
one thing must be clear: this cannot call into question the coherence of the European project and
the integrity of its single market – a legal space in which the common rules are respected and
consumers and investors are protected. The purpose of the European institutions is to protect
that integrity. And that holds true if the negotiations fail, which is sadly a possibility.
With its economy battered by year after year of crisis, what could be the future drivers of
growth in Greece?
That  is  the  issue  the  Greek  Government  can  now  tackle.  The  agreement  reached  by  the
Eurogroup in June isn’t perfect, because it doesn’t provide a clear answer to the issue of Greek
debt sustainability, but it will enable the economy to stabilise and investment to return. If political
uncertainty and uncertainties around the implementation of the aid package disappear, I am sure
that Greece will be able to benefit from a strong cyclical recovery that will ultimately enable it to
consider its model for future growth. The time has finally come to ask these long-term questions.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
