S S Mundra: Financing MSMEs: Banks & FinTechs - competition,
collaboration or competitive collaboration?
Inaugural  address  by  Mr  S  S  Mundra,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the
NAMCABS Seminar organized by College of Agricultural Banking, Mumbai, 20 February 2017.
 1.  Mr.  Simon  Bell,  Global  lead,  SME  Finance,  World  Bank  Group;  Smt.  Surekha  Marandi,
Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India; Shri P. K. Panda, Principal, College of Agricultural
Banking(CAB);  Chairmen/CEOs  of  various  banks  present  here;  other  senior  officers  from  the
banking  sector;  my  colleagues  from  RBI;  ladies  and  gentlemen!  At  the  outset,  let  me
congratulate CAB for organising this Seminar on the theme of “Coping with the challenges of
Financial  Technology  Innovations  in  MSME  Financing”.  I  particularly  take  this  opportunity  to
welcome  Mr.  Simon  Bell  to  India  and  thank  him  profusely  for  consenting  to  address  the
participants this morning.
1
2. I think the seminar theme is very topical especially in the backdrop of a public policy push
towards digitisation of finance in all its manifestations. MSME sector, which accounts for more
than  half  of  the  world’s  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  and  employs  almost  two-thirds  of  the
global work force, is virtually the backbone of the global economy. Hence, the sector needs to
benefit from the fintech innovations to keep the global growth engine chugging along.
3.  The  seminar  theme  precludes  the  discussion  on ‘whether’  and ‘how’  financial  technology
innovations can be employed for financing of MSMEs and takes it as a given. Certainly to a large
extent, financial technology (or FinTech ) innovations have permeated across the entire Financial
Services  Value  Chain.  So,  whether  it  is  wholesale  banking,  wholesale  payments,  retail  and
commercial  banking,  customer  relationship  or  payment  services,  FinTech  finds  applications
across the spectrum. What we are set to discuss today is, thus, only a segment of this value
chain  i.e.  use  of  fintech  for  financing  of  MSMEs.  Nevertheless,  the  challenges  of  financial
technology innovations in Finance would be generally common to the entire value chain.
4. In the context of MSME Financing, I have been asked to speak on the topic ‘A new business
model  for  the  next  decade:  collaboration  with  the  fintech  companies’. All  of  you  would
agree that technology has been in use in banking and more generally in the sphere of finance for
quite some time now -whether it is use of computers for book-keeping, products like credit and
debit cards or use of ATM for delivery of services etc., all were fintech innovations in their time.
But  when  we  talk  of  fintech  in  today’s  context,  we  generally  mean  innovations  which  have
enabled Big Data Analytics, Algorithmic trading and applications of Block Chain Technology and
their variants. In my address today, I intend to focus on the financial technology innovations and
emerging collaboration opportunities for the banks with Fintech players for MSME financing.
Financial technology innovations in MSME financing
2
5. With around 51.1 million units throughout the geographical expanse of the country, MSMEs
contribute around 8% of GDP, 40% of the total exports and around 45% of the manufacturing
output . They are also estimated to provide employment to around 120 million persons in the
country. Moreover these figures may not be capturing contribution of MSMEs in services sector
fully. As per the International Financial Corporation (IFC), a ‘funding gap’ of $ 2.1 to 2.6 trillion
exists for all formal and informal MSMEs in emerging markets alone, which is equivalent to 30 to
36 per cent of current outstanding MSME credit. SME lending being a hugely underserved market
is  a  major  opportunity  for  FinTech  Start-ups  to  build  and  scale  up  sustainable  businesses  by
offering services such as credit underwriting, marketplace lending, etc.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
6. Given the huge business potential the number of FinTech companies in the MSME Financing
space has been growing rapidly. FinTech companies are improving access to finance for SMEs
by  giving  loans  themselves,  connecting  SMEs  to  banks  and  financial  institutions  (Marketplace
Model) (e.g. Lendingkart, smelending.com, etc.) or becoming financial product aggregators (e.g.
BankBazaar, bookmyforex.com, PolicyBazaar, FundsIndia.com, etc).
7. The fintech companies have leveraged on growing technological advances and pervasiveness
of  smartphones  and  have  targeted  niches  in  SME  lending  to  bridge  the  funding  gap  for  small
businesses  with  innovative  and  flexible  credit  products.  Potentially,  the  MSME  borrowers  can
apply online in minutes, select desired repayment terms and receive funds in their bank accounts
within  2-3  days  with  minimal  hassle.  There  are  few  documentation  requirements,  very  quick
turnaround  time  and  flexible  loan  sizes  and  tenors.  That  the  P2P  lenders  can  become  a
significant source of finance for the small borrowers is evident from the UK example where the
P2P lending represents about 14% of the new lending to the SMEs.  A NESTA survey in the UK
suggests  that  around  55–60%  of  peer-to-peer  business  borrowers  were  either  refused  bank
credit  or  they  had  not  approached  banks  considering  they  were  not  credit  worthy  enough.
Though, corresponding data is not available for India, I believe the position in respect of refusal of
credit to potential borrowers may be more acute. FinTech lending companies and the market
place based lending, thus, have an underlying potential to emerge as an alternative source of
finance for the small businesses. Considering the need to strike a balance between regulation of
these  entities  even  while  preserving  their  ability  to  innovate,  RBI  is  currently  consulting  on
approach to regulate the P2P lending.
3
8. As I said earlier, the fintech firms are powered by technologies that harness big data analytics
& machine learning and use a mix of traditional and non-traditional methods to assess the credit
worthiness of individuals and SMEs. These firms are also willing to lend to small businesses that
might not have collateral, significant revenues or years of experience. Many of the fintech firms
abroad  employ  unorthodox  techniques,  including  psychometric  tests  to  run  checks  on  their
borrowers, determine their social media reputation and do rigorous due diligence before lending.
This  provides  an  inherent  advantage  to  them  over  the  traditional  lenders  in  gauging  the
creditworthiness of the potential borrower/business.
9. With the combination of data and analytics, it is possible now to do credit risk analysis online,
complete  loan  appraisal  and  disbursal  faster.  A  key  reason  why  algorithm-based  automated
lending by FinTech firms is possible today, unlike say 5-7 years ago, is the availability of reliable
data  on  potential  borrowers.  On  the  back  of  strong  growth  in  internet  penetration  and  mobile
density, e-commerce and smartphone-based services have created a huge amount of data on
individuals and small businesses. The availability of records from credit bureaus, utility and credit
card bill payments etc., has enabled the FinTech firms to sift through large volume of available
information and gather specific data on potential borrowers. As more and more data is getting
digitized, the cost and effort involved in assessing the creditworthiness of SMEs would decline
significantly. The borrowers can give their ‘consent’ to a FinTech lender or to a bank to use their
digital footprint for sanctioning a loan. This is already evident in the pre-approved loans that are
being offered to retail borrowers.
Why are we talking about bank’s collaboration with Fintech companies?
10.  Fintech  companies  as  we  have  seen  are  disrupting  every  facet  of  the  traditional  financial
services business and have emerged as a challenge to the banking system. According to a PwC
2016 Global Fintech Survey report, up to 28% of the banking and payments business are at risk
by  2020.  The  imminent  competition  to  banks’  business  comes  from  the  new  breed  of  fintech
companies  having  capacities  to  address  specific  pain-points  of  financial  customers  such  as
remittance,  credit,  savings,  etc.  The  report  adds  that  MSME  banking  is  likely  to  be  the  fourth
largest sector to be disrupted by Fintech in the next 5 years after consumer banking, payments,
and investment/wealth management. Another study  done by Citi researchers predicted that the
4
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
fintech revolution will wipe out nearly a third of all the employees at traditional banks in the next 10
years.  This  prediction  is  essentially  about  the  lack  of  growth  and  loss  of  business  over  time,
though  it  may  be  difficult  at  this  juncture  to  accurately  gauge  the  possibility  of  any  particular
benefit or risk materialising in the fintech universe.
11. In view of the above challenges that the fintech companies may present, it seems to make
business sense for the brick and mortar banks to collaborate with the more efficient and agile
fintech players. The banks would need to assess the likely impact of disruption and re-orient their
business models. As the incumbents, they may need to leverage their comparative advantage to
improve  their  customer  relationships,  change  their  internal  processes,  mindset,  and  internal
structures. Some banks have already adopted the ways of the fintech companies by employing
technology for making credit-decisions in a limited way. Many have started using credit scoring
models  for  retail  and  SME  borrowers.  What  still  eludes  them  is  the  nimble-footedness  of  the
fintech players, which alienates the potential borrowers.
12. Fintech firms are good at innovative skills and mindsets supported by the regulatory freedom
presently  available  to  be  innovative,  to  leverage  Big  Data  and  to  be  nimble  in  responding  to
market changes. However, as this segment grows in size, they would sure be coming under
equivalent  regulatory  framework.  Moreover,  majority  of  them  are  venture  capital  supported
entities,  which  can’t  exactly  substitute  a  wide  capital  base.  This  is  where  the  banks  could
capitalise on the fintech ecosystem. The banks could as well leverage big data, data analytics,
SME friendly applications, etc., in effectively lending to MSME segment while remaining compliant
with extant KYC norms and appraisal & monitoring principles and reduce their intermediation and
compliance costs. Whether to do so inhouse or through a collaboration is a business judgement
that individual banks need to make.
13. Despite some inherent advantages that the fintech players enjoy, it is not a one way street for
them. The fintech companies do not have a big client base of their own and without the expertise
to navigate the regulations and licensing discipline of the finance industry; they can’t go very far
on their own. A major strength that traditional banks possess is a reputation for trustworthiness
built over several decades. The banks have capital and can weather intense competition. They
also have the benefit of experience and tried-and-tested infrastructure alongside specific financial
knowledge of risk management, local regulations and compliance. In fact, banks’ on-the-ground
market and customer knowledge and pre-existing client base can be of immense value to fintech
projects.  In  a  nutshell,  banks  and  fintech  firms  have  different  comparative  advantages  and  a
strategic  collaborative  partnership  between  the  two  would  liberate  them  to  focus  on  their
respective core competencies and contribute to the innovation process.
14. Let me now highlight few recent tech-enabled initiatives which have been blessed by RBI for
promoting accessibility of finance to the MSME sector.
Some RBI initiatives
15. RBI has initiated measures to expand the reach of banking services for unbanked population,
regulating an efficient electronic payment system and providing alternative options to the MSME
sector. Before I conclude let me focus on couple of recent tech-based initiatives launched by the
RBI for benefit of the MSME ecosystem.
(i) TReDS: In order to solve the problem of delayed payment to MSMEs, RBI has licensed three
entities for operating the Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS). The objective is to
create Electronic Bill Factoring Exchanges which could electronically accept and settle bills so
that  MSMEs  could  encash  their  receivables  without  delay.  The  system  would  facilitate  the
financing of trade receivables of MSME enterprises from corporate and other buyers, including
government departments and public sector undertakings (PSUs) through multiple financiers. It is
expected that the TReDS will commence operations within this current fiscal.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
(ii) An Udyami Mitra portal has been set up to leverage IT architecture of Stand-Up Mitra portal
which aims at instilling ease of access to MSMEs’ financial and non-financial service needs. The
Portal, as a virtual market place endeavours to provide ‘End to End’ solutions not only for credit
delivery but also for the host of credit-plus services by way of hand holding support, application
tracking, multiple interface with stakeholders (i.e. banks, service providers, applicants).
(iii) Payment  Banks/  Small  Finance  Banks  (SFBs):  Following  the  issuance  of  differentiated
banking  licenses,  a  number  of  such  entities  have  become/  will  shortly  become  operational.
These  banks  will  have  the  advantage  of  embracing  state  of  art  technology  from  beginning.
Payment  banks  can’t  lend  directly  but  can  be  distributors  of  the  credit  products,  while  SFBs
would  predominantly  be  in  MSME  space.  This  throws  open  meaningful  oppurtunities  for
emergence of two-way/ three-way alliances between legacy bankers/ new banking entrants &
fintech companies in the area of MSME financing. Key would be who develops a clear vision &
moves fast.
Conclusion
16. Let me utilise the presence of the bank CEOs and in-charges of MSME divisions to draw their
attention  to  the  need  for  focussing  separately  on  ‘micro’  customers  from  amongst  the  MSME
segment. Micro entities comprise a very ‘niche’ segment as these are mostly individual or family
run businesses having very unique credit needs. As they generally lack adequate documentation,
they fail to receive credit from the formal financial system. An estimate suggests that at present
almost 93% of such units are outside the formal credit system. I think this segment, including the
small enterprises, can benefit immensely from the collaboration between banks and the fintech
players  whereby  their  other  payment  records  can  form  a  basis  for  working  their  credit
worthiness.
17. A related aspect I want to highlight is that the smaller players in the MSME segment typically
dealt  in  cash  despite  having  a  bank  account.  Thanks  however  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  SBNs
recently,  most  of  them  have  begun  to  route  their  transactions  through  their  bank  accounts.  It
opens  up  a  huge  opportunity  for  the  banks  to  employ  data  mining  techniques  and  utilize  the
outcomes  to  assess  credit  needs  of  the  small  entrepreneurs.  Needless  to  add  that  such
exercise  has  to  be  supplemented  with  financial  literacy  efforts  –  for  ensuring  that  borrowers
utilize the credit for productive purpose & also don’t retreat to cash dealings.
18. In fact, my vision of a fin-tech enabled banking system is one in which a micro entrepreneur
receives an online bank credit early in the morning, which she utilizes for buying her wares from
the wholesale market, sells them during the day, receives payment from customers in electronic
form (mobile money), pays back the bank loan at the end of the day and gets the surplus credited
to her linked savings account. Part of this saving when pooled, automatically moves to some
micro  investment/  pension  products.  I  strongly  feel  that  a  harmonious  collaboration  between
fintech firms and the banks can quickly help realize this vision.
19. Let me conclude by reiterating that the age of FinTechs is here and for the incumbent banks
there is no time to lose. The banks that do not quickly convert in to a new-age digital bank run the
risk of becoming history. They would need to tap the requisite talent and create an environment
where  such  talent  can  innovate  and  be  agile.  The  banks  must  view  the  success  of  fintech
ecosystem as an opportunity and not as a threat.
I once again thank CAB for inviting me here and wish the Conference all success.
Thank you!
1
Financial Stability Board defines FinTech as technology-enabled financial innovation that could result in new
business models, applications, processes or products with an associated material effect on financial markets
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and institutions and the provision of financial services.
msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/Background%20Note%20-%20UAM_0.pdf
“The Promise of FinTech-Something new under the Sun?”- Speech delivered by Mark Carney, Governor, Bank of
England at Deutsche Bundesbank G20 Conference in Wiesbaden.
svicenter.com/how-big-banks-are-embracing-the-fintech-revolution-and-more-news
2
3
4
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
