 BANK OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA 
 PRESENTATION TALKING POINTS 
AT THE BSP E-BUSINESS EXPO, 
SIR JOHN GUISE STADIUM, PORT MORESBY  
 1ST FEBRUARY 2017 
 
BY 
 
MR. LOI M. BAKANI, CMG,  
GOVERNOR OF THE BANK OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA 
 TOPIC 
ENHANCING THE ENABLING ENVIRONMENT TO SUPPORT E-BUSINESS IN PNG 
 Introduction 
 
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  extended  to  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  to  do  a 
presentation on the central bank’s and regulator’s perspective concerning E-Business. 
 
Although  the  terms  e-commerce  and  e-business  are  often  used  interchangeably,  there  are 
differences. E-commerce is the buying and selling of goods and services on the Internet or other 
computer network. Any brick and mortar store can become an e-commerce business by adding a 
virtual storefront with an online catalogue. In most cases, e-business refers exclusively to Internet 
businesses of buying and selling of goods and services, but it may also refer to any business that 
uses Internet technology to improve productivity and profitability. 
 
The Bank of PNG continues to ensure that, in all aspects of digital financial services, the 
following parameters need to be in place: 
 
A Legislative Framework to Enable Digital Financial Services 
•  The enactment of the National Payments System Act in 2013,  
o  The  Act  regulates  all  providers  of  mobile  and  electronic  payments  services  in 
Papua New Guinea, 
  1 
o  The Act paved the way for the implementation of a new, efficient, reliable and 
safe payments system. 
 
•  Regulations Supporting the Payments System 
 o  The  Regulations  are  required  to  operationalize  the  Act  to  deal  with  risks  that  might 
emanate for the financial institutions and retail clients, 
o  Supporting  regulations  are  required  to  give  strength  to  the  Act  as  they  are  forward 
looking and sufficiently flexible, 
 
o  A number of regulations and guidelines to be issued address the following areas: 
a)  Payments System Oversight function 
o  With  scope  for  best  practice  and  standards,  identification  of  NPS  instruments, 
ensure  systems  employed  are  reliable,  to  cover  both  high  and  low  value 
transaction, 
 b)  Regulation on Agent Banking and Arrangement 
o  Agent  of  the  same  financial  institution,  an  agent  manager,  or  a  third  party.  
Ensures that proper risk mitigating arrangements are in place, whilst promoting 
financial  inclusion  and  to  reduce  the  cost  of  financial  services,  and  cover 
responsibilities of parties and termination of agreements, 
 c)  Regulation of Electronic Fund Transfer 
o  A payment made by one person is received by the other, 
 d)  Regulation of Retail Payments Instruments 
o  Ensure safety, and must satisfy the requirements of the Central Bank. That the 
products are safe and sound including outsourcing arrangement. 
 
The National Payments System 
•  The introduction of the world class Kina Automated Transfer System (KATS) which 
is a real time gross settlements system, 
o  Cheques truncation phase implemented in 2014 
§ 
It reduced the cheque clearing time to 3 days by January 2016.  
§  The clearing time has further reduced in January 2017 to 2 days 
o  Direct Credits phase   
 2 
o  Central  Switch  -  The  next  plan  by  the  Central  Bank  is  to  establish  a  Central 
Switch, 
§  To creating a financial eco-system for all mobile and electronic payments 
service  providers  (All  mobile  &  cards  payments  service  providers  are 
connected through a licensing process) 
ü  The  customers  can  transact  from  any  terminal  of  any  payment 
service provider efficiently at least cost, 
 
Digital Financial Services 
 
The  Bank’s  approach  to  the  promotion  of  providers  of  financial  services  is  one  of  liberal 
where  we  are  encouraging  different  models  based  on  the  party  holding  the  contractual 
relationship with the customer: 
1)  A full-service bank offering a basic or simplified transactional account for payments, 
transfers,  and  value  storage  via  mobile  device  or  payment  card  plus  point-of-sale 
(POS) terminal; 
2)  A mobile network operator (MNO) e-money issuer;  
3)  A non-bank / non-MNO e-money issuer 
 
As  a  result  of  this  approach  we  have  seen  a  number  of  initiatives  taken  out  by  several 
institutions and organisations: 
 
•  ANZ Bank rolled out its Go-Money 
•  BSP launched its Wantok Moni, 
•  Nationwide Microbanks with its MiCash and MiLife products,  
•  Digicel with its Cell moni, 
•  Westpac’s In-Store Banking 
•  BIMA  in  collaboration  with  Capital  Life  Insurance  successfully  launched  its  micro-
insurance products, 
•  The various other providers launched out their innovative services such as account 
balance checks, sms alert messages, or for payment for bills (e.g. Easy Pay by PNG 
Power) via an account, mobile or electronic wallet or via airtime 
 
There  have  been  continuous  efforts  by  mobile  network  operators 
the 
communication  coverage  across  PNG.  The  country  is  experiencing  a  rapid  change  in 
to  widen 
 3 
access to modern communication technologies including having access to internet and the 
upgrade  of  networks.  The  rate  in  the  uptakes  and  usage  of  mobile  phones  in  PNG  has 
been exponential since its introduction less than a decade ago. 
 
•  Opportunities  
 
There are very good reasons which make digital financial services a key and essential tool 
when it comes to addressing the 75 percent currently unbanked population in PNG; 
 
  It  increases  convenience  by  reducing  travelling  from  remote  villages  and  also  for 
reducing queuing times, 
It increases the safety of transactions for users; and, 
through agents and outlets, users have a greater control on where to transact; which 
helps protect privacy and reduce fraud.  
 
I  hope  that  the  establishment  of  the  national  payments  switch  in  the  near  future  will 
establish an ecosystem for interoperability that would enhance efficiency, low transaction 
costs  and  to  some  extent  merchants/agents  who  provide  the  service  will  benefit  from 
adequate  cashflows  because  more  people  will  be  able  to  use  the  same  access  point(s) 
regardless of which service provider they align with. 
 
•  Addressing The Challenges  
 
The findings from the National Financial Capability study carried out in 2015 has guided us 
to review and change the way we promote financial inclusion in PNG. The second National 
Financial  Inclusion  Strategy  2016-2020  responded  to  those  findings,  by  setting  out  a 
number  of  initiatives  for  strengthening  financial  inclusion,  and  in  particular  DFS,  into  the 
rural areas.  These include: 
Inclusive Insurance, 
•  Digital Financial Services, 
• 
•  Financial Literacy & Financial Education, 
•  Financial Consumer Protection, 
• 
•  SME Finance, 
•  Resources Sector Engagement, 
Informal Economy and Agriculture Finance, 
 4 
•  Government Engagement. 
 
Financial Literacy & Financial Education 
 
Financial  illiteracy  is  the  biggest  challenge  throughout  PNG.  In  order  to  see  e-Business 
reaching economies of scale, adequate resources and collaborative efforts are required to 
ensure  our  adult  population  is  financial  competent.  In  addition,  there  is  still  lack  of 
information about the location of access points. Where there are already points of access, 
there is still lack of customer service. These are some of the challenges which we should 
also discuss and may be research out the causes. 
 
Agent management is also another challenge for DFS. Agents are the front lines as from 
wherever  they  operate;  they  enable  customers  to  transact  by  turning  cash  into  e-money 
and  back  again.  Agents  play  a  critical  role  not  only  in  handling  transactions  but  in 
identifying,  acquiring,  and  educating  new  customers,  as  well  as  delivering  a  customer 
experience that keeps customers coming back. At the same time, the use of agents can 
trigger  operational,  technological,  legal/compliance,  reputational,  and  other  risks  that 
should be appropriately managed.  
 
Agents must not only comply with Know-Your-Customer (KYC) and Anti Money Laundering 
(AML)  standards  but  also  help  guard  the  entire  system  against  fraud,  encouraging 
customers' trust in the service. In addition, agents must provide customers with access to 
cash when they need it. Therefore, agents play a critical role in liquidity management by 
keeping adequate stocks of both cash and e-money to enable clients to transact. And as 
the first point of contact, agents help bridge the gap between high-tech service and low-
literacy clients. 
 
One thing is certain; technology will play a critical role. The rapid spread of new information 
and  communications  technologies,  and,  in  particular,  mobile  technologies,  is  increasingly 
making more services available to the unbanked.  I see the potential of digital technology to 
open up access to financial services and drive down costs.   
 
The National Financial Capability Survey findings also strongly emphasized the importance 
of  strengthening  financial  education  and  financial  literacy  in  order  to  increase  financial 
inclusion by women. Levels of financial knowledge, in particular knowledge of the cost of 
 5 
financial  services  suggest  a  continuing  commitment  is  required  to  further  strengthen 
consumer protection.   
 
The uptake and customer retention will continue to be pressing issues for DFS providers. It 
brings  no  return  on  investment  for  digital  financial  service  providers  if  end  users  are  not 
using  it.    Inactivity  and  account  dormancy  are  challenges  for  DFS  providers  globally. 
Furthermore, keeping customers happy and loyal is a daunting task in a jurisdiction where 
there are several players.  
 
Conclusion 
 
E-Business will become successful provided these following: 
•  The enabling environment is conducive for e-business to prosper; 
•  Adult  financial  literacy  for  the  economically  active  population  of  PNG  is  significantly 
supported; and, 
•  There is strong emphasis on the protection and empowerment of consumers’ interests.   
 
Thank you. 
 
 6 
