Elvira  Nabiullina:  Bank  of  Russia’s  strategic  objectives  and  plans
for the next five years
Speech by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the International Financial
Congress, Moscow, 13 July 2017.
 I would like to speak about the Bank of Russia’s strategic objectives and plans for the next five
years. The present situation suggests that we focus on the planning horizon and determine the
overall strategy for financial market development because the Russian economy currently stands
on the cusp of a new cycle.
The economy has rebounded to deliver positive growth rates although, in truth, they remain low.
This year we expect growth of 1.3-1.8%. The agenda of stabilisation and adaptation to external
shocks, which has dominated in recent years, has naturally transformed into discussion on how
to start up the engine of economic development. That is why the theme of this year’s congress is
“Finance for Development". I expect that the two days at the Congress will help us gain a greater
understanding of the changes occurring in both the Russian and global financial system.
I  will  start  by  addressing  global  economic  development.  This  year  marks  ten  years  since  the
onset of the financial crisis.
Contending with the onslaught of the crisis – like waves crashing in one after another for many
years  –  and  the  economic  consequences  thereof,  the  central  banks  of  many  countries  were
forced  to  take  unprecedented  steps  to  stabilise  and  reverse  course.  It  is  only  now,  ten  years
later, that they are taking steps to move away from these measures.
What is everyone afraid of? That growth will remain rather low and unstable.
Indeed, after a long period of crises and stagnation, the global economy is entering a new cycle.
But what is the aftermath?
First.  A  higher  debt  load  than  in  2007.  In  developed  economies,  the  primary  problem  is
government debt, whereas many countries with emerging markets struggle with corporate debt.
Second. Developed economies are contending with exceedingly low inflation and even deflation.
Moreover,  there  are  bubbles  in  individual  markets  that  threaten  to  grow  owing,  among  other
things, to the effects of long-term soft monetary policy.
Fourth.  Low  growth  rates  in  productivity  and  investment.  This  not  only  limits  opportunities  for
development but also hampers growth due to increased debt burden.
Fifth. Developed countries are seeing increased inequality in the face of stagnating middle-class
incomes,  a  trend  observed  over  the  past  30–40  years  and  often  labelled  the  result  of
globalisation.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  unequal  access  to  the  opportunities  afforded  by  new
technologies  also  played  a  role.  In  this  regard,  the  digital  revolution  and  the  new  wave  of  job
automation, which changes the traditional profile of the labour market in a number of professions
and sectors, bring about significant social risks. As a result, we are observing an upswing of
populism  in  politics,  which  in  itself  generates  new  economic  risks  and  harbours  continued
financial market volatility.
Sixth. An important point for us. The global economy is entering its new cycle at a low phase of
the commodity (primarily oil) super cycle. So far, there has been no truth to the predictions that
low  commodity  prices  will  have  a  positive  impact  on  global  growth  thanks  to  the  positive
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
momentum  enjoyed  by  raw  material-importing  countries  exceeding  the  negative  impact  on
exporting countries. However, it is important to note the technological progress in the oil industry
both in terms of supply (e.g. the development of shale technologies; incidentally, the decreased
investment in shale oil in the face of low oil prices has once again begun to grow) and in terms of
demand (the development of the electric car and alternative green energy markets). In fact, in the
medium term the balance of these factors remains highly uncertain. Therefore, the markets are
constantly shifting their expectations about medium-term trends (almost every quarter) and thus
the oil market remains relatively volatile.
Lastly.  The  global  economy  is  entering  a  new  cycle  with  growing  cyber-risks  capable  of
threatening both the stability of financial systems and economic growth.
Positive developments include the financial technological revolution (fintech and the cost cutting,
increased financial service penetration, and the improvements to their quality it entails), and the
financial  markets’  increased  stability  in  the  face  of  various  shocks.  This  stability  has  been
repeatedly  tested  over  the  past  year  and  a  half,  a  period  not  lacking  in  political  surprises.  It
appears,  the  reforms  jointly  developed  and  implemented  by  regulators  in  the  major  countries
after the global financial crisis truly bolstered the financial system.
The very structure of the global financial markets has undergone dramatic changes over the past
decade. The role of global banks and cross-border lending by banks has taken a downward turn.
Moreover, capital raising markets (stock markets) saw stagnation and even company delisting.
The role of market lending (bond markets) and asset managers, i.e. the markets impacted by
regulatory reforms to a lesser extent, has increased. These markets could potentially become
more volatile, however.
In  broad  terms,  what  does  all  this  mean  for  global  growth?  In  our  view,  it  will  not  be  stable.
Average growth rates will be lower than in the early 2000s.
The main trend we will see in the coming years will be slow economic recovery and the leading
central  banks  taking  a  tighter  policy  stance.  This  will  include  increased  interest  rates  and
curtailed balances.
For financial markets, these dynamics bring about two contradictory trends. On the one hand,
economic growth has a positive impact on financial markets and risk appetite. On the other hand,
increased interest rates are cooling the markets. Therefore, despite the overall stabilisation, there
is a high probability of financial market volatility.
What does all this mean for the Russian economy?
Our economy will be bolstered by external demand to a lesser extent and will be sensitive to
external volatility.
Although, as recent years have shown, our economy has learned to adapt to external shocks,
there are nevertheless a host of internal factors that leave us rather exposed.
These include low economic diversification, insufficient flexibility of institutions and rules, a weak
competitive  environment  (where  new  companies  find  it  hard  to  enter  the  market  and  those
lagging  behind  economically  continue  to  do  so  for  a  long  time). As  a  result,  even  given  the
potential  for  growth  (which,  as  you  know,  the  Central  Bank  estimates  at  1.5-2%)  there  will
potentially be significant fluctuations in output in the coming years. Therefore, there is an urgent
need for structural changes that will raise the bar of potential growth above 1.5-2% and make it
sustainable. The financial sphere is also in need of such structural changes.
What policy response are we seeing in the face of these challenges in the financial sphere?
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Above all, focus should be on maximum flexibility. Certainly, the floating rate should be upheld. It
is crucial to adjust and constantly re-adjust regulation in established and new spheres based on
the principles of proportionality to risks. Since rules quickly become outdated, it is important to
gradually transition from management guided by rules to management by principles.
Greater  attention  should  be  paid  to  systemic  problems  and  risks,  not  just  to  the  stability  of
individual  institutions. Adopting  the  principle  of  countercyclicality,  using  macroprudential  tools.
Early warning of problems both in the system as a whole and in individual institutions.
Greater transparency in the financial sphere. This means transparency of sources of capital and
combatting instances of financial institution owners financing their businesses.
Rejecting dogmas. For example, the dogma that banking regulation is neutral and is aimed at
mere  risk  management.  We  are  starting  to  gradually  transition  towards  incentive-based
regulation.
Supporting new technology: focusing on that with greater protection from cyber risks.
I will now discuss the Bank of Russia’s main areas of activity in more detail.
The first area is monetary policy. Its role is sustaining low macroeconomic risks, thus creating a
framework  where  banks,  business,  and  the  public  can  enjoy  an  increased  planning  horizon,
create long-term money and realise long-term projects.
Over the next five years, the focus of our policy will gradually shift from achieving the inflation
target  and  lowering  inflation  expectations  to  keeping  inflation  close  to  the  target  level  and
maintaining inflation expectations at a low and, importantly, anchored level.
However, while transitioning to a policy of fine tuning, there are a number of challenges we must
face.
Ultimately, inflation is clearly a monetary phenomenon and, if we look to the medium term, the
average inflation rate depends first and foremost on monetary policy. Average inflation will near
4%. However, it will naturally fluctuate. Meanwhile, inflation fluctuations around the average level
can vary in nature, affect inflation expectations in different ways and therefore have an impact on
monetary inflation.
As our experience has shown, during times of high volatility it is crucial to avoid rash responses
to shocks (shocks being any big changes, both positive and negative). This policy suggests that
rushed decisions should be avoided. For example, if at the beginning of the year we had lowered
the  rate  at  a  faster  pace,  as  many  wanted  us  to,  we  might  very  well  have  faced  the  need  to
sharply increase it again shortly thereafter.
However,  there  are  clearly  also  shocks  such  as  those  in  2014  that  require  a  more  decisive
response.
However, it is important to contend with both the consequences of shocks on inflation as well as
the reasons behind them. These reasons are often beyond the Central Bank’s control but this
does not mean it is impossible to hit upon suitable state policy measures on the whole.
This primarily concerns the dynamics of food inflation and regulated prices and rates. The state
policy of developing infrastructure, logistics, market competition (primarily food markets), and the
regulation of natural monopolies’ rates can go a long way to reduce price volatility and thus lead
to a faster reduction in inflation expectations. This, in turn, will allow the Central Bank to draw the
key  rate  closer  to  the  equilibrium-neutral  level  faster  (I  would  like  to  reiterate  that,  in  our
estimation, it stands at 2.5-3% in real terms or 6.5-7% in nominal terms). We will discuss these
matters in more detail at one of the upcoming sessions with Minister of Economic Development
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Maxim Oreshkin.
The second area of ??our activity is maintaining financial stability. Here, our focus is also shifting:
from reversing the negative consequences from earlier risks to preventing new systemic risks.
On this, I would like to highlight three main points:
First. The systematisation of macroprudential regulation. We already have experience in cooling
the consumer lending market and staving off bubbles (in 2013), in driving a shift away from bank
balances  in  foreign  currency,  and  implementing  de-dollarisation.  However,  we  typically
introduced such measures by way of changes to our standard regulatory acts. We are planning
to prepare stand-alone regulation as early as this year, encompassing all macroprudential policy
measures.  In  our  opinion,  this  will  allow  us  to  streamline  the  system,  foster  a  countercyclical
approach, and make it clearer and more transparent for the market to use these tools.
Second.  The  introduction  of  the  “payment-to-income”  ratio  in  order  to  influence  the  consumer
lending  market  more  effectively.  The  corresponding  advisory  report  we  published  has  already
been discussed with the market. We will soon produce solid proposals.
Third. The new regulations related to the credit history bureau. It is the credit history bureau that
comprises the key infrastructure for collecting information on borrowers’ aggregate debt. Here
there is a fork in the road. Our main objective is to entrust several strategic credit bureaus with
the  imperative  to  aggregate  information  on  aggregate  debt  payments.  These  offices  will  be
subject to greater regulation, primarily concerning data protection. If the market cannot come to
an  agreement,  we  will  have  to  take  an  alternative  route  and  create  a  single  integrator.
Furthermore, we plan to eliminate certain issues with regulation. These include the collection of
credit histories in cases of securitisation, license revocation or bank resolution.
Furthermore, in recent years financial regulation has been advanced by adding further objectives
that are completed using this regulation. Therefore, alongside the main objective of ensuring the
stability of individual banks and financial institutions, ensuring financial stability now falls within
the remit. In our opinion, there is currently room for one more addition. Let me explain.
The aim of financial regulation has conventionally been seen solely as risk limitation. Attempts to
put in place differentiated regulation that would curtail one area of business but stimulate other,
higher-priority ones, have always been met with outcry. But proportional regulation, for example,
which we started to develop, stimulates small business lending. This was one of the goals for its
introduction. Another example: the discouragement of unsecured consumer lending forced banks
to cultivate mortgage lending, among other things.
For example, a large share of bank lending is currently used for mergers and acquisitions. This
creates risks for banks, is unlikely to significantly benefit the country, does not create additional
gross product or new jobs, and simply facilitates the redistribution of property. Meanwhile, our
economy requires more lending for companies’ operations and investment.
Moving  forward,  we  must  understand  which  issues  can  be  solved  through  regulation  and  for
which it would be the way. This should never, under any circumstances, be pursued by reducing
risk protection. We need to strike a balance between limiting risk in some sectors and stimulating
others.  This  is  a  major  conceptual  challenge  with  no  unambiguous  answer.  We  will  be
discussing it here at the congress.
Before addressing the objectives we set ourselves in individual sectors, I would like to say a few
words  about  the  most  fundamental  prerequisite  for  development  –  healthy  competition.
Encouraging competition is our unequivocal priority.
What are we doing to promote competition?
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
First. Thorough market cleansing. In our opinion, low-quality competition is just as bad as none at
all. Honest business should not have to compete with fraudulent market players. Our duty as the
financial  market’s  supervisory  body  is  providing  an  environment  where  effective  and  stable
financial institutions reap the benefit. This means ridding the market of dishonest players.
Second. Proportional regulation. It levels out the competitive playing field for players of different
sizes, and helps the market cultivate niches where different types of financial institutions tie in
with different types of clients and their needs. A year ago, in this hall we announced that we were
planning to transition to proportional regulation in the banking sector.
For most of the year, we have worked on elaborating the details of this approach. What is more,
Mr Aksakov has already announced that the Duma has adopted the necessary changes to the
legislation in the current session, and within a year and a half the banks will be able to choose the
type of license they will work under, and subsequently, what regulation will be applied to them.
We expect that banks with a basic license will mostly work with small businesses and household
finances. Moreover, we are now working on and support the idea of ??introducing small business
insurance in banks to bolster entrepreneurs’ confidence in small banks.
Third.  Encouraging  competition.  This  involves  developing  the  capital  market,  which  can  offer
alternative or complementary products to bank lending. With the development of equity financing
and  the  bond  market,  private  investors  will  enjoy  a  wider  range  of  financial  investment
instruments.  Thus,  product  competition  will  benefit  both  real  sector  enterprises  as  well  as
various investors.
I would now like to address the objectives that we set for ourselves in the banking sector.
We  are  seeing  positive  trends  in  the  banking  sector.  In  June,  both  assets  and  lending  to  the
economy continued to grow, consumer loans increased significantly, and mortgage lending saw
rapid growth. Household deposits also rose. Typically, the share of household deposits in bank
liabilities exceeded that of corporate funding.
Looking at the results of the first half of the year as a whole, banking sector assets increased by
2.2%  (adjusted  for  the  impact  of  exchange  rate);  lending  to  the  economy  rose  by  1.8%.  The
share of overdue loans has stabilised and is starting to decrease.
Banking sector profit in the first half-year stood at 770 billion rubles (this is double that recorded
in  the  same  period  in  the  previous  year).  This  is  the  source  of  capital  growth  of  the  banking
system.
These trends show that the banking system is successfully recovering. Lending is already on the
rise and will continue to expand.
What objectives have we set ourselves in order to develop the banking sector?
An  active  supervisory  policy  and  tightening  regulation  allowed  us  to  boost  the  health  of  the
financial system. This ensured the stability of the financial system despite the external shocks.
We  have  largely  removed  banks  whose  business  was  built  on  illegal  transactions  and  those
considered chronically unsustainable.
To achieve this, we had to uproot unfair business practices, and force banks to abandon the
instruments they used to conceal the real state of affairs or siphon off assets. A whole host of
unscrupulous  practices,  previously  considered  the  norm,  have  been  consigned  to  history.
Certainly, there is still a great deal of work ahead.
Now,  with  most  improvements  to  the  banking  system  already  complete,  our  regulation  and
supervision will be more focused on development and stimulation.
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
By introducing proportional regulation, we envision that it will stabilise small banks and enhance
the solvency of their business models. I would like to highlight that while proportional regulation
limits the risks that small banks can take on, but they will be subject to simpler regulation. This
will ensure a fairer competitive environment.
The second innovation we also announced a year ago here at the congress is the transition to a
new bank resolution mechanism and the creation of a fund for banking sector consolidation. We
are now ready, both from a legal point of view and in terms of management, to apply the new
bank  resolution  mechanism.  We  hope  that,  as  the  market  progressively  clears  and  there  is
improved early detection of problems, there will be more cases where it is more beneficial to try
to recover banks’ solvency than simply revoke their license. Moreover, the new bank resolution
mechanism  itself  could  promote  the  development  of  competition  in  the  banking  sector:
consolidation will allow relatively large banks to return to the market. We are currently observing
the lowest competition rate among the largest banks. Thus, we have made progress in two of the
three major objectives we announced at last year’s congress. The third objective we spoke about
last  year  was  establishing  qualitative  supervision  over  financial  groups  –  we  have  prepared  a
draft bill that is being discussed in the government. We hope this innovation will be introduced
next year.
I would now like to address the objectives that we are yet to complete.
The  most  pressing  problem  is  lending  to  business  owners.  The  standard  N25  restricting
financing of one’s own projects was introduced this year but is still only applied in a preferential
mode.
Lending to owners is dangerous for two reasons. First, the bank will turn a blind eye to risks
linked to its own company when issuing it a loan i.e. the risk of non-return. Second, our practice
has shown that if the owner’s project really experiences difficulties the last place it returns money
is  the  affiliated  bank.  These  are  not  marketable  loans  but  loans  extended  by  unwritten  rules.
Banks cannot refinance or resell them.
In the end, this is the cause of bankruptcy for many banks. It is one of the factors that led to the
collapse of relatively large banks, whose licenses we revoked. We want the banking community
to know that our intentions in this field are serious and we will continue to take a tighter stance.
Therefore,  I  advise  those  whose  business  model  is  built  on  lending  to  owners  to  seriously
consider finding alternatives.
Yet another problem is the quality of banks’ capital. We need to be confident that our banks have
real, not borrowed, capital. Therefore, as of this year we will be introducing tighter regulation on
the  quality  of  capital.  When  calculating  a  bank’s  capital,  we  will  not  take  funds  from  non-
transparent sources into account.
There is another whole host of problems associated with collateral. Let me clarify.
In the Russian banking system, a significant proportion of lending is secured lending. On the one
hand, collateral is a good way to motivate borrowers to repay loans. However, we are witnessing
the fact that many banks, when issuing loans, are immediately factoring the collateral in as part
of  the  loan  repayment.  In  some  cases,  loans  are  issued  to  enterprises  on  the  verge  of
bankruptcy in view of the quality of their collateral.
This is fundamentally wrong because the source of loan repayment should be the borrower’s
operating profit, not their collateral. Should the latter be the case, the banking system would turn
into a mere big pawnshop.
This problem is further complicated by the fact that collateral value can be used to lower potential
loss reserves. A lot of collateral is also low liquid. Moreover, in Russia, the value of collateral is
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
often overestimated.
Problems  arise  when,  just  prior  to  a  crash,  assets  are  withdrawn  as  collateral.  Despite  the
restrictions and injunctions imposed on banks, managers and owners can still withdraw assets
through  collateral  agreements.  The  regulator  currently  only  has  the  right  to  limit  or  prohibit
banking  operations.  It  has  no  jurisdiction  over  transactions  with  collateral  or  other  property.
Therefore, the Central Bank will seek the right to limit transactions with collateral alongside other
banking operations within its framework of supervisory measures.
Otherwise,  this  is  what  happens.  We  lower  the  required  reserves  due  to  collateral  taken  into
account. When this collateral is easily withdrawn, the quality of the loan drops sharply. In cases
where  the  bank’s  license  is  revoked,  the  bankruptcy  estate  receives  nothing.  The  rights  of
depositors and creditors are compromised. In our opinion, collateral should only be taken into
account when calculating reserves if the Central Bank has the right to impose a moratorium on
operations with it.
Similarly, bankruptcy law must undergo improvement allowing honest creditors faster access to
collateral acquired under a contract or other assets by court decision.
I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  the  regulator  is  of  the  firm  belief  that  secured  lending  should  not
dominate  the  lending  profile.  This  is  precisely  how  the  banking  system  will  contribute  to
economic development.
Lombard  loans  should  not  establish  themselves  as  the  mainstay  of  banking  business.  Banks
need to work with clients and examine their business models rather than expect to acquire their
assets.
I  would  like  to  address  our  priorities  in  supervision.  Over  the  course  of  the  year,  the  Bank  of
Russia  reengineered  its  supervisory  activities:  it  established  a  risk  analysis  service  (which
assesses the quality of loans and the values of securities and derivatives, as well as collateral).
We are already seeing certain results.
We are now centralising supervision – we have created an ongoing banking supervision service
in  order  to  accelerate  the  use  of  supervisory  response  measures  and  establish  a  uniform
supervisory practice in Russia.
We  call  the  model  we  are  pursuing  advisory  supervision.  Advisory  supervision  allows  us  to
identify problems at an early stage and help the bank’s owners develop a plan for their solution.
However,  to  achieve  this,  banks  must  also  take  responsibility:  working  transparently  with  the
regulator. In fact, we tend to have friendlier interactions with banks if they are willing to provide
reliable and complete information about their operations. This is because advisory supervision
instruments are built around banks’ internal procedures: internal stress testing, internal capital
adequacy assessment procedures, and risk management. Be aware that if a bank has already
violated  standards,  we  will  not  hesitate  to  adopt  supervisory  measures  over  simply  advising
them. Advisory supervision involves joint work in the early stages of problem identification.
The  Bank  of  Russia  will  also  seek  the  right  to  motivated  judgment  to  ensure  supervision  is
proactive and that the instruments we develop to facilitate extensive analysis of the situation in
banks and provide early detection of problems are effective.
Considering  there  is  a  great  number  of  situations,  for  example  those  that  involve  proving  the
relatedness of parties, it is impractical to rely on formal rules alone. Unfortunately, this reliance is
often  the  case:  when  the  Bank  of  Russia’s  supervision  has  detected  that  the  bank  was
experiencing  problems  but,  without  the  right  to  professional  judgment,  wasted  time  collecting
formal evidence, which may result in bank owners receiving the time to siphon off assets.
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Last week, the Bank of Russia produced a report for public discussion. It outlines our approach
to applying professional judgment within the supervision process (incidentally, not restricted to
banking supervision alone). I hope that following discussion with the professional community and
legislative bodies, the necessary changes will be made.
I would now like to address the development of other sectors of the financial market.
Starting with what, in our opinion, is the key area – creating sources of long-term money in the
financial system e.g. the funded pension system, investment of insurance reserves and various
forms of investment (primarily collective).
We are putting a great deal of effort into preserving the funded pension market. Accounting for
demographic  trends,  the  funded  component  is  the  only  way  to  ensure  a  reasonable  pension
level. This is extremely important for broadening the horizon of investment in the economy.
We have fully corporatised non-state pension funds.
Now,  all  funds  concerned  with  compulsory  pension  insurance  are  participants  of  a  guarantee
system. The financial stability of non-state pension funds continues to increase thanks to strict
admission to the guarantee system, constant monitoring of non-state pension funds, as well as
initiating stress tests. We will be overseeing this progress.
To  assure  future  pensioners  of  their  income,  we  plan  to  introduce  fiduciary  responsibility  for
NPFs. To broaden the horizon of their investment, we will change the remuneration system to
fend off the false motivation behind recording income for a short period of time.
These measures are the groundwork for ensuring that NPFs are stable and work to benefit their
clients. But it is not enough. In our opinion, a convenient, large-scale voluntary funded pension
system is needed to preserve the funded pension market given the expected long-term freezing
of the funded component of pensions.
In conjunction with the Ministry of Finance, we have spent a lot of time developing the Individual
Pension Capital system. This involves voluntary pension deductions via automatic subscription.
In our opinion, it is crucial to establish centralised administration of the system. It will provide a
single window for customer service, and standardise and automate work, providing the public
with a convenient service. Incidentally, we believe that having centralised administration would
reduce the number of incidents where the public’s rights are infringed when transitioning from
one non-state pension fund to another. As we see it, the draft bill is currently nearing completion.
The government is working on removing disagreements and, all being well, the draft bill will soon
be submitted to the Duma.
Moving on to the insurance market.
It is demonstrating growth and is, on the whole, marked by positive trends. However, there are
problematic  segments:  mainly  OSAGO.  Resolving  the  issues  linked  to  OSAGO  is  one  of  our
near-term objectives. As of this year, it is mandatory for insurance companies to sell the OSAGO
policy in electronic form.  This helped provide access to the policy in problematic regions. In the
first half of the year, seven times the number of electronic policies were issued than over the
course of the whole previous year. The priority of repairs over payments, introduced in April, is
intended to remove unscrupulous agents from the market. We expect that these measures will
stabilise the situation.
The strategic objectives to develop the insurance market are aimed at ensuring the long-term
sustainability of insurance companies and protecting the rights of policyholders.
There is also another gap in legislation. Unlike in the banking sector, there is no legal mechanism
for the resolution of insurers. We plan to introduce one in the near future. The corresponding
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
draft bill has been developed and is being discussed.
The Bank of Russia’s priority objectives in the long-term include introducing Solvency II principles
to the risk-oriented approach to regulating financial stability and the solvency of insurers.
Microfinance is a financial service that carries great social significance. Notably, those who turn
to microfinance organisations are mostly poor people and the use of microloans arises in very
difficult situations (literally, when the cash will not last them until their pay day). Therefore, the
Bank of Russia’s policy in this market is primarily aimed at protecting consumer rights. The first
objective is reducing borrowers’ debt burden and limiting the marginal cost of the loan. The limits
we introduced have already significantly lowered the cost of microloans but we plan to reduce it
further.
Another  of  our  areas  of  focus  is  combatting  illegal,  so-called  “black”  creditors.  In  this  field,
legislation has been adopted that ensures the prosecution and responsibility of illegal creditors.
We  are  working  together  with  law  enforcement  agencies  and  are  now  focusing  on  public
awareness. About  a  month  ago,  we  launched  a  joint  project  with  Yandex  –  the  microfinance
organisations on our register are marked with a special symbol in the search results so that it is
easier to understand whether a given microfinance institution is legal or not.
Moreover, this year saw Mir cards issued on a large scale. In Russia, they are accepted by all
payment terminals and ATMs. The issue is proceeding at a good pace: over 10.6 million cards
have already been issued. In the last month and a half alone, over 2 million cards were issued.
Mir is a competitive system and offers all the services on the domestic market that the public are
used to after using international payment systems.
Our strategic objective in the coming years is ensuring Mir cards are accepted internationally,
firstly within the Eurasian Economic Union.
We are making progress in this area with our partners in the Eurasian Economic Union. Last
week, the first cross-border transactions using Mir cards were carried out with Armenia’s ArCa
payment  system.  This  is  the  first  project  we  have  undertaken  to  organise  equal  intersystem
interaction. (I believe the citizens of the two countries will benefit from new financial opportunities.
I would like to express my gratitude to the Central Bank of Armenia and the management team of
the  ArCa  payment  system  for  their  incredibly  effective  collaboration  and  promotion  of  this
project).
Moving on to developing financial technologies
Technology has an increasingly large impact on the financial sector. Russia is progressing in line
with global trends. In some cases, we are even ahead of some of these trends: for example,
Russian banks already offer cutting-edge mobile applications. According to Ernst & Young, the
Russian market is currently in third place globally in terms of financial technology development.
It would be foolish to miss out on the technological revolution. We have work ongoing in three
areas.
The first two (where we are highly engaged, which is hopefully evident to you) involve supporting
fintech and preventing cybercrime in the financial sphere. The third involves the so-called regtech
i.e. new regulatory and supervisory approaches for us to elaborate in order to provide adequate
risk  management  of  financial  institutions  that  are  becoming  increasingly  like  technology
companies.
What is the Bank of Russia doing to support financial technologies?
We have repeatedly talked about our principles of regulation and supervision over fintech – first
you need observation then regulation in proportion to risks. We engage in constant dialogue with
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
the market and created Fintech, an association for financial technology development. The next
step for us to accomplish in the coming years is to create a national fintech infrastructure i.e. the
necessary elements that will be beneficial to and in demand by all market players and will ensure
that players of all sizes have convenient access to the market. The national infrastructure will
foster competition in the market, encourage new financial ecosystems and, as a result, provide
cheaper and better quality products to the public.
What elements are included in the national infrastructure?
Remote  identification  for  both  financial  and  public  services.  We  are  working  on  this  with  the
Government.
This involves creating a platform for instant retail payments so that consumers can easily make
payments and transfers regardless of where they hold their account.
It also involves creating marketplaces offering financial products and services to individuals and
helping them to choose cost-efficient and safe purchases.
Lastly, it involves developing the national payment system. It is our aim to create an entirely new
payment infrastructure type for Russia.
What  is  more,  effectively  countering  cyber  threats  is  increasingly  important.  We’ve  seen
malicious  programs  paralyse  even  the  largest  companies  for  hours  and  days.  This  year,  the
congress  will  include  a  session  devoted  entirely  to  information  security  in  the  banking  sector
(more  generally  in  the  financial  sphere)  for  the  first  time.  Our  near-term  priorities  include
establishing information security standards for financial institutions, continuing work on identifying
threats and helping the market to develop effective strategies to deal with cyber-risks.
I would like to add a few words about regtech.
Up  until  now,  all  financial  regulation  and  supervision  mainly  concerned  prudential  aspects:
capital, liquidity, profitability, and  asset  quality.  The  shift  that  digitalisation  brought  about  in  the
financial  industry  touches  not  just  on  the  emergence  of  fintech  companies  but  also  the
widespread use of new technologies by existing financial institutions. For example, big data, risk-
oriented decision-making systems, credit decisions, the use of complex mathematical models in
the risk management system, and working with open interfaces and cloud computing.
All this suggests that soon there will be high proportion of risks that are technological in nature
rather  than  financial.  We  need  to  be  ready  to  face  these  risks.  Our  objective  is  to  elaborate
uniform  standards  for  working  with  databases,  data  quality,  and  develop  the  requirements  on
models applied in data outsourcing, and requirements on information security. This is a great
deal of work. We will develop approaches while engaged in dialogue with the industry.
The  revolution  in  the  use  of  data  has  had  an  impact  on  both  financial  institutions  as  well  as
regulators like us, the central bank. We need more data about deals and transactions. Then, we
need to use modern data analysis methods.
For  this,  we  will  optimise  the  reports  that  are  submitted  and  introduce  formats  that  are
convenient for the market such as XBRL. I would like to highlight the fact that we will be working
to  improve  quality  control  and  data  management  systems  and  you  will  benefit  from  lower
regulatory costs.
The last area of work I would like to mention is one of the most important: protecting consumer
rights.
Our objective in this area is absolutely clear – financial decisions should not lead to misfortune in
consumers’ lives. Therefore, we suspend fraudulent market players, limit the risks that the public
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
take on themselves, and delve into specific situations related to public complaints. But it is not
enough. We need instruments to prevent practices that may be formally legal but are designed to
deceive the client, sell the wrong product, at the wrong price, with unspecified risks.
We are preparing to establish a second vertical supervision framework for financial institutions –
the so-called behavioural supervision.
Our next steps will be:
-  introducing  rules  about  selling  financial  products  and  services  to  various  categories  of
consumers, in particular about providing the information about the product that is being sold;
- reinforcing the role of self-regulating organisations that should develop basic standards about
providing services and monitoring their implementation.
We would be glad to see law passed regarding a financial ombudsman. Discussion thereof has
already been very drawn out. We propose developing this new mechanism on a step-by-step
basis:  First,  introduce  OSAGO  to  the  ombudsman’s  remit,  then  microfinance  products,  then
banks and other institutions.
Certainly, it is impossible to create a system that effectively protects consumer rights without
improving financial literacy, reducing the number of “unforced errors” that members of the public
make  when  choosing  financial  services  and  vendors.  Therefore,  we  will  particularly  focus  on
financial literacy. We have already launched a number of programmes, ranging from educating
schoolchildren and students to creating a specialised website.
Access to financial services has been given separate priority status because it is vital for Russia.
Special  attention  will  be  paid  to  the  uniform  development  of  access  to  services  in  different
territories, cities and towns and reducing disparity. I would also like note it is unacceptable that
some people lack access to financial services owing to disability. Unfortunately, such examples
still occur.
To conclude, I would like to summarise the overall focus of the measures that we plan to take in
various areas in the coming years. How will our work differ from that in previous years?
I started my speech by saying the Russian economy is entering a new cycle and the Central
Bank’s  approaches  to  work  should  rise  to  meet  these  new  conditions.  Our  work  will  be
consistent, we will continue to resolve the problems we have already identified, where progress
has  been  made.  However,  we  also  need  to  think  about  a  new  stage  in  the  Bank  of  Russia’s
operation.
In  recent  years,  we  worked  on  solving  a  number  of  entrenched  problems  and  were  partially
successful in eliminating the consequences of external shocks. For example, we removed weak
and unscrupulous players from the financial market, completed building the necessary elements
of the national infrastructure of the financial market, and transitioned to inflation targeting.
Now  that  the  economy  and  the  financial  system  have  become  stable,  we  have  more
opportunities  to  focus  on  development  issues.  We  will  prioritise  competition  issues,  new
technologies,  financial  accessibility,  developing  long-term  money  instruments  and  the  capital
market. Indeed, what we can do together to foster development of the financial sector and what
the  financial  sector  can  do  to  foster  development  of  the  economy  will  be  the  subject  of  our
discussion here at the congress. I look forward to the productive work and successful outcomes
we will share. Thank you for your time.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
