SPEECH 
    DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
  16 May 2017 
Governor Stefan Ingves 
Swedish Economics Association  
 SVERIGES  RIKSBANK 
SE-103  37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergst org  11) 
 
Tel  +46  8 787  00 00 
Fax  +46  8  21 05 31 
registratorn @ riks ban k .se 
www.riksb ank .s e 
Monetary policy challenges – weighing 
today against tomorrow* 
I’d like to begin by thanking you for the opportunity to come here to the Swedish 
Economics Association. As many of you know, this is a tradition, and today’s 
speech is my twelfth in a row. I have always appreciated the opportunity to come 
here and discuss both current issues and long-term themes of more fundamental 
significance for the Riksbank’s operations.  
Today’s speech is about monetary policy and its challenges in a slightly longer 
perspective. But before broaching that subject, I would first like to comment on 
the news item published by the Riksbank this morning. In brief, it states that the 
Executive Board is considering switching over to a new target variable, the CPIF, 
this autumn, and introducing a ‘variation band’ to illustrate uncertainty over the 
development of inflation.  
Ever since the inflation target was introduced nearly 25 years ago, it has been 
defined as the annual change in the consumer price index, the CPI. However, in 
recent years, the CPI has become increasingly difficult to use as guidance for 
monetary policy. The reason for this is that adjustments to the policy rate have 
large and direct effects on the CPI which are not connected to underlying 
inflationary pressures and which are also counter-productive. This means, for 
example, that interest rate cuts, which are intended to bring inflation up, instead 
further lower CPI inflation over the short term as the costs for mortgages fall. For 
this reason, the CPIF, i.e. the CPI with a fixed interest rate, has increasingly acted 
as guidance for monetary policy. But large variations in the CPI in recent years, 
due to adjustments to the policy rate, have sometimes led to problems in 
communication. By switching to the CPIF, we are making monetary policy clearer.  
The target is that the annual change in the CPIF shall be 2 per cent. However, it is 
not possible for the Riksbank to achieve this target every single month, so, for 
 * I would like to thank Magnus Jonsson for his help with writing the speech and Goran Katinic for his help with 
data and figures. I would also like to thank Carl Andreas Claussen, Charlotta Edler, Cecilia Roos-Isaksson, Martin 
W. Johansson, Ann-Leena Mikiver, Marianne Nessén, Marianne Sterner, Ingvar Strid, Ulf Söderström, Anders 
Vredin and Daniel Wallemo for valuable comments and Calum McDonald and Gary Watson for helping to 
translate the speech into English. 
 
  1 [23] 
   various reasons, inflation will vary around 2 per cent. To illustrate this uncertainty, 
the Riksbank is considering the use of a so-called variation band for the CPIF 
outcomes in its future communication. The variation band is +/- 1 percentage 
point around the target of 2 per cent, which captures almost three -quarters of 
CPIF outcomes since 1995. The design of the variation band is thus linked to the 
historical development of inflation and should therefore be reviewed as 
necessary.  
As I see it, the changes now being considered do not entail any change to the 
monetary policy being conducted. For some time, the CPIF has functioned as the 
Riksbank’s operational target variable. We are now considering formalising this 
practice by allowing the inflation target to be defined as an annual change in the 
CPIF of 2 per cent. The aim of monetary policy will continue to be the stabilisation 
of inflation at 2 per cent. In other words, the proposed variation band is not a so-
called target range.1 This means that the Riksbank will always strive towards 2 per 
cent inflation, regardless of whether inflation is inside or outside the variation 
band. 
Our deliberations are now being referred for consultation. If we adopt a new 
target variable and variation band, these changes are expected to be applied as 
from the autumn.  
Unusual times create new challenges 
The Swedish economy is going through unusual times. We have good growth, high 
resource utilisation and inflation is rising and approaching the target of 2 per cent. 
But despite good economic activity, monetary policy is still expansionary. We have 
a negative policy rate and have carried out extensive purchases of government 
bonds to hold longer-term interest rates down as well.  
Maintaining confidence in the inflation target is the main task of monetary policy. 
A challenge for monetary policy in recent years has been to push up the 
excessively sluggish inflation rate, which is one explanation for the expansionary 
policy. By doing so, we can correspond with the expectations of all the 
participants in the Swedish economy who base their calculations on the fact that 
we are aiming for a fixed target. The inflation target has been a cornerstone of the 
Swedish economy for twenty years, it is well known and established and helps to 
boost confidence in the Swedish economy. 
The Riksbank’s forecasts indicate that monetary policy will continue to be 
expansionary with low interest rates in the period ahead in order to stabilise 
inflation around the target. But this could also bring new challenges with it. 
Continued low interest rates could lead to the policy rate hitting its lower bound 
more often, thereby making it more difficult to stimulate the economy when 
economic activity weakens and inflation is below target. In such a case, it could be 
necessary to implement other measures, both from the Riksbank and from other 
policy areas.  
 1 For a discussion of the concepts of target range and tolerance band, see Sveriges Riksbank (2016).  
  2 [23] 
   A persistent low interest rate environment also risks leading to the continued rise 
of indebtedness among mortgage borrowers, making them more sensitive to 
interest rate changes. This means that they could be affected more than others 
when the policy rate needs to be raised. This would be unfortunate as monetary 
policy probably works best when it affects the entire economy in a similar way.  
Furthermore, low interest rates for a long time entail increased risks to the 
financial system and financial stability. And, as a stable financi al system is a 
prerequisite for successful monetary policy and financial policy, monetary policy 
in our present situation needs to be supplemented by, among other things, a well-
functioning macroprudential policy.  
An important question in this context is what formal role the Riksbank should 
have in the work to reduce risks and vulnerabilities in the financial system. The 
Riksbank’s responsibility for financial stability is expressed in the legislation as the 
task of “promoting a safe and efficient payment system”. More specific details are 
not given. In my opinion, the Riksbank’s responsibility – in common with a 
number of other central banks – should include financial stability and this should 
be clarified in the Sveriges Riksbank Act. I hope that this is dealt with at the 
committee stage of the review of the monetary policy framework and the 
Sveriges Riksbank Act. 
The Swedish banking sector is large by international standards and strongly 
concentrated on a small number of major banks that are dependent on foreign 
funding – about half of their funding is in foreign currency. This poses a further 
risk to financial stability. The Riksbank therefore needs to hold a foreign currency 
reserve that is large enough to satisfy the needs that arise in a financial crisis, in 
other words the currency reserve needs to be at least as large as it is today.  
Another challenge that monetary policy needs to relate to is the free movement 
of capital. In combination with a rapid financial development, this has led to asset 
prices, indebtedness and exchange rates being increasingly affected by monetary 
policy in the major currency areas. This has progressively limited the degree of 
freedom for monetary policy in smaller economies. How to increase the degree of 
freedom for monetary policy, by, for example, implementing macroprudential 
policy measures that could put a dampener on indebtedness, is being discussed 
internationally. This is highly relevant for Sweden and I have brought this matter 
up in several of my previous speeches to the Swedish Economics Association. I will 
also return to this problem today. 
Conducting monetary policy is about being constantly prepared to meet new 
types of challenges and economic problems. Low interest rates are needed today 
in order to stabilise inflation at around 2 per cent, but they must be weighed 
against the risks of low rates over a longer period. This is very much the theme of 
my speech here at the Swedish Economics Association – weighing the effects of 
monetary policy today against the effects tomorrow and what challenges this 
creates. But I thought I’d start by discussing the downward trend in global interest 
rates and what this means for monetary policy, as it is important to realise that 
the problems we are grappling with in Sweden are very much influenced, and 
shared, by the world around us.  
  3 [23] 
   Downward trend in global interest rates  
The financial crisis that broke out in the autumn of 2008  was preceded by a 
seemingly calm and stable period of low inflation and good economic growth. The 
period is normally referred to as The Great Moderation. This positive 
development can be attributed to a number of factors. Ever-faster globalisation 
led to greater movement of goods, services, labour and capital among countries. 
This, in combination with various deregulations increased competition on labour 
and goods markets, contributing to higher economic growth. Increasingly 
independent central banks focused on achieving low and stable inflation are also 
considered to have contributed to the positive development.  
In retrospect, we can now see that major financial imbalances had built up in 
what appeared to be a stable macroeconomic environment. Central bank 
monetary policy had successfully stabilised inflation. But this did not prevent the 
break-out of the more serious economic crisis since the 1930s. It is now clear that 
the financial sector had not been fully able to manage the risks and that 
supervision of the financial sector needed to be improved. A more moot point is 
whether central bank monetary policy contributed to the build-up of financial 
imbalances.2 Had central banks been so focused on stabilising inflation that they 
ignored the financial imbalances that were building up? Had the  Great 
Moderation given rise to overconfidence in the ability of monetary policy to steer 
the economy? I believe that both these questions will become increasingly 
important in the period ahead. I also believe that they need require further 
analysis, although one lesson to be learned in any event is that financial stability 
cannot be taken for granted.  
We can also establish that the recovery after the crisis has been slower than many 
expected. Output per capita in Sweden and in several other countries is only 
between 1 and 5 per cent higher than before the break-out of the financial crisis 
(see Figure 1(a)). Another example is labour productivity. In Sweden, for example, 
labour productivity is around 5 per cent higher than in 2007,  which is a slow rate 
of increase in a historical perspective (see Figure 1(b)). Once a financial crisis has 
broken out, it can hence take a very long time for the economy to recover.  
  2 See also Billi and Vredin (2014) and Rajan (2005).  
  4 [23] 
  Figure 1. GDP per capita and labour productivity in Sweden and abroad 
 1(a ) GDP per capi ta 
1(b) La bour productivi ty 
   Note. Index, 2007 = 100. 
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Consensus Bureau, Conference Board, Eurostat, Japanese 
Ca bi net Office, Ja panese Statistics Bureau, Office for National Statistics, Statistics Sweden and 
Sta ti stics Ca nada 
The long recovery after the crisis is also reflected in the fact interest rates in many 
countries are still very low. Central banks reacted quickly when the crisis broke 
out and cut policy rates to close to zero to avoid a further deepening of the crisis 
(see Figure 2(a)). Inflation also fell sharply in many countries (see Figure 2(b)). This 
was partly because the price of oil fell heavily and inflation recovered relatively 
quickly to begin with. But since then, it has remained at levels some way below 
many central bank targets.  
Figure 2. Nominal 3-month interest rate and inflation in Sweden and abroad 
 2(a ) Nominal interes t ra te  
2(b) Inflation 
  Note. Fi gure 2(a), per cent. The nominal interest ra te refers to three-month treasury bills except i n 
the euro area, where it refers to EONIA. Figure 2(b), annual percentage change. Inflation refers to 
the CPIF for Sweden, the HICP for the euro area a nd the CPI for the remaining countries. 
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Euribor, Eurostat, Ja panese Statistics Bureau, Macrobond, 
OECD, Offi ce for Na tional Statistics, Statistics Sweden and Statistics Ca nada 
Global real interest rates have been falling for a long time  
Monetary policy in many countries has therefore been characterised by close -to-
zero policy rates ever since the onset of the financial crisis. All the major central 
banks, along with several small ones, have also large volumes of purchased 
  5 [23] 
   government bonds and taken other measures to push down interest rates even 
further. One of the explanations for the historically very low policy rates is a 
downward trend in global real interest rates, that is, the interest rates obtained 
when inflation is subtracted from nominal interest rates.  
Most central banks control a short, risk-free nominal interest rate – the so-called 
policy rate. This then affects other nominal market rates to households and 
companies with longer maturities. The nominal rate has a certain impact on 
household consumption and corporate investment and hence on demand in the 
economy. But perhaps an even more important role is played by the real interest 
rate. Monetary policy is considered to be able to affect the real interest rate in the 
short term. This is partly due to the fact that it can take time for companies to 
adapt their prices when demand changes. Via the real interest rate, the central 
bank can thus influence demand in the economy and by extension inflation.  
On the other hand, monetary policy is not considered to be able to affect the real 
interest rate over the longer term. Instead, it is then determined by other factors, 
such as demographic development, households’ valuation of consumption today 
compared with in the future, trend growth and, in smaller economies, also by the 
international real interest rate level. But the long-term real interest rate plays an 
even more important role for rate-setting. If it has fallen, the average policy rate 
needs to be lower in order to be able to uphold the inflation target.  
It has long been known that real interest rates have shown a falling trend around 
the world over the last few decades. The “global” real interest rate, i.e. an average 
of real rates for risk-free assets (here measured using ten-year government 
bonds) in the major economies, has shown a falling trend of just over 4 
percentage points since the end of the 1980s and is currently slightly below 1 per 
cent (see Figure 3(a)).  
The global real interest rate is important for small, open economies. In a world 
with the free movement of capital, it is difficult for a small economy to have real 
interest rates that deviate a lot from the global real interest rate level. This does 
not mean, however, that the real interest rate in Sweden always has to 
correspond exactly to the rate abroad. Deviations can exist both in the short- and 
long-term for various reasons. In the short-term, economic activity can develop 
differently in Sweden and abroad, which can affect real interest rates. Deviations 
can also take place over longer periods, depending, for example, on different 
trends in population development or productivity growth. But just as in other 
countries, there has been a downward trend in the real interest rate in Sweden. 
The real interest rate for two-, five- and ten-year government bonds has fallen 
from around 6 per cent at the end of the 1980s to almost -2 per cent today (see 
Figure 3(b)). 
      6 [23] 
  Figure 3. Global real interest rate and Swedish real interest rates from a 
historical perspective 
 3(a ) Global real interest ra te  
3(b) Swedish real interest rates 
 Note. Per cent. The broken trend line has been calculated using the HP filter. Real i nterest ra tes a re 
ca l culated as nominal government bond yi elds minus actual i nflation. The calculation of the global 
rea l  interest ra tes includes the euro a rea (as of 1995), Ja pan, Ca nada, the United Ki ngdom and the 
Uni ted States. 
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Eurostat, Japanese Statistics Bureau, Ma crobond, OECD, 
Offi ce for National Statistics, Statistics Sweden and Statistics Ca nada 
 Falling global real interest rates can be caused by secular 
stagnation...  
Research provides several different explanations for the falling trend in global real 
interest rates.3 The explanation that has probably received the most attention 
recently is the theory of secular stagnation, developed by the American 
economist Lawrence Summers.4 According to him, weaker global demand and 
lower growth, which can be long-lasting, lie behind the low level of interest rates. 
The weak demand is, in turn, due to various structural factors that have led more 
people wanting to save and fewer wanting to invest. Both of these parts tend to 
push the real interest rate down.  
Demographic factors may provide an explanation for why the willingne ss to save 
has increased. Average life expectancy in the population has risen in both 
developed countries and emerging economies in recent decades. This may lead 
more people to wish to save for their old age. In a lifecycle perspective, saving is 
highest in middle age, when most people’s earnings are highest and they are very 
motivated to save prior to retirement. So the greater number of middle-aged 
people today may thus provide an explanation for the increase in saving. If the 
saving is intended for future retirement, one effect of the falling real interest rates 
may also be that many people need to save even more to reach their saving 
targets. 
Another explanation for the increase in saving, particularly during the 2000s, has 
been put forward by the former Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke.5 
According to him, the increase in saving that occurred in China and other Asian 
 3 See Fischer (2016), Sveriges Riksbank (2017a) and Rachel and Smith (2015) for an attempt to quantify the 
significance of the various explanations.  
4 See Summers (2014). 
5 See Bernanke (2015). 
  7 [23] 
   emerging economies, as well as in the major oil-producing countries, contributed 
to the downward pressure on interest rates. This is because the large current 
account surpluses in these regions have been invested on the global capital 
markets, resulting in low real interest rates. 
The falling trend in real interest rates may also be due to a reduced willingness to 
invest. In an article that has attracted much attention, the famous American 
economist Robert Gordon claimed that the pace of innovation has declined 
sharply since the 1970s.6 In his opinion, growth between 1870 and 1970  was 
abnormally high thanks to relatively simple and growth-promoting innovations, 
such as electricity and the combustion engine. According to Gordon, it will not be 
possible to repeat this growth as today’s innovations, such as the Internet and 
mobile technology, he says, do not provide any major productivity gains in the 
long term. A reduction in global willingness to invest may thus be due to a slower 
pace of innovation. This means there are fewer profitable projects in which to 
invest.  
...but there may also be other reasons  
According to the theory of secular stagnation, the falling real interest rates may 
be a sign of a shortage of investment opportunities for companies. But has this 
actually been the case? One way of investigating this is to study the return on 
companies’ capital stock.  
Figure 4(a) shows the real return on capital in the US between 2000 and 2016.  As 
can be seen, return has been stable with relatively minor variations around just 
below 9 per cent while the real interest rate has shown a falling trend. After the 
financial crisis, return on capital has even risen slightly, suggesting good 
investment opportunities. Investment growth after the financial crisis is in line 
with such a hypothesis. Figure 4(b) shows that investments have risen relatively 
rapidly since 2010 and are now close to or above their long-term trend. None of 
this is easy to reconcile with secular stagnation.7   
   6 See Gordon (2012). 
7 See Gomme et al. (2015) for further discussions. 
  8 [23] 
   Figure 4. Real return on capital, real interest rate and investments in the United 
States 
 4(a ) Return on capi tal and real interes t ra te 
4(b) Investments i n the business sector 
 Note. Fi gure 4(a), per cent. Return on capital in the business sector. Broken lines show a verage 
return on ca pital s ince the year 2000. Real interest ra te refers to 5-year real government bonds. 
Fi gure 4(b), USD billion. The broken trend l ines have been calculated using the HP filter. 
Sources: Gomme et al. (2011), Bureau of Economic Analysis, Federal Reserve and the Riksbank  
We can observe that the development in Sweden has been similar. Figure 5(a) 
shows that the real return on capital in Sweden between 2000 and 2016  has been 
relatively stable with minor variations around slightly below 8 per cent while the 
real interest rate has shown a falling trend. Figure 5(b) shows that investment is 
also close to or slightly above its long-term trend in Sweden.  
Figure 5. Real return on capital, real interest rate and investments in Sweden 
 5(a ) Return on capi tal and real interes t ra te 
5(b) Investments i n the business sector 
 Note. Fi gure 5(a), per cent. Return on capital in the business sector. Broken lines show a verage 
return on ca pital s ince the year 2000. Real interest ra te refers to 5-year real government bonds. 
Fi gure 5(b), SEK billion. The broken trend l ines have been calculated using the HP filter. 
Sources: Na tional Institute of Economic Research, Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
The real return on capital and the real interest rate should be strongly associated 
with each other, i.e. the exact opposite to what we observed in both the United 
States and Sweden. A falling real interest rate tends to reduce the cost of 
investment, which should increase the rate of investment and thereby decrease 
the return on capital. The various premiums that measure the difference in return 
on capital and government bond yield should therefore not show a trend, even 
though that appears to be the case.  
An important factor that can often explain some of the difference between return 
on capital and government bond yield is the so-called credit risk premium, which 
compensates the investor for the risk of the company going bankrupt. There is 
  9 [23] 
   reason to believe, however, that the credit risk premium has been stable as the 
number of bankruptcies has been constant or falling. 
Another premium is the so-called liquidity premium. Risk-free assets such as 
government bonds can often be used as collateral for various loan contracts. 
Government bonds and other risk-free assets that can relatively easily converted 
into liquid funds therefore have an added value given by the liquidity premium. 
The higher the liquidity premium is on an asset, the higher the price and the lower 
the yield will be.  
The falling trend in the real interest rate should, at least in part, be due to the 
premium on government bonds having risen. It is not difficult to find reasons why 
this could be the case, particularly not in the period after the financial crisis. The 
supply of acceptable collateral on the financial markets decreased when a 
significant share of the assets were lost during the financial crisis. The sovereign 
debt problems in the euro area may also have reduced the supply of safe assets. 
The demand for safe assets may have increased due to new financial regulations, 
such as Basel III. Finally, central bank purchases of government bonds reduce 
supply on the financial markets.  
To summarise – making predictions about future economic development is, as 
everyone knows, very difficult. The economic system is complex and new 
innovations and changes that are difficult to predict happen all the time. The 
theory of secular stagnation was presented for the first time as early as the 1930s 
by the American economist Alvin Hansen.8 It proved to be incorrect at that time 
and I have suggested that there may be reason to still be sceptical about it now. 9 
The current low interest rate environment may very well have been caused by 
factors other than secular stagnation and need not therefore be long-lasting.  
A look-back in history shows that real interest rates often vary in longer cycles. 
They have been on the same low levels as today only to then return to more 
normal levels.10 The difficulty we now face is assessing how long this cycle of low 
real interest rates will last. This is no easy task even if there is every indication 
that they will continue to be low for the foreseeable future. We must remember, 
however, that history has also taught us how economic development can 
sometimes take unexpected twists and turns.  
Future challenges 
The global real interest rate continues  to be low 
I have mentioned a few different possible reasons for the downward trend in the 
global real interest rate – demographic factors, lower growth and higher demand 
for safe assets. These factors will probably continue to exert an influence in the 
period ahead, with lower interest rates as a consequence. In such a case, this 
 8 See Hansen (1938).  
9 See also Bernanke (2015) and Rogoff (2015) for additional arguments that can call the theory of secular 
stagnation into question. 
10 See Yi and Zhang (2016). 
  10 [23] 
   would also be in line with pricing on the Swedish financial markets. The market 
pricing of the overnight rate five years ahead is around 1 per cent, which indicates 
that the policy rate will continue to be low (see Figure 6). Market participants’ 
expectations of the policy rate as expressed in surveys indicate similar levels (see 
Figure 6). 
Figure 6. Overnight rate 5 ahead years according to market pricing and 
expectations of the policy rate 5 years ahead 
Sources: TNS Sifo Prospera a nd the Riksbank 
 Increased risks to the financial system 
A persistent low interest rate environment may threaten the stability of the 
financial system. A stable financial system forms a condition for monetary policy 
and also fiscal policy to succeed. If the financial system is threatened, the 
government may need to intervene with various support measures. This may be 
very expensive, not least in Sweden, considering the size of the Swedish banking 
sector.  
One lesson from the economic crisis at the start of the 1990s  is that healthy public 
finances form a condition for achieving good economic development with stable 
inflation. To reduce the risks to the financial system and public finances – and, 
ultimately, monetary policy – it is therefore important to have a smoothly 
functioning regulation of the banking system. The policy area with main 
responsibility for counteracting the emergence of financial imbalances and 
contributing to the stability of the financial system is macro- and microprudential 
policy.  
  11 [23] 
   Greater dependence on other monetary policy tools 
For monetary policy, continued low real interest rates mean that it may become 
more difficult to stimulate the economy only with the use of the policy rate when 
economic activity is weakening and inflation is below target. If, for example, the 
long-term real interest rate is around zero, at the same time as the inflation target 
is 2 per cent, the policy rate will also be around 2 per cent, on average. This does 
not provide much scope for interest rate cuts in the event of an economic 
slowdown, as the policy rate cannot be cut too far below zero. If the economic 
slowdown is large enough, households and companies may also start to believe 
that monetary policy’s scope is limited and accordingly set their expectations to a 
rate of inflation below the inflation target. 
Consequently, the monetary policy toolkit, both in Sweden and in other countries, 
may also continue to need to include more tools. This may include large -scale 
asset purchases, a measure impacting long-term interest rates, expectations of 
future short-term interest rates and the amount of money in the economy. 11 
Another measure that could be used is the publication of forecasts of the interest 
rate path, so-called forward guidance, which the Riksbank also does. This year, it 
is actually ten years since we started to publish three-year paths for the policy 
rate. Other ways of making monetary policy more expansionary could be by 
intervening on the foreign exchange market and giving loans directly to 
companies via the banks. 
Mortgage borrowers more sensitive to interest rate changes 
The falling real interest rates are one of the reasons that indebtedness has risen 
over the last twenty-year period. Inflation targeting was formally introduced in 
1995  when households’ debt-to-income ratio – debt in relation to disposable 
income – was around 90 per cent. Today, just over 20 years later, indebtedness 
has pretty much doubled and is almost 180  per cent. 12 The rising indebtedness 
and many people choosing a variable interest rate on their mortgages has made 
households more sensitive to interest rate adjustments. The importance of 
monetary policy for households with high indebtedness, in practice mortgage 
borrowers, has therefore become greater.  
In an example calculation, four economists from the Riksbank have attempted to 
shed light on how an interest rate rise today would affect mortgage borrowers’ 
consumption, compared with 20 years ago. 13 The following scenario could provide 
a backdrop to these calculations. To fund loans for housing, the Swedish banks 
issue mortgage bonds, among other things. These are partly funded by foreign 
investors. If these foreign investors, for whatever reason, should lose confidence 
in the Swedish economy and the mortgage bonds, the banks may become very 
vulnerable. They may find it more difficult to obtain funding on the international 
markets, at the same time as interest rates start to rise. The exchange rate may 
 11 Since February 2015, the Riksbank has purchased nominal and real government bonds. At the end of 2017, 
total purchases were calculated to amount to SEK 290 billion. 
12 If tenant-owner associations’ debts are also included in household indebtedness, households’ debt-to-income 
ratio is today around 200 per cent.  
13 This calculation can be found in Finocchiaro et al. (2016).  
  12 [23] 
   start to weaken due to decreased confidence among foreign investors, which, in 
turn, could push inflation up. In such a scenario, the Riksbank may be forced to 
raise the policy rate to restrain inflation. These rising interest rates would 
primarily impact households with large mortgages. They would face higher 
mortgage costs and would thus find it more difficult to manage their loans, which 
could lead to reduced consumption and demand.  
The calculation assumes that the policy rate is raised by one percentage point. At 
the current level of indebtedness, mortgage borrowers would have to reduce 
consumption by almost two per cent. If indebtedness had instead been the same 
as when inflation targeting was introduced 20 years ago, their consumption would 
only have decreased by a few tenths of one per cent. Mortgage borrowers’ 
consumption would thus decrease by a significantly greater degree today, 
compared with 20 years ago. The calculation probably also underestimates the 
effect on consumption, as variable interest rates are much more common today, 
something the example calculation does not consider.  
If real interest rates continue to be low, this could lead to indebtedness rising 
even more. The interest rate sensitivity of mortgage borrowers will then become 
even greater and they may be even more affected than the example calculation 
suggests when the policy rate must be raised. This would be unfortunate as 
monetary policy probably works best when it affects the entire economy in a 
similar way.  
However, the fact that interest rate sensitivity is greater today than previously 
among mortgage borrowers does not necessarily mean that the impact of 
monetary policy has also become greater. Inflation depends on how an interest 
rate adjustment affects the overall demand in the economy. This, in turn, depends 
on total consumption, which is to say how much mortgage borrowers and other 
households consume together. The results from the example calculation indicate 
that the impact on inflation is only slightly greater today than it was 20 years ago. 
Limited degree of freedom for monetary  policy 
Rapid financial development, in combination with free capital movement, has led 
to the emergence of significant capital flows between different countries when 
monetary policy in major currency areas such as the United States and the euro 
area is changed. This affects asset prices, indebtedness and exchange rates in a 
way that can limit monetary policy’s degree of freedom. 
In Sweden, we saw an example of this in mid-2014, when it became clear that 
monetary policy in the euro area and the United States was moving in different 
directions. The Federal Reserve tapered its asset purchases and was expected to 
raise its policy rate in the second half of 2015.  The ECB, on the other hand, cut its 
policy rate and announced a support package to make it easier for small and 
medium-sized enterprises to get bank loans. The ECB also decided on substantial 
asset purchases in order to make monetary policy more expansionary at the start 
of 2015. There was thus a risk that the krona would become too strong against 
the euro. In a situation in which inflation was below target and inflation 
expectations were falling, it was particularly important to avoid a rapid 
  13 [23] 
   appreciation of the krona. The policy rate was therefore cut to below zero per 
cent and purchases of government bonds were initiated. 
The trilemma may be a dilemma 
The limits of monetary policy are often discussed on the basis of the so-called 
economic trilemma, which is to say the difficulty of uniting an independent 
monetary policy and free capital movements with a stable exchange rate. 14 The 
problem is that all of this, according to the trilemma, cannot be attained 
simultaneously. If a central bank wishes to conduct its own monetary policy, 
which is to say to set domestic interest rates independent of foreign ones, and, at 
the same time, have a stable exchange rate, capital movements must be 
regulated, otherwise the domestic interest rate cannot deviate from the 
international one without there being major fluctuations in the exchange rate. 
The differences in the interest rate affect the currency flows which, in turn, puts 
pressure on the exchange rate. 
In Sweden, for 20 years, we have had free capital movements, a variable exchange 
rate and an independent monetary policy aimed at meeting the inflation target. 
However, recent years’ experiences have shown that it can be difficult to conduct 
an independent monetary policy when capital movements are free, even with a 
variable exchange rate. The exchange rate has not always acted as the stabilising 
factor that many economists have counted on. One example of this is the ECB’s 
highly expansionary monetary policy from the start of 2015,  which risked entailing 
an excessively rapid appreciation of the krona. One hypothesis put forth is that 
monetary policy’s trilemma may, in fact, be a dilemma: It is not possible to fully 
unite an independent monetary policy with free capital movements. 
New studies based in what is usually known as the financial cycle provide a certain 
amount of support for this.15 No widely-accepted definition of the financial cycle 
exists, but, as a rule, it is usually constructed on the basis of time series of various 
financial variables such as indebtedness, asset prices and so on. What 
distinguishes this cycle is that it lasts for longer and fluctuates more than a normal 
economic cycle. According to the new studies, there exists a global financial cycle 
that is mainly steered by monetary policy in the United States. For smaller 
economies, it can be difficult to deviate from this global cycle in practice. Some 
economists even argue that it is so pervasive that smaller economies have 
completely lost the ability to conduct an independent monetary policy if capital 
movements are free. That is probably an altogether too drastic conclusion, but 
there is much to suggest that international capital flows and the global financial 
cycle at least limit the degree of freedom for monetary policy. 
Monetary policy needs to be complemented by macroprudential 
policy measures  
The global financial cycle after the financial crisis has largely been steered by the 
expansionary monetary policies of the United States and euro area. Low interest 
 14 See, for example, Obstfeld and Taylor (2004).  
15 See, for example, Rey (2015). 
  14 [23] 
   rates have led to rapid credit growth and rising house prices in several countries.  
Attempting to counteract this development at a local level with monetary policy 
has hardly been possible. Monetary policy can certainly ‘lean against the wind’ 
and thereby hold policy rates a little higher than what would have been justifiable 
by the prevailing economic situation with the aim of restraining excessively rapid 
credit growth. This can reduce the risks, but it would probably not be enough and 
would also be linked with costs.  
Many consider therefore that monetary policy needs to be complemented by 
other measures so that it can meet the price stability target. The introduction of 
capital controls, thus directly restricting capital flows, is one possible measure. But 
this would be expensive. Trade in various assets entails large economic gains, 
among other reasons because consumption in different countries can be evened 
out over time. Other advantages are the transfer of technology that often 
accompanies foreign investments and the increased competitiveness in the 
domestic market that results when foreign companies are allowed to invest 
locally. A better complement to monetary policy is thus formed by measures 
restricting supply and demand for credit, which is to say primarily 
macroprudential policy measures.  
Measures for reducing the risks are needed 
now  
Having low interest rates for a long time entails risks for the financial system. Low 
real interest rates are contributing to the growing trends of rising housing prices 
and increasing household debt. Investors with predetermined nominal required 
rates of return, such as fund managers, insurance companies and pension funds, 
are finding it more difficult to reach their targets. This risks leading to an excessive 
increase in risk-taking, the overvaluation of assets and the accumulation of 
financial imbalances. 
In several of the countries worst impacted by the global financial crisis of 2008–
2009,  the crisis had been preceded by rapidly-rising debts and housing prices. The 
downturn after a crisis also risks being deeper and more prolonged if 
indebtedness has risen rapidly before the crisis.  
The risks of household indebtedness therefore need to be managed and the 
longer this is put off, the more expensive it risks becoming. Measures thus need 
to be applied now to reduce the risks in the financial system. Household demand 
for loans needs to be dampened. A debt-to-income limit may be an appropriate 
measure, but strengthening the loan-to-value limit and the amortisation 
requirement should also be considered. It may also be necessary to reduce 
households’ incentive to borrow by reducing tax relief on interest expenditure.  
Measures are also needed to strengthen resilience among Swedish banks. Given 
the risks in the Swedish banking system, it is important that the banks hold 
enough liquidity and capital. So that the banks can manage their short-term 
liquidity risks, they need to have a reasonable liquidity coverage ratio in all 
significant currencies, for example in certain Nordic currencies and pounds 
sterling for those banks that obtain funding in these currencies to a great extent. 
  15 [23] 
   To ensure that the banks have enough capital, a leverage ratio requirement, 
which is to say a requirement for the banks’ equity in relation to their total assets, 
should be introduced as a complement to the risk-weighted capital requirements 
already existing. This would restrict the banks’ possibilities for increased credit 
granting. It would be particularly effective to initiate this measure when the global 
financial cycle is on the way up and the banks are finding it easy to obtain funding.  
However, it should be repeated that a fundamental cause of indebtedness in 
Sweden is that the housing market does not function. It has not been able to meet 
the rising demand for housing that has long been highly visible. Implementing the 
reforms needed to create a better balance on the housing market and to build 
more housing will, however, take some time. Measures to restrain the 
accumulation of debt by households and to strengthen the banking system will 
therefore be necessary during this period. 
Over the long term, mortgage borrowers will benefit from lower 
indebtedness  
The measures that need to be applied to restrict households’ opportunities to 
borrow and to strengthen the banks’ resilience may have short-term effects on 
demand and inflation, which monetary policy needs to consider. But the measures 
may also impact different groups in society in different ways. In practice, this 
could be one reason for why it has been difficult to apply appropriate measures. 
There are so many groups to consider: mortgage borrowers and other 
households, high income earners and low income earners, households in rural 
areas and households in metropolitan areas, and so on. But in several cases, the 
variations are also large between different households within these different 
groups, which makes it difficult to determine who will win and who will lose from 
different measures. It may therefore be difficult to conduct a policy that clearly 
mitigates the consequences for those households hit hardest by the measures.  
Another difficulty concerns distribution effects in the short and long terms. These 
can often differ. In the short term, it is likely that many indebted households – 
mortgage borrowers – may be forced to cut back on their consumption while they 
reduce their debts. During this period of adjustment, it is possible that their 
economic situation may deteriorate. But, over the longer term, when debts have 
been decreased, mortgage borrowers may benefit. This long-term distribution 
effect may be worth emphasising as it is seldom mentioned in the debate. 
In the study I mentioned previously, the authors have also tried to estimate how 
much mortgage borrowers could benefit from indebtedness decreasing over the 
longer term.16 One of their example calculations assumes that Finansinspektionen 
introduces a debt-to-income limit that reduces household debt-to-income limits 
by 10 per cent. This leads to mortgage borrowers’ interest expenditure becoming 
lower over the longer term, so that their disposable incomes become higher. They 
thus become able to consume more goods and buy better housing. In this simple 
calculation, consumption becomes around 1 per cent higher over their lifetimes. 
The losers are the debt-free households, which lose out on interest income as 
 16 This calculation can be found in Finocchiaro et al. (2016). 
  16 [23] 
   indebtedness in the economy decreases. As mortgage borrowers are more 
economically vulnerable than other households, measures that reduce their 
indebtedness may thus be advantageous from the perspective of distribution, at 
least over the longer term.  
Another measure that is often discussed to reduce indebtedness is a gradual 
reduction of tax relief on interest expenditure. This tax relief subsidises debt and 
gives households an incentive to take larger mortgages than they would have 
done without tax relief. The long-term distribution effects of reducing tax relief on 
interest expenditure are uncertain, as they also depend on how the government 
uses the budget funds made available, something we perhaps do not think about 
too often. The funds could be used to compensate the indebted households or 
even to increase public expenditure in other ways, for example through various 
reforms. 
From a socioeconomic perspective, a reform gradually reducing tax relief on 
interest expenditure would probably be beneficial. The distorting effect of tax 
relief, which benefits excessive indebtedness in society, would thereby cease.  
In summary, it could very well be beneficial to have lower indebtedness from a 
distribution perspective. The most important effect of lower indebtedness is, as I 
have pointed out several times before, reduced risks to the financial system. But, 
as well as this, mortgage borrowers’ disposable income and thereby their 
consumption may thus also become higher over the longer term. 
The Riksbank’s responsibility for financial stability needs to be 
clarified 
One of the primary tasks of the Riksbank is to “promote a safe and efficient 
payment system”, as it is expressed in the legislation. This means that the 
Riksbank is to conduct a policy for financial stability but no more exact definition 
is given. One controversial issue in this context is whether monetary policy should 
take consideration of the risk of a financial crisis. It is not unusual for central 
banks with inflation targets to take practical account of financial stability in their 
monetary policy framework – a few examples of this are the Bank of England, the 
Bank of Canada, Norges Bank and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. I consider 
that the Riksbank’s responsibility should also include financial stability and this 
should be clarified in the Sveriges Riksbank Act.  
In recent years, economic policy, including monetary policy, has focused on 
tidying up after the global financial crisis, which has been very expensive. 17 As 
monetary policy affects the economy through some of the same channels as 
various macroprudential policy measures and normal stabilisation policy, it seems 
likely that a slightly less expansionary monetary policy ahead of the financial crisis 
could have contributed towards a better economic development. We should 
therefore ask ourselves whether we should continue to consider financial stability 
                                                                 
17 Estimating the overall cost to society of a financial crisis is difficult and associated with a high degree of 
uncertainty. Sveriges Riksbank (2017b) notes that estimates in academic research indicate that the costs of a 
crisis can vary between 8 and 300 per cent of GDP, depending on which methodology is used, the definition of a 
crisis, the time horizon and the countries studied. For Sweden, it is estimated that the cost of a financial crisis can 
be expected to be around 180 per cent of GDP, calculated as the present value of the GDP loss over time. 
  17 [23] 
   in the same way as prior to the financial crisis or whether monetary policy should 
actually take explicit account of the risk of a financial crisis. My view is that 
financial stability and monetary policy are so closely interlinked that it is difficult 
to draw a clear boundary between them, which is one reason I think it would be 
good if the Riksbank were to have main responsibility for macroprudential 
policy.18  
The importance of independent macroprudential policy 
The Riksdag has given the Riksbank an independent status. This is based on the 
insight that there may be reasons for economic policy makers to pursue a short-
term policy that is incompatible with long-term goals. This is usually referred to as 
the ‘time inconsistency problem’ and is commonly found in economic policy. 
In monetary policy, the fundamental problem is that decision-makers are happy 
to promise low and stable inflation, at the same time as they also wish – after 
households have formed expectations of low and stable inflation – to conduct a 
more expansionary monetary policy to increase employment. However, 
households realise this and incorporate this knowledge into their inflation 
expectations, which leads to inflation becoming excessively high. One solution to 
the time inconsistency problem is to delegate monetary policy to an independent 
central bank with an inflation target. My assessment is that this is a solution that 
has worked well in Sweden. 
Time inconsistency is also a problem in macroprudential policy. One example of 
this is capital requirements for banks.19 The supervisory authority would very 
much like to set high capital requirements for the banks so that they do not take 
excessive risks. At the same time, however, in a recession, it may be desirable to 
mitigate capital requirements because high levels can lead to a reduction of 
lending and, ultimately, a credit crunch. The banks understand this when they 
choose how much risk they will take, which leads to risk-taking becoming 
excessive.  
The time inconsistency problem is an argument for the management of 
macroprudential policy, just like monetary policy, by an independent authority. 20 
Monetary policy and macroprudential policy obviously differ in several respects. 
For example, monetary policy is guided by an inflation target of 2 per cent, while 
the target of macroprudential policy is harder to formulate in a simple and clear 
way. This may make it more difficult to evaluate macroprudential policy decisions 
and hold the decision-makers to account. But I think it can be solved. It should be 
possible to develop and adjust the structures for democratic follow-up and 
control exercised by the General Council of the Riksbank to macroprudential 
policy. The publication of reports and minutes, as well as regular hearings by the 
 18 This is also in line with Goodfriend and King’s recommendation that “the mandate of the Riksbank should 
include financial stability, and the Riksbank must have some formal powers to enable it to achieve its objective”. 
See also Billi and Vredin (2014), Bjørnland (2017), Blinder (2010), Ingves (2007) and Stein (2014).  
19 In this example, I am referring to capital requirements intended to remain constant over time and applied to 
the entire banking sector. It is thus not possible to apply the example to the countercyclical capital buffer. See 
also Gersbach (2011).  
20 This is in line with Goodfriend and King (2016), who write that it is important that decisions on 
macroprudential responses be separated from day-to-day political pressures.  
  18 [23] 
   Riksdag Committee on Finance, could also be adjusted for the follow-up and 
control of macroprudential policy decisions.  
There are thus strong grounds for arguing that macroprudential policy should be 
conducted by an independent authority. In addition, there are other reasons for 
why macroprudential policy should also be coordinated with monetary policy. 
One that I have just mentioned is that financial stability and monetary policy are 
closely interlinked with each other. This means that the coordination of the 
monetary policy decisions and decisions on macroprudential policy measures 
would probably be of increased benefit to society. 21 Giving the Riksbank an 
extended mandate to prevent financial crises and, at the same time, allocating the 
Riksbank some macroprudential policy tools would solve both the time 
inconsistency problem and the lack of coordination between monetary and 
macroprudential policies.  
An independent and effective macroprudential policy is important for the 
prevention of financial crises. But if a financial crisis should nonetheless occur, an 
important task for the Riksbank is to provide liquidity support to Swedish banks, 
not only in Swedish currency but also in foreign currency. 
The foreign currency reserve needs to be readily available in the 
event of a crisis 
Sweden has a large and expanding banking sector with major commitments and 
funding in foreign currency. In the event of a financial crisis, the Riksbank has a 
unique role as crisis manager due to its ability to provide liquidity support to the 
banks. In order to provide liquidity support in foreign currency, the Riksbank 
needs to maintain a foreign currency reserve. This should be so large that it covers 
the needs that could be expected to arise in the short term in a financial crisis. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) makes the assessment that the current 
level of the foreign currency reserve is sufficient for the Riksbank to cover the 
requirements of a financial crisis.22 My own assessment is that the foreign 
currency reserve needs to remain at today's level or become larger. 
However, the Government proposes that the foreign currency reserve should be 
roughly halved.23 This is a high risk proposition. It could both take time and be 
expensive not to have the money at hand at the height of a crisis but to be forced 
to ask the Swedish National Debt Office to borrow it. If the foreign currency 
reserve is large enough, it could also act preventively by creating confidence in 
the Riksbank’s ability to act in a crisis. The currency reserve should thus be seen as 
an insurance policy that not only reduces the risk of crises, but also ensures good 
protection when they nevertheless occur. The cost of borrowing the currency 
reserve should therefore be funded by the banks that create liquidity risks in 
foreign currency. The possibility of transferring this cost to the banking sector 
should be investigated as soon as possible. 
 21 See Bryant et al. (2012), who discuss the background for why coordination can increase social benefit, and 
Jonsson and Moran (2014), who illustrate this in a number of example calculations. See also Spencer (2014) for 
an interesting discussion.  
22 See IMF (2016). 
23 See the Riksbank’s financial independence and balance sheet (draft proposal) from the Ministry of Finance.  
  19 [23] 
   The currency reserve’s share of the banking system’s foreign funding in 2016 was 
on the same level as in 2002,  but would – if the Government’s proposal were to 
be implemented – fall dramatically (see Figure 7(a)). This is also a very low level 
from an international perspective (see Figure 7(b)). The countries with lower 
currency reserves are the euro countries (with the exception of Bulgaria) which, 
similarly to the United States and United Kingdom, enjoy the benefit of possessing 
a reserve currency. Furthermore, as members of the euro area, they also have 
greater chances of receiving liquidity in euros from the ECB. 
Figure 7. Figure 7(a) foreign currency reserve in relation to GDP and to the 
Swedish banking system’s foreign funding and Figure 7(b) foreign currency 
reserve as a proportion of the country’s short-term debts in foreign currency 
2016 
 7(a ) 
7(b)  
Note. Fi gure 7(a), per cent. Foreign funding refers to Swedish banks’ (including Swedish subsidiaries 
but excl uding foreign s ubsidiaries) market funding and deposits i n foreign currency. The broken part 
of the l ine represents the Riksbank’s forecast based on the reduction of the currency reserve 
proposed i n the draft. Figure 7(b), countries marked in grey belong to the euro a rea. 
Sources: IMF, Statistics Sweden a nd the Riksbank.  
 Conclusions for monetary policy  
I opened by noting that these are unusual times in the Swedish economy. We 
have strong economic activity at the same time as monetary policy continues to 
be expansionary. Inflation has been below target for a longer period, but is now 
rising and approaching 2 per cent. The expansionary monetary policy is necessary 
for inflation to stabilise at 2 per cent. Despite the difficulties encountered in 
recent years in bringing inflation up, I think that flexible inflation targeting, on the 
whole, works well. But monetary policy cannot, by itself, solve all the economic 
problems Sweden and the rest of the world are struggling with. 
Real interest rates have fallen for a long time in the rest of the world and in 
Sweden. It is also likely that interest rates will remain low in the period ahead. 
This may make it more difficult to stimulate the economy with interest rate cuts 
when economic activity becomes weaker and inflation is below target. In such a 
case, it could be necessary, both for the Riksbank and other policy areas, to 
implement other measures. 
When the interest rate has been low for a longer period, it also entails increased 
risks for the financial system and financial stability. Stability is a condition for both 
monetary policy and fiscal policy to succeed. The free movement of capital and 
  20 [23] 
   the rapid financial development have led to increased capital flows that affect 
asset prices, indebtedness and exchange rates. And this limits monetary policy’s 
degree of freedom, above all in smaller economies such as ours. To reduce the 
risks to the financial system and increase the degree of freedom for monetary 
policy, monetary policy needs to be complemented by an efficient 
macroprudential policy, among other things. 
Inflation targeting is based on an assignment that largely disregarded the risks 
inherent in financial stability. The Riksbank’s responsibility in this area is 
expressed in the legislation as the task of “promoting a safe and efficient payment 
system”. More specific details are not given. I consider that the Riksbank’s 
responsibility should include financial stability and this should be clarified in the 
Sveriges Riksbank Act.  
An important question in this context is what formal role the Riksbank should 
have in the work to reduce risks and vulnerabilities in the financial system. After 
the financial crisis, the framework surrounding the preventive work for financial 
stability has been reviewed in several countries, including Sweden. The outcome 
of the Swedish inquiries has not improved the Riksbank’s chances of working 
preventively on reducing the risks in the financial system – rather the opposite. I 
do not consider that dispersing responsibility among several different authorities 
and reducing the Riksbank’s role is a good solution for Sweden. The risk is that it 
will become unclear who is to act should a risk arise in the financial system and 
how accountability is to be demanded should a crisis nevertheless occur. As I have 
pointed out several times previously, I think it would be good if the Riksbank were 
to be given an extended mandate to prevent financial crises and, at the same 
time, were to be allocated some macroprudential policy tools.  
The Swedish banking system has a relatively great need for wholesale funding in 
foreign currency. In order to provide liquidity support in foreign currency, the 
Riksbank therefore needs to maintain a sufficiently large foreign currency reserve. 
The Government's proposal that the foreign currency reserve should be roughly 
halved is risky. My assessment is that at least the current level of the foreign 
currency reserve is necessary to allow us to meet the needs that can be expected 
to arise in the short term in a financial crisis. 
 
   21 [23] 
   References 
Bernanke, Ben (2015), “Why are interest rates so low, part 2: secular stagnation”, 
Ben Bernanke’s blog, 31 March 2015, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-
bernanke/2015/03/31/why-are-interest-rates-so-low-part-2-secular-stagnation. 
Bernanke, Ben (2015), “Why are interest rates so low, part 3: the global savings 
glut”, Ben Bernanke’s blog, 1 April 2015, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-
bernanke/2015/04/01/why-are-interest-rates-so-low-part-3-the-global-savings-
glut. 
Billi, Roberto and Anders Vredin, (2014), “Monetary policy and financial stability – 
a simple story”, Economic Review 2014:2, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Bjørnland, Hilde, (2017), ”Should monetary policy pay attention to financial 
stability?” in Erfaringer med inflasjonsmål for pengepolitikken, Arbeidsnotat 
2017/4,  Ministry of Finance, Norway. 
Blinder, Alan, (2010), ”How central should the central bank be?”, Journal of 
Economic Literature, 48:1, pp. 123–133. 
Bryant, Ralph, Dale Henderson and Torbjörn Becker, (2012), ”Maintaining financial 
stability in an open economy: Sweden in the global crisis and beyond”, SNS Förlag. 
Finocchiaro, Daria, Magnus Jonsson, Christian Nilsson, and Ingvar Strid, (2016), 
”Socioeconomic effects of reducing household indebtedness”, Economic Review 
2016:2,  Sveriges Riksbank. 
Fischer, Stanley, (2016), ”Why are interest rates so low? Causes and implications”, 
speech, Economic Club of New York, October 2016. 
Gersbach, Hans, (2011), “A framework for two macro policy instruments: Money 
and banking combined”, CEPR Policy Insight No. 58. 
Gomme, Paul, B. Ravikumar and Peter Rupert, (2011), “The return to capital and 
the business cycle”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 14:2, pp. 262–278. 
Gomme, Paul, B. Ravikumar and Peter Rupert, (2015), ”Secular stagnation and 
returns on capital”, Economic Synopses, Number 19, 2015. 
Goodfriend, Marvin and Mervyn King, (2016), “Review of the Riksbank’s Monetary 
Policy 2010–2015”,  Reports from the Riksdag 2015/16:RFR6. 
Gordon, Robert, (2012), “Is U.S. economic growth over? Faltering innovation 
confronts the six headwinds”, NBER Working Paper No. 18315. 
Hansen, Alvin, (1938), ”Economic Progress and Declining Population Growth”, 
speech, American Economic Association, December 1938. 
IMF (2016), ”Article IV consultation”, November 2016. 
Ingves, Stefan, (2007), “Housing and monetary policy: a view from an inflation-
targeting central bank”, Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy, A 
Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming. 
  22 [23] 
   Jonsson, Magnus and Kevin Moran, (2014), “The linkages between monetary and 
macroprudential policies”, Economic Review, 2014:1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan Taylor, (2004), ”Global capital markets: integration, 
crisis and growth”, Cambridge University Press. 
Rey, Hélène, (2015), ”Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and 
monetary policy independence”, NBER Working Paper No. 21162. 
Rajan, Raghuram, (2005), ”Has financial development made the world riskier?,” 
The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, A Symposium Sponsored by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
Rachel, Lukasz and Thomas Smith (2015), “Secular drivers of the global real 
interest rate”, Staff Working Paper No. 571, Bank of England. 
Rogoff, Kenneth, (2015), ”Debt supercycle, not secular stagnation”, Vox: CEPR’s 
Policy Portal, April 22, http://www.voxeu.org/article/debt-supercycle-not-secular-
stagnation. 
Spencer, Grant, (2014), “Coordination of monetary policy and macroprudential 
policy”, speech, Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference, Hong Kong. 
Stein, Jeremy, (2014), ”Incorporating financial stability considerations into a 
monetary policy framework,” speech at the International Research Forum on 
Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C. 
Summers, Lawrence, (2014), ”Reflections on the ‘New secular stagnation 
hypothesis’”, in Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin, eds., Secular stagnation: 
facts, causes and cures, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London, UK. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2016), ”The Riksbank’s inflation target – target variable and 
interval”, Riksbank Studies, September 2016. 
Sveriges Riksbank, (2017a) "The long-term repo rate”, Monetary Policy Report, 
February 2017.  
Sveriges Riksbank, (2017b), ”Suitable capital ratios in major Swedish banks – new 
perspectives”, Staff Memo, May 2017,  under publication.  
Yi, Kei-Mu and Jing Zhang, (2016), ”Real interest rates over the long run”, 
Economic Policy Paper 16-10, September 2016, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis.  
   23 [23] 
