Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Reflection on professionalism, Hippocratic
oath and the banking industry
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia),  at  the  20th  AICB  Chartered  Banker's  Graduation  and  Awards  Ceremony,  Kuala
Lumpur, 13 May 2017.
 Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  the  20th AICB  Chartered  Banker’s  Graduation  and
Awards Ceremony. My congratulations to the 1,062 graduates who have been certified across 15
qualifications. Today, you join the ranks of the over 18,600 banking professionals in the nation.
Your graduation is not only an important step in your own careers, but also contributes to our
shared aspirations of elevating the banking profession towards greater heights.
When  we  reflect  about  professionalism,  the  medical  profession  often  comes  to  mind  for  its
dedication, devotion, care and interest for society. Over 2,000 years ago, the Hippocratic Oath
was first introduced to the world. Today, most medical school students profess some form of the
oath upon graduation.
While written in antiquity, its principles are held sacred by doctors to this day. Its words have
evolved with history. But its message remains the same: treat the sick to the best of one’s ability,
preserve patient privacy, teach the secrets of medicine to the next generation, and much more.
What is interesting is not the oath itself, but the principles it expounds and the deep philosophical
values that have firmly grounded the medical profession over the years. With it has also come an
unwavering sense of identity, ethics and purpose for medical practitioners.
The  numbers  are  equally  telling.  Polls  such  as  Gallup  and  Ipsos  have  consistently  ranked
doctors among the most competent and ethical professionals worldwide. In 2016, 65% of people
surveyed believed that medical doctors had either a high or very high level of honesty and ethical
standards. The corresponding number for bankers was a mere 24%. A sad reflection of the state
of affairs in the banking industry.
We  trust  doctors  with  the  most  intimate  details  of  our  health  problems,  complications  and
issues.  We  adhere  to  their  instructions  and  advice,  often  assuredly  and  willingly.  Few
professions enjoy such stature, respect and trust. This is the epitome of professionalism.
Professionalism matters. Like the medical field, professionalism ought to form the cornerstone of
the banking sector. It can be fostered. It should be practiced. And above all, it must be earned. As
intermediaries  in  the  economy  and  guardians  of  public  funds,  banking  sector  cannot  hope  to
perform its role effectively if the respect and trust of the people is not earned.
As  we  commemorate  this  graduation  today,  there’s  no  better  time  to  ask  ourselves  what  it
means to be a professional banker. Drawing from the medical profession and the Hippocratic
Oath, let us ponder on the traits to guide our pursuit of developing high calibre and trustworthy
bankers,  and  professionalising  the  banking  industry.  Three  traits  come  to  mind;  Competence,
Character and Calling.
The first is Competence. Competence is a prerequisite of any professional – indeed, the promise
to perform to the best of one’s ability is the first line of the Hippocratic Oath.
In  other  fields,  including  medicine  and  law,  the  competency  standards  and  pathways  to
qualification are often developed by the relevant professional bodies. For the banking sector here
in Malaysia, we have made significant progress to professionalise the banking industry with the
establishment of the Asian Institute of Chartered Bankers (AICB), Asian Banking School and the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
roll-out  of  the  Chartered  Banker  qualification.  This  initiative  charts  a  clear  pathway  towards
developing higher levels of technical proficiency and specialisation within our profession.
The AICB saw its pioneer batch of 45 graduates in 2015. This is a very good start. It lays the
foundational  bedrock  for  professionalising  the  banking  industry.  In  fact,  several  accredited
specialised  programmes  for  the  industry  were  introduced  including  the  ones  offered  by AICB.
Together  with  the  Chartered  Banker  Qualification,  the  creation  of  specialised  training  and
certification  will  further  strengthen  the  required  technical  competencies  and  professional
standards for the banking sector. Over time, financial institutions should give due recognition to
these professional qualifications with clear linkages to bankers’ career advancement.
As we move forward, we need to introduce steps that will further accelerate the move towards
professionalising the banking sector:
1.  Firstly, in line with existing practice for the credit, compliance and treasury functions, key
personnel  in  other  critical  functions  will  also  be  required  to  acquire  the  appropriate
specialised qualifications to better equip themselves in performing their respective functions.
For example, staff who are involved in the development of internal models or those that carry
out  penetration  testing  to  address  cyber  threats  shall  undergo  specialised  training  and
certification in the relevant fields to ensure effectiveness in discharging their role. To ensure
smooth implementation, the industry  is  expected  to  work  with AICB  and  the  regulators  to
jointly develop the curriculum and a working timeline for implementation.
2.  Secondly, to ensure that adequate attention is accorded to quality training and human capital
development,  the  Bank  will  extend  its  supervisory  oversight  to  review  the  quality  of  staff
training  expenditure.  Capacity  and  capability  development  will  be  reinforced  through
qualification-based training and certification provided by professional bodies such as AICB.
In this respect, the Board of financial institutions shall devise appropriate incentive structures
to promote such programs by according appropriate weightage in the performance appraisal
of senior management, including the chief executive officers.
3.  Thirdly, I wish to lend my support to a proposal, that sometime into the future, all reporting
submissions made by banks to Bank Negara Malaysia are to be undersigned by a Chartered
Banker. This practice is not new. It is akin to the insurance industry where qualified actuaries
are required to certify certain submission to the central bank. This idea came from a senior
banker amongst us. With this requirement, my wish is that it will provide an impetus to the
attainment of the chartered banker qualification.
Second  is  Character.  If  competence  represents  the  ‘head’  of  a  professional  banker,  then
character must surely be the ‘heart’.
Over  the  last  decade,  the  ethical  scorecard  of  the  financial  sector  was  blemished  by
irresponsible risk-taking and opaque practices of bankers in the lead up to the global financial
crisis. Ethical lapses and conduct failures in more recent years have compounded matters.
Far too often, we witness the rise of bankers who are highly competent but ethically deficient.
Worse,  we  allow  and  tolerate  such  practices.  This  is  unsustainable.  It  also  tarnishes  the
reputation  of  the  many  who  spent  their  lifelong  careers  in  the  industry,  and  who  hold  the
profession with great dignity and regard.
Another principle worth attention in the Hippocratic Oath is the adage, “Do no harm”. There is a
lot of richness in this ethos. It is worth emulating. Considering that consumers come into contact
with banking personnel far more frequently than they visit their doctors, one may even argue a
higher expectation ought to be applied for the banking industry.
The  Bank  has  actively  worked  towards  reinforcing  this  objective  over  the  years.  The  Bank
believes that when the right set of fundamental principles is followed, it can positively shape the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
actions and behaviour of people. Therefore, the Bank, in consultation with the industry, is due to
publish five universal ‘Principles for a Fair and Effective Financial Market'. These five Principles
encapsulate values that are crucial for the well-functioning of Malaysia’s financial market such as
professionalism, integrity, transparency, competition and good internal governance.
In addition to this, the Bank also enhanced standards for corporate governance, strengthened
requirements  for  KLIBOR  rate  setting  and  introduced  a  Code  of  Conduct  for  the  Malaysian
Wholesale Financial Markets. These are a few recent examples of initiatives aimed at promoting
greater professionalism, integrity and quality service to the public, consistent with the Hippocratic
Oath to ‘Do no harm'. To add seriousness in upholding ethical standards and integrity, beginning
1 January 2018, a strengthened transparency framework for our enforcement actions will also be
introduced to serve as an added deterrence against misconduct.
The recent findings published by the Financial Services Professional Board, based on a 2016
survey  of  Malaysian  banking  professionals,  are  sobering.  23%  of  respondents  observed  that
supervisors reward behaviour derived through unethical means. Another 15% expressly stated
that  they  would  act  unethically  when  not  being  watched  or  monitored.  These  disheartening
results are a clear manifestation that our journey is far from over and that, much more needs to
be done to further strengthen the character within the banking community.
There are economic consequences related to ethical choices. It is not a subject of discussion
reserved only for the morally enlightened. The consequences are real. They can be dire and they
can  be  expensive.  The  2008  financial  crisis  alone  cost  the  U.S.  economy  more  than  USD22
trillion.    Misconduct  costs  by  banks  globally  have  exceeded  USD320  billion  since  2008,  with
USD42 billion incurred in 2016 alone.
At the institutional level, there should be a ‘clear tone from the top’ that unethical behaviour will
not be tolerated. This culture of ‘zero tolerance’ for unethical behaviour should permeate across
all levels of the organisation, including in the process of recruitment, retention and remuneration.
As a community, we cannot possibly expect ethical behaviour to be burnished if we persist in
retaining, hiring or rewarding people who had acted otherwise.
Our work environment should also evolve, making it conducive and safe for individuals to speak
up on ethically questionable practices. Encouraging conversation about ethical behaviour in the
workplace can go a long way in empowering all layers in the organisation to serve as an ethical
beacon. This can significantly reduce the probability and occurrence of unethical conduct.
The third is Calling. We should marvel at the deep sense of purpose and identity contained in the
medical profession. One sentence in the modern version of the Hippocratic Oath is particularly
resonating:
“I will remember that there is art to medicine as well as science, and that warmth, sympathy, and
understanding may outweigh the surgeon’s knife or the chemist’s drug.”
Ultimately,  to  make  sense  of  what  we  do  in  our  profession,  we  cannot  shy  away  from  its
purpose. To echo the words of the poet William Butler Yeats: “Though the leaves are many, the
root is one.” As a community of bankers, we should have one overriding root purpose – to serve
and  steward  our  community.  The  services  we  offer  are  to  serve  the  larger  interest  of  the
community. We do not originate a loan merely to meet business targets, but to enable individuals
to own homes, businesses to create jobs and for overall societal wellbeing
Finance exists for society, not society for finance. We can no more detach ourselves from this
social purpose than we can separate humanity from humans. It ought to be an inherent part of
us, our profession’s DNA.
This sense of identity and purpose should ground all our pursuits. It is also the thread that ties all
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
functions of banking together. Whether you are in the credit, compliance, IT, risk management or
audit functions, you share a common purpose to society and duty to serve the public interest.
As we reflect back over the centuries, the first banks in the ancient world made grain loans to
farmers and traders who travelled between cities. During the 15th – 18th century, banks also
catalysed the financing of international trade, subsequently ushering in a new age of maritime
discovery  and  exploration.  The  banking  world  then  served  the  real  needs  of  the  economy.
However,  the  creeping  commodification  of  finance  over  the  years  has  gradually  blurred  the
nature of finance, with excessive risk accumulation driven by greed and perverse incentives.
Serving the needs of the real economy is key. That is why issues such as financial inclusion,
financial  literacy  and  financial  planning  are  so  important  to  us  as  our  nation  progresses. As
professional bankers, we should think beyond profits and understand how to meet the evolving
needs  of  the  economy.  Like  the  medical  profession,  we  cannot  begin  to  prescribe  a  solution
without first diagnosing the needs of the customer.
As  an  industry  we  should  aspire  that  one  day,  consumers  may  walk  into  a  bank,  safe  in  the
knowledge that bankers will always have their best interest in mind. That each encounter with the
consumer is viewed not as opportunities to extract value, but as a privilege, to contribute towards
financial wellbeing of the community we serve. It is an aspiration worth pursuing.
Closing remarks
Let me conclude. Like the physicians, my hope is that as bankers we will always uphold the high
standards  expected  of  our  profession.  Like  the  physicians  oath,  an  old  banking  maxim  used
centuries ago reads “my word is my bond”. Our knowledge of bonds and financial instruments
may tell us what we know. But our bonds to society tell us about our existence. 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
