Grant Spencer: Banking regulation - where to from here?
Speech  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to
KangaNews New Zealand Debt Capital Markets Summit, Auckland, 2 August 2017.
Background
 I began my present job as Head of Financial Stability at the Reserve Bank in April 2007.  That
month saw the first straw in the wind of the US sub-prime crisis – the failure of a real estate trust
called “New Century Financial”.  Over the next three years the Reserve Bank was kept very busy
attempting to protect the New Zealand banking system and economy from the ravages of the
global financial crisis (GFC).
In the aftermath of the GFC from 2010 onwards, we saw a step up in banking regulation globally,
epitomised by the G20-sponsored Basel III reforms, Financial Stability Board initiatives, and the
Dodd-Frank Act in the USA.  The reforms sought to reduce risk-taking by banks, increase capital
and liquidity buffers, and improve resolution regimes so that government bail-outs could be more
avoidable in the future.
While the Australian and New Zealand banks were less directly affected by the GFC than their
Northern  Hemisphere  counterparts,  they  were  severely  tested,  particularly  when  shut  out  of
international  funding  markets  for  several  months  following  Lehman  Brothers’  collapse.  It  was
inevitable and appropriate that the tightening of banking regulation would be felt in this part of the
world.    The  New  Zealand  banking  system  is  highly  integrated  with  international  markets  and
needs  to  maintain  a  strong  reputation  if  it  is  to  continue  its  lead  role  in  intermediating  New
Zealand’s financial dealings with the rest of the world.
As the post-GFC reforms rolled out internationally, the Reserve Bank endeavoured to tailor the
reforms  to  suit  the  specific  characteristics  of  the  New  Zealand  financial  system  and  our
regulatory  philosophy.  We  did  not  adopt  certain  policies  such  as  the  leverage  ratio  and
compensation policies, but in broad terms have adopted most of the components of Basel III.
That said, some of these policies may be better suited to the major banking systems of the US
and Europe, than to New Zealand’s relatively vanilla banking system. This raises the question of
how closely we need to follow international standards in order to realise the undoubted benefits of
international recognition.
We are currently reviewing our regulatory experience over the post-GFC period and thinking how
we  might  shape  the  New  Zealand  framework  going  forward.    Two  particular  catalysts  in  this
regard are the recent IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) report, and our recently
initiated review of bank capital adequacy.
To guide our planning we need to revisit the objectives of the regime, our regulatory philosophy,
the experience to date with the post-GFC reforms, and the trade-offs involved in deviating from
international norms.
Today I will summarise these guiding principles and discuss how they are likely to influence key
regulatory initiatives over the coming years. While I will focus my remarks on banking regulation,
the principles and key themes apply more broadly to the other financial sectors that the Reserve
bank regulates. I will comment specifically on our upcoming review of the insurance regime.
Objectives and regulatory philosophy
The Reserve Bank’s mandate is to promote the maintenance of a sound and efficient financial
system. While we see soundness as the primary goal of prudential regulation, the secondary
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
goal  of  efficiency  has  an  important  influence  on  our  approach.  When  setting  prudential
requirements we need to be mindful of inefficiencies that can be created if they needlessly or
disproportionately  add  to  the  cost  of  financial  intermediation,  stifle  innovation  or  disadvantage
some institutions over others.
Broadly speaking, our regulatory interventions aim to improve soundness and safety while as far
as  possible  minimising  the  efficiency  costs  of  those  interventions.  We  focus  our  attention  on
areas where there is strong justification for regulation based on clear market failure and where
the benefits to society of regulation are expected to well exceed the costs.
The main source of market failure in banking is negative externalities – which occur when banks
do not fully take into account the wider effects of their commercial decisions. For example, the
combined effect of mortgage credit expansion on house prices and housing risk is not factored
into  the  risk  assessments  of  individual  banks.    Nor  do  bank  owners  and  creditors  take  into
account the systemic costs of failure that can be well in excess of private capital losses. As the
GFC demonstrated, governments may feel compelled to commit public funds to rescue failing
banks  in  order  to  limit  the  systemic  damage  from  such  events.  The  presence  of  externalities
means  that,  in  the  absence  of  prudential  regulation,  banks  may  take  on  greater  risk  than  is
appropriate from the point of view of the broader economy and society.
The prudential framework reinforces incentives for banks and their creditors to understand and
manage  the  risks  they  take.  In  some  areas,  incentives  alone  are  insufficient  and  we  have
imposed direct regulatory requirements. Our approach is built on three pillars: self; market and
1
regulatory discipline.
The self-discipline pillar aims to support institutions’ internal risk management and governance,
and has been at the heart of the Reserve Bank’s approach to banking supervision for close to
three  decades.  The  primary  responsibility  for  prudent  risk  management  lies  with  the  directors
and senior management of banks.  Giving boards and management the right incentives to act
prudently is the first priority of our regulatory framework.
The market discipline pillar seeks to reinforce incentives for prudent behaviour by requiring the
disclosure  of  financial  and  risk-related  information  by  banks  and  also  through  our  own
publications  (such  as  our Financial  Stability  Reports).    The  aim  is  to  increase  market
participants’ understanding of risks in the individual institutions and the wider financial system,
enabling  investors  to  differentiate  between  institutions  and  thereby  apply  market  discipline  to
those institutions.
The third pillar of regulatory discipline, which has grown in prominence since the GFC, involves
the application of prudential standards intended to reduce various aspects of risk in bank balance
sheets, for example via minimum capital and liquidity requirements.  While the Basel Committee
has  promoted  global  prudential  standards,  the  approaches  of  different  countries  span  a  wide
spectrum.  At  the  intensive  end  are  regulators  with  long  lists  of  prescriptive  prudential
requirements and supervisory guidance, with extensive compliance monitoring. At the other end
of the spectrum are regulators who choose to be less prescriptive, and instead rely on setting
higher, more conservative buffers or limits on a narrower set of key variables.
Our preference is the latter.  A less activist approach to regulatory discipline is more consistent
with our emphasis on self- and market discipline.  Those disciplines can be eroded if institutions
feel  that  the  responsibility  for  risk  management  has  been  taken  over  by  the  regulator. A  less
prescriptive approach is also less likely to impose excessive compliance and efficiency costs.
This  more  permissive  view  has  guided  our  approach  to  loan-to-value  ratio  (LVR)  limits,  for
example,  where  we  have  set  broad  speed  limits  on  high-LVR  mortgage  lending  rather  than
outright restrictions. 
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
How close should New Zealand stick to international norms?
In shaping our regulatory approach – with its emphasis on self- and market discipline and being
at the more permissive end of the spectrum – we must consider the potential costs of deviating
too far from international norms.  This is especially important to consider as we seek to tailor the
sometimes  complex  international  regulatory  environment  to  New  Zealand’s  relatively  vanilla
banking system.
The  integration  of  our  banking  system  with  international  financial  markets  means  that  the
adoption  of  the  key  elements  of  the  Basel  framework  is  desirable;  a  strong  degree  of
commonality  between  New  Zealand’s  banking  regulations  and  those  of  the  major  countries
enhances  our  financial  system’s  international  credibility.  Thus,  while  there  might  be  efficiency
gains from a more streamlined regime that is free of unnecessary complexity, there would also
be efficiency losses if the New Zealand regime ceased to be recognised as broadly in line with
international  standards.  This  could  result  in  a  higher  risk  premium  in  bank  funding  costs  and
potentially reduced access to international capital markets.
As  you  might  expect,  much  of  the  “demand”  for  adopting  Basel  regulations  in  New  Zealand
comes  from  the  four  major Australian-owned  banks,  who  generally  seek  to  have  a  regulatory
framework  that  is  closely  aligned  with  the Australian  Prudential  Regulation Authority’s  (APRA)
requirements. The FSAP report acknowledged the Reserve Bank’s close cooperation with APRA
and recommended that we strengthen this relationship further. We will continue to develop the
relationship with APRA but both sides are well aware of the differences in our circumstances and
our different regulatory approaches. 
Over recent years we adopted most of the key Basel initiatives even when some have been less
than  ideally  suited  to  New  Zealand  circumstances.   At  the  same  time  the  Reserve  Bank  has
taken on additional compliance oversight roles, some of which require specialised skill sets. Two
examples are the oversight of banks’ internal capital models and the non-objection process for
bank capital instruments. Such activities do not sit very well with the regulatory philosophy that I
have described. Nor are they easily handled with the limited resources of a small Central Bank.
Such an approach has however been consistent with maintaining recognition of the New Zealand
regulatory regime by international investors and rating agencies.
The  IMF  takes  the  view  that  our  framework  needs  to  be  brought  more  into  line  with  the
international  orthodoxy.  The  recent  FSAP  report   on  New  Zealand  found  the  Reserve  Bank’s
prudential  framework  to  be  less  than  fully  compliant  with  the  Basel  Core  Principles  in  many
areas. This assessment relates more to the Reserve Bank’s intensity of supervision than to its
adoption  of  Basel  standards  per  se.  The  IMF  recommends  that  the  Reserve  Bank  take  on
significantly more resources in  order  to:  more  proactively  engage  with  the  banks;  issue  more
comprehensive  rules  and  guidance  on  key  prudential  matters;  and  more  frequently  verify  and
enforce compliance.
2
Can we retain our regulatory approach and still achieve the benefits of international recognition?  I
believe we can. Notwithstanding the views of the IMF, compliance with the international prudential
frameworks  is  not  always  a  black  and  white  choice;  the  Basel  framework  sets  minimum
standards  for  key  prudential  requirements  but  often  offers  a  menu  of  choices  within  those
standards, for countries to tailor to their specific circumstances. Further, while Basel Committee
members such as APRA are more bound to comply with the Basel standards, a small country
like New Zealand implicitly has a greater degree of freedom. 
In  summary,  our  objectives  are  to  retain  our  regulatory  philosophy  with  relative  emphasis  on
governance  and  market  discipline.  We  want  to  streamline  and  simplify  the  current  regulatory
regime in a number of areas but at the same time heed the IMF’s advice about improving the
effectiveness  of  our  supervisory  model.  Underpinning  this,  we  need  to  maintain  the  high
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
international reputation of the New Zealand financial system.
I  now  turn  to  how  these  broad  objectives  might  influence  the  shape  of  the  Bank’s  current
regulatory initiatives.
Supervisory model
As  I  mentioned,  the  FSAP  report  recommends  that  we  issue  more  guidance,  and  be  more
prescriptive in many of our banking and insurance requirements. The IMF also says we should
seek  more  assurance  of  compliance  via  direct  on-site  verification  and  validation.  The  report
recommends  a  significant  increase  in  resourcing  to  support  such  changes.  The  IMF
acknowledge that their recommendations imply a departure from the current balance in the three
pillars approach and philosophy.  However they also take the view that the Reserve Bank needs
to increase resourcing in order to effectively implement its current low-intensity model.
The Reserve Bank’s preferred approach is to improve the effectiveness of the supervision model
through  a  combination  of  simpler  regulations,  some  increase  in  resourcing,  and  streamlining
approval processes.
We will continue to emphasise the quality of banks’ decision making processes, with director
accountability  for  compliance  through  the  attestation  regime.    In  this  context,  current  Reserve
Bank “non-objection” regimes run the risk of weakening internal incentives for banks to “get it
right first time”.  We will look at these processes closely in the context of our current review of
the  attestation  regime  and  other  governance  arrangements  which  underpin  the  self-discipline
pillar. The review will also consider whether the attestation regime needs to be supported with
supervisory guidance and/or verification.
With regard to the broader question of improving verification, we believe the best approach could
be through increased use of thematic reviews. These reviews are conducted by our supervisors,
and  hone  in  on  industry-wide  areas  of  supervisory  interest.  Recent  reviews  in  banking  have
looked at outsourcing arrangements and problem loan identification. In the insurance sector we
have  recently  reviewed  disclosure  compliance.  Such  thematic  reviews  achieve  the  combined
purpose of compliance assessment, an improved understanding of risks by the supervisors, and
the sharing of best practice across the industry.  We are also looking to make greater use of
targeted reviews by external experts in cases where serious non-compliance becomes apparent
3
at particular institutions.
Capital review
In a speech in March I outlined the principles that would guide the current review of the capital
adequacy  framework  for  locally  incorporated  banks.   The  two  overarching  principles  were
conservatism and simplicity. Regarding the latter, we do not believe that New Zealand’s relatively
vanilla banking system warrants a high degree of complexity in its capital regime. We are leaning
towards simplifying both the allowable capital instruments and the methods for measuring risk,
though we are in the consultative phase and far from making any decisions.
4
On the allowable capital instruments, many of you will have read our “numerator” consultation
5
paper and we are keen to receive your submissions (the consultation closes on 8 September).  
It  proposes  that  we  remove  contingent  debt  instruments  from  regulatory  capital,  which  were
introduced to the framework in 2013 as part of Basel III. Several factors lean us in this direction.
There is an inevitable interaction between capital regulations and tax law, and an inherent tension
with both sets of regulations when an instrument has both debt and equity characteristics. Debt
status brings about tax benefits whereas equity characteristics can see an instrument accepted
as loss-absorbing capital from the Reserve Bank’s perspective. Banks often seek to structure
financial instruments to maximise the regulatory capital value of the instrument, while reducing
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
their tax liability. In our experience this often leads to complexity in instrument design, greyness
around their true loss-absorbing capacity, and high compliance costs.
Further, it is questionable whether contingent debt has added any real economic value in terms
of  improving  the  risk-return  options  available  to  issuers  and  investors.  Two  thirds  of  the
contingent debt issued since 2013 has been by Australian-owned banks to their parents, with the
remainder  largely  issued  to  retail  investors.  The  former  may  be  driven  mainly  by  the  tax
treatment,  while  retail  investors  receive  an  interest  premium  over  deposits  but  may  not
appreciate the underlying conversion or write-down risk. In this context, we are concerned that
contingent debt may be a financial innovation that is born more of regulatory arbitrage than of
market need.
On  the  risk  measurement  side,  we  will  be  taking  stock  of  the  current  framework,  particularly
around the internal risk models used by the four largest banks since 2008. Our experience, and
that of other regulators, is that it can be very difficult to assess whether these models provide
objective measures of the underlying risks banks face. In theory, internal models allow banks to
more accurately manage their risks, and thereby more efficiently align capital with those risks.
On the other hand, internal models add complexity to the regulatory framework that may not be
warranted in some risk areas, and the banks’ assigned risk weights are often lower than would
be prescribed by standardised models. While deliberations are on-going, the Basel Committee
has signalled its intent to make some major changes to the risk measurement framework, in
particular a greater use of floors to ensure modelled outcomes do not deviate excessively from
standardised  measures.  We  expect  to  release  a  consultation  paper  looking  at  these  risk
measurement issues once the “numerator” consultation is complete, around mid-September. 
We also intend reviewing the capital ratios themselves. The key relevant principle here will be
conservatism relative to international peers. New Zealand’s relatively high risk profile supports
such an approach, as does the Reserve Bank’s non-prescriptive regulatory philosophy. We are
also conscious that the international minimum standards are not calibrated to deal with some of
the  issues  we  face  in  New  Zealand,  including  high  industry  and  portfolio  concentration.  An
interesting issue to address in this part of the review will be the future role and management of
conservation  buffers,  including  the  counter-cyclical  buffer,  relative  to  the  minimum  capital
requirements. We plan to progress these issues later in the year and in early 2018.
The dashboard
Market discipline is a key part of the Reserve Bank’s regulatory philosophy. We know market
discipline works best when it is supported by the timely and transparent disclosure of financial
information.  In  this  rapidly  advancing  digital  age,  we  have  an  opportunity  to  improve  the
effectiveness of disclosure regimes – the “Dashboard” is an important step in this direction. It will
be located on the Reserve Bank’s website and will provide market participants and the general
public with more timely and comparable quarterly data on New Zealand incorporated banks. The
information will cover capital, liquidity and asset quality as well as profitability and balance sheet
positions. It will replace existing (off quarter) disclosure statements and make information more
easily available and comparable. The information will be available at different levels of granularity
6
to meet the needs of different users.
We see the current Dashboard project as an important step in an on-going effort to support and
enhance  more  effective  and  efficient  disclosure  for  banks,  insurers  and  other  financial
institutions. We are working closely with the banks and want to make sure we get it right. We
expect to have the first Dashboard published in the first quarter of 2018.
Looking further ahead, we see scope for ongoing advances in effective disclosure and private
data management for supervised institutions. Advances in digital services and data management
tools are likely to offer a range of new opportunities for assessing and managing the prudential
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
performance  and  compliance  of  banks,  non-banks  and  insurers  alike.  I  expect  technology  will
also offer increasing scope for automation in many of these processes. We anticipate greater
use of “Big Data” in our supervisory assessments and in providing warning signs of crises or
market concerns. But the day of full “robo-supervision” may still be some way off!
Macro-prudential policy
Macro-prudential is a relatively new policy area that we have so far implemented through LVR
speed limits, applied in 2013, and modified in 2015 and in October last year. The objectives of the
macro-prudential  policy  framework  are  set  out  in  the  2013  Memorandum  of  Understanding
between the Governor and the Minister of Finance, which also outlines the instruments we can
use to respond to emerging systemic risks.
Macro-prudential policies have been adopted by many countries in recent years as the underlying
issues  have  been  global  in  nature.  The  very  low  level  of  inflation  and  interest  rates  in  most
countries since the GFC has led to rapid increases in leverage and an escalation of systemic
risk  in  property  markets,  particularly  housing.  Macro-prudential  policies  in  New  Zealand  and
elsewhere  have  been  aimed  at  moderating  systemic  risk  by  directly  limiting  housing-related
credit risk on banks’ balance sheets.
These instruments are more prescriptive than our baseline micro-prudential tools. They target a
specific  and  significant  systemic  risk  in  the  form  of  a  leveraged  and  highly  stretched  housing
market. In a booming housing market, such as we have seen in recent years, we believe the
adverse  externalities  from  rapid  mortgage  credit  growth  become  accentuated,  warranting  the
imposition of temporary macro-prudential measures such as the LVR speed limits.
The Bank currently has a consultation paper out on debt-to-income (DTI) limits. We regard a DTI
instrument as complementary to the LVR speed limits. Limits on DTIs reduce the likelihood of a
mortgage borrower defaulting, in response to interest rate or unemployment shocks, while lower
LVRs help to reduce the risk of banks facing losses arising from a default. They are not just two
types  of  hammer  hitting  the  same  nail.    Of  course,  banks  already  investigate  borrowers’
repayment capacity when deciding whether to grant a loan as part of prudent banking practice. At
times, however, high volumes of high-DTI lending can contribute to a build-up of risk across the
financial system which individual banks may not take fully into account. This is why the IMF and
the Reserve Bank believe it is appropriate to have this tool in the macro-prudential toolkit, even
though we would not wish to use it while the Auckland and national housing markets continue to
moderate.
Thinking  more  broadly  about  the  macro-prudential  framework,  we  will  seek  to  achieve  more
broad-based  support  by  ensuring  that  the  policy  framework  is  understood  by  stakeholders,
including the public. It should be positioned consistently with our macro-financial monitoring and
our micro-prudential policy and supervision. Policy adjustments should follow a systematic and
well-articulated process in response to emerging systemic risks. It is important to be clear what
macro-prudential policy can and cannot achieve. For example, while macro-prudential policies
can  help  reduce  housing-related  risk  in  the  banking  system,  they  cannot  control  house  price
inflation.
These  broad  macro-prudential  framework  issues  will  be  jointly  examined  next  year  by  the
Reserve Bank and Treasury when the Bank’s Memorandum of Understanding with the Minister of
Finance comes up for review.
IPSA review
My comments today have focussed on the future of banking regulation. However, many of the
issues  around  banking  are  also  relevant  for  the  Reserve  Bank’s  oversight  of  insurance
companies. Certainly our regulatory philosophy applies to insurers (and non-bank deposit takers)
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
just as it does to banks. This includes our key principles of simplicity and conservatism. We will
be applying these in the upcoming review of the Insurance Prudential Supervision Act (IPSA),
7
which has now been in place for close to seven years.
We are undertaking the review in recognition of the experience we have gained operating under
the legislation, and developments in international standards and guidance. The review aims to
ensure  a  cost-effective  supervisory  approach  that  promotes  the  soundness  and  efficiency  of,
and confidence in, the insurance sector.
It is a comprehensive review and the range of issues is wide. It includes the legislative scope
(who  is  required  to  be  licensed),  the  treatment  of  overseas  insurance  business,  governance
requirements and distress management mechanisms. Earlier this year we published an issues
paper, which sought submissions on the scope of the review and areas which the review should
prioritise. We are currently reviewing the submissions, and thank those who provided feedback.
The FSAP report on insurance will be an important input to our thinking. While recognising the
relative  youth  of  our  supervisory  regime,  and  the  Reserve  Bank’s  three  pillar  supervisory
philosophy, the IMF assessors made a wide ranging set of recommendations. As in the banking
area,  we  are  particularly  interested  in  the  FSAP  findings  that  could  enhance  the  oversight
framework within the existing three pillars approach. These include the development of clearer
and more enforceable prudential requirements, enhancements to verification and improvements
to disclosure and market conduct requirements.
Conclusion
Today  I  have  provided  some  of  our  thinking  on  the  Reserve  Bank’s  objectives  for  financial
regulation  and  how  these  are  expected  to  shape  our  framework  over  the  coming  years.  Of
primary importance is to maintain the high international reputation of the New Zealand financial
system. However we seek also to reinforce our regulatory approach based on the less-intensive
supervisory  model  and  simple-yet-conservative  prudential  requirements.  We  believe  this
approach continues to suit New Zealand’s small and relatively vanilla financial system. 
We will continue to place emphasis on getting the right incentives in place for prudent institutional
governance, supported by effective market discipline that increasingly makes use of technology
advances.  The  greater  use  of  thematic  and  external  reviews  will  enhance  our  approach  to
supervision, while maintaining an appropriate balance between the three pillars of the prudential
framework. We will also explore how the macro-prudential framework can be made more robust
through a well-signalled and understood policy process.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
For a more detailed discussion of the three pillars approach, and how it applies across the different sectors we
regulate, see Fiennes (2016), New Zealand’s evolving approach to prudential supervision.
See  the Financial  System  Stability  Assessment  report.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  published  a Bulletin  article
summarising  the  IMF’s  recommendations,  see  Hunt  (2017), Outcomes of the 2016 New Zealand Financial
Sector Assessment Programme.
Under Section 95 of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act, the Reserve Bank can require a registered bank to
provide the Reserve Bank with a report prepared by a party approved by the Reserve Bank on the corporate,
financial, prudential or other matters of the registered bank.
Spencer (2017), Review of bank capital requirements. A consultation paper outlining the intended scope of the
review is available on the Review of the capital adequacy framework for registered banks page.
See the news release for the Review of the capital adequacy framework for registered banks consultation.
6  Further  information  on  the  Dashboard  is  available  on  the Dashboard  approach  to  quarterly  disclosure
consultation page.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
See the news release for the review of the Insurance Prudential Supervision Act and links therein for the Terms
of Reference and Issues Paper.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
