François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Banking  risks,  regulations  and
supervision
Introductory  speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and
Chairman  of  the  Autorité  de  contrôle  prudentiel  et  de  resolution  (ACPR),  at  the  ACPR
conference, Paris, Friday 16 June 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  to  this  new  conference  organised  by  the Autorité  de  contrôle
prudentiel  et  de  résolution  (ACPR).  The  three  issues  that  will  be  discussed  this  morning  –
banking  risks,  regulation  and  supervision  –  are  all  essential  and  are  naturally  highly
interdependent. To introduce this conference, I would particularly like to focus on the issue of
regulations and their impact on the financing of the economy and growth.
As  you  know,  this  is  the  subject  we  chose  to  address  this  year  in  the  Banque  de  France’s
Financial  Stability  Review,  which  will  partly  serve  as  a  framework  for  your  discussions  this
morning.  Ten  years  after  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis  and  eight  years  after  the  G20
summits in London and Pittsburgh that forged a global action plan, it is time to take stock. We
brought together 14 remarkable and complementary views for the Financial Stability Review from
public authorities, academics and industry representatives. What emerges is, to my mind, both
an achievement and a challenge.
 I. Firstly, an achievement: the banking and financial system is substantially more resilient today
than it was ten years ago. This is thanks to unprecedented international cooperation on financial
reforms  under  the  aegis  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  coordination  of  the  Basel
Committee  in  the  banking  sector,  and  thanks  to  the  remarkable  efforts  made  by  the  banking
industry. Thankfully, the world of finance in 2017 is not what it was in 2007.
That  is  particularly  true  for  banks  in  Europe  and  in  France.  It  is  important  to  stress  this
achievement, as the European banking sector is often criticised, particularly from the other side
of the Atlantic, solely in the light of its difficult cases or institutions that are trailing at the rear,
whereas on the whole, it is clearly far more robust than before the crisis. Banks in France for
example,  have  doubled  their  levels  of  capital  since  the  crisis  and  generate  a  return  on  equity
(RoE) of 7%, and even up to 9% or 10% when adjusted for one-off items. As regards this return,
it is clearly lower than the pre-crisis levels, but in certain respects, this can be expected and is
reasonable. We cannot ask banks to generate a double-digit return on equity when interest rates
and the risk-free rate are so low and banks are indeed more resilient than they were. Moreover,
this improvement does not only concern the banks: it can also be seen in the non-banking sector
and  the  financial  markets,  with  particular  progress  made  with  regard  to  over-the-counter
derivatives and the shadow banking system.
Regarding  the economic consequences of the reforms, it is important first to remember the
cost of the financial crisis: according to IMF data, the total loss of global output from 2007 to 2014
amounts to 25%. Compared to this considerable loss, the potential cost of financial regulation is
very small. And above all, no one can seriously claim that in France or more generally in the
majority  of  advanced  economies  the  supply  of  credit  has  been  excessively  constrained  by
banking regulations. On the contrary, lending to the economy remains robust, with housing loans
in France up 5.6% year-on-year in April 2017 and loans to non-financial corporations up 5.4%. In
the coming months, this strong overall growth may actually warrant general vigilance and closer
scrutiny by the High Council for Financial Stability, in which I participate.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
 II. Nevertheless, we are still faced with a challenge for the future, which brings me to my
second point: even if the achievement is now on solid foundations, there is clearly no room today
for complacency or respite. Although the risks of a future crisis have diminished, no one should
believe that they have disappeared entirely.
So what measures are required? For banks, the priority is to stabilise the regulatory framework
and therefore we must finalise Basel III. Here, it is useful to remember that, essentially – let’s say
approximately 80% – Basel III was already completed in 2011. In addition, there is now a broad
consensus on risk measurement approaches. The main point that is still undecided and which
continues  to  occupy  the  Committee  members  is  the  setting  of  the  so-called  “output  floor”  for
banks that apply internal models. Let’s be clear: I read and hear the banking industry, and French
banks in particular, giving its advice for negotiations on this point. A little restraint would not go
amiss, and it is not our intention to defend corporate interests. If an output floor of 75% is not
acceptable,  it  is  because  this  floor  –  and  consequently  the  standardised  approach  –  would
become  the  constraint  for  half  of  the  international  banks.  I  must  stress  that our  goal  is  to
finalise Basel III, based on improved models that remain risk sensitive, and not to move
onto Basel IV, which would use the standardised approach. Therefore, an agreement must
be reached on a lower output floor along with a tightening of controls over the banks’ internal
models, much like the targeted review of internal models (TRIM) that was approved for the Single
Supervisory Mechanism and the results of which we are more than willing to submit to peer-
review. This stance is shared at the very least by other European countries such as Germany
and the Netherlands, and by the European Commission.
International  cooperation  on  financial  reforms  is  a  common  good  that  has  been  extremely
precious during these past eight years and is crucial to our future. The temptation to go back on it
is extremely dangerous and would increase the risk of another financial crisis. In this respect, the
current situation in the United States is worrying. Generally speaking, the measures that will be
effectively adopted and implemented by the new administration and the competent government
agencies regarding financial and banking regulation still have to be clarified. There is a possibility
that the regulations already finalised in Basel such as the Fundamental Review of the Trading
Book (FRTB) or the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) could be called into question. Unilateral
deregulation would be nothing less than a lose-lose scenario with serious consequences for the
stability of the global financial system as well as the competitive landscape for US and European
banks.  In  view  of  this,  the  integration  of  a  possible  agreement  on  Basel  III  into  European
standards should be finalised while keeping a close eye on what the other major countries will
do, starting, as you will have understood, with the United States.
We must also avoid regulatory arbitrage. For non-bank players, significant progress is required
on  liquidity  management  by  funds  and  asset  management  companies,  on  fintechs  and  more
generally on the major digital platforms, which, if they carry out financial activities, will have to
comply  with  similar  regulations  sooner  or  later. As  for  the  financial  markets,  the  decrease  in
market  liquidity  must  be  explained,  and  in  doing  so  we  must  also  consider  the  role  of  high
frequency trading and its highly debatable social utility.
A  final  word  on central  counterparties  (CCP):  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  valuable
proposals  recently  made  by  the  European  Commission  to  insist  that  those  CCPs  whose
activities are “super-systemic” for the EU market establish themselves in the European Union.
They are a step in the right direction and represent the only viable mechanism to guarantee that
European authorities and national central banks in particular, can control and manage the risks
that CCPs are likely to pose to the financial stability of the European Union. Once the provisions
on the resolution of CCPs have been finalised, the compensation framework within the EU will
have been improved considerably. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Let  me  conclude  with  a  general  remark  that  concerns  the  economy:  we  need  a  system  to
assess, ex post, the economic effects of the reforms. France fully supports the work of the FSB
to develop a structured analytical framework, which Germany has rightly included in its priorities
for its G20 presidency.
Europe,  and  Germany  and  France  in  particular,  now  has  a  special  duty  to  protect  financial
regulation  –  a  regulation  that  is  sensitive  to  risk,  balanced  in  its  treatment  of  banks  and  non-
banks and binds the entire international community. Generally, that is what we’ve been doing well
since 2009, and it is what continues to inspire us. Thank you for your attention and I wish you an
excellent conference.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
