Jens  Weidmann:  Improving  the  investment  climate  in Africa  –  the
role of institutions
Keynote address by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  G20  Conference
&quot;G20 Africa Partnership – Investing in a Common Future&quot;, Berlin, 13 June 2017.
 It is a great pleasure for me to open the second day of the Conference “G20 Africa Partnership –
Investing  in  a  Common  Future".  This  two-day  conference  is  the  third  G20  conference  of  the
German presidency in the Finance Track.
We kicked off the German presidency with a conference here in Berlin. The aim was to discuss
how to best make the global economy more resilient. The second conference, which was about
the digitisation of finance, took place in Wiesbaden. We addressed both the opportunities and the
challenges surrounding the digitisation of finance.
Now we are back in Berlin to push on with the third key priority of the Finance Track agenda: the
“Compact  with  Africa”  initiative.  The  initiative  aims  to  help  African  countries  mobilise  private
investment in general and infrastructure investment in particular.
These three priorities of the German presidency were not chosen at random. They express an
ambition  and  a  conviction:  the  ambition  to  shape  globalisation  in  our  mutual  interest,  and  the
conviction that it is possible to do so. The relationship between Africa and the G20 is a case in
example.
Africa  stands  ready  to  benefit  from  an  open  world  economy.  Its  economic  outlook  is  positive.
Between 2009 and 2014, the average growth rate was about 4 %. Since then, low commodity
prices have slowed the pace of growth somewhat. But medium-term growth prospects remain
solid.
That’s true, at least, when looking at total growth rates. But what really matters when seeking to
improve  welfare  is  per  capita  growth.  Here  the  picture  is  less  benign.  Africa’s  population  is
growing  fast.  Today,  it  is  home  to  1.2  billion  people,  and  the  United  Nations  expects  the
population  to  double  by  the  year  2050. And  although  the  economy  is  growing  faster  than  the
population, it is doing so only slightly. Because higher output has to be shared with ever more
people,  the  World  Bank  expects  income  per  capita  growth  to  lag  behind  total  growth
substantially.  
Africa’s  young  and  growing  population  can  be  a  boon  or  a  bane.  The  demands  of  the  young
population are growing by the day, in part due to the increased use of mobile phones and social
media.  In  an  unfavourable  economic  and  political  environment,  this  can  lead  to  frustration,
conflict and a high willingness to emigrate. But in a favourable environment, the young population
can help achieve a demographic dividend. In that case, Africa would also strengthen the global
economy. 
But  creating  enough  jobs  to  absorb  the  new  workers  requires  investment.  The  World  Bank
estimates that investment in the African countries needs to reach one-quarter of gross domestic
product to achieve sustainable and inclusive growth. Over the past 15 years, the average was
only one-fifth of GDP. So there is still some way to go.
At  the  same  time,  in  other  regions  in  the  world,  the  forces  of  demography  are  almost  the
opposite. In Europe, the population is generally older and what is more is expected to shrink.
Germany  is  a  prime  example  of  this.  The  medium  age  of  our  population  is  only  exceeded  by
Japan.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
These demographic trends are already burdening the long-term economic outlook of Western
economies today. And it might also reduce the return on investment in these countries.
At the same time, people are looking for ways to channel their retirement savings into reliable and
profitable investments. And they are doing so not only at the domestic level, but are in general
also open to investing these funds abroad.
This  is  where  the  “Compact  with  Africa”  initiative  comes  in.  It  seeks  to  mobilise  private
investment – infrastructure investment in particular – in Africa.
But those funds for investment do not necessarily have to come from abroad. I’m sure many
Africans are looking for safe and profitable investment opportunities too.
You may have noticed that you are sitting in what was once such an infrastructure investment.
The gasometer in the Schöneberg district of Berlin is an early-20th century industrial site. When
it was constructed in 1908, it was one of the three largest gas holders in Europe. Gasometers
were built for factories in the Industrial Revolution as a light source and for industrial processes
that required gas.
This  particular  gasometer,  and  many  others  like  it,  became  redundant  as  we  turned  to  other
sources for lighting. But to this day, it is a reminder that an efficient energy infrastructure is an
important precondition for private investment and growth.
Infrastructure is the backbone around which private sector activities can flourish. Transport and
energy services are essential arteries through which the lifeblood of an economy flows to the
veins of the private sector.
After all, what good is the best crop if the farmer can’t transport it to the market? And what good
is the best engineered car if it can’t be shipped to the customer?
An economist would put it like this. A functioning infrastructure – the safe supply of electricity,
1
access to roads, railways or the sea – raises the return of private investment.
So investment in infrastructure can start a virtuous cycle: when adequate infrastructure raises
income and productivity, it becomes easier to mobilise the financial resources for investment in
general and infrastructure investment in particular.
But unfortunately, the chain of causation can also go the other way round. Barry Eichengreen
has pointed out that countries can find themselves in a low-level equilibrium trap in which the lack
2
of infrastructure limits finance and the lack of finance limits infrastructure.
By the time this gasometer was built, Germany – and other Western countries – had managed to
avoid this trap: partly because they developed strong institutions and an effective administration;
they protected private property rights as well as capital markets and banking systems; moreover
the  rule  of  law  prevailed.  All  these  factors  helped  in  mobilising  financial  resources  to  fund
infrastructure projects.
This shows that the conditions to mobilise investment can to a large extent be created by the
individual countries themselves. This is why the “Compact with Africa” stresses the need to put
in place a stable macroeconomic environment, reliable legal systems and appropriate regulatory
and supervisory frameworks. These are the three building blocks of the “Compact with Africa”
initiative. They go under the headlines (i) Macroeconomic Framework, (ii) Business Framework
and (iii) Financing Framework. You will have the opportunity to discuss these three topics during
the two Breakout Sessions this morning and this afternoon.
But in the end, when it comes to improving macroeconomic stability and to establishing reliable
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
legal  systems  as  well  as  sound  regulatory  frameworks,  there  is  no  one-size-fits-all  solution.
Each country has to tailor these general orientations according to its own individual needs. This
task cannot be outsourced to someone else.
That is why it is called the Compact with Africa, not for Africa. The guiding principle is that our
African partner countries are in the driver’s seat. And they don’t have to begin from scratch. We
know at the Bundesbank from our technical central bank cooperation that the level of expertise is
often quite impressive.
In the past years, the Bundesbank has conducted seminars with central bankers from 13 African
countries. Only in May this year, together with the Bank of Morocco, we organised a conference
on “good governance” in Rabat. Participants came from ten different central banks in the French-
speaking  part  of  Africa.  And  together  with  the  Federal  Financial  Supervision  Authority  of
Germany, we are planning a seminar on “capital market development” in Rwanda.
Domestic debt markets are the primary way to raise private funds for investment. And they are
even more helpful when they raise capital in local currency because no exchange rate variations
put the investment decisions at risk. The existence of such a local currency bond market also
underscores the credibility of the domestic currency.
So far, relatively developed local currency bond markets in Africa exist in South Africa, Egypt and
Nigeria.  Together,  they  account  for  nearly  90  %  of  total  outstanding  local  currency  bonds  in
3
Africa.
I’m  convinced  that  other  African  countries  could  benefit  from  the  experience  of  these  three
countries. In South Africa, for example, the domestic bond market developed as far back as the
1980s, when the country had to look inwards to finance fiscal deficits.   Nowadays,  the  South
African market is well integrated into international financial markets, and has successfully funded
infrastructure to upgrade ports, railways and public utilities such as the power grid.
4
And local currency debt markets also have another advantage. My colleague, Governor Lesetja
Kganyago, has once pointed out “In South Africa, the existence of a large and liquid domestic
government bond market […] has limited the rise in foreign-currency denominated debt, even as
our country has experienced large current account deficits."
Today, digital technologies can help develop domestic debt markets. And digital technologies can
be key drivers of financial inclusion in less developed countries.
In Kenya, for example, the share of people with a financial account rose from 42 % in 2011 to
75 % in 2014. Over the same period, the respective global figure rose from 51 % to 61 %.
In  tandem  with  the  mounting  ubiquity  of  cell  phones,  mobile  money  accounts  have  gained
popularity, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa.
In some countries, there are even more adults with a mobile money account than a conventional
5
bank account.
So  when  it  comes  to  digitisation  in  finance,  there  may  be  something  the  G20  can  learn  from
Africa, too.
In any case, “Compact with Africa” signals that African countries are not alone. A compact has at
least two signatories. The G20, other partner countries as well as international organisations like
the African Development Bank, the IMF and the World Bank are offering their support with regard
to implementing reforms. Partner countries can also set up technical assistance, support early-
stage project development and encourage their business sectors to invest in compact countries.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  G20  will  act  as  a  platform  to  give African  countries  the  opportunity  to  make  their  reform
efforts known, and to help them find potential investors. Today’s Investor Roundtable is the first
opportunity to do so.
So in a way, the “Compact with Africa” acts like an amplifier: African countries participating in the
compact send out a signal that they want to mobilise investment and are willing to undertake the
necessary reforms. The G20 amplifies this signal, making it more audible and more credible.
Yesterday, we heard from many G20 member states and guests that they want to support the
countries  that  have  already  signed  a  compact.  There  was  broad  agreement  that  coordinated,
comprehensive  and  country-specific  measures  have  the  best  chance  of  attracting  private
investment. And the International Financial Institutions stated their strong commitment to pursue
this  initiative  further.  The  incoming Argentinian  presidency  will  also  ensure  continuity  after  the
German presidency ends.
But today marks the beginning of putting ideas into practice.
It  is  often  said  that  it  took  the  West  300  years  to  innovate  and  industrialise,  Japan  less  than
100 years and the East Asian “tigers” only 40 years. Maybe Africa can break the record again.
Certainly, I won’t delay an attempt to do so any longer.
I wish you all a very successful second conference day and inspiring discussions.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
As mentioned by Paul Collier, it is not the rate of investment but the return on investment that matters; P Collier
(2007), The Bottom Billion, Oxford University Press, p 44.
B Eichengreen (1994), Financing infrastructure in developing countries: lessons from the Railway Age, Policy,
Research working paper no WPS 1379, Washington, DC, World Bank.
A figure of 88 percent is mentioned in the joint AfDB, IMF and WBG Report G-20 Compact with Africa.
At that time, South Africa was under international pressure from the anti-apartheid movement and was the target
of financial sanctions.
A Demirguc-Kunt et al (2015), The global findex database 2014: measuring financial inclusion around the world,
World Bank Group Policy Research Working Paper, No 7255.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
