Philip Lowe: Renminbi internationalisation
Remarks by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the RMB Global Cities
Dialogue Dinner, Sydney, 27 April 2017.
 I would like to thank Laura Berger-Thomson, Eden Hatzvi, Chris Ryan and Callan Windsor for
assistance in the preparation of these remarks.
It is an honour for me to be able to speak at this Renminbi (RMB) Global Cities Dialogue. I would
like to congratulate the Department of Premier and Cabinet in New South Wales and the Sydney
for  RMB  Committee  for  putting  this  dialogue  together.  I  would  also  like  to  offer  a  very  warm
welcome to Sydney to those of you who have travelled from afar, especially those of you from
other offshore RMB centres.
We are all here to discuss the internationalisation of the Chinese currency.
This is an important topic. I say this for two reasons. The first is that the internationalisation of the
RMB  and  the  associated  liberalisation  of  the  Chinese  capital  account  have  significant
implications for the global financial system. Indeed, it is likely that the internationalisation of the
RMB will be one of the biggest forces shaping the global financial system over the next decade or
so. The second reason is that as the RMB becomes a truly global currency it is likely to change
the way the Chinese economy operates. Australia’s experience provides an example here. In our
own case, the internationalisation of the Australian dollar played an important role in shaping the
development  of 
three  decades  or  so.  The
internationalisation of our currency was a by-product of the move to a floating exchange rate and
the abolition of capital controls. For us, it has been a positive experience. My expectation is that
one day China too will be able to make the same claim.
the  Australian  economy  over 
the  past 
It  is  easy  to  appreciate  why  the  Chinese  authorities  have  sought  to  have  an  internationalised
currency. As one of the world’s largest economies – and one that continues to grow in relative
importance – it is understandable that China wishes to see the RMB take its place as one of the
world’s  truly  global  currencies.  There  are  some  clear  advantages  of  being  in  this  position.
Mainland China’s financial markets will be deeper and more liquid, lowering the cost of finance to
business. And there’s an advantage in being able to use your own currency in international trade
and have global prices quoted in your currency. Being a major reserve currency can also help
lower the cost of external financing. So China’s ambition is readily understandable.
China is clearly making progress towards achieving this ambition. Given this, tonight I would like
to talk first about that progress and then about some of the challenges and opportunities that lie
ahead.
Progress
When we speak of an internationalised currency, what we typically have in mind is a currency
that is used frequently in international trade and investment transactions between residents and
non-residents and also in transactions that involve only non-residents.
An  internationalised  currency  can’t  be  achieved  overnight.  It  takes  time.  It  takes  time  for  non-
residents to be comfortable using another currency. They need to have the hedging instruments
available to manage risk effectively and a degree of familiarity with the foreign currency. It also
takes time for the home authorities to be comfortable allowing their currency to be freely bought
and sold by non-residents. So internationalisation is not something that occurs quickly.
For the RMB there has been more progress in the use of the currency in transactions between
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
residents  and  non-residents  than  there  has  been  in  its  use  for  transactions  between  non-
residents only. This is particularly so on the trade side, as the Chinese authorities have been
encouraging the use of the RMB for trade invoicing and settlement for quite some time.
The use of the RMB for trade transactions has been facilitated by the establishment of offshore
RMB  centres,  which  provide  a  link  between  offshore  markets  and  the  mainland. As  you  are
aware, these centres are a unique feature of the RMB internationalisation process and are an
obvious impetus for this dialogue.  Importantly, market participants should have the confidence
to use the RMB freely within these centres, as many of these centres have RMB swap facilities
with the People’s Bank of China (PBC). As such, they play a role in facilitating RMB transactions
between  non-residents.  That  said,  there  has  recently  been  a  decline  in  some  measures  of
offshore RMB activity, which I will touch on in a moment.
1
2
Consistent  with  the  experience  of  other  currencies,  the  increased  use  of  the  RMB  in  trade
transactions  has  led  to  an  increase  in  RMB-denominated  financial  transactions  between
mainland residents and non-residents.   Most  foreign  financial  institutions  now  have  access  to
China’s bond markets, including, since last year, in the way previously available only to central
banks  and  sovereign  wealth  funds.  Nevertheless,  domestic  bonds  purchased  by  foreign
investors only account for around 1–1½ per cent of the market, although the market itself has
expanded  quickly.  The  authorities  also  intend  to  create  a  link  between  the  bond  markets  in
mainland China and Hong Kong later this year. In addition, as of earlier this year foreign investors
are  permitted  to  participate  in  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  derivative  market  to  hedge  the
currency risk they take on as part of their bond investments.
Foreign investors also have access to China’s equity markets through programs such as the
Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Connect schemes with Hong Kong. The stock connect schemes
have  facilitated  capital  outflows  from  China,  alongside  other  schemes  allowing  institutional
investors to invest offshore.
Reflecting the progress that has been made, last year the RMB entered the basket of currencies
that determine the value of the IMF’s Special Drawing Right. This followed the IMF’s decision in
late  2015  to  designate  the  RMB  as  ‘freely  usable’.  Not  surprisingly,  an  increasing  number  of
countries, including Australia, invest a portion of their foreign reserves in RMB. I note, however,
that according to the IMF’s latest figures, the total value of foreign reserves invested in Australian
dollars is still significantly higher than invested in RMB. I expect this to change over time.
Our  local  RMB  market  has  also  been  developing,  albeit  from  a  low  base.  Recently  published
survey  data  collected  by  the  RBA  show  that  the  value  of  RMB  deposits  held  with Australian-
resident banks rose strongly over 2015 and has been broadly unchanged over the past year, at
around  RMB30–40  billion.   Consistent  with  this,  annual  data  from  the  Australian  Bureau  of
Statistics show that the share of Australia’s trade with China invoiced in RMB has continued to
rise in recent years.
3
In contrast to the experience here in Australia, the share of China’s total trade settled in RMB has
declined  over  recent  times.  After  peaking  at  almost  30  per  cent  in  mid  2015,  that  share  is
currently  around  15  per  cent.  The  decline  in  the  share  of  RMB  payments  for  imports  has
contributed to a decline in the stock of RMB deposits in the offshore centres given that supply of
RMB to these centres is largely through RMB trade payments.
As Dr Ma touched on earlier today, part of this rise and subsequent fall in offshore RMB deposits
reflects changed expectations about the future path of the RMB. But there has also been some
underlying  growth  in  demand  for  offshore  RMB  deposits  for  transactional  purposes,  with
investors actively seeking to manage their exposure to exchange rate fluctuations.
So putting all this together, there has been significant progress on many fronts. Indeed, there has
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
been more progress than many observers expected. There is, though, still some way to go for
the RMB to be a truly internationalised currency.
Challenges and Opportunities
An obvious question then is how to build on the progress that has been made.
One lesson from experience elsewhere is that having an internationalised currency requires an
open capital account. It requires allowing domestic citizens to buy and sell assets overseas and
allowing  non-residents  to  buy  and  sell  domestic  assets.  The  flows  associated  with  these
transactions generate depth in financial markets and provide a stimulus to the development of
hedging markets. This then encourages more transactions: a form of virtuous circle develops.
This  was  certainly  the  case  here  in  Australia  with  the  internationalisation  of  our  currency.
Interestingly, though, at no point did we have a strategic objective of having an internationalised
currency. Instead, it happened rather organically as a result of market forces in an open system.
China  has  been  gradually  moving  in  this  direction,  but  the  process  of  opening  up  has  its
challenges.
Two of these are worth pointing out. The first is managing the volatility in capital flows that can be
associated with a more open capital account. The second is managing the implications for global
markets and investment patterns.
The  first  of  the  challenges  is  one  that  faces  any  country  moving  from  a  highly  constrained
system to a more liberal system. As the constraints are lifted, people adjust their portfolios in
ways they previously could not. These adjustments can lead to sharp and disruptive movements
in market prices, particularly exchange rates, especially when markets are still not fully mature.
To  date,  the  Chinese  authorities  have  largely  avoided  this  volatility  in  market  prices,  although
changes in expectations for the path of the exchange rate have affected capital flows into and out
of China.
For  a  number  of  years  up  until  mid  2014,  the  RMB  had  been  considered  a  ‘one-way’  bet  to
appreciate against the US dollar. Foreign capital flowed into China as investors sought to take
advantage of the higher returns available, but also the appreciation of the RMB. As this capital
flowed into China, the central bank offset some of the upward pressure on the exchange rate by
purchasing foreign currency and buying foreign assets.
Over the past couple of years, though, things have changed, with the RMB depreciating against
the US dollar, alongside persistent expectations for further depreciation. Chinese residents have
taken  advantage  of  some  new  freedoms  to  increase  foreign  investment  and  the  depreciating
exchange rate has increased their incentive to do this. Mainland companies also appear to have
delayed their export receipts and pre-paid for imports in anticipation of the RMB being weaker in
the future. And they have also boosted their foreign currency deposits by holding onto foreign
currency trade receipts (rather than converting them to RMB) and using them to repay foreign
currency loans.
In response to these changes, the Chinese authorities have sold some of the foreign assets they
purchased previously. As a result, China’s foreign currency reserves have declined from a peak
of US$4 trillion in mid 2014 to around $US3 trillion now. Fewer foreign assets are now held by the
central bank and more are being held by other Chinese entities. As the People’s Bank of China
has stated, this is a desirable shift.
The Chinese authorities are understandably concerned that, left unchecked, the turnaround in
capital flows could be destabilising. As a result, there has been some tightening up in the ability
of  Chinese  residents  to  purchase  foreign  assets.  The  available  data,  as  well  as  reports  from
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
China, suggest that these measures have slowed the outflow of capital.
It should not come as a surprise that the Chinese authorities are proceeding cautiously and have
sought  temporarily  to  slow  outflows  or  inflows  from  time  to  time.  While  many  countries  have
liberalised  their  capital  account  and  made  their  exchange  rate  more  flexible,  few,  if  any,  have
done so without causing at least some disruption to their domestic financial system.
Short-term controls arguably can have a positive effect on financial stability in China by reducing
the  risk  of  a  disorderly  currency  adjustment  and  pressures  in  Chinese  financial  markets.  But
there is a balance to be struck here, as tightening up controls runs counter to the longer-run goal.
One consideration is the signal that a tightening of controls, after several years of liberalisation,
could  send  to  investors  about  how  the  government  perceives  the  balance  of  risks  facing  the
economy. A  broad  based  and  persistent  tightening  of  capital  controls  might  also  exacerbate
domestic vulnerabilities, by causing domestic liquidity to be greater than might be desired from a
strict macroeconomic management perspective. Ultimately, balancing these competing risks is a
difficult task.
The second challenge for China is dealing with the implications for the global financial system.
Unlike the challenge of dealing with volatility, this challenge is not one that most other countries
have  faced.  It  is  an  issue  for  China  because  of  its  size.  When  Australia  opened  its  capital
account the rest of the world hardly paid attention. But this is not the case for China. The rest of
the world is watching and it has a strong interest in the outcome.
Chinese  gross  portfolio  flows  remain  small  relative  to  the  size  of  its  economy.  As  my
predecessor, Glenn Stevens, noted, if China’s gross portfolio flows were equivalent to 5 per cent
of GDP in 2015 – the figure for many other countries in Asia and a bit less than that for Australia
4
– China would account for a little more than one-fifth of global portfolio flows.
Because of China’s size, investment by Chinese entities abroad has the potential to affect the
prices of many assets significantly. We have already seen some signs of this with, for example,
housing prices in some cities being affected by the inflow of Chinese money. The nature of the
foreign assets owned by Chinese entities is also changing, as the central bank has a different
portfolio composition from that of most other Chinese entities.
In many countries, a related issue is the purchase of domestic assets by Chinese state-owned
enterprises. There have been a few high-profile cases where governments have blocked deals
by Chinese state-owned enterprises. But, by and large, most countries, including Australia, have
welcomed  Chinese  investors  in  a  wide  range  of  sectors.  Chinese  capital  is  helping  to  build
businesses and stronger trade links. So there are a lot of issues to be managed here.
Conclusion
To  conclude,  China  is  going  through  an  important  transition.  It  was  not  that  long  ago  that  the
Chinese currency could be used only within China’s borders. In contrast, today China has the
ambition  of  having  a  global  currency.  The  effects  of 
the
internationalisation of the RMB and the opening up of the capital account – could ultimately be as
wideranging as were the effects of China’s ascension to the World Trade Organisation. Managed
well, this transition can be a win-win for both China and the rest of the world.
transition  – 
involving 
this 
Thank you.
1
2
Eichengreen  B  (2017),  ‘The  Renminbi  Goes  Global  –  The  Meaning  of  China’s  Money’,  Foreign  Affairs,
13 February. Available at www.foreignaffairs.com/reviews/review-essay/2017-02-13/renminbi-goes-global.
See,  for  example,  Frankel  (2012),  ‘Internationalization  of  the  RMB  and  Historical  Precedents’,  Journal  of
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Economic 
www.hks.harvard.edu/fs/jfrankel/RMBintnztnJEI2012pg329~365.pdf.
Integration, 
27(3), 
pp 
329–365, 
available 
at
3
4
These data can be found on the Statistical Tables page of the RBA website (Table B20).
Stevens G (2015), ‘Address to the Boao Forum for Asia Financial Cooperation Conference’, Audio address,
Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, 30 July. Chinese gross portfolio flows were equivalent to a little less than
1 per cent of GDP in 2015.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
