Vítor  Constâncio:  Presentation  of  the  European  Central  Bank
Annual Report 2016 to the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, to the
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 10 April
2017.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am honoured to be here today before your Committee to present the ECB Annual Report for
2016.
The Annual  Report  is  an  essential  element  of  our  democratic  accountability.  It  supports  the
democratic  debate  regarding  our  decisions.  And  our  accountability  does  not  stop  with  our
reporting  obligations.  This  occasion  ensures  that  our Annual  Report  will  be  discussed  by  the
representatives of the people of Europe.
We take our accountability to the European Parliament extremely seriously. This is the beginning
of a well-established process. Our exchange today, and the regular dialogue between our two
institutions, will feed into the European Parliament resolution on the ECB Annual Report. This is
very important for us because we want to make sure that we deliver on the democratic mandate
that was conferred upon the ECB. The ECB is independent so that it can act in line with this
mandate, without political interference. And it is democratically and legally accountable to ensure
that  it does  act  in  line  with  this  mandate. As  is  customary,  today  we  are  also  publishing  our
feedback concerning your resolution on our previous Annual Report.
In introducing our discussion, I will touch upon our monetary policy decisions over the past year
and their contribution to the ECB’s primary objective of maintaining price stability – a precondition
for  sustainable  growth  and  job  creation.  That  objective  –  which  serves  as  a  performance
benchmark – supports both our independence and the accountability of our actions. I will then
continue by emphasising the importance of a strong financial system for a prosperous euro area.
The euro area recovery and the support provided by the ECB’s monetary policy
1
2016 was, in many ways, a challenging year. The last time I spoke before this Committee, in April
2016 ,  the  global  economy  was  emerging  from  an  acute  episode  of  financial  instability.  That
episode had once again given rise to another phase of deep pessimism concerning not only the
capacity of the world economy to generate positive growth, but also the ability of central banks to
steer their economies by applying unconventional monetary policy tools. Inflation was heading
towards new lows, dragged down by a renewed sharp fall in commodity prices.
Twelve months on, in part thanks to the measures that we took at that time  (and disproving the
policy sceptics), macroeconomic conditions have improved and the euro area has been a major
source  of  positive  news.  Fears  of  deflation  have  receded.  Despite  a  still  weak  international
backdrop, GDP grew at a solid rate of 1.7% in 2016 and in the first quarter of 2017, economic
sentiment climbed to the highest levels since 2011. Unemployment is at its lowest point since
May 2009. Over four and a half million more people are now employed than was the case three
years  ago.  Our  measures  have  also  reduced  fragmentation  among  Member  States:  the
2
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
dispersion of both GDP growth and inflation rates is at the lowest level since the beginning of the
monetary union.
Looking back, we can see how the measures that we took in March 2016 have effectively fed
through to the broader economy, adding to the substantial monetary stimulus already in place at
the time. They have built a new cushion that helped to firm up the recovery and make it more
resilient to external shocks and uncertainties. In December 2016 we decided to extend our asset
purchases until December 2017, though at a reduced pace of €60 billion per month from April
2017 onwards, in line with the diminished risks to price stability. This safeguards the financing
conditions that are still necessary to foster a return of inflation rates towards levels below, but
close to, 2% over the medium term.
The  measures  the  ECB  took  in  March  2016  have  supported  the  improvement  in  financing
conditions. They have facilitated the continued fall in composite bank lending rates for loans to
non-financial firms and for housing loans. Both have fallen to historically low levels. Overall, since
May  2014,  i.e.  immediately  before  our  decision  on  a  combination  of  measures  to  provide
additional  monetary  policy  accommodation  and  to  support  lending  to  the  real  economy,  the
decline in bank lending rates has amounted to almost 120 basis points for loans to firms, and
around  110  basis  points  for  housing  loans.  Likewise,  lending  volumes  have  increased
considerably as growth in loans to firms recovered to 2.0% in February 2017, from  2.9% in May
2014, and for households to 2.3% from –0.1% over the same period. Small and medium-sized
enterprises,  the  backbone  of  the  euro  area  economy,  have  greatly  benefited:  their  access  to
financing has significantly improved and their borrowing costs have dropped by around 40 basis
points since March 2016 and around 180 basis points since May 2014.
By the end of 2016, the recovery was clearly firming and further broadening across sectors and
countries. Incoming data and sentiment indicators in the first quarter of this year suggest that the
pace of growth may be gaining momentum.
Nevertheless, the legacy of the financial crisis still determines today’s economic performance in
many  respects.  Owing  to  a  considerable  amount  of  unutilised  resources  underlying  inflation
continues  to  lack  a  convincing  upward  trend.  Headline  inflation  has  increased  but  that  mostly
reflects rising energy and  food  prices.  The  March  flash  estimate  shows  that  headline  inflation
dropped to 1.5% from 2% in February and that underlying inflation decreased from 0.9% to 0.7%.
We had previously warned that headline inflation could decline after March-April as a result of the
reduced statistical base effect of comparing this year’s price levels of oil and other commodities
with their levels a year ago.
The  decrease  in  underlying  inflation,  however,  was  disappointing.  The  domestic  drivers  of
inflation, namely wages, are not yet responding to the recovery and the narrowing output gap.
According to our latest staff projections, inflation is expected to move towards 1.7% in 2019, but
that assumes underlying inflation at 1.8% and wage growth at 2.4%. The foreseen increase in
wages in the baseline scenario is thus essential for the staff projections for growth and inflation
to materialise in 2019.
Furthermore, while near-term projected inflation has been subject to sizeable upward revisions
due to energy and food price rises, the medium-term outlook remains largely unaffected. More
importantly,  the  upward  path  of  headline  inflation  over  the  coming  years  remains  highly
dependent on monetary policy support.
Against this background, it is appropriate to preserve the degree of monetary accommodation we
are currently providing.
Ensuring a safe and growth-supporting financial system
While our monetary policy is primarily geared towards maintaining price stability, the ECB is also
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
tasked with identifying and assessing the potential impact of systemic risks on the stability of the
euro area financial system. Our Annual Report sets out four key risks.
First, the possibility of a rise in global risk premia has increased in an environment of political
uncertainty and benign pricing in the markets. Second, possible rising negative feedback loops
between  weak  bank  profitability,  in  the  face  of  structural  challenges  in  a  low  interest  rate
environment,  and  low  nominal  growth.  Third,  political  uncertainty  which  undermines  reform
efforts, with debt sustainability concerns resurfacing for the sovereign and non-financial private
sectors in some countries. Fourth, liquidity risk is increasing in the rapidly growing investment
fund sector, with potential spillovers to the broader financial system.
Beyond  systemic  risks  at  the  aggregate  euro  area  level,  we  are  also  closely  monitoring  risks
arising  at  the  country  and  sectoral  levels.  Targeted  macroprudential  policy  measures  are  the
appropriate policy instruments to address these country or sector-specific risks. As you know,
responsibility  for  decisions  on  macroprudential  measures  in  the  euro  area  is  shared  between
national authorities and the ECB. This means that we can top up the macroprudential measures
taken by national authorities for those instruments that are envisaged in EU legislation.
3
The ECB strengthened its role in macroprudential policy in 2016 and also took action to improve
transparency – the Governing Council published its first macroprudential statement in December
2016.  Besides the risks in some countries’ real estate sectors, we noted that cyclical systemic
risks  in  the  euro  area  remained  contained  and,  therefore,  a  broad-based  increase  in
countercyclical capital buffers in the euro area was not warranted. This view was in line with the
decisions of the national authorities, with whom we enjoyed excellent cooperation over the past
year. Transparency in the macroprudential policy domain was also enhanced by the launch of
the new biannual ECB Macroprudential Bulletin in March 2016.
Our 2016 Annual Report also focuses on the actions necessary to overcome the legacy of the
crisis in the banking sector. Decisive action is needed at the sectoral, national and European
levels.
First, banks need to continue adjusting their business models to better cope with the low interest
rate  environment.  As  we  show  in  a  dedicated  analysis  contained  in  the  Report,  the  optimal
strategy is likely to depend on each bank’s core characteristics. Adjustments may include cross-
border mergers and acquisitions where they allow efficiency gains.
4
Second, significant effort is needed to solve the problem of non-performing loans (NPLs). The
extent  and  macroprudential  nature  of  the  problem  calls  for  a  comprehensive  and  coordinated
response at EU level. While actions should be taken by stakeholders at the national level, these
should  be  harmonised  in  a  European  blueprint  for  asset  management  companies  (AMCs),
among the strategies to reduce the stock of NPLs on banks’ balance sheets. The issue is also
5
being addressed as a matter of priority from a microprudential perspective.
Further enhancing the European financial framework
Turning now to financial regulation, the ECB is involved in shaping the regulatory framework at
the international and European levels to ensure that it takes appropriate account of both macro-
and microprudential considerations.
In  2016,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  agreed  on  several  reforms,
including the treatment of interest rate risk in the banking book, revisions to the securitisation
framework, and a standard for the regulatory capital treatment of banks’ investments in total loss-
absorbing capacity. It also issued public consultations on the regulatory treatment of accounting
provisions and Pillar 3 disclosure requirements.
As part of the process to finalise the Basel III package, the Group of Governors and Heads of
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Supervision  (GHoS),  the  oversight  body  of  the  BCBS,  set  out  a  work  programme  for  the
Committee to finalise its work to reduce excessive risk weight variability in risk-weighted assets,
as  well  as  the  calibration  of  the  leverage  ratio.  In  January  2017,  the  GHoS  welcomed  the
progress made by the BCBS towards completing the post-crisis reforms. While more time is
needed to finalise the reforms, the work is expected to be completed in the near future.
It is crucial that we complete the post-crisis reform package and do not undo the progress made
in recent years. The ECB will continue to support work at the international level to achieve an
appropriate regulatory framework that establishes a level playing field.
Over the last four years, we have also made significant progress at the European level, namely
with  the  establishment  of  the  banking  union. At  this  stage,  it  is  crucial  to  take  the  remaining
additional steps which are necessary to complete it. The ECB has helped, and will continue to
help, to bring forward the two processes of risk reduction and risk sharing, within its mandate as
a central bank and supervisor.
In  this  context,  accelerating  the  work  on  creating  a  European  deposit  insurance  scheme  is
essential, as is introducing a common backstop for the Single Resolution Fund. In parallel, the
European Commission’s package reviewing the current EU regulatory framework for banks is
moving  in  the  right  direction  in  terms  of  risk  reduction  measures.  It  is  expected  to  make  a
significant  contribution  to  strengthening  banking  regulation,  supervision  and  resolution,  even  if
there are some areas for improvement.
These achievements in the regulatory framework for banks will be accompanied by regulatory
initiatives for financial markets and financial infrastructures, in order to cope with the changing
landscape in the euro area financial system.
From this perspective, acting decisively to build a fully fledged capital markets union (CMU) is a
priority for the EU as whole, and also for the ECB. A CMU with deeper, more integrated and well-
supervised capital markets can increase risk sharing via cross-border investment, contribute to
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  and  ultimately  facilitate  the  transmission  of  monetary
policy in the euro area.
It  is  also  important  to  establish  the  legal  basis  for  macroprudential  tools  that  can  be  used  to
address  risks  to  financial  stability  that  emerge  from  outside  the  banking  sector,  as  well  as  to
include a macroprudential perspective in the regulation of non-bank financial institutions across
the EU.
Greater financial risk sharing, diversification and heightened competition between banks and non-
banks, and across borders, bring material economic benefits. Indeed, capital markets can be an
important complement to banks when it comes to providing finance to the economy. At the same
time, such developments inevitably call for heightened financial stability surveillance outside the
banking system perimeter and the appropriate policy toolkit to address related risks.
Conclusions
Let me conclude.
The  euro  area  economy  demonstrated  substantial  resilience  in  2016.  The  recovery  is
progressing and is now gaining momentum. Our monetary policy stance is appropriate and a
reassessment is not warranted at this stage. However, we continue to stand ready to react to
downside  shocks.  While  cyclical  conditions  have  improved,  we  still  need  to  address,  without
delay, the legacy of the crisis and reinforce the structural underpinnings of our Union.
Tomorrow would have been the 97th birthday of a former President of the European Parliament,
Emilio  Colombo.  Let  me  recall  his  words  of  almost  40  years  ago,  which  have  particular
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
resonance now, when one Member State has given notice of its intention to leave the Union:
We have no reason for complacency about the present state of Europe in spite of the efforts we
have made. […] as Europeans we can make a real impact when we manage to find the right joint
6
solutions to the problems of our time.
These  words  remind  us  of  the  importance  of  our  responsibility  as  a  Union  to  steadily  strive,
together, towards achieving better economic outcomes for our citizens.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See Presentation of the ECB Annual Report 2015 to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the
European Parliament – Introductory remarks by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, Brussels, 7 April
2016
In March 2016, the ECB decided on a powerful set of monetary policy measures. They included lowering the key
ECB interest rates, expanding the asset purchase programme, including corporate bonds in the programme,
and creating a new medium-term liquidity facility to support bank lending.
See the Governing Council statement on macroprudential policies from 15 December 2016
See  the  box  entitled  “Diversity  of  banks’  business  models  and  adjustment  to  the  low  interest  rate
environment”, Annual Report 2016, ECB, 2017.
See Presentation  of  the  ECB Annual  Report  on  supervisory  activities  2016  to  the  European  Parliament’s
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee – Introductory statement by Danièle Nouy, Chair of the Supervisory
Board of the ECB, Brussels, 23 March 2017
“The decisions facing Europe”, Second Jean Monnet Lecture by the President of the European Parliament,
Emilio Colombo, Florence, 9 November 1978
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
