William  C  Dudley:  Transcript  of  Fireside  Chat  at  York  College  in
Queens
Transcript of a discussion between Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Dr Olajide Oladipo, Professor and Chair of the
Business and Economics Department, during the Fireside Chat at York College in Queens, New
York City, 24 March 2017.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
 President Dudley, can you please share with us the purpose of your trip here today to Queens?
President Dudley:
So,  there  are  12  Federal  Reserve  Banks  around  the  United  States,  and  one  of  them  is  the
Federal Reserve Bank in New York that sits downtown in Manhattan, and near Wall Street. Our
Second  District  consists  of  New  York,  Northern  New  Jersey,  Fairfield  County,  Connecticut,
Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. Haven’t gotten to the Virgin Islands yet.
As part of our Mission, we want to represent the communities in our District, and so four times a
year, I get on the road, and I go out to visit people, to find out what’s really happening on the
ground. It’s meeting with businesses, meeting with people from educational institutions, going to
visit manufacturing facilities, community development organizations.
It’s  really  designed  to  do  two  things.  One,  explain  sort  of  a  little  bit  of  what  we  do  –  like  for
example there, in the introduction, talking about this BIS. What the heck is the BIS?  Well, BIS is
a bank for central banks that sits in Basel, Switzerland.  In fact, what did I do last weekend? 
Well, I was in Basel, Switzerland, at the BIS. This is where central bankers get together from
across the world, exchange information with one another.
So,  the  first  thing  is  to  explain  ourselves  to  people  in  the  community.  Because  the  Federal
Reserve is pretty mysterious in terms of – when I went to grad school even, I wasn’t really sure
again what the Federal Reserve was. Had to be explained to me.
The second thing we do in the community, and this is the more important piece, is to really learn
what’s going on, on the ground, in the community. What’s happening in terms of businesses –
are they successful? If they’re having trouble, what are the reasons for the trouble? Do they have
access  to  the  credit?  Can  they  find  people  with  the  job  skills  they  need  to  support  their
businesses?    What  are  the  challenges  in  the  community,  in  terms  of  education,  in  terms  of
transportation?
Queens, one of the issues is that if you’re not located near a subway line, it’s pretty hard to get
around in Queens, and that has pretty significant implications for people’s ability to get to and
from work, which is important in terms of economic development.
Another issue is the affordability of housing. Queens is actually doing quite well. If you look at the
employment growth in Queens over the last few years, it’s been very strong. Just like New York
City as a whole. But one of the consequences of economic development can be gentrification,
where richer people move in and they make housing less affordable for people who have been
living here for a much longer period of time.
So, all these type of issues that we talk about when we visit. And oftentimes I get some personal
stories and anecdotes that are actually pretty valuable to me in terms of how I think about how
the economy is operating and what we need to do as the Federal Reserve in terms of how we
 1 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
set monetary policy.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank  you.  The  economy  is  coming  out  of  a  serious  crisis  that  started  in  2008.  From  your
perspective, where do you see the greatest growth in the economy right now?
President Dudley:
Well,  the  good  news  is  the  economy  is  actually  in  a  pretty  good  place  right  now.  Not  for
everybody, but if you think about the unemployment rate today, it’s 4.7%, which is pretty close to
what we think is full employment. You could probably push that unemployment rate even lower,
but if you did, you’d probably start to have an inflation problem. So, that would not be something
that you could sustain over the longer term. The Federal Reserve has two missions: maximum
sustainable employment and price stability. And so we’re trying to find that balance. Right now
we’re doing pretty well. We’re pretty close to both our objectives. In fact, if you could tell me that
we could just stay here for the next 20 or 30 years, I would be very happy with that.
So,  things  are  going  pretty  well.  What’s  driving  the  economy?  I  think  in  the  local  economy  in
Queens, it’s very dependent on transportation, very high level of transportation employment, in
part because of La Guardia and JFK. Those industries are doing quite well.
Tourism is important to this region, so New York City has really benefited from tourism. And the
fact that people want to live in cities now as opposed to live in suburbs or more rural areas is
also helping a lot.
In terms of actual employment in this area, you have the transportation component.  Healthcare
is also very, very important. A lot of uncertainties on that front. Maybe we’ll get some resolution of
some of those uncertainties today. Also business and professional services is a very important
driver of growth in this area.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank you. From your perspective, which sector do you think is actually propelling the growth?
President Dudley:
Well, I think – one thing that’s been really good for New York City over the last few years, it’s
become much more diversified as an economy. In the old days, New York City was sort of rise
and fall, depending on how the financial services industry was doing, especially the securities
industry. And what’s happened in the last few years is the securities industry employment has
been pretty flat. And the securities industry, while they’re making some money, it’s not at all as
profitable as it was back in the days of 2005, 2006, before the great financial crisis. Now that
profitability was a little bit ephemeral because it was not built on a strong foundation.
Since  then,  the  city  I  think  has  become  a  lot  more  diversified.  Tourism  has  become  more
important. Technology – the technology sector really is about the same size now as the financial
services sector. We still see pretty good manufacturing. The hollowing out of the city in terms of
manufacturing seems to be over. In fact, manufacturing employment is actually doing pretty well
in the city, in certain parts of Queens. It’s actually quite supportive.
So, in general, it’s a pretty positive story. The city still faces challenges. I think one of the most
significant  ones  is  going  to  be:  how  does  the  change  in  the  conversation  about  trade  and
immigration affect people’s willingness to visit New York City?
I think there is some prospect that international tourism to New York could decline over the next
few years, and that would be something that would hurt the hospitality industry in New York City.
 2 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, that’s something that we’re going to have to keep a close eye on.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank  you.  The  Dodd-Frank  Act,  which  is  often  referred  to  as  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act, placed regulations on the financial industry. I wanted to
ask you, do you think the removal of the Dodd-Frank Act would be productive for the economy?
And if so, why?
President Dudley:
So removal of the Dodd-Frank Act be productive for the economy? I’m going to give you a little bit
more nuanced answer. I don’t think it’s a question of either the Dodd-Frank Act or no Dodd-Frank
Act.  I  certainly  wouldn’t  want  to  go  back  to  the  world  we  were  in  2006,  2007,  because  that
financial system led to the worst financial crisis that we’ve had since the Great Depression, and
as  you  know  the  economy  suffered  greatly.  The  unemployment  rate  climbed  over  10%.  So
clearly, we don’t want to go back to that.
But  at  the  same  time,  is  the  Dodd-Frank Act  as  it  exists  today  perfect?  I  doubt  it.  What  I  tell
people is we really want to be careful not to throw the baby out with the bathwater. What we want
is a system where we have banks with adequate capital, adequate liquidity – number one – so
the probability of a large bank failing is a lot lower today than it was back in 2006 and 2007.
Number two, we want a system where if a large bank were to get into difficulty, we have the
ability to resolve it in a way that it doesn’t threaten to take down the rest of the financial system.
The  Federal  Reserve  intervened  in  a  very  unusual  and  aggressive  way  in  2008  because  the
failure of a large financial institution was threatening to basically push the U.S. economy into a
Great Depression. We didn’t do it because we wanted to save the institution. We did it because
we wanted to save the economy. We don’t want to be in that situation again. So we need to have
a regime in place, so if a large institution were to fail, it doesn’t threaten to take down the rest of
the financial system.
And the third thing we need is we need to a financial system that’s robust and resilient to bad
economies, to financial stress. One of the things that the Dodd-Frank Act does that I think is
important  is  it  mandates  central  clearing  of  derivatives  activity.  Now  derivatives  activities  are
things where corporations exchange interest rate payments, fixed income interest rate payments
for floating interest rate payments, et cetera. During the pre-Dodd-Frank era, most of these were
firm-to-firm. Financial institution to financial institution. Now they’re all cleared centrally. This is a
tremendous innovation because it reduces the amount of risk in the financial system. The Dodd-
Frank  Act  has  one  of  its  chapters  or  titles  all  dedicated  to  the  clearing  of  over-the-counter
derivatives.
And  finally,  we  have  some  entities  called  financial  market  infrastructures.  What  is  a  financial
market infrastructure? So, let’s say I buy a stock, and then that stock has to be transferred to me
through some entity that actually clears and settles that stock transaction. The entity that actually
manages that stock transaction – you selling stock to me, or me selling stock to you – that’s a
financial market utility. They have to be robust as well. And one of the things the Dodd-Frank Act
does is it allows the Federal Reserve to have some oversight capacity to make sure that those
financial market utilities are sound.
So,  there  are  definitely  things  that  could  be  changed.  I  think  you  could  definitely  relax  the
regulatory burden on smaller banking organizations because I don’t think they pose a systemic
threat to the U.S. financial system. I think you could take a look at certain regulations like the
Volcker Rule to see if they could be administered in a less aggressive way.
 3 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, it’s not in my mind a question of Dodd-Frank or no-Dodd-Frank. I think it’s a question of better
financial reform legislation.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank you. Just like you said, the economy is picking up now, and at the same time, we are
experiencing a kind of upward trend in interest rates. I wanted to ask you, do you think the current
movement  in    interest  rates  is  politically-driven?  If  not,  what  is  the  business  reason  for  the
upward movement?
President Dudley:
Well, if I said it was politically-driven, that would be an unbelievable news story. Because we try
to stay as apolitical as possible and set monetary policy, not based on the political winds and
fortunes of the different political parties, but what we think is appropriate to keep the economy on
an even-keel and to achieve our goals of maximum sustainable employment in the context of
price stability. So, we’re basically trying to set the level of interest rates in a way that will keep the
economy close to our objective of full employment, with relatively stable price. It’s 2% inflation.
That’s sort of where we are right now. So, why are we raising interest rates a little bit?  First of
all, I would point out that the interest rate rise that we’ve had in place has been extraordinarily
gradual. The short-term interest rates that the Federal Reserve sets, the federal funds rate, that
range is three-quarters of a percent to 1%. If you lived like I did through the 1970s and ‘80s, you
realize that that’s an extraordinarily low level of interest rates.
Monetary  policy  over  the  last  few  years  has  been  what  we  think  is  accommodative.  In  other
words, it’s been supporting economic activity. As we get closer to full employment, we want to
make  monetary  policy  a  little  bit  less  accommodative  because  if  monetary  policy  were  too
accommodative, we would actually get an inflation problem over time. Then the Federal Reserve
would have to slam on the brakes, we’d have a recession, people would be thrown out of work.
Not a good situation.
So, the idea is to have an economy that moves in a smooth way. And so by taking out a little bit
of that accommodation, moving up interest rates just a little bit, we think it’s more likely that we’ll
achieve a soft landing and keep the economy about where it is today in terms of employment.
So, it’s a delicate adjustment. It’s not something that’s very harsh. We think it’s appropriate and
necessary. But I think the economy will be able to adjust to this just fine.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank  you.  Sometime  ago,  I  think  that  was  2012,  2013,  I  took  some  students  to  the  Federal
Reserve Bank. And you do have annual events at the Fed which I attend every year, often in
March. A question that came to mind is that the students were very excited when they went to the
Federal Reserve Bank. The question I wanted to ask you is what are the skills required to work at
the Fed?
President Dudley:
Well, there’s lots of different parts of the Federal Reserve. There isn’t one particular skill. There’s
a lot of economists because we think about how the economy is working and operating and the
conduct of monetary policy. There’s a lot of people that work on overseeing banks. Supervision is
one of our biggest groups. We have a lot of bank supervisors who typically get degrees in public
policy or business, and come and work at the Federal Reserve and become bank examiners.
We have a lot of people in the Markets Group, which I ran prior to becoming President of the
Bank. We monitor the markets. We talk to market participants to understand what’s going on.
 4 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
We execute monetary policy on behalf of the Federal Reserve System.  We have people that are
in Operational Risk, who assess risk. We have people who manage custody accounts for foreign
and central banks. We have about $3 trillion of foreign central bank assets in custody at the New
York Fed.
We have the largest holdings of gold in the world in the vault of the New York Fed, so someone
has  to  protect  that.  We  have  a  number  of  people  in  the  Protection  and  Law  Enforcement
Services that make sure that the gold is safe regardless of what one of the Die Hard movies
implied, that it could be robbed pretty easily. That’s not the case.
When I became the President of the Bank, I actually rented out the Die Hard movie because I
wanted to see if it was plausible – the way they stole the gold from the New York Fed, and it
turned out that they sort of glossed over that. There was apparently supposedly a subway line
that was really close to the gold vault, and so they just had to punch a little hole in the subway
tunnel and the gold vault was right there. But it doesn’t really actually work that way. So sorry.
My point is, there’s a lot of different activities that we do. Obviously in education, Bachelor’s or
Master’s, is sort of I think probably a good place to start. The more analytical skills you can get in
terms of math and economics and business – those are the skills that are very attractive to us.
Training and public policy because that’s what we do, is very important.
It’s a great place to work. The typical New York Fed employee joins the Bank and says I’m going
to be here two, three years. And then the next stop I ask them how long have you been here? “25,
30 years.”  Which I think means that it has – it’s a good place to work. Reasonable pay, good
benefits  But mainly, a great culture. People are very committed to what we do.  People have a
strong sense of mission and integrity.
I tell people that one of the great things about working at the New York Fed is there’s no moral
ambiguity at any day about why I’m going to work. We’re there to serve the public interest, and
that’s a nice thing to think about every day when you go to the office.  You don’t have to think
about, well, why am I doing this exactly?  Well, we’re trying to serve the public interest, keep the
economy on an even-keel, and execute on our mission as the New York Fed.
The  New  York  Fed  is  a  little  different  than  the  other  Reserve  Banks  because  we’re  really  the
operational arm of the Federal Reserve System for many, many different things. So, it’s sort of
interesting.    We  do  policy,  and  we  do  operations.  Very  unlike  most  central  banks  around  the
world,  where  the  policy  and  operations  are  all  in  headquarters  down  in  Washington.  In  the
Federal Reserve it’s split, with the New York Fed doing a lot of the operational activities of the
Federal Reserve System. It’s a pretty cool place. Check us out!
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
I will surely do. The Federal Reserve has been around since 1913. How would you compare the
1929 Depression to that of 2008?
President Dudley:
Well, very different outcome. In 1929, the stock market crash led to a widespread banking panic,
where people basically tried to get their money out of banks because they were afraid the banks
were  going  to  fail. And  of  course  in  the  process  of  trying  to  pull  all  those  deposits  out  of  the
banks, the banks didn’t have enough money, so a lot of banks actually did fail. And in fact, in
1933, FDR declared a national banking holiday where all the banks were closed for a period of
time.
Fortunately, we didn’t get to that point during this crisis. The Federal Reserve, and many other
people around the world, pulled out all the stops to avoid the collapse of the banking system, of
 5 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
the financial system, and as a consequence, we had a bad recession – worst recession that
we’ve  had  since  in  the  post-WWII  period,  but  far  short  of  what  happened  in  the  Great
Depression.
The Great Depression, the unemployment rate I think climbed above 20%. The price level, the
level  of  prices  dropped  by  about  I  think  a  third.  So  it  was  a  really  absolutely  horrendous
experience. If you talk to someone like my mother, my mom’s 94 years old, she was a relatively
young girl during the Depression. She still remembers and talks about it, just incredibly searing.
People were out of work for really until WWII. The Crash started in 1929, the U.S. economy really
didn’t get back to close to full employment, only in the 1940s, and because of WWII.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank you.
President Dudley:
So this time was quite a bit different, thank God.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
I’m sure that everybody here invests. And they are ... students in economics and finance. We talk
about investment. I wanted to shed light or your perspective on how the fixed income investor
performed in the last eight years, please.
President Dudley:
Well, the fixed income market has been a good place to be because, basically, interest rates 
have been generally coming down, if you look at long-term bond yields. So, we would like to look
at the government debt issue by the U.S. Treasury. Ten-year government debt is trading today
about 2.4% which is pretty low, and credit spreads have narrowed over that period. So, fixed
income has been a pretty good place to be invested in over the last 8 years.
Same thing with U.S. equity market, though, for that matter. If you bought the U.S. equity market
at the very bottom in 2009, it’s more than tripled in price since then. As an investor, you’ve done
pretty well if you’ve stayed invested through that entire period.
Now,  I  would  expect  that  fixed  income  investing  is  going  to  be  less  attractive  going  forward
because interest rates still are at a very, very low level. So, some of the gains that people have
seen in fixed income have been really prices going up because interest rates were declining. And
I  think  that  you’re  probably  not  going  to  see  prices  going  up  a  lot  because  interest  rates  are
declining going forward.
So I would guess most likely, most people think that short-term interest rates will gradually rise
over  the  next  couple  of  years.  That  certainly  is  what  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
expects,  and  as  that  happens  people  generally  expect  that  longer-term  interest  rates  will
eventually rise. And so that means that there will probably be a little bit less good returns in the
fixed income market compared to the last 8 years.
We’ve had a bull market in fixed income really going back to 1982. My first house I ever bought,
mortgage rates at the time were 17%. They’re now around 4%. I got financing from the seller. I
got a 12% mortgage. I thought it was a really good deal. So now mortgage rates are around 4%.
We’ve had a very, very long bull market in fixed income. People are debating now whether this is
the end of that bull market or it’s going to go on for a little bit further. So, we’ll see.
  6 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank  you.  If  you  look  at  the  global  economy,  it’s  looking  buoyant  now.  Also  the  national
economy,  which  is  the  United  States  economy,  is  looking  buoyant  now.  I  wanted  to  ask  you,
looking at the United States, which region do you think is growing at the moment?
President Dudley:
I would answer that question, which region is growing at the moment, in two ways. Regionally, in
terms of the geography of the United States, it’s really the South and West, and this has been a
pattern  for  a  long  time,  that  there  has  been  sort  of  a  migration  to  –  when  they  invented
air conditioning, they made the South a lot more attractive to people. And so the South and West
have been growing faster than the country as a whole for a very long time.
Now there are some pockets of weakness there because we had a big collapse in energy prices,
so some of the areas in the South and West that are very dependent on the energy sector are
probably a little bit less robust. So, that’s the first way I would describe it.
The second way I would describe it is rural/suburban/urban. There’s been a tremendous shift in
people’s enthusiasm for living in big cities, and that’s really one reason why New York City is
doing so well because people basically want to live in the big cities, especially younger people.
And  so  you’re  seeing  the  cities,  especially  the  big  cities,  outperform  the  smaller  cities  and
outperform  the  rural  areas.  New  York  City  has  actually  been  very  much  a  beneficiary  of  this,
relative to many other parts of the country.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank you.  I’m sure now that we may have questions from the audience. To my right we have –
a  stand  there.    And  to  my  left,  we  have  another.    If  you  have  questions,  please,  students,
colleagues?  It’s time for Q&A. If you have any questions, please.
Audience Member:
Good morning, and welcome to your college. Although the Die Hard scenario may not work in
reality,  cybercrime  has  been  a  greater  threat  to  the  financial  system.  And  recently,  it  was
reported that North Korea was able to illegally transfer monies from a Bangladesh account at the
Fed to an account at the Philippines. What’s being done to protect funds that are held not only at
the Fed but also at other financial institutions?
President Dudley:
Well, that’s a good question. Cybersecurity is a really important activity for us at the Fed. We
want to make sure that not only is the Federal Reserve well-protected but also the banks that we
supervise are also well-protected against cyber-risk.
This is a particularly hard risk to evaluate on any given day because we’re trying to improve our
defenses,  but  the  bad  guys  are  also  improving  their  capabilities.  So,  we  do  a  lot  of  different
activities within the bank to make sure that we’re secure from a cyber-perspective. For example,
we phish our employees, and we send them emails that sort of suggest that if you’ll click on this,
and if you click on this you get a message from our Information Technology Department that
you’ve been phished and you learn that you have to be a lot more careful about what you actually
click on. That’s important because a threat can both come from outside, but it can also come
from within.
The  other  thing  we’ve  done  is  we’re  spending  a  lot  of  time  internationally  to  try  to  make  the
financial system safer by making sure that the payment executer, their systems are secure. So,
 7 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
think  of  that  as  Bangladesh.  That  the  messenger,  who  the  person  is  who’s  transmitting  the
payment,  this  is  SWIFT,  is  secure. And  the  receiver.    So  in  this  case,  the  New  York  Fed  is
secure.  That goes for anybody who is executing payments.  It doesn’t have to be Bangladesh,
through the SWIFT, to the New York Fed. It’s anybody executing a payment through any payment
medium to any receiver.
The  thing  that  we’re  trying  to  work  on  internationally  is  to  try  to  make  sure  that  everyone
understands their responsibilities in that chain. So, it’s really important that the person executing
the payment, that their facilities are secured.
What seemed to be the case in the Bangladesh situation was their facilities were not secured, so
someone executed a payment that looked completely authentic through the SWIFT pipes to the
New  York  Fed.  It  was  an  authentic  payment  –  it  looked  like  an  authentic  payment  when  we
executed on some of those payments – not all of those payments.
So, we need to make sure that that first leg is buttoned up, and also we need to make sure that
everyone understands their responsibility along that chain.
So, this is something that we take very seriously. We’re working also with the institutions that we
interact  with.  One  of  the  things  that  the  Federal  Reserve  runs  –  the  New  York  Fed  runs  –  is
called FedWire, so if you have to wire money, if someone needs the money immediately, you
can  wire  that  through  a  New  York  clearinghouse  in  the  CHIPS  system,  or  you  can  wire  that
through FedWire. It’s really important that – and FedWire interacts with lots of institutions around
the country. We need to make sure that all those institutions that interact with FedWire also have
their systems secured.
So, it’s a big issue. We spend a lot of resources on it. We’re going to continue to spend a lot of
resources on it. We take it very seriously.
Audience Member:
We  welcome  you  to  Jamaica.  I’d  just  like  to  ask,  there  have  been  some  other  regulatory
measures taken over the past couple of decades. As I understand it, they repealed the Glass-
Steagall Act and also passed the Sarbanes-Oxley laws. Would you say that these things had any
effect  on  the  2008  recession,  or  has  Congress  been  more  responsible  than  not  for  the
recession?
President Dudley:
I  think  that  –  well,  I  think  Sarbanes-Oxley  is  actually  –  was  basically  about  good  financial
reporting, good financial accounting. Accountability of the people at the top of the house for all the
financial records and statements. The Federal Reserve is not subject by law to Sarbanes-Oxley,
but we actually follow Sarbanes-Oxley nevertheless. We think it’s good governance. So, I would
say  Sarbanes-Oxley  generally  makes  the  system  safer  because  it  makes  it  much  harder  for
people to – it really deters fraud and manipulation of financial accounts in a way that I think is
very, very positive.
The second part was?
Audience Member:
Glass-Steagall?
President Dudley:
Glass-Steagall.  Well,  I  think  that  –  the  Glass-Steagall Act  was  an  act  that  was  passed  in  the
1930s  that  basically  said  that  you  could  either  be  in  commercial  banking  or  you  could  be  in
 8 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
investment  banking.  You  couldn’t  be  in  both. And  so  this  is  an  act  that  basically  forced  the
Morgan Company to separate into Morgan Stanley and J.P. Morgan. Now what happened was
many years later in the 1980s, I actually was involved with this because I was working at J.P.
Morgan at the time, people started to say, “Look, if I’m a big commercial bank like J.P. Morgan,
I’m  losing  all  my  customers  who  are  going  to  the  securities  market.  I  need  to  follow  my
customers,  but  I  can’t  because  of  Glass-Steagall.” And  they  found  that  there  was  a  loophole,
Section  20  of  the  Glass-Steagall  Act  basically  said  that  you  can’t  be  principally-engaged  in
securities  activities.  So,  it  meant  that  you  could  be  engaged  but  just  as  long  as  it  wasn’t
principally-engaged. And so this is a little loophole that a number of firms managed to exploit. And
so they actually found a way to get into some securities activities, and then Glass-Steagall Act a
number of years later was actually formally repealed because the firms were already, essentially,
in the business.
Now my own personal view is that I don’t think the Glass-Steagall Act had much to do with the
great financial crisis. If you look at the firms that got into great difficulty, at the earliest stages –
Bear  Stearns  and  Lehman  Brothers, AIG  –  they  really  had  nothing  to  do  with  Glass-Steagall
because  they  really  weren’t  banks  and  securities  firms.  They  were  securities  firms  and
insurance companies. My own view is that the Glass-Steagall Act was not a major – the repeal of
the  Glass-Steagall Act  was  not  a  major  factor  behind  the  Great  Recession  and  the  financial
crisis.
Now this is something that people probably would debate. Other people might have somewhat
different views. You could repeal the Glass-Steagall Act again. I think it would obviously require a
lot of financial corporate restructuring because there are a lot of firms in the U.S. that are in both
the securities business and the commercial banking business today. I think that there are links
between those two businesses. It probably helps those firms, satisfy the demands of their large
corporate clients more easily than if you had to separate them into separate entities. But you
could do it.
One thing I would say if you do do it, you better have a mechanism in place to make sure that
those large securities firms that are left actually are well-regulated, well-capitalized, have enough
liquidity, and have access to a lender of last-resort.
One of the problems that we had in the financial crisis is there wasn’t a good method to lend to
securities firms. By law, the Federal Reserve discount window – this is the facility that we have
open to commercial banks – were not allowed to have that discount window open to securities
firms.
So,  in  the  crisis,  we  had  to  do  extraordinary  lending  activities  to  securities  firms.  We  need  a
better lender of last resort backstop for securities firms.
If  you  decide  to  repeal  Glass-Steagall  and  separate  commercial  banks  from  securities  firms,
that’s not something that I would recommend, but if you were to do that, make sure you have a
way  of  backstopping  the  securities  industry,  too,  so  if  a  big  securities  firm  gets  in  trouble  it
doesn’t threaten the entire financial system.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank you.  I’ll be expecting questions from students, too.
Audience Member:
Not a student.
President Dudley:
 9 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
But you’re a student of something, right?
Audience Member:
My concern is MWBEs. I feel that the racist element within our capitalization has not allowed us
to participate in the economy on an equal level by having access to capital. The government’s
asking  for  30%  on  major  projects.  For  example,  at  LaGuardia,  we  have  a  $5  billion  project.
Contracts  to  facilitate  that  will  probably  be  too  high  for  many  minority  and  women-owned
businesses. Therefore, if we don’t have access to capital, we won’t even be allowed to bid on
that  work.  And  that’s  when  fraud  comes  in,  when  a  major  contractor  proposes  to  a  small
contractor, “I’ll help you out if you bid, give you give me a number on this contract.”
If we had access to capital, we then bid. I’d like you to take a look at what the New York State
Department of School Construction Authorities are doing. They worked out a system that allows
us to bid on major contracts. If you took a look at that, because we need some ingenious new
ways of financing. We don’t have a black bank per se. There were 94 black banks across this
country,  now  there’s  only  23.  Some  of  the  banks  that’s  going  out  of  business,  I  don’t  think  is
kosher, but something has to be done to allow us to participate in the marketplace.
On your material, you have listed some organizations within the minority community that you deal
with.  I’d  like  to  recommend  some  additional  organizations.  For  example,  the  ones  that  are
primarily interested in the flow of contracts and development. I’m not in a prime area of what’s
going  on  today.  In  addition,  for  example,  we  have  here  at  York  College  one  of  the  best  small
business development sectors.  They’re number one in the state a couple of times.
President Dudley:
I agree with your concern. Is there a question?
 
Audience Member:
Yes, what can you do to set up financial resources for minority and women-owned businesses to
become  involved  in  the  economy?  Whether  that’s  establishing  a  bank  –  we’ve  asked  the
controller to control this, let him set up a funding source for us using pension funds, and there’s a
way to do that, if you look at it. But we need you to be an advocate for us in that area, but help us
come up with an ingenious idea for how we can develop access to capital.
President Dudley:
Well, I certainly agree with the importance of access to capital, and I certainly agree with you in
the  importance  of  having  minority  work  enterprises  have  the  ability  to  participate  in  economic
development and bidding on contracts. We don’t have the legal authority to do anything direct, but
we have a lot of convening authority. One thing that we do do is we do continuing workshops,
conferences, symposiums. We’ve had a number of things with small businesses on how small
businesses can get access to credit, how small businesses can figure out how to export their
goods and services.
And so this is something that for you to talk to our regional development people on how we could
be helpful. Because we definitely think this is an important issue, and we definitely want to be
helpful and use the resources we have, both in terms of research and our convening power, to
try to take this forward. So, let’s have a conversation.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Next question please. I’m still expecting a student.
 
10 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
President Dudley:
Good morning. My question will be in the form of appeal. This is for small homeowners. Recently,
the  Fed  announced  about  increasing  the  interest  rate.  But  I  don’t  know  how  long  the  Federal
Open Markets Operations committee will actually sit for that. But what I’m appealing for is for that
period to be extended. We just came out from an economic recession. Thank God we didn’t get
to  the  depression  part  of  that  business  cycle.  Many  homeowners  basically,  particularly  small
homeowners,  they  are  struggling  to  fix  their  credits. And  because  their  credit  scores  are  so
terrible, they cannot refinance, and therefore they are locked in with high interest rates – we are
talking about thousands and thousands of dollars. Banks are making money off them because
they cannot refinance.
If you go ahead and increase that interest rates when they are still struggling to pay what they
have  now,  I  think  many  will  lose  their  homes.  So,  my  appeal  is  for  the  Fed  to  please,  let  the
current interest rates stay – give a little bit more room for small homeowners to fix their credit
scores so that they can refinance. Thank you.
President Dudley:
Well, first thing I would say is the level of interest rates are still pretty darn low. The federal fund
rate, that’s the rate we target, is three-quarters of a percent to 1%. And we’ve only raised interest
rates twice since the end of the Recession eight years ago. It’s important to recognize that the
trajectory has been very, very shallow because we are aware of some of the issues that you’re
raising and we’re trying to get the balance right.
End of the day, what are we trying to accomplish? We want to have an economy that can grow
for a long time. So, we want to keep the economy in balance growing at a rate that is sustainable
over the medium- to longer-run. What we’re trying to do is find that level of interest rates that’s
just right. Now we recognize that anytime that we change interest rates, it’s going to help some
people, and it’s going to hurt other people. So, on the other side of the story are all the people, like
my mom, who are savers and they’re unhappy. They’ve been unhappy for the last eight years
because interest rates have been so low. So, we’re trying to get that balance right.
I think we’ve been pretty cautious in terms of how we’ve been raising interest rates because of
some of the concerns that you raise. Janet Yellen, who’s the Chair of the Federal Reserve, has
talked about the headwinds that have been slowing down the U.S. economy.
One of those headwinds is exactly what you’re talking about, the fact that people are locked into
homes because their homes are either underwater, the value of the homes are less than the
value of their mortgages, or because their credit-rating was damaged during the Financial Crisis
because people lost their jobs, and so their credit-rating was impaired. And so that’s really the
reason why we’ve been so delicate and so slow in actually raising interest rates. It’s partly exactly
what you’re talking about.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank you.
Audience Member:
Good morning. Thank you for being here. One of the things that we’ve been looking at here in
Southeast Queens is the establishment of CDFIs, additional CDFIs to support the growth and the
access to capital of small businesses. Would you comment a little bit about what do you see as
the future of CDFIs going forward in this economic climate, and any suggestions that you would
have to support us in doing that? Thank you.
 11 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
President Dudley:
Well, I guess I sort of think of CDFIs as doing God’s work in some ways because the hardest
thing for someone with a really good idea and starting a small business is to get that initial bit of
capital  to  establish  a  track  record.  Banks,  as  you  know,  are  reluctant  to  lend  to  start up
businesses because the firms don’t have collateral to pledge against the loans, and they don’t
have a track record of experience. So CDFIs are really the group that can provide that lifeblood to
small business enterprises at the start-up stage.
It’s also very resource-intensive to lend to small businesses, so the economics don’t work very
well for a for-profit company. So, I’m a big fan of CDFIs. We think it’s really an important avenue,
especially in less developed areas where getting a small business well-established can create
local  jobs  which  can  create  a  virtuous  circle  in  terms  of  economic  development.  So,  this  is
something that we definitely want to encourage over time, and anything that we can do to be
helpful  –  we  try  to  partner  with  the  CFI  community  to  be  helpful,  in  terms  of  providing  data,
information. We have a lot of very detailed information about the local economies and we can be,
I think, helpful in actually providing some information and support to the CDFIs.
Audience Member:
Good morning. I want to thank you for coming here and sharing some information with us.  I have
two specific questions I wanted to ask. A lot of us, we’ve already talked about access to capital,
which is a huge thing.  For those who don’t know, Sen. Sanders is the ranking Democrat on the
Banking  Committee  for  New  York  State.  My  first  question  is  how  do  we  establish  a  better
relationship with your organization in an effort to – we can get this information that you have and
its resources on the grassroot level? And my second question is –
 
President Dudley:
All you have to do is give me your card afterwards.
Audience Member:
Oh, okay. My second question is we’ve done an assessment of the economic state of Southeast
Queens, Sen. Sanders’ office, and a majority of our residents here are considered banked and
under-banked. My question to you is a lot of ... especially for – we have a huge population of
Millennials, we’re looking to purchase homes in our area. A lot of us make under $50,000 and
probably have some problems with credit.
But  my  question  with  the  home  buyers  programs  is  there  a  way,  or  how  can  we  have  a
conversation  about  increasing  the  matching  funds  because  the  highest  that  the  rates  for  the
federal home buyers program is 4:1. And we want to talk about how we can get that to 10:1 so it
can help, it can match the demographics, economic demographics, of our community, so people
can start receiving in tangible resources like purchasing a home with the resources that they
have.
President Dudley:
I’m not an expert in the issue of how much money you need to match. I don’t think I can speak to
that directly. But clearly getting people the resources so that they can become homeowners in a
prudent way is a good thing. And what we saw in the financial crisis, in the run-up to the financial
crisis, is that we were giving credit to people in an imprudent way. I think as long as it can be
done in a prudent way, where people understand the responsibilities, have the income to pay on
their mortgages, I think it’s something that we definitely want to encourage.
 12 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, what I would suggest is give me your card, and I’ll give it to the right people in the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, and we’ll have a conversation and see what we can do. This is not
something that we could probably be involved in directly, as a funding provider. Legally, we don’t
have the authority.
The  Federal  Reserve  is  pretty  powerful  in  terms  of  monetary  policy.  But  our  mandate  is  also
pretty narrow in terms of what we’re allowed to do.
I remember during the financial crisis, people were coming in and saying, “you should do this,
you should do that, you should do that.”  And most of the things that they were suggesting that
we do were some things that were not actually allowed by the Federal Reserve Act that was
passed back in 1913. Come talk to us and we will see what we can do.
Audience Member:
Greetings, good morning to – or good afternoon to you and your guest. Now while it would be
interesting to speak of why the New York Fed and the Atlanta Fed are differing on their economic
forecasts, that might be interesting, but I want to speak to something far more local. Far more
local.
This community, and communities like this, were devastated, were ravaged – and I could use a
stronger word – during the financial crisis of 2008.  We’ve never recovered from this. The black
community lost approximately 50% of its wealth in four years. 50% of the wealth accumulated
from slavery till today lost in four years. No one, of course, was ever jailed for these things, no
one was ever – very little punishment, if anything, was done. I understand that while you may
want to do or feel strongly it’s not the purview of the Federal Reserve – I understand that.
Using your researchers at Liberty and other parts of your organization, I need to know what laws
that I can put on the books to protect communities like this. We’re about to go back into another
phase of exotic mortgage-lending, and I will humbly differ with you on Glass-Steagall, of course.
We’re  about  to  go  into  another  phase  of  exotic  lending.  They  call  it  exotic  lending.  We  call  it
predatory lending, and we pay for it. We can expect that again. What laws can I – what do we
need  to  put  on  the  books  to  protect  communities  like  this?  Liberty  and  other  organizations,
research  organizations,  that  you  guys  have  can  come  up  with  some  of  these  things.  I  look
forward to speaking with you later today.
President Dudley:
Okay. On this issue of predatory lending, I mean this is – I think you raised a very good point, and
this is something that we actually heard about small business lending when we were up I think in
the Bronx awhile back, where, basically, people have these come-ons to lend money to small
business, and it seems attractive on the surface, but it turns out that the actual rate of interest
that  people  are  paying  is  prohibitive  to  be  able  to  run  a  successful  business.  So,  I  think  the
predatory lending thing is a completely important issue that we do need to address. Obviously,
the Small Business Administration can play a role in this. I think we would certainly be interested
in having a conversation about it, because I think it is a really serious issue.
I mean one of the problems, just more broadly, is financial literacy in the United States. Part of
the reason that predatory lending can work is because people don’t really have a good idea –they
don’t know enough about the financial system, about the economy, about what’s a good value or
not. They just say, “What’s my payment going to be next month?” And if the payment is low, they
don’t look at the fine print about what the payment is going to be not next month, but a year from
now, or two years from now. And that’s how they get into a great deal of difficulty. So, I think not
just working on the predatory loans writ narrow, but also on the issue of financial literacy writ
large, I think colleges like this one can do a lot in making sure that when people graduate, they
 13 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
have a level of financial literacy that can help them navigate through the world.
The  number  of  scams  that  are  out  there  now  are  just  extraordinary.  Sometimes  people  will
pretend that they’re me and they send letterhead out supposedly from me telling people that if
they were to send a bunch of money to someone, the New York Fed would release a check for a
large amount of money, and people actually believe this. Now, my advice to people always is if
something seems too good to be true, it probably is. But unfortunately people offer these things,
and it’s really quite tragic, because the people who fall for these things often are people that are
not  so  sophisticated,  of  not  so  large  means,  and  they  can’t  afford  to  be  sending  money  to
fraudsters hoping that there might be a big prize from the Federal Reserve Bank in New York or
somewhere else down the road, which of course there’s not.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank you. I think we have – I just have time to take only one more question.
Audience Member:
Actually, the question I wanted to ask is for the students. Why do you refuse to ask questions?
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Somebody wants to ask now.  Thank you.
Audience Member:
How are you, sir? My question for you today is what are, or were, your daily habits or rituals that
helped you get to the level of success that you have today?
President Dudley:
Oooh, I can’t think of any rituals. Habits. I guess what I would say is I’ve always just tried to learn
more. So basically, it’s always about trying to find opportunity to, what I call, grow my human
capital. So, I think – my view of the way to success is find a job that’s interesting to you, because
you need that passion about what you do. If you don’t have passion about what you do, it’s not
going to feel like a lot of fun and you’re not going to do it with a great enthusiasm. So, if it’s not fun
and you’re not enthusiastic, you’re probably not going to do very well at it. So, the first thing is to
find something that you’re really liking, you’re enthusiastic about.
And two, basically find something where you can continue to learn. If you get into a job and you’ve
been in the job for a long time and you’re doing the same thing, you’ve sort of mastered the job,
then it’s probably time to move on.
I was at a large investment bank for many years – 20 years to be exact – and I decided at the end
of 2005 that I was going to retire because there was no job that they had that they would give me
that I wanted. And vice versa. There was no job I wanted that they would give me. So it was sort
of, I can keep doing my same job of being the Chief U.S. Economist and continue to do that for a
great many, many years. But at that point I felt I was no longer learning so much. I was bringing in
a little bit less enthusiasm to the job, and so, it was time for a change. I didn’t know what that
change was, and after I announced I was retiring, Tim Geithner, who was the President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time, called me up. First conversation was, he asked
me if I’d be an advisor at the New York Fed. I said, “Tim, that’s a great job. I really like you, I’d love
to work with you, but what do I do the 39 other hours of the week besides advise you?” And then
a couple of weeks or months later, I can’t remember exactly how long it was, he called up again
and said, “Well, how would you like to come to the New York Fed and run the Markets Group?”
Markets  Group  at  the  time  had  about  230  employees.  They  executed  monetary  policy  for  the
 14 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  I wasn’t sure I was going to have any time to talk to Tim
Geithner in that role. And so I said yes immediately.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
You have a question? Are you a student?
Audience Member:
Yes, I am.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
Thank you.
Audience Member:
I am a student.  Thank you so much for taking the time and speaking to us. My question was,
being from a younger generation, I’m definitely interested in investing, but what would be your
biggest piece of advice. Especially for us, the younger generation, with a limited budget, what
would you – how should we go about it?
President Dudley:
Well,  I  don’t  think  I’ve  ever  been  asked  for  investing  advice  before  now.  It’s  probably  not
appropriate for the Federal Reserve to give out investing advice. I think the first thing is you want
to get knowledgeable. I think the first thing is you want to get some knowledge before you start to
invest. And recognize that there are no quick, get-rich-quick schemes. If something seems to be
too good to be true, it probably is.
I remember when I got out of college, back in 1974, a long time ago, I decided – I had this very
small amount of money that my great-grandmother left to me, I think it was $2,000, and I decided
I was going to go out and invest. And I have to say, at the beginning, I didn’t really know what I
was doing. But I read a lot of books and I got really pretty well educated. There’s a lot of good
books in the market, and I think you can actually educate yourself. And if you do that I think then
you can start to gingerly start to invest. And you’ll learn as you go. It’s a long journey. I’ve learned
things as I invested over the years. Now I don’t do anything, but I’m sort of retired from investing
in my current role. But part of that I found that I kept learning it over a very long period of time. So,
it wasn’t like the journey of knowledge was over at any point in time. But first thing is to find a
really good book on investing, and read that. When I did it, I read probably five or ten different
books, and that gave me a good sort of basis for thinking about investing. But before investing,
make sure you have that $400 that you need in case an emergency comes up.
Audience Member:
Thank you.
President Dudley:
Thank you.
Dr. Olajide Oladipo:
With two good questions from our students, I think I’m comfortable now to bring the discussion to
an end.
 15 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
