Andreas  Dombret:  Can  we  manage  with  less?  The  debate  on
greater proportionality in regulation
Presentation  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, to board members of Baden-Württemberg savings banks, Stuttgart, 24 April 2017.
 1 Introduction
Dr Herrmann,
ladies and gentlemen
Banks and savings banks have come under fire in the media again recently. Referring to "shock
charges", "fee stings" and "piggish banks", it was as if the big daily newspapers were trying to
outdo each other with their headlines. The reason? More and more banks and savings banks are
introducing fees for services that were previously free – and they're becoming more open about it
too.
These new fee structures have come about as a result of the banks' quest to find new sources
of income. To a certain extent, it's entirely legitimate to do this – after all, banks need to make
money  somehow. And  we  consumers  need  to  get  used  to  the  idea  that  we'll  be  paying  for
banking services in future because as we've been told, the "culture of freebies" is coming to an
end.
The thing is, other sources of income that banks and savings banks could rely on in the past are
drying  up.  In  today's  low-interest-rate  environment,  interest  gains,  which  are  so  important  to
many institutions, are not as plentiful as they once were. And even after the period of low interest
rates finally comes to its long-awaited end, danger will still be lurking in the form of interest rate
risk.
But it's not just interest rates that are causing banks and savings banks headaches. Even though
most  institutions  would  probably  put  the  interest-rate  environment  at  the  top  of  their  list  of
pressing problems, I expect regulation would not be much further down.
Regulation is also the topic of my talk today – that's what I agreed with the organisers. Many
institutions  see  regulation  in  general,  and  specifically  the  reforms  of  the  past  few  years,  as  a
constraint  and  a  burden.  Today  I'd  like  to  explore  this  viewpoint  further  and  will  also  take  the
opportunity to explain why I'm convinced that we need the regulatory reforms anyway. I'd then like
to talk about whether or where I see potential to revise the regulatory framework and how these
changes could perhaps provide institutions with some degree of relief.
2 Regulation as a burden
But let's start with the idea of regulation as a burden. Why do we have strict rules and close
supervision if they seem to cause so much trouble for banks and savings banks? No one can
seriously argue with the fact that regulation and supervision present a challenge for institutions.
Rules are restrictive, and there are costs associated with obeying them. And this burden has
become even greater thanks to the reforms since the last financial crisis. Wouldn't it be better for
banks to focus all their energy on financing the real economy instead of wasting their time trying
to follow complicated rules?
After all, the services of banks and savings banks are crucial for a stable economic cycle, for
growth and prosperity. Especially in bank-based economies in Germany and Europe, businesses
and  consumers  depend  on  a  functioning  banking  system.  Banks  and  savings  banks  fund
investments,  they  manage  savings  and  deliver  important  services,  such  as  processing
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
payments.
But taking risks is also part of the banking business. And when you take risks, there's a chance
you might fail. Plus, we have to remember that bankers are only human – and humans make
mistakes. I guess given the increasing digitalisation in today's world, another point to add is that
algorithms are just that – algorithms – and algorithms can be wrong. This is why the area of IT
risks, in particular, is also worthy of so much attention these days.
The implications of a financial institution's failure are far-reaching – and I don't just mean for the
institution itself, but also for its investors, for the real economy, and for us all. The financial crisis,
which  is  just  about  to  reach  its  tenth  anniversary,  has  shown  us  that  the  failure  of  a  single
institution is on its own enough to trigger a chain reaction throughout the entire sector.
And that's why we need rules – even in the places they cause the most pain. Regulation and
supervision help to keep the financial system in order. Smart regulation ensures that financial
institutions can still pursue their business, but that they are appropriately protected against the
biggest  risks.  This  then  safeguards  the  economy,  consumers  and  the  financial  system  itself
against  turbulence.  Therefore,  the  reason  we  can't  give  banks  and  savings  banks  full  rein  is
because of the important part they play in the economic cycle.
Smart regulation and close supervision are also desirable from the banks' and savings banks'
point  of  view,  as  they  prevent  cost-intensive  threats  to  their  existence.  There  are  more
advantages for the sector as a whole. On the one hand, uniform rules ensure that the minimum
requirements  for  risk  identification  and  limitation  are  the  same  for  all  market  participants,
meaning  that  they  can  be  assessed  under  fair  conditions.  On  the  other  hand,  rules  establish
trust. Trust which banks and savings banks desperately need to do business. Trust which many
banks lost during the financial crisis. Trust which has since had to be painstakingly rebuilt.
3 Eliminate unnecessary burdens
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  regulation  and  supervision  are  not  expendable.  This  justifies  a  certain
amount  of  burdens  resulting  from  regulation.  I  am  firmly  convinced  that  regulation  and
supervision have a positive overall impact on the economy, consumers, and banks and savings
banks themselves. That said, it is also clear that we should eliminate undesirably high burdens
from regulation as far as possible, as I'm sure you will all agree. For that reason I would now like
to talk about whether and where I can see such undesirably high burdens – and what we can do
about them.
However,  I  am  opposed  to  a  broad-brush  criticism  of  regulation.  This  applies  in  particular  to
internationally harmonised rules for large institutions. As you are all aware, we have undertaken
extensive reform measures in the past few years and are currently working on the final details in
the  Basel  Committee.  Our  work  was  and  still  is  shaped  by  what  we  have  learned  from  the
financial crisis. One consequence of this is that the international rules have since become more
extensive and complex. The increased complexity of the rulebook reflects the complexity of the
global banking business, and is therefore completely justified.
But the new rules do not solely concern the very big institutions operating on a global scale. The
framework of the Basel Committee affects rules at both the European and national levels. These
rules ultimately define the framework conditions of smaller institutions, thereby affecting you and
your employees.
In fact, this has resulted in burdens for smaller and medium-sized banks, some of which are
undesirable and even harmful, because small institutions cannot utilise the economies of scale
that large banks profit from when adhering to the rules. The regulatory framework has already
partially taken this into account with gradations which vary according to an institution's size and
business model. Yet necessary measures such as the procurement of new IT systems or the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
recruitment  of  staff  who  ensure  that  the  rules  are  complied  with  are  still  leading  to  high  fixed
costs, which represent a large burden to smaller institutions.
When  regulation  makes  size  an  advantage,  this  can  clash  with  the  goal  of  creating  a  stable
financial system. After all, it was the large institutions in particular which played the tragic leading
role in the crisis about ten years ago. Gradual harmonisation of the financial sector would not be
in the customer's interests either. The German banking and savings bank sector in particular is
characterised  by  its  great  diversity  and  its  close  customer  proximity.  Last  but  not  least,
excessive  burdens  in  smaller  institutions  contradict  the  idea  of  a  level  playing  field,  in  other
words, ensuring that competitive conditions are the same for all banks and savings banks. With
regard  to  the  creation  of  fair  competitive  conditions,  rules  which  excessively  burden  certain
institutions are simply wrong.
4 We can manage with less
That is why I believe regulation must be made more proportional. Many of you are aware that I
have felt strongly about this for a quite some time, so I am pleased that we have made solid
progress in the meantime. In this vein, the European Commission put forward a proposal last
November concerning how the Capital Requirements Regulation, or CRR, and other European
rulebooks such as the Capital Requirements Directive, or CRD, are to be revised. Some of its
suggestions relate to proportionality.
The Commission's suggestions are a good start. Naturally, some points need further discussion.
However, I am confident that we will be able to make meaningful minor improvements.
I use the term "minor improvements" because the amendment of a few rules is unlikely to solve
the problem of excessive burdens among smaller banks. This is why I support a more basic
approach: the creation of separate regulatory frameworks for smaller institutions on the one hand
and for large multinational institutions on the other.
This approach is often referred to as the small banking box. This would not necessarily make a
completely  new  rulebook  essential,  although  it  might  sound  that  way  at  first.  A  single  short
section in the CRR would suffice. But how might the box look in concrete terms? I would like to
outline its basic features for you, focusing on two essential characteristics in particular: firstly,
defining the parties which could be subject to a simplified rulebook, and secondly, the areas in
which I believe it would be feasible to ease the burden.
Let's  start  with  the  definition.  I've  talked  about  a  set  of  rules  for  small  institutions.  An  initial
criterion  for  deciding  whether  a  bank  or  savings  bank  comes  under  simplified  rules  would
therefore be comparatively small total assets. A sensible limit beneath which an institution could
use simpler rules would be, say, a low single-digit billion figure. Whatever figure is finally chosen
can be up for discussion for the time being.
An  absolute  threshold  value  on  its  own  might  lead  to  systemically  important  institutions  in
some EU countries becoming part of the simplified regime. To rule out that possibility, a second,
relative size criterion should be incorporated, namely that an institution is no larger than a given
part of the GDP of the member state in question.
These  criteria  result  in  a  practicable  and  prudent  initial  assignment  to  the  category  of  small
institutions. They are not enough, however, as they could also lead, for example, to institutions
with risky business models coming under the simplified rules. This has to be avoided under all
circumstances; and a series of hard additional conditions has to be set.
First:  only  institutions  subject  to  insolvency  proceedings  in  the  event  of  insolvency  may
become part of the box.
Second: candidates for the small banking box should not have any significant capital market
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
or cross-border activities.
Third: they should have a small trading book as well as a small derivatives book.
Fourth: they should not be using any internal models.
Taken  together,  this  list  of  requirements  will  result  in  institutions  with  riskier  business  models
being excluded from the outset. Above and beyond that, we also must not forget systemic risks
that  can  stem  from  the  interconnectedness  of  a  large  number  of  small  institutions  –  the  "too
many to fail" problem.
And, when all's said and done, the final decision – even if all the criteria are fulfilled – should
always  be  up  to  the  supervisors.  If  they  have  serious  objections,  they  can  refrain  from
supervising an institution under simplified rules.
This possibility of choice should not be a one-way street, by the way. I take the view that even
institutions  that  are  potential  candidates  for  the  small  banking  box  should  still  be  able  to  opt
voluntarily for supervision under the more demanding rules.
A sensible and practicable definition of the institutions for which simpler conditions are possible
is  therefore  quite  feasible.  This  only  leaves  the  second  key  question:  What  is  it  exactly  that
should be made simpler?
In some areas, a simplification could be achieved by institutions in the small banking box being
entirely exempted from certain requirements. I could imagine the smaller institutions being freed
largely of the disclosure requirements as well as the remuneration regulations being abolished.
But we should also give thought to making things simpler in other areas. The reporting system
could be limited to a core reporting system, for example – a standard approach in the reporting
system,  so  to  speak.  In  the  second  pillar,  in  other  words  the  prudential  monitoring  of  the
institutions, there could be a reduction in the scope and depth of detail in the audits. And I can
see potential in some places in the field of corporate governance.
there 
is  no  shortage  of  possibilities 
So, 
things  simpler.  To  avoid  any
misunderstanding: what I have outlined here is, for the moment, a collection of ideas and not a
ready-made  plan.  It  is  still  too  early  for  that.  Nevertheless,  we  at  the  Bundesbank  together
with BaFin and the Ministry of Finance are already working on a concrete, detailed draft. We shall
shortly be entering into a dialogue on this with the associations.
for  making 
But  it  should  be  clear  from  the  outset  that  a  small  banking  box  has  its  limitations.  What  is
especially important is that capital and liquidity requirements are not lowered or watered down.
5 Conclusion
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  idea  of  a  small  banking  box  cannot  be  put  into  practice  overnight.
However,  and  this  is  important  for  me:  the  approach  can  indeed  work. As  a  systematic  and
comprehensive solution, it could restore the requisite measure of proportionality in regulation. I
am therefore advocating an open debate.
It is no less important to me that this debate should not be exploited for  a  general  critique  of
regulation.  Prudent,  but  also  strict  regulation  and  supervision  are  indispensable  for  both  fiscal
and macroeconomic stability.
I am asking you all as institution representatives for nuanced contributions to the debate on more
proportionality.  Make  specific  detailed  proposals  to  the  supervisors;  let  us  know  where  you
perceive unnecessarily high burdens. In that way, we can work to together to achieve a balanced
solution. Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
