Simon  M  Potter:  Money  markets  at  a  crossroads  - policy 
implementation at a time of structural change
Remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California, 5
April 2017.
Accompanying slides
 Thank you very much. I’m very pleased to be back at UCLA, where I enjoyed eight years in the
1990s  as  an  assistant  professor  of  economics.  I’d  like  to  thank  my  hosts  for  their  gracious
invitation  to  have,  once  again,  the  experience  of  speaking  to  a  classroom  of  future  leaders  in
1
finance, business, economics, and—just perhaps—central banking as well.
Due  to  the  large  size  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet,  we  are  employing  a  new  and
innovative  framework  to  control  money  market  rates.  Since  late  2015,  we  have  seen  several
significant developments in money markets that have tested this new framework. These include
a  profound  reshaping  of  the  money  market  fund  industry  as  a  result  of  new  Securities  and
Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  rules,  significant  shifts  in  cash  management  practices  at  the
Treasury and large foreign reserve managers, and continued pressure on bank balance sheets
due  to  the  ongoing  implementation  of  Basel  III  capital  requirements. Also  since  that  time,  the
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  has  directed  three  25  basis  point  increases  in  its
target range for the federal funds rate.
Today I will discuss these structural developments, and evaluate the continued efficacy of the
Federal  Reserve’s  policy  implementation  framework  in  light  of  their  effects  on  money  market
competition and integration. I’ll briefly review the means by which we implement policy, and the
reasons why we do so differently now from before the financial crisis. I’ll explain why changes in
money market structure could conceivably impair the transmission of monetary policy. We will
see  that  the  impact  of  many  of  the  recent  structural  developments  were  smoothed  by  the
presence  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  overnight  reverse  repurchase  facility.  Then,  I  will  take  you
through some data about money market dispersion to see what effect these developments had
in practice.
The takeaway from all this is clear: our framework remains highly effective, and has proved quite
resilient, even to these significant shifts in market structure. It continues to provide the FOMC
with excellent control over money market rates. Indeed, the effective federal funds rate remained
within the FOMC’s target range 100 percent of the time in 2016 and this has continued so far this
year,  as  shown  in  (Figure  1).  Changes  in  the  federal  funds  rate  continue  to  transmit  in  a
predictable way to other money market rates, thereby affecting, as intended, the broad financial
conditions upon which the price and quantity of private sector credit depend. However, recent
evidence on dispersion in overnight and term rates suggests that we should continue to monitor
the transmission of the FOMC’s policy stance into money market rates carefully.
As always, these views are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the New York Fed
or  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  My  comments  today  are,  in  part,  a  condensed  version  of
“Domestic Open Market Operations During 2016,” a report prepared by the Markets Group of the
New York Fed for the FOMC. This annual report provides extensive and illuminating detail on the
Federal Reserve’s operations and balance sheet. It is published as part of our mission to make
monetary policy transparent and accessible to the public. The report will be published tomorrow
on the New York Fed’s website and I encourage you to read it.
Our new policy framework: a review
1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let  me  start  out  by  reviewing  two  basic  questions:  what  is  our  framework  for  implementing
monetary policy, and why has it changed so much?
Before the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve followed a well-worn playbook for monetary policy
implementation that was based on keeping reserve balances scarce.  Even though the Federal
Reserve  paid  zero  percent  interest  on  reserves,  banks  still  needed  to  hold  small  amounts  of
them, mainly to satisfy their reserve requirement but also for operational liquidity. The demand for
reserves by banks was downward sloping (and steep). The Federal Reserve was therefore able
to  achieve  the  desired  level  of  the  federal  funds  rate,  its  policy  target,  by  making  slight
adjustments in the supply of reserves in the system, so that it intersected the demand at that
rate.  On a typical day, implementing monetary policy entailed forecasting the level of reserves
that would achieve the targeted level of the federal funds rate, and then, if necessary, conducting
open-market operations to add or remove reserves.
2
3
Nowadays,  however,  reserves  are  no  longer  scarce.  The  supply  of  reserves  now  fluctuates
widely around roughly two trillion dollars, compared to remaining tightly around ten billion dollars
in mid-2007. This largely reflects the effect of the large-scale asset purchase programs, the last
of which concluded in 2014, and the FOMC’s subsequent direction to maintain the size of the
balance sheet by reinvesting principal repayments. Because the stock of reserves is so large, it
is impractical to use open market operations to quickly reduce reserves back to the point where
4
the federal funds rate can be controlled with scarcity, at least for now.
6
Our  current  framework  relies,  instead,  on  providing  the  market  with  two  overnight  investment
opportunities  to  help  steer  money  market  rates:  interest  on  reserves  (IOR)  and  the  overnight
reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility.  By law, IOR is available only to depository
institutions.  Absent  frictions,  IOR  should  provide  a  floor  on  interest  rates,  since  competition
between banks that can acquire funds in the wholesale market at rates below IOR and earn the
spread should bring these rates very close to that paid on reserves. In practice, a number of
frictions have led money market rates to trade moderately below IOR. ON RRP, which is offered
to a broad selection of counterparties that includes money market funds, is intended to intensify
competition in money markets and enhance the transmission of IOR into other overnight money
market rates. It also has proved useful as a shock absorber. I will get back to that in a moment.
5
The transmission of monetary policy relies on competition within, and integration across, money
markets. The FOMC’s policy target is the federal funds rate, which is a measure of what banks
pay to take out unsecured overnight loans from other banks and from government-sponsored
entities.  However,  the  Federal  Reserve  does  not  transact  in  the  federal  funds  market,  and
therefore  cannot  directly  impact  the  federal  funds  rate.   Instead,  it  relies  on  a  predictable
relationship between rates in the markets in which it does operate, and rates on federal funds
borrowings. Moreover, while the FOMC’s goals for monetary policy are maximum employment
and  price  stability,  the  economic  decisions  of  households  and  firms  generally  don’t  depend
directly  on  the  federal  funds  rate,  since  they  don’t  participate  in  that  market.   Instead,  their
decisions  depend  on  broader  financial  conditions,  including  the  interest  rates  on  home
mortgages and corporate bonds, the performance of the stock market, and the foreign exchange
value  of  the  dollar.    As  a  result,  for  monetary  policy  to  achieve  its  objectives,  markets  must
function well enough to transmit the stance of policy, both from the markets in which the Federal
Reserve directly transacts to its policy target, and then onward from that target to other money
markets, and eventually to those asset prices which directly affect real activity.
7
8
9
It’s helpful to think through how shocks to the structure of money markets could impair monetary
control and transmission. I think about this in three steps: control of conditions within the markets
in which we operate, control over the FOMC’s target—the federal funds rate, and transmission
into broader financial conditions.
Some  structural  changes  could  reduce  the  ability  of  our  operations  to  affect  rates  on  other
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
transactions within those same markets. For example, our ON RRP operations provide a floor on
the repo rate offered by dealers to cash investors because of the competitive pressure the Fed’s
offer rate places on borrowers of funds in the repo market.
 If this competitive pressure were
less  effective,  perhaps  because  of  greater  constraints  on  lenders’  switching  counterparties,
changes in the ON RRP rate could become less effective in influencing repo market rates.
10
Other shocks could affect the transmission of rates from our operations to the federal funds rate.
In the absence of strong financial intermediation between the federal funds market, interest on
reserves, and the repo market, changes in rates the Federal Reserve controls—like the IOR rate
and the ON RRP offering rate—might not affect the federal funds rate as intended. Shocks to
intermediation  could  result  in  permanently  weaker  integration  between  markets.  The  effects
could also prove temporary, for example if intermediation weakens initially but then recovers over
time as market participants adjust to the shock.
Finally, changes to the federal funds rate might not affect other interest rates and asset prices
that are relevant to the cost of credit in the real economy. And also, even if changes in the federal
funds rate do affect those other rates, if the linkage between them were to become particularly
noisy  or  hard  to  predict,  it  could  become  harder  for  policymakers,  as  well  as  the  public,  to
forecast what level of the federal funds rate will best achieve maximum employment and price
stability.
Recent developments in money market structure
Since 2015, my staff and I have focused on four changes in money market structure that some
observers believed could have had an impact on the implementation or transmission of monetary
policy. I’ll discuss each of these in turn.
To begin with, we are now firmly off the zero lower bound. After seven years at very low levels,
the federal funds rate is now trading at 91 basis points. As shown in (Figure 2), the distribution of
overnight federal funds activity is now quite distant from zero, in comparison to the period before
liftoff. (Figure 3) shows a similar presentation for the triparty repo market, similarly revealing that
traded rates are now consistently well above the zero bound and largely above or at the ON RRP
offer rate.
Certain features of the financial system likely provide support to interest rates near zero. These
include  the  availability  of  physical  cash  and  a  behavioral  aversion  by  some  money  market
investors to investing at negative rates. They also encompass certain unique features of money
markets in the United States, such as legal and regulatory incentives applicable to money market
funds  and  the  inability  of  the  Federal  Reserve  to  remunerate  deposits  held  by  government-
sponsored enterprises.
Accordingly, when we were at the zero lower bound, we weren’t able to rule out the possibility
that initial increases in the policy target might not translate one-for-one into increases in money
market rates, as reduced uplift from the zero lower bound could have offset some of the policy
tightening. In addition, one might have also worried that various money markets might not move
together  as  rates  rise,  meaning  that,  for  example,  a  larger  spread  might  emerge  between
secured and unsecured rates, or between overnight and term instruments, than had historically
been the case. I will discuss some evidence on these issues later on.
The second development, in October 2016, was the entry into force of new SEC rules for money
market  funds.  These  new  rules  require,  among  other  things,  a  floating  net  asset  value  for
institutional prime money market funds, provide for liquidity fees and redemption gates for prime
funds, and establish more stringent rules for portfolio diversification and financial reporting for all
money market funds.
 Many of these reforms are aimed at least in part at enhancing financial
stability, and in particular at addressing the potential for runs on prime funds to intensify financial
stress. They could also make prime funds, which can hold a broad spectrum of money market
11
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
assets, less attractive to investors who desire an investment opportunity with a fixed net asset
value or who are concerned about redemption fees or gates.
Our  contacts  in  the  money  market  fund  industry  could  foresee,  based  on  their  own  business
plans and discussions with their clients, that these reforms would lead to a substantial shift in
money market fund assets. Substantial amounts were expected to come out of prime funds and
into  government-only  funds,  which  generally  hold  Treasury  securities,  repo  against  Treasury
collateral,  or  similar  ultra-low-risk  assets. As  a  result,  this  reallocation  was  expected  to  bring
about  somewhat  lower  rates  on  Treasury  bills  and  repo  backed  by  Treasury  collateral,  and
somewhat higher unsecured rates.
It is important that the monetary policy implementation framework take note of changes to the
broader financial market landscape, including its regulatory structure, and adapt as necessary in
response to such changes. Ahead of the reforms, our focus, which I discussed in a speech in
early 2016, was on whether the reforms would have an impact on the transmission of monetary
policy that might require such adaptation. In particular, we wanted to observe whether markets
remained sufficiently competitive to allow for robust control of rates, and see whether the shifts in
volume—particularly  the  anticipated  upswing  in  demand  for  government-fund-eligible  assets—
would impair competition.
 We also wanted to see whether linkages across markets remained
strong enough to ensure that policy was transmitted in accordance with the FOMC’s forecasts,
especially  given  prime  funds’  broad  investment  scope,  and  their  ability  to  reallocate  across
markets according to relative value.
12
13
The size of the reallocation ended up being quite a bit larger than most had expected. As shown
in (Figure 4), about $1 trillion of assets had migrated from prime to government funds by late
2016. This resulted in a major reallocation of the investments held by the money market fund
industry, shown in (Figure 5). This reallocation had far-reaching effects on the structure of money
markets, as described in a recent blog by some of my New York Fed colleagues.
 For example,
banks that were relying on the funding by prime funds had to find other institutions that would be
willing  to  lend  to  them.  Government  funds,  which  received  large  inflows,  had  to  place  the
additional funds they had received, for example into Treasury or agency securities or into repo.
Such  a  large  change  in  funding  flows  could  have  created  significant  movements  in  money
market interest rates.
14
The good news is that the ON RRP facility served as a shock absorber for overnight rates. As
shown in (Figure 6), money market funds, particularly government funds, increased their use of
ON RRP during the transition. Because of the availability of ON RRP, government funds knew
they would be able to temporarily place some of the new funding they received at the ON RRP
facility  while  they  were  looking  for  new  investment  opportunities,  and  prime  funds  knew  they
would  have  access  to  a  very  secure  and  liquid  overnight  investment  as  they  increased  their
liquidity to meet an uncertain level of redemptions. As a result of this elastic provision of a risk-
free investment opportunity, overnight secured and unsecured rates were only modestly affected
by these large flows, and overnight markets continued to move as intended following changes in
the FOMC’s target for the federal funds rate. That said, the runoff in prime fund assets did leave
an  imprint  on  term  unsecured  rates,  although  some  of  this  has  retraced  recently  as  markets
have adapted. I will return to this later.
Third, for some time now we have been keenly focused on the impact on the structure of money
markets that ensues from higher balance sheet costs for financial institutions.
15
When I refer to balance sheet costs, I mean costs that are primarily related to the size, but not
the composition, of a financial institution’s balance sheets. One example of such a cost is the
leverage ratio, which is a requirement that a bank has, at minimum, capital of certain percentage
of its overall assets.
16
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The leverage ratio was introduced as a simple non-risk-based backstop to the risk-based capital
requirements and sets an amount of required capital that depends exclusively on the size of the
balance sheet, plus off-balance sheet exposures for the largest U.S. banks, and does not depend
on  the  composition  of  the  balance  sheet  or  the  risk  of  those  exposures.  The  use  of  explicit,
numerical  minimum  leverage  ratios  as  part  of  the  capital  regulation  of  insured  depository
institutions and bank holding companies (BHCs) and their broker-dealer subsidiaries has a long
history in the United States, dating back to 1981, but in recent years the scope of their use has
broadened considerably as many large broker-dealers were not subsidiaries of BHCs prior to the
financial crisis.
  The  U.S.  intermediate  holding  company  (IHC)  operations  of  foreign  banking
organizations including their broker-dealers will also be subject to the leverage ratio requirements
starting on January 1, 2018. Finally, reflecting the lessons learned during the financial crisis and
recognizing  that  excessive  leverage  could  be  built  up  from  off-balance-sheet  exposures,  the
leverage  exposure  definition  was  expanded  to  include  off-balance  sheet  exposures.  This  new
leverage  ratio  is  called  the  supplementary  leverage  ratio  and  applies  to  the  largest  U.S.
institutions.
17
18
Balance  sheet  costs  tend  to  make  it  more  expensive  for  financial  institutions  to  act  as
intermediaries in money markets.
 If these costs are economically large in the context of the
ultra-low-risk,  ultra-low-margin  world  of  money  markets,  this  could  operate  to  reduce  dealers’
incentive to make markets and act as financial intermediaries, so long as the leverage ratio is the
binding capital requirement relative to the risk-based capital requirement for such firms.
20, 21
19
 In calculating the leverage ratio, all assets, including cash held at the central bank, are included.
Because of the large outstanding stock of reserves in the system, this might have the effect of
making the leverage ratio more binding for some firms. In addition, the effect of the leverage ratio
is further magnified by dealers’ inability to “net” across similar transactions on a bilateral basis
with different counterparties for accounting and capital purposes. Netting is generally allowed so
long  as  the  transactions  have  the  same  counterparty  and  settlement  date.
  The  “same
counterparty” requirement could in theory be met via the implementation of a central counterparty
(CCP). However, for several money markets that are important to the transmission of monetary
policy, no CCP has been implemented to date. For example, there is still no CCP in the United
States for the repo market, and there is also no CCP for foreign exchange swaps. The regulatory
capital  benefit  from  the  implementation  of  a  CCP  for  the  repo  market  might  be  reduced  by
regulatory requirements for some arrangements, such as those associated with the provision of
committed  liquidity  to  the  CCP.  The  implementation  of  a  CCP  raises  other  important  policy
issues that would need to be carefully considered.
22
The  fourth  and  final  development:  money  markets  have  been  impacted  by  increasingly  large
shifts  in  the  Treasury’s  cash  management  practices,  as  well  as  the  cash  management  of  a
number of foreign official holders of dollar reserves. (Figure 7) and (Figure 8) show the behavior
of the Treasury General Account—the Treasury’s “checking account” at the New York Fed—and
balances in the New York Fed’s foreign repo pool, which is an overnight investment opportunity
made available at market rates as a service to eligible foreign official and international account
holders.
23
Large shifts in these cash management practices can impact monetary transmission in a couple
of  ways.  First,  although  we  are  not  now  conducting  monetary  policy  via  a  reserves-scarcity
framework, in the assessment of some analysts, changes in the stock of reserve balances still
matter  to  pricing  in  money  markets  over  a  medium-term  horizon.
  Largely  as  a  result  of
fluctuations in these balances and in ON RRP take-up, reserves have ranged widely since the
start of 2016: from as low as $1.85 trillion on January 4, 2017, to as high as $2.5 trillion on March
9, 2016.
  If  the  shifts  in  reserves  are  large  enough,  they  can  affect  money  market  rates.  In
addition, changes in Federal Reserve balances of the Treasury and of foreign official accounts
are  often  associated  with  offsetting  shifts  in  other  components  of  their  cash  management
24
25
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
programs. For example, recent shifts in the Treasury’s cash holdings have coincided with efforts
to expand the issuance of Treasury bills, and foreign reserve holders might in some cases use
the foreign repo pool as a substitute for Treasury bills. Greater and more elastic supply of ultra-
low-risk assets through these channels likely helped smooth out the effects of the expansion of
government money market funds that I noted earlier.
Evidence of the efficacy of policy transmission: views from Duffie and Krishnamurthy
Recently, numerous academic papers have explored the functioning of money markets in the
post-crisis environment, and have sought to investigate—both theoretically and empirically—how
structural shifts like those I have discussed will affect the Federal Reserve’s approach to policy
implementation.  Darrell  Duffie  and  Arvind  Krishnamurthy  presented  a  particularly  notable
empirical and theoretical study at last year’s Jackson Hole conference.
26
Darrell  and Arvind’s  central  empirical  observation  was  that  money  rates  have  become  more
dispersed. (Figure 9), which shows a selection of overnight money market rates, illustrates some
of  this  dispersion.  Darrell  and Arvind  use  a  broad  selection  of  market  rates,  assembled  from
various sources and adjusted in a number of ways to make them comparable to each other, to
construct what they call a “dispersion index” of money market rates, shown in (Figure 10). This
series  is  calculated  as  a  weighted  mean  absolute  deviation  across  these  rates.  This  metric
shows that, according to their measure, dispersion across money markets has risen since late
2015, around the time the FOMC began the process of policy normalization and money market
funds started to change their business models in anticipation of the new SEC rules.
Based  on  these  data  and  on  theoretical  modeling,  Darrell  and Arvind  conclude  that  monetary
transmission may be less efficient than it was before the crisis. As a result, they expect that, as
the FOMC increases the federal funds rate over time, other interest rates might not rise one-for-
one with it. As one consequence of this, they express a concern that the Federal Reserve might
see greater use of its ON RRP operations over time as monetary policy is tightened, because
the rates offered on these operations—presumably rising one-for-one with changes in the target
federal funds rate range—will become increasingly attractive relative to other market rates, which
they expect to rise more slowly. To date, at least, this does not appear to be happening.
I think this paper makes an important point about transmission: monetary control does not stop at
the  effective  federal  funds  rate,  and  our  framework  must  ensure  that  the  stance  of  monetary
policy is passed through into other money market rates. However, I am less persuaded that the
data supports Darrell and Arvind’s concern about the present efficacy of the framework.
First, I think the recent pickup in dispersion we see in money markets might not tell us much
about what will happen going forward. A lot of what has happened in money markets in recent
years may relate to one-off factors associated with money market fund reform and with liftoff
from the zero lower bound.
Second, there are significant challenges associated with the construction of the data in the index,
especially related to the measure they call “jumbo deposits.”
  Virtually  the  entire  rise  in  their
measure of dispersion in late 2015 comes from this one series, but this rise is largely eliminated
if the series is instead constructed as done in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD)’s Main Economic Indicators for the United States.
27
Third,  it  isn’t  obvious  to  me  that  higher  or  lower  levels  of  this  index  correspond  to  “better”  or
“worse” monetary transmission. Absent frictions and risk premia, dispersion would be zero. In
practice, there is quite a bit of dispersion. These spreads are driven by liquidity, credit, term and
other  fundamental  risk  premia  that  vary  over  time.  Effective  monetary  transmission  does  not
require zero dispersion—instead, it requires that market rates respond appropriately to changes
in  the  federal  funds  rate,  and  that  the  relationships  among  market  rates  be  reasonably
predictable. Put another way: if some change in market structure causes rates across markets
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
to be more dispersed, but every traded rate within each money market moves up by exactly 25
basis points following a 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate, is transmission really
worse than it was before the structural change?
Finally,  if  we  are  to  use  dispersion  as  a  yardstick  for  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy
implementation, we should make use of individual transaction-level data to see how effective our
tools are at uniformly affecting traded rates within each money market. Because transaction-level
data are not publicly available, Darrell and Arvind’s index is based on “average” or “market” rates
for each asset class. This means that they can assess only dispersion across money markets,
rather than both across them and within them.
Evaluating efficacy using transaction level data
In my view, the difference between dispersion within markets, and dispersion across markets, is
revealing  about  the  nature  of  underlying  changes  in  money  markets.  If  competition  were  to
become impaired, I might expect to see greater dispersion in rates within each individual market,
as the decline in competition might allow for greater market power by individual borrowers and
lenders, and therefore permit more price discrimination. In contrast, if intermediation were to be
impaired, I would expect to see higher dispersion across money market rates, and more variable
dispersion  over  time,  even  for  very  similar  investments.  This  is  because  impairments  to
intermediation could result in greater market segmentation.
Of course, such changes in dispersion either within or across markets could also result from
other  changes,  such  as  movements  in  risk  premia.  One  way  of  reducing  the  impact  of
movements  in  risk  premia  is  to  focus  on  overnight  transactions  only.  This  has  the  further
advantage  of  not  requiring  a  complex  adjustment  to  term  rates  to  take  account  of  market
expectations for changes in overnight rates.
To get a sense for dispersion within money markets, we can use overnight transaction-level data
in the unsecured market (federal funds and Eurodollars) collected by the Federal Reserve on
form  FR  2420,  and  in  the  customer-to-dealer  triparty  repo  market  collected  from  the  triparty
clearing banks. (Figure 11) and (Figure 12) show dispersion indices for activity within each of
these markets, calculated the same way as done by Darrell and Arvind. (Figure 13) combines all
this activity into a single combined transaction level dispersion index.
When I look at these figures, I see three things.
First, I don’t see a pronounced move upward in dispersion within either the secured or unsecured
markets individually, either in general or around FOMC meetings at which monetary policy was
tightened.  This  suggests  to  me  that  recent  increases  in  the  federal  funds  rate  have  passed
through, immediately and one-for-one, to virtually all activity in these markets.
In fact, within the secured market, we see dispersion ticking down. This appears to relate to the
general decline in secured rates after money market fund reform, which caused trading in the
repo market to become more concentrated at or around the ON RRP offered rate. Interestingly,
there is a small amount of trading in the repo market that takes place slightly below the ON RRP
offered rate; this largely reflects lending by firms that are not New York Fed counterparties and
therefore cannot participate in our operations.
Second,  within  each  market,  I  see  periodic,  transitory  jumps  in  dispersion.  In  the  unsecured
market, these typically occur on month- and quarter-end dates.
 We don’t typically observe this
pattern  in  the  customer-to-dealer  repo  market,  but  did  see  a  spike  in  dispersion  on  June  24,
2016,  the  day  after  voters  in  the  United  Kingdom  chose  to  leave  the  European  Union.
  This
spike might reflect the pricing-in, for a brief moment, of a modest increase in counterparty-level
risk related to this development.
28
29
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
These  shifts  in  unsecured  market  activity  around  period-end  dates  are  consistent  with  the
incentive  provided  by  the  leverage  ratio  requirement.  The  frequency  of  the  leverage  exposure
calculation differs by jurisdiction: the U.S. and UK require a daily or weekly average calculation for
on-balance-sheet  exposures  for  their  supervised  banks,  while  some  other  jurisdictions  only
require  a  quarter-end  calculation  or  average  of  the  three  month  ends  within  the  quarter.  As
discussed  earlier,  the  leverage  ratio  requirements  in  the  U.S.  apply  to  insured  depository
institutions, BHCs and IHCs operations of foreign banking organizations. While these period-end
approaches  may  be  less  administratively  burdensome  to  implement  than  daily  or  weekly
averages, they can incentivize firms to temporarily adjust their balance sheets around quarter-
end  to  report  higher  ratios:  balance  sheet  growth  incurs  no  cost  on  most  days,  but  incurs  a
significant capital cost on one or three days a quarter. Much activity in unsecured markets is low-
margin  intermediation  in  which  banks  borrow  funds  from  non-banks  and  deposit  them  at  the
Federal Reserve to earn IOR; this activity can be less economic for leverage-ratio-constrained
foreign banks on the few days when the ratio is calculated.
Third, since liftoff in December 2015, I see a modest and gradual uptick in dispersion in the index
that combines both secured and unsecured markets. This increase seems to have occurred in
two stages: once at liftoff, and again in autumn 2016. In contrast, there was nearly no change in
dispersion  following  the  FOMC’s  two  additional  policy  rate  increases  in  December  2016  and
March 2017. This rise in dispersion in the combined measure reflects the fact that the spread
between unsecured and secured overnight rates rose around those times.
30
Much of the fairly modest pick-up in that rate spread seems tied to individual, one-off factors. To
begin with, the dispersion in money market rates was compressed to some extent by the zero
lower bound, and as rates moved into positive territory, they were able to “unpack” to an extent. In
addition, at liftoff, the FOMC decided to widen the spread between IOR and the ON RRP offered
rate  by  5  basis  points,  which  acted  to  slightly  reduce  secured  rates  relative  to  unsecured
rates.
 These two factors explain why dispersion rose around the first tightening, but not at the
following two tightenings: reduced uplift from the zero lower bound and the lower relative setting
of the ON RRP offered rate had some effect on the outcome of the first tightening, but had no
effect on the subsequent two. Finally, the new SEC money market fund rules brought about a
pickup  in  demand  for  ultra-low-risk  investments,  and  a  corresponding  decline  in  demand  for
unsecured  investments.  If  these  one-off  factors  were  the  primary  reasons  that  this  spread
widened,  we  would  expect  to  see  essentially  one-for-one  passthrough  of  future  monetary
tightening into both markets.
Transmission to broader money markets
This  evidence  on  control  and  transmission  is  encouraging.  However,  there  have  been  some
recent signs of more volatile transmission of interest rates into broader money markets.
The most notable of these has been the rise in LIBOR rates relative to like-maturity overnight
index swaps, shown for a 3-month maturity in (Figure 14). This figure suggests that banks’ cost
to  obtain  funding  for  three  months  has  risen  relative  to  the  cost  of  borrowing  that  funding
overnight—for  example  in  the  federal  funds  or  Eurodollar  market—and  hedging  the  overnight
interest rate risk of such borrowing with a swap. During the financial crisis, this spread rose and
fell with changes in investors’ perception of bank credit risk. In contrast, its recent moves are
related  to  money  market  fund  reform:  term  rates  rose  considerably  as  prime  money  market
funds both shrunk in size and reduced their maturities to remain highly liquid, and have recently
come back a bit as the market has stabilized and markets have adapted to the new industry
structure.
Shown in (Figure 15) are customer-to-dealer versus dealer-to-dealer Treasury repo rates. The
customer-to-dealer market consists primarily of cash investors like money market funds lending
to dealers, while the dealer-to-dealer market reflects dealers lending amongst themselves.
 The
31
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
spread between these two rates is thus a proxy for the cost dealers with ready access to cash-
investor  financing  charge  to  act  as  intermediaries  between  these  two  markets.  Since  all  the
lending is secured by Treasuries, this intermediation entails very modest risk.
U.S.  versus  currency-hedged  3-month  interest  rates,  as  reflected  by  foreign  exchange  basis
swaps,  are  shown  in (Figure  16).  U.S.  and  foreign  money  markets  are  linked  together  by  a
dealer-intermediated  foreign  exchange  derivatives  market,  which  allows  firms  to  essentially
convert  money  market  loans  and  borrowings  from  one  currency  into  another.  A  dealer  that
intermediates this spread can be thought of conceptually as making a secured loan, in which it
lends  out  dollars  and  takes  in  foreign  currency  cash  as  collateral.  Such  a  transaction  entails
modest risk.
32
As I’ve mentioned, a certain amount of dispersion across markets is normal and to be expected,
due to liquidity, credit and other types of risk premia.
 Spreads have also declined considerably
in recent months. This could be due to the market adapting to the changes I have described.
However,  the  data  indicate  that  spreads  have  become  more  variable,  have  increased  to  high
values at times, and in the case of repo and foreign exchange swaps have become especially
volatile around month-end, and, especially, quarter-end dates.
33
35
34
The  increase  in  spreads  in  the  repo  and  FX  swap  markets  relate  to  the  confluence  of  two
factors:
 constraints to intermediation ensuing from the leverage ratio pressures I mentioned
earlier, combined with limited access to dollar money markets by some financial as well as non-
financial  institutions.
  Pressures  to  reduce  balance  sheet  size  at  period-end  dates  affect
domestic money market integration, and integration across different global money markets, just
as  they  affect  the  link  between  unsecured  markets  and  IOR  that  I  discussed  earlier.  These
pressures are made more acute by inelastic demand for wholesale dollar funding from some
firms that hold large dollar loan and securities portfolios but lack access to dollar deposits or to
direct funding from money market funds.
Prognosis
36
On the whole, these shifts in broad money market spreads do not pose a problem for monetary
policy formulation or implementation. Although LIBOR and some other spreads are wider, they
are, on average over time, generally stable and slow-moving, and as a result forecasters are able
to  incorporate  any  effect  these  spreads  might  have  when  formulating  their  projections  for
monetary policy. Changes in the policy rate continue to be passed through predictably into all
these  markets,  as  recently  observed.  Transitory,  predictable  and  non-disruptive  increases  in
period-end  volatility  are  unlikely  to  meaningfully  affect  the  real  economy. And  finally,  there  is
evidence that the wider spreads among market rates that came out of money market fund reform
are  gradually  closing  over  time,  as  firms  adapt  to  the  new  structure  of  money  markets  by
adjusting their portfolios and identifying new counterparties.
However,  if  market  dispersion  were  to  increase  too  much,  this  could  cause  a  variety  of
challenges.  Such  dispersion  could  affect  monetary  transmission,  altering  the  price  of  credit
made available to certain borrowers. This could complicate the formulation of monetary policy if it
were  to  become  harder  for  policymakers  to  anticipate  the  impact  on  the  economy  that  would
ensue from future changes to the federal funds rate. Such dispersion could also affect the use of
our operations.
37
As I have noted, it seems that much of the recent shift in money market dispersion has arisen as
a byproduct of important regulatory improvements to improve the safety and soundness of the
global financial system. Money market fund reform is now in place, and while the leverage ratio
and many other Basel III rules are not fully in force, in practice most banks are complying with
them. As a result, what we have observed in money markets might simply have reflected a one-
off realignment of asset prices to the new enhanced regulatory structure.
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
To conclude: I continue to be greatly encouraged by the performance of our framework for policy
implementation, which has provided the FOMC with excellent control over the federal funds rate
and  predictable  pass-through  of  the  monetary  policy  stance  into  broader  money  market
conditions.  Transaction-level  dispersion  measures  demonstrate  markets  that  are  competitive,
and suggest that the effects of policy tightening are realized as expected and intended. These
markets, and our framework, have proved resilient to major shocks to the structure of money
markets, including the reshaping of the money market fund industry.
I remain highly confident that our framework will continue to perform very well. Nevertheless, we
should  continue  to  monitor  the  possibility  of  a  growth  in  dispersion  in  broader  money  market
rates. Gathering more and better data about money markets is a useful step in this direction, and
one at which my colleagues and I are actively engaged. Learning more about policy transmission
through theoretical and empirical modeling is another useful endeavor.
As  stated  in  a  recent  Bank  for  International  Settlements  report,  “Financial  regulation  aims  to
influence the behavior of banks and other financial intermediaries to enhance their resilience and
support financial stability. Given that those same intermediaries interact with central banks in the
context of monetary policy implementation, changes to the regulatory environment are bound to
have effects that central banks will need to take into account.”
 Economic and financial stability
are closely interconnected; for example, monetary transmission was reliably effective in 2007,
but in 2008 became quite impaired as a result of systemic financial stress. In navigating these
issues, my colleagues and I are aided by the integration of policy analysis across disciplines at
the Federal Reserve System, an arrangement which provides an ongoing breadth and depth of
perspective.
38
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
I would like to thank James Egelhof and Antoine Martin for their assistance in the preparation of these remarks,
Adam Biesenbach for his assistance with the calculation of the dispersion indices presented here, Logan Suba
for his assistance with data, and colleagues in the Federal Reserve System for numerous insightful comments
and suggestions.
See,  for  example:  Bernanke,  “Implementing  Monetary  Policy,”  March  30,  2005;  Ihrig,  Meade  and  Weinbach
“Rewriting Monetary Policy 101: What's the Fed's Preferred Post-Crisis Approach to Raising Interest Rates?,
” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2015.
Conceptually, the federal funds rate is a measure of what banks pay to take out unsecured overnight loans from
other banks, government-sponsored entities, and certain other entities. The technical definition of a federal
funds  transaction  is  provided  in  Regulation  D, 12  CFR  204.2(a)(1)(vii).  The  effective  federal  funds  rate  is
calculated as the volume-weighted median of federal funds transactions reported by banks on FR 2420, Report
of  Selected  Money  Market  Rates.  See  “Statement  Regarding  the  Calculation  Methodology  for  the  Effective
Federal Funds Rate and Overnight Bank Funding Rate,” July 8, 2015.
The FOMC’s September 2014 Policy Normalization Principles and Plans indicate that the Committee expects to
reduce the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in a gradual and predictable manner, primarily by ceasing to
reinvest repayments of principal. On March 15, 2017, Chair Yellen stated: “We’ve emphasized for quite some
time that the Committee wishes to use variations in the fed funds rate target – our short-term interest rate target
– as our key active tool of policy.” She also stated that while “asset purchases are a tool we could conceivably
resort to if we found ourselves in a serious downturn where we were, again, up against the zero lower bound
and faced with substantial weakness in the economy, it’s not a tool we would want to use as a routine tool of
policy.” See the transcript of Chair Yellen’s March 15, 2017 press conference.
Overnight RRP operations supplement IOR by offering reverse repurchase agreements at a specified offering
rate to a broad set of counterparties, including several types of nonbank financial institutions that are significant
lenders in U.S. money markets. See Potter, “Money Markets and Monetary Policy Normalization,” April 15, 2015,
and Frost, Logan, Martin, McCabe, Natalucci and Remache, “Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Tool: Some Design Considerations,” February 19, 2015.
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Designated financial market utilities may be paid interest on balances maintained at the Federal Reserve as
well, as provided for in the Dodd-Frank Act and Regulation HH. The payment of interest to these entities does
not appear to have had a measurable impact on money markets to date.
Recall that federal funds loans are unsecured. Like the vast majority of central banks, the Federal Reserve
conducts its open market operations in the secured market.
Although households and firms do not directly transact in the federal funds market, the effective federal funds
rate is used as a reference rate in the setting of a variety of private sector contracts, including in interest rate
futures and swaps. Many bank loans are priced to The Wall Street Journal’s Prime Rate, which since the mid-
1990s has been set by convention to 300 basis points above the FOMC’s target rate or range.
See Dudley, “The Importance of Financial Conditions in the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” March 30, 2017.
When I refer to repo rates, I mean those on repo backed by Treasury securities generally, rather than specific
Treasury issues – that is, “general collateral” repo.. See Copeland, Davis, LeSueur and Martin, “Mapping and
Sizing the U.S. Repo Market,” June 25, 2012.
These new floating net asset value, liquidity fee and gating rules apply to municipal (tax-exempt) money market
funds as well. Municipal (tax-exempt) money markets are beyond the scope of my remarks.
Competition could have suffered, for example, if too few prime funds continued lending to banks, giving the
remaining funds some market power. Similarly, if the supply of funds in the secured market were to become
overly large relative to banks’ balance sheet capacity, those banks willing to accept these funds could potentially
obtain some market power.
Other money market investors have similar broad mandates and play a role in promoting relative value between
the secured and unsecured markets. However, some such investors, such as nonfinancial corporations and
foreign official institutions, appear to have limited ability to dynamically reallocate funds among asset classes,
perhaps  because  of  limited  information  or  investment  mandate  restrictions.  Further  research  to  explore
mechanisms by which money market lenders substitute between secured and unsecured investments may
prove helpful.
Chen, Cipriani, La Spada, Mulder and Shah. “Money Market Funds and the New SEC Regulation,” March 20,
2017.
For a broad perspective on how financial regulation changed after the crisis, see Tarullo, “Departing Remarks,”
April 4, 2017.
The U.S. regulatory capital rules include two leverage ratios: the tier 1 leverage ratio and the supplementary
leverage ratio (SLR). The tier 1 leverage ratio applies to all banking organizations subject to the regulatory
capital rules. It is measured as tier 1 capital divided by weekly or daily average total consolidated assets. The
minimum tier 1 leverage ratio requirement is 4 percent and is currently in effect. The SLR is effective January 1,
2018 with public disclosure requirement in effect starting in January 1, 2015, and will apply only to “advanced
approaches banking organizations” That are defined as those with at least $250 billion in total consolidated
assets or at least $10 billion in consolidated on-balance sheet foreign exposures. It will be measured as tier 1
capital divided by total leverage exposure, which equals the daily average of total consolidated assets plus
month-end average of certain off-balance-sheet exposures. The minimum SLR requirement will be 3 percent. In
addition,  there  will  be  an  enhanced  SLR  requirement  applicable  to  U.S.  top-tier  bank  holding  companies
identified  as  globally  systemically  important  banking  organizations  (G-SIBs).  The  enhanced  requirement
consists of a 2 percent leverage buffer above the minimum SLR requirement, for a total of 5 percent.
Burhouse, Feid, French and Ligon, “Basel and the Evolution of Capital Regulation: Moving Forward, Looking
Back,” January 14, 2003.
Other financial regulations, such as the G-SIB surcharge and the FDIC assessment fee, have similar economic
effects. One factor that helps determine the surcharge level is based on a bank’s systemic footprint.
Suppose a securities dealer borrows $100 and lends $100 in repo. If a 5 percent leverage ratio requirement
were binding on this dealer, and that dealer planned its business around a 10 percent return on equity, it would
require a 50 basis point interest rate spread to cover its capital cost. Such a cost would be quite substantial
relative to typical money market spreads. Of course, this is a stylized example, and banks could well choose to
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
apply  a  lower  cost  of  capital  than  used  here  for  low-risk  activities  like  money  market  intermediation.  The
mechanism by which banks determine their cost of capital for individual activities remains a topic of active
research without a strong consensus. See Stiroh, “A Perspective on Supervisory Objectives and Trade-offs,”
February 23, 2017.
See also Duffie, “Why the leverage ratio distorts market-making.” Risk, January 3, 2017.
There are likely other disincentives to dealers’ acting as intermediaries in money markets. For example, the
Dodd-Frank Act’s prohibition on proprietary trading may limit banks’ ability or willingness to engage in activity
that is classified for regulatory purposes as arbitrage, such as in the foreign exchange swaps market.
This discussion is intended as a high-level summary, and omits a number of other technical requirements for
transactions  to  be  eligible  for  netting.  The  financial  accounting  rules  for  balance  sheet  netting  for  repo
transactions are spelled out in Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Interpretation No. 41, “Offsetting of
Amounts Related to Certain Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase Agreements” (FIN 41). For other derivatives
contracts, FASB Interpretation No. 39, “Offsetting of Amounts Related to Certain Contracts” (FIN 39) states the
relevant requirements.
I discussed the foreign repo pool in my 2016 remarks. See Potter, “Money Markets after Liftoff: Assessment to
Date and the Road Ahead,” February 22, 2016. It is also discussed in the annual report.
See “The Recent Increase in the Effective Fed Funds and Overnight Bank Funding Rates,” Wrightson ICAP,
October 17, 2016.
See “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances,” March 10, 2016 and January 5, 2017.
Duffie and Krishnamurthy, “Passthrough Efficiency in the Fed’s New Monetary Policy Setting,” 2016.
In  constructing  this  time  series,  Darrell  and Arvind  combine  two  things:  before  mid-2009,  they  use  a  now-
discontinued secondary market rate for tradable certificates of deposit. This is a wholesale market rate, and
during normal times it generally tracked the federal funds rate. However, after mid-2009, they use a primary
market deposit rate (i.e., rates offered in bank branches to customers) that did not rise after the December 2015
tightening. This low responsiveness of primary market rates to tightening of monetary policy is consistent with
similar  behavior  during  previous  tightening  cycles,  as  documented  by  Driscoll  and  Judson,  “Sticky  Deposit
Rates,” October 1, 2013.
The OECD’s dataset includes a 90-day interest rate series. Pre-2013, it similarly used the now-discontinued
secondary-market  CD  rate  data.  However,  post-2013  it  uses  the  interest  rate  on  90-day AA-rated  financial
commercial paper. In contrast to the retail rate Darrell and Arvind use, this commercial paper rate rose along
with the federal funds rate in late 2015.
In the unsecured market, we also sometimes see small upticks ahead of holiday weekends, such as on days
that are not Federal banking holidays but on which the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association
has recommended closure or early closure. For example, we saw modest, transitory upticks in dispersion on
March 24, 2016 (Good Friday) and December 23, 2016 (the business day before the Christmas holiday). A
similar uptick was observed on November 23, 2016 (the day before Thanksgiving).
In the measure that combines both markets, we see dispersion fall on month- and quarter-end dates; this
occurs because rates tend to fall in the unsecured market on these dates, pushing them closer together.
I discussed these factors in my February 2016 speech.
Some government-sponsored entities can also participate in the dealer-to-dealer market.
This  is  due  to  covered  interest  rate  parity:  the  proposition  that  the  interest  rate  differential  between  two
currencies of a given tenor should equal the differential between the spot exchange rate and the future exchange
rate of the same tenor. See Borio, McCauley, McGuire and Sushko, “Covered interest parity lost: understanding
the cross-currency basis,” September 2016.
Counterparty risk may have risen somewhat since the crisis. However, in the absence of acute financial stress,
the  impact  of  counterparty  risk  on  interest  rates  paid  by  well-capitalized  financial  firms  is  likely  to  be  quite
modest for overnight or short-term tenors.
In other jurisdictions there is also evidence that a restricted supply of good collateral is exacerbating the impact
of these factors.
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
35
36
37
38
A number of other factors have likely been relevant at the margin. For example, monetary policy divergence
across currency areas, and shortages of high-quality foreign collateral, may have put pressure on FX swap
markets.  See  Nakaso,  “Monetary  Policy  Divergence  and  Global  Financial  Stability:  From  the  Perspective  of
Demand and Supply of Safe Assets,” January 20, 2017.
Much net borrowing in interdealer repo comes from smaller or less creditworthy dealers, and a large portion of
foreign exchange swap borrowing market appears to come from firms that have large dollar asset holdings and
copious foreign-currency financing, but that lack a U.S. deposit base or direct wholesale dollar money market
presence. To the extent that these firms had previously had access to financing from money market funds, in
many cases this came from prime funds, which as I mentioned earlier have shrunk considerably. 
The apparently short-run inelastic demand for funds from these firms has supported higher intermediation
spreads in these markets, particularly on period-end dates. Over time, these higher spreads might encourage
these firms to seek more stable sources of dollar funding or decrease their dollar assets, either of which would
likely be positive for financial stability. Indeed, we have heard anecdotally that firms of this type are increasingly
shifting towards wholesale deposits from nonfinancial corporations.
For example, if repo rates fell relative to other rates, we might see more take-up at our ON RRP operations, or if
foreign  exchange  swap  rates  were  to  rise  further,  we  might  see  greater  use  of  the  official  dollar  auctions
conducted by foreign central banks that are part of the standing swap network.
CGFS Paper No. 54, “Regulatory change and monetary policy,” May 2015.
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
