Mojmír  Hampl:  Central  banks,  digital  currencies  and  monetary
policy in times of elastic money
Speech by Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Official Monetary
and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) Roundtable, London, 11 July 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Good afternoon. Before I start in earnest, let me thank the OMFIF for the kind invitation to this
event,  which  allows  me  to  speak  in  front  of  such  a  distinguished  audience.  It  is  an  utmost
pleasure for me to be here.
The topics of today’s session are threefold: cryptocurrencies, central bank digital currencies and
monetary  policy  with  elastic  money.  I’ll  try  to  touch  upon  all  of  these  topics  and  bind  them
together, yet I realise the task is challenging.
Let  me  begin  with  a  story  from  Prague.  In  our  capital  city  we  have  a  strong  community  of
supporters and users of cryptocurrencies. Among libertarians, some of them my ex-colleagues
or friends from the University of Economics in Prague, bitcoin is seen as a real, fully fledged
alternative to the current monetary order. Indeed, I could show you a place in Prague where one
can only pay in bitcoin.
By the way, I appreciate the name chosen for the most popular cryptocurrency, bitcoin. In the era
when  the  foundations  of  the  monetary  system  were  based  on  precious  metals,  people
sometimes “bit the coins” to check whether or not they were counterfeit. In the digital age, of
course, biting won’t help, and standard counterfeiting doesn’t rank among the many problems
that bitcoin faces.
Two  years  ago  we  held  a  seminar  on  cryptocurrencies  (and  especially  bitcoin)  at  our  central
bank. When we were preparing for the event, people from the libertarian, cryptocurrency-loving
community in Prague asked me: aren’t you afraid of us? Aren’t you afraid of bitcoin and other
independent, central-bank-free currencies and their power to marginalise traditional money?
I said – well, not really. Let’s put aside the fact that all of these alternative currencies are still
marginal  in  terms  of  size  and  scope  (all  the  electronic  transactions  using  bitcoin  worldwide
combine to some 16% of the number of electronic transactions conducted in the Czech koruna,
a currency used by a mere 10.5 million people). Bitcoin’s global market cap also constitutes only
a fraction of even the Czech money supply.
The  key  problem  is  bitcoin’s  constantly  changing  purchasing  power.  So  far  it  has  been  more
volatile than natural gas, the most volatile commodity. Such a feature is really worrying for any
innovation that wants to be seen as money: a means for paying and settling transactions, a unit
of account and a store of value.
Let’s try to imagine the following: today’s five pound note being worth ten pounds tomorrow and
then  one  pound  the  day  after  tomorrow.  It  would  be  very  difficult  to  exist  in  such  a  monetary
system, to use the currency in everyday life.
If the money you hold is losing its value, you have every incentive to get rid of it as quickly as
possible. If, on the other hand, it is gaining value fast, you want to hoard it and store it. In any
case, swift changes in purchasing power are the mortal enemy of any good currency.
Some  bitcoin  enthusiasts  put  forward  that  this  problem  will  moderate  over  time  as  more  and
more  bitcoins  are  mined  and  the  “velocity”  of  bitcoin  money  demand  increases  with  more
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
universal  acceptance  of  the  cryptocurrency.  I  don’t  think  so,  since  there  is  no  guarantee  of
purchasing power stability for any commodity-based money.
Its key principle is exogenous “money supply”, which in my eyes invites inherent volatility in value.
From this perspective, bitcoin is the antithesis of our elastic money system, which is based on
the  notion  that  to  keep  the  value  of  money  and  purchasing  power  relatively  constant  and
predictable, the amount of money has to change flexibly over time. This is the lesson of the late
19th and 20th century in monetary policy: price stability matters.
People take this as such a self-evident statement that typically they do not even think about it and
take it for granted. But this observation does nothing less than confirm the most beneficial feature
of our money and the monetary policy behind it – people use the currency and don’t have to think
about why, in fact, they trust it.
Our fault as central bankers is that we have been unable to explain, at least in many developed
countries,  that  one  of  the  key  reasons  for  the  actions  we  took  during  and  after  the  Great
Recession was simply to keep the price stability, i.e. to keep the purchasing power of money
relatively constant and predictable. Yes, sometimes it required unorthodox policies.
In conservative societies, people tend to fret about too much money being “created”, but they
typically have no idea whatsoever about how much money there actually is in circulation, how
large the effective money supply is. When I ask about the size of the money supply even in front
of well-educated audiences, I often get estimates that are wildly off the mark. In contrast, I obtain
very precise answers on the rate of inflation. Price stability, not money supply, matters.
Bitcoin nicely illustrates the very essence of the current monetary policy, which relies on elastic
money.  It  is  a  policy  of  nominal  stabilisation  of  prices,  of  the  purchasing  power  of  money.  In
consequence,  the  impact  of  shocks  does  not  require  tough  adjustments  through  wages  and
employment.
So, as long as central bankers abide by the principle of purchasing power stabilisation, I’m not
afraid  that  any  newly  invented  fixed  money  system  will  spontaneously  prevail  and  become
dominant. The fact that current money is fiat, not really in line with my libertarian friends’ dreams,
is less important than price stability, I would say.
What  is  really  interesting  and  potentially  useful  about  cryptocurrencies  (beyond  the  mere
intellectual  stimulus,  of  course)  is  distributed  ledger  technology  and  the  idea  of  digital  money
being  issued  by  mainstream  central  banks  themselves.  The  two  are  bound  together  by  a
common feature: a reduction of the importance of intermediaries.
The distributed ledger technology behind bitcoin brings the attractive notion that, in principle, we
don’t need any centralised settlement systems, any standardised systems that settle payments.
The settlement system can be decentralised, thus potentially saving time.
But  let’s  not  forget  how  the  system  of  payment  confirmation  works  when  distributed  ledger
technology is in play. Bitcoin makes many users confirm that a transaction has taken place. The
process  is  very  energy-demanding,  akin  to  actual  mining:  it  resembles  all  the  processes
employed in the past when we were dealing with physical money. Using classical commodity
money requires physical investment; using bitcoin requires energy investment. So far it seems
that distributed ledger technology would consume much more energy than standardised central
clearing houses.
That’s  why  we  now  use  non-physical  money  without  any  intrinsic  value  –  it  is  more  efficient.
Going back to any physical money would be like going back from PCs to typewriters.
Maybe this is one of the reasons I haven’t so far heard of any distributed ledger technology being
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
used in the mainstream banking systems of Europe. Many institutions have been investigating
the possibility, studying it, researching it, but that’s all. Perhaps you have more information about
the practical applications of this potentially promising technology than I do.
The  second  innovation  stimulated  to  some  extent  by  alternative  currencies  is  digital  currency
issued by central banks. One can argue that central banks issue digital currencies even now –
expanding their balance sheets by creating electronic money.
But this new concept is defined in a narrower sense. In our current system the money creation
process is a public-private partnership, with the majority of money being created by commercial
banks by means of lending. The banks are essentially creating new deposits, rather than passing
on the existing ones.
Therefore, when the central bank wants to increase or decrease monetary balances for the final
users  of  money  (households  or  non-financial  companies)  it  can  only  incentivise  the  change
indirectly through the actions of credit institutions.
Central bank digital currency would bypass the financial sector and issue money to end-users
directly  through  the  balance  sheet  of  the  central  bank.  Similarly  to  cash,  digital  money  would
constitute a liability of the central bank. Instead of being the bank of banks, the central bank would
become the “bank of the people” or “for the people”. Every household or company might hold an
account at the central bank directly, not via an intermediary.
As we know, the Swedes have gone relatively far with their e-krona project, and the Danes have
also proceeded with similar investigations. Here in the United Kingdom, the Old Lady has gone a
long  way  as  well.  One  of  the  main  motivations  for  this  rapid  research  effort  is  the  swiftly
decreasing use of cash. Just some two per cent of the money supply is now created directly by
the central bank in Sweden, for instance. But even the avant-garde Swedes consider the e-krona
a complement of cash, not a fully-fledged substitute.
The potential advantages of distributed ledger technology and central bank digital currency are
the  following:  more  efficient  payment  systems,  direct  and  more  efficient  conduct  of  monetary
policy  (perhaps  even  practically  enabling  helicopter  drop  of  money)  and,  if  implemented  on  a
sufficiently large scale, an end to the need to run costly deposit insurance schemes.
But will central bank digital currency become a complete alternative to cash one day? I’m not
sure. Many questions remain: anonymity, susceptibility to cybercrime and IT issues. But above
all  those,  a  key  issue  arises:  the  problem  of  competition.  Will  the  central  bank  change  into  a
direct competitor to commercial banks? Will it serve as a “bank of last resort” for all deposits in
bad times? Should it also provide credit to the real economy? Might it become a real monobank,
like the ones we saw a few decades ago in former socialist countries? What would the entire
money-creation process look like?
 These questions are too important to rush around. So far it seems to me like social engineering
to talk about abolishing cash fully and issuing digital currency instead. As one of my colleagues
once put it: we might have a novel solution, but do we really have a problem?
Thank you very much for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
