Mohd Adhari Belal Din: Cybersecurity – safeguarding the future for
innovative financial inclusion
Remarks by Mr Mohd Adhari Belal Din, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  "Cybersecurity:  Safeguarding  the  Future  for  Innovative  Financial
Inclusion", Kuala Lumpur, 1 August 2017.
 It  is  my  privilege  to  welcome  you  to  this  landmark  event  – A  very  important  policy  forum  for
policymakers and regulators to discuss on the significance of cybersecurity in safeguarding the
future for innovative financial inclusion.
Intersection of financial inclusion and cybersecurity
As digital financial services expands in reach, scope and scale, cybersecurity matters a great
deal for policymakers and regulators with financial inclusion mandates. The fast-changing digital
landscape  has  brought  the  financially  excluded  and  underserved  populations  into  the  formal
financial system, bringing about a positive impact on economic growth and stability. However the
rapid paced innovation of digital financial services also opens up opportunities and incentives for
cyber-attacks, which challenges the fundamental principles of information risk and cybersecurity
management. Leaders must understand the risks associated with digital innovation, and balance
the imperative to protect their organisations and consumers with the need to adopt innovative
technology approaches.
The likelihood for cyber-attacks and fraud is exacerbated by those who are inexperienced with
formal  financial  services  and  unfamiliar  with  consumer  rights.  Low  financial  and  technology
literacy  amongst  consumers  could  translate  to  greater  vulnerabilities  and  exposures.  More
worryingly,  we  have  seen  major  cyberattacks  occurring  globally  which  caused  disruptions  to
essential financial services and destroy savings or financial assets that the underbanked depend
on.  Financial  institutions  are  not  only  prime  targets  for  cyberattacks  but  bear  tremendous
fiduciary  and  legal,  regulatory,  and  compliance  responsibility  to  protect  customer  data  and
privacy.  Safeguarding  trust  in  the  formal  financial  system  is  now  particularly  important  for  the
newly included grassroots.
In  financial  services,  the  push  for  digital  innovation,  disruptive  technologies,  delivery  of  more
personalized  customer  experiences,  and  seamless  access  to  consumers  for  more  inclusion
continuously  introduces  new  threats.  Forrester  Research  calls  this  dynamic  an  “epic”  battle
between  privacy  and  digital  innovation,  and  predicted  that  by  2020  financial  services  and
insurance  companies  expect  to  generate  the  biggest  portion  of  their  total  sales  from  digital
products,  services,  or  items  sold  online.  Alongside  this  drive  toward  digital  business,  many
organisations rely on legacy IT systems that are expensive to maintain and susceptible to more
vulnerabilities, greatly compounding the cybersecurity challenge.
Importance of cybersecurity
The current chairman, president and CEO of IBM, Ginni Rometty had described cybercrime as
“the  greatest  threat  to  every  profession,  every  industry,  every  company  in  the  world.”  While
cybersecurity used to be considered an issue primarily for the IT folks, these days it is an agenda
item for the entire C-Suite. What has really changed? It is not just the frequency of media reports
on cybersecurity breaches. If anything, these are merely symptomatic of a larger shift underway.
Cyber-attacks  are  fueled  by  increasingly  sophisticated  technologies  along  with  relatively  new
trends  in  mobility  usage,  social  media,  and  rapidly  expanding  connectivity,  all  in  the  hands  of
organized online criminal networks.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The first six months of 2017 have seen an inordinate number of cyber-attacks and they were not
just  the  standard  corporate  breaches.  Already  there  has  been  viral,  state-sponsored
ransomware, leaks of spy tools from US intelligence agencies, targeted denial-of-service attacks
and  full-on  campaign  hacking.  Unfortunately,  this  is  likely  a  prelude  of  more  cyber-attacks  to
come.
Let me share with you some key statistics on cybersecurity:
The global cost of cybercrime will reach USD2 trillion by 2019, a threefold increase from the
2015 estimate of USD500 billion.
Last  year,  cybersecurity  researchers  estimate  that  criminals  made  over  USD1  billion
through  ransomware,  with  victims  ranging  from  the  chief  executives  of  Fortune  500
companies to mom-and-pop businesses and private individuals.
1 in 131 emails contained malware in 2016, the highest rate in 5 years.
76% of organisations worldwide reported being victim of a phishing attack in 2016
Only 38 percent of global organizations claim they are prepared to handle a sophisticated
cyberattack.
Global spending to combat cybercrime will top USD80 billion this year, with organisations
increasingly  focusing  on  detection  and  response.  I  shall  deliberate  more  on  this  shift  of
focus.
Shift cybersecurity focus to detection and response
Traditionally,  the  main  focus  of  cybersecurity  traditionally  has  been  on  prevention.  However,
organisations which have been taking preventative approaches to combat cybersecurity threats
are coming to realise that this strategy have not always been successful in blocking malicious
attacks. A paradigm shift is required to move from the ‘old ways’ of trying to prevent every threat.
Organisations  need  to  emphasize  on  detecting  and  responding  to  malicious  behaviors  and
incidents, because even the best preventative controls will not prevent all incidents. There is just
no such thing as perfect protection. As there are more and more innovative financial inclusion
initiatives coming on-board, we will all need to continually reassess how much risk and controls
are appropriate.
The disparity between the speed of compromise and the speed of detection is one of the starkest
failures discovered in breach investigations. According to a 2015 report by Mandiant, the average
targeted malware compromise was present for 205 days before detection. The longest malware
presence was 2982 days, and 69% were actually discovered by external parties and not internal
IT security functions. Additionally, the 2015 Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report highlighted
that, “in 60% of cases, attackers are able to compromise an organization within minutes."
In  this  digital  world,  the  pace  of  change  and  innovation  is  already  too  fast  to  anticipate  and,
combined with advanced and persistent attacks, it will be impossible to defend against every type
of  cyber-attack.  Organisations  must  invest  in  technical,  procedural  and  human  capabilities  to
detect  when  a  compromise  occurs.  They  must  provide  the  tools  for  first  responders  to  react
quickly and investigate the source and impact of breaches, compromises and incidents.
Most  essentially,  there  is  a  need  to  balance  the  right  mix  of  investments  across  prevention,
detection and response capabilities vis-à-vis an organisation’s risk appetite. Not only are new and
advanced  tools  needed  to  supplement  existing  protection  solutions,  but  also  new  skills  and
culture need to be developed within existing security teams and the larger organization, more so
within the ambit of digital financial services whereby regulatory compliance plays a major role in
cybersecurity.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regulatory compliance does not equal cybersecurity
Regulations are designed to protect organisations, clients, and consumers against the potentially
devastating  consequences  of  cyber-attacks.  Regulatory  requirements  for  financial  institutions
have undeniably become tougher, and organisations are continuously burdened by the need to
interpret  what  a  fragmented  global  regulatory  landscape  means  for  their  operations.  Financial
institution often find themselves chasing regulatory compliance, rather than leading independent
security planning. Regulatory compliance by itself is not cybersecurity.
When  new  cybersecurity  requirements  or  frameworks  are  published,  organisations  must  first
determine  their  current  security  state  and  identify  gaps.  If  routine  testing  and  remediation  are
conducted, being compliant or meeting regulations should be easier to achieve. Of course, some
parties will want or need to go above and beyond regulations. Too often, however, organisations
find themselves in reactive mode.
Rather than taking a “check the box” approach, organisations should implement an integrated
and  cross-discipline  effort  in  order  to  adopt  an  enterprise-wide  program  of  cyber  risk
management that is tailored to business objectives, while also maintaining a tolerable level of
risk.  By  taking  an  integrated  approach  to  the  broad  objectives  of  cybersecurity  management,
organizations  can  achieve  these  business  and  security-focused  goals,  while  also  achieving
regulatory compliance in an effective and efficient manner.
Ultimately, cyber resilience which is the ability to defend, respond to, and recover from a breach,
should be the end goal for organisations. Although compliance is rightly prioritized in the highly
regulated  financial  services  industry,  being  compliant  should  be  viewed  as  a  result  of  having
good security practices rather than as a check-the-box exercise that is expected to guarantee
security.  The  focus  should  be  shifted  toward  conducting  good  cyber  due  diligence  and
assessments, implementing proper detection controls, having effectively enforced third-party risk
and insider risk programs and conducting testing such as red teaming in order to simulate the
organisation’s  response  in  the  event  of  a  serious  attack.  If  such  practices  are  implemented,
organisations  can  stay  ahead  of  industry  regulations  and  embrace  innovation,  because  their
response to any new cybersecurity requirement is less likely to demand a dramatic overhaul of
their current program.
The world today is remarkably different from the world we were living 20 years ago. The world is
fast converging in aspirations and ideals because of globalization and technology, and with that
comes  different  risks.  These  forces  of  change  present  equal  measure  of  challenges  and
opportunities but are exciting. I would like to share some open questions for everyone to ponder
upon. What is the top cyber security concern for innovation in financial inclusion which we face
today?  Have  we  allocated  enough  resources  to  properly  address  the  most  significant  cyber
security  threats?  What  specifically  have  we  done?  What  is  our  plan  for  identifying  and
addressing cyber threats? Is it current? And what does your organization need to do to ensure
continuous cybersecurity vigilance moving forward?
May we keep these questions in our mind as we have fruitful discussions and take home great
lessons in order to keep pushing the boundary of what we could achieve.
With that, I hope you will have an engaging, successful and fruitful discussion in the next 2 days. I
strongly believe this forum would be a valuable platform for members to learn and share their
knowledge and experiences as well as generate new ideas, approaches and innovations as take-
aways that could be emulated in your respective countries.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
