Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim:  Monetary  policy  autonomy  –  intricacies,
instruments and independence
Luncheon  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at Bank Negara Malaysia's Monetary Policy Conference 2017 "Monetary
Policy Autonomy: Intricacies, Instruments and Independence", Kuala Lumpur, 24 July 2017.
 Monetary policy was thought to be a relatively simple and straightforward business. It was widely
concluded  that  all  that  the  central  bank  needed  to  do  was  conduct  monetary  policy  in  a  way
consistent  with  the  inflation-target  and  ensure  that  employment  levels  are  satisfactory.  Life
should  have  been  easy  for  central  banks.  The  holy  grail  of  monetary  policy  was  achieved. 
Central banks had finally understood how monetary policy should best be conducted. This was
one  of  the  primary  explanations  for  the  Great  Moderation  –  the  period  of  prolonged
macroeconomic stability that preceded the 2007–2008 Global Financial Crisis.
Today, the situation is markedly different. Conducting monetary policy is anything but easy. For
the  advanced  economies,  despite  almost  10  years  of  easy  monetary  policy,  inflation  is  still
persistently below target and economic recovery remains slow and fragile. The latest enigma is
strong growth devoid of inflationary pressure.
For open economies, especially in emerging markets, we are left to manage the spillovers of
extraordinary policy measures implemented in the advanced economies. These spillovers have
had  tremendous  implications  on  emerging  market  central  banks  through  macroeconomic  and
financial  instability,  financial  and  foreign  exchange  market  volatility,  and  more  importantly,  the
ability and autonomy of central banks in the region to conduct monetary policy.
So much attention has been focused on the advanced economies – the growth recovery, policy
trajectory  and  political  uncertainty.  Not  enough  has  been  discussed  on  the  countries  at  the
receiving  end  of  these  uncertainties,  and  the  difficult  circumstances  under  which  emerging
market central banks have had to operate in recent years. This will be the focus of my remarks
today. 
I  intend  to  describe  a  few  reasons  on  why  it  has  been  a  real  challenge  for  emerging  market
central banks to conduct monetary policy in recent years than in the period prior to the global
financial crisis. I will then discuss the policy thinking and tools from the perspective of an open
economy  when  facing  the  challenges  that  emanate  from  global  policy-spillovers.  Lastly,  I  will
share my view on the importance of having utmost autonomy in policy-making and suggest what
we and the global community can possibly do to improve independence in policy decisions.
Global developments since the crisis have added extra layers of complexity in policy-
making
For most emerging economies, structural changes in the economy over the past two decades
such  as  diversification  of  sources  of  growth,  wider  set  of  policy  tools  and  deeper  domestic
financial  markets  have  all  contributed  to  greater  independence  in  the  formulation  of  monetary
policy. Nevertheless, the transmission of global monetary conditions to emerging economies is
unavoidable  given  the  open  nature  of  the  economies  and  the  increasingly  open  and
interconnected financial markets.
To fully appreciate the changes in the global landscape since the Global Financial Crisis and the
challenges  and  risks  they  entail,  let  me  suggest  five  important  developments  that  emerging
market economies have been facing in conducting domestic monetary policy.
First, global financial markets are more interconnected than before. Financial openness in
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  Emerging Asia,  as  measured  by  the  sum  of  assets  and  liabilities  in  the  international
investment position to GDP, has grown from around 800% of GDP to now more than 1000%
of  GDP.  Emerging Asia  cannot  escape  the  vagaries  of  the  financial  markets  around  the
globe.
Second, global capital flows have increased in size and volatility. Cumulative non-resident
capital flows to the region have reached USD2.1 trillion in 2016, compared to only USD400
billion in the period prior to the Global Financial Crisis. More importantly, capital flows have
also  become  more  fickle  than  before.  Debt  flows  now  contribute  to  66%  of  capital  flows.
These  flows  are  short-term  in  nature  and  carry  higher  propensity  of  reversals.  Emerging
markets had never experienced such phenomena before.
Third, the volume of global foreign exchange trading has grown by more than four times in
the  last  15  years  alone.  The  global  foreign  exchange  market  has  become  bigger,  more
complex  and  increasingly  disconnected  with  economic  realities.  Today,  exchange  rate
overshooting  is  the  norm  rather  than  the  exception.  Emerging  economies’  trade  volume
relative to the global market is, at best, minuscule.
Fourth, non-resident participation has increased tremendously in most emerging markets.
Non-resident holdings of Government bonds in Uruguay for example. In a little over a year,
non-resident holdings surged from 2% to 45% of the outstanding bonds in May 2013. Closer
to home, non-resident holdings of Malaysia and Thailand Government bonds increased from
10.2%  and  2.5%  in  2009  to  32.2%  and  14.1%  in  2016  respectively  .  These  non-resident
investors tend to be driven more by global rather than domestic factors, motivated by the
search for yields. As participation becomes too high, it brought heightened risks to domestic
markets  through  the  distortion  in  asset  prices.  The  disproportionate  influence  of  NR
investors  further  amplified  the  disconnect  between  domestic  interest  rates  and  economic
fundamentals.
Fifth,  asset  prices  in  emerging  economies  are  increasingly  correlated  with  global  factors,
exposing emerging markets to shocks in the advanced economies. Stock market indices
and long-term bond yields in emerging markets have shown strong co-movement with the
indices and bond yields in the advanced economies, particularly the United States. This has
led  to  signs  of  weaker  monetary  control.  The  increasingly  correlated  yields  between
advanced  economies  and  emerging  market  economies  have  weakened  the  transmission
from policy rate to domestic yields.
Given this new landscape, policymakers in highly open economies are often caught in a “catch
22” situation.  Raising interest rates to manage rising inflation and the central bank may stoke
capital  inflows  and  further  currency  appreciation.  Cutting  interest  rates  to  manage  economic
slowdown,  only  to  find  that  it  worsens  capital  reversals,  exchange  rate  depreciation,  and
potentially reignite financial imbalances that policymakers have tried so hard to tame.
These are some amongst the many challenges to any policymaker, which brings me to my next
point – the importance of policy pragmatism.
The importance of policy pragmatism
Our own experience suggests that in dealing with multifaceted challenges, a broad array of policy
instruments is critical. The idea is that no single policy tool should be overburdened. The region’s
experience theorises that despite great strides in achieving price stability and sustainable growth
since the Asian Financial Crisis, an open economy with sizeable financial market invites volatile
capital flows that adds layers of complexity in policy-making. We have expanded our policy toolkit
to  include  micro  and  macroprudential  as  well  as  financial  market  stability  measures.  This
additional arsenal of policy tools has helped to maintain the effectiveness of monetary policy and
safeguard domestic financial and macro stability.
But having a broad policy toolkit is not enough. It may be tempting for us to treat these challenges
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
as linear strings of events in order to cope with the complexity. But breaking the challenges into
digestible  fragments  of  their  own  and  tackling  them  in  isolation  using  our  various  policy  tools
seem  a  futile  attempt.  Given  the  closely  interdependent  and  constantly  evolving  nature  of  the
challenges, solving one part of them may amplify the risks in others. In this environment, it is
imperative for policymaking to also be agile and pragmatic.
One aspect of pragmatism is the need to be bold and timely in introducing new policy tools, even
unconventional ones when it becomes necessary. When a new crisis occurs, it is likely that the
factors  causing  it  are  unprecedented.  It  goes  without  saying,  that  the  solutions  required  to
remedy  the  problem  requires  new  measures  as  well.  Using  conventional  and  ‘consensus
thinking’ are unlikely to be an effective remedy.
Policy-making  is  also  increasingly  characterised  by  shorter  time  horizon.  With  the  rapid
developments in the financial markets, the window of opportunity and effectiveness for policy has
shrunk considerably. Gone are the days when policy-making can take months to formulate and
implement,  let  alone  years. As  financial  markets  evolve,  the  shelf-lives  of  policies  have  also
become shorter as policies can become ineffective very quickly. Such an uncertain environment
necessitates the deployment of new and untested policies.
The  “audacity  of  pessimism”  –  as  Mervyn  King  calls  it  –  a  situation  when  policymakers  start
scrambling to address problems only when things have gone terribly wrong – may prove too little
too late to salvage the situation. Constant, holistic and courageous assessments of implemented
policies are therefore crucial in ensuring that policies remain relevant.
Another area of policy pragmatism that seldom gets discussed is the ability and conviction in
reversing policies when deemed appropriate. In my years as a central banker, there seems to be
an unspoken rule among global policymakers that certain policy paths are one-way, no-return
endeavours. Any policy reversals are seen as a backward move that is time inconsistent, which
could risk a permanent damage on trust, reputations and credibility of the central bank.
For me, this mindset is not tenable and counterproductive. It is imperative to realise that under
extreme circumstances, a reversal of policies may be beneficial and in fact, necessary for the
greater good and wellbeing of the society. Sometimes, taking a step backward may be the best
way forward.
A case in point is in the area of liberalisation. While we have benefitted from an open market, and
are strongly committed to the principles of this approach, we believe that countries should be
cautious  in  its  adoption,  giving  due  consideration  to  the  various  trade-offs  and  preconditions.
There  might  be  a  situation  where  a  ‘short  moratorium’  for  further  liberalisation  becomes
necessary. As  with  everything  else,  a  balanced  approach  is  always  the  preferred  and  wiser
option.  Liberalisation  is  not  a  ‘cure  all’  for  economic  development.  It  is  not  a  panacea  for
economic sustainability either. Liberalisation requires patience and sequenced planning. Greater
openness needs to be phased in and be consistent with the readiness of the domestic market.
Should expanded relaxation of policy become a source of financial instability, policymakers must
be decisive and have the boldness to change course. This brings me to my final point of my
remarks today.
Policy autonomy
It is now widely accepted that a broad policy toolkit and pragmatic policymaking are paramount in
dealing  with  multiple  challenges.  Unconventional  and  unprecedented  policies  are  no  more
heresy. This shift in mindset is a very welcome change. If only this mindset had persisted during
the AFC, our experience in the region would have been much more positive. Experience also
suggests  that  policy  autonomy  is  critical  in  deploying  measures  in  an  environment  with  no
precedent. Especially when the essence of the problems is domestic in nature, compounded by
the specificity of each economy’s operating and legal environment, political and social structures.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Policy prescriptions will be least effective when it is not ‘owned’ by the domestic policy maker or
when it is not independent of external influence and coercion or when policy being administered
is more a reflection of ‘consensus economic’ thinking.
External  influence  can  be  viewed  from  two  aspects.  External  developments  that  transcend
national  boundaries;  and  external  players  that  may  directly  or  indirectly  suppress  domestic
autonomy.  The  former  has  been  greatly  discussed,  where  financial  liberalisation  and
globalisation have worsened the trade-offs for monetary policy to achieve its multiple domestic
objectives.  Some  consensus  has  also  been  reached  on  the  ways  to  regain  autonomy,  in  the
form of broad policy toolkit to prevent overburdening of any single policy instrument, the building-
up of buffers and instituting the necessary structural reforms that serve to fortify the economy.
What  is  less  represented,  but  in  no  way  less  relevant,  is  the  potential  for  external  players  to
suppress national autonomy. Let me elaborate.
Despite  great  strides  in  global  integration  bringing  the  benefits  of  reduced  inter-country
disparities, differences still exist. As much as we can categorise economies based on common
characteristics, be it by geography, or by level of development, no two countries are identical.
Even if countries may seem similar, their reaction to a certain phenomenon, in all likelihood, will
not be the same.
This  reminded  me  of  the  doctor-patient  relationship,  grounded  by  the  classical  “Principle  of
Biomedical Ethics” that emphasises respect for the patients’ autonomy. A doctor may well know
all  the  treatment  options  available,  and  would  prefer  some  over  others,  but  it  is  ultimately  the
wishes of the patient that needs to be considered. The doctor, rather than vehemently working
against the patient, should upon exploration of options and sharing of information, wholeheartedly
respect and support the decision of the patient. Underlying this bilateral covenant is the crucial
recognition of the shared humanity of doctors and patients.
In a similar manner, we can all agree that as policymakers and regulators, macroeconomic and
financial stability is a shared goal. We have been very grateful for the wealth of information and
quality of debate that multilateral institutions bring to the table, which have immensely aided our
decision-making  process.  However,  individual  countries  should  not  be  starved  of  policy
autonomy  to  manage  challenges.  Domestic  policymakers  have  greater  understanding  of  the
local economic and financial conditions, with the necessary experience in dealing with country-
specific  circumstances.  In  this  regard,  multilateral  institutions  must  respect  that  individual
countries, as independent institutions, have made the tough but necessary choices after careful
and deliberate considerations.
Multilateral  institutions  possess  great  breadth  of  cross-country  information  to  dispense
prescription for its member countries. But there is no such thing as a ‘one-pill-cures-all’ remedy.
Instead, tailored policy responses are essential given the unique and diverse nature of emerging
economies. As the world becomes increasingly more integrated and harmonised, we welcome
the value of global coordination and interaction if it adds to the betterment of society at large. But
where  peculiarities  exist,  member  institutions  ought  to  be  given  the  space  to  exercise  their
autonomy.
We  must  also  avoid  the  rush  towards  greater  cross-country  standardisation  that  impinge  on
policy flexibility or where policies are judged based on pre-subscribed narrow definitions, theories
and concepts rather than the actual outcomes. The never-ending debate on the categorisation of
policies  as  capital  flow  management  measures  or  macro  prudential  policies  is  one  such
contention. In an increasingly integrated and complex environment, the impact of shocks varies
between countries. The policy would also vary. Even if policies are similar, the outcomes might
be different. The work of multilateral institutions becomes even more difficult and complex. For
instance,  any  mis-categorisation  of  policy  could  prematurely  reverse  the  effectiveness  of  that
policy,  given  the  impact  it  might  have  on  investor  perception  and  sentiment.  Beyond  the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
potentially arbitrary labelling, the efficacy and desirability of a given policy should be judged solely
by its outcome and its effectiveness in correcting market failures and imbalances. Only then can
policies be evaluated intelligently, fairly and measurably.
Today  I  have  talked  about  how  it  has  become  more  difficult  for  central  bankers  in  open
economies to conduct monetary policy. I attempted to highlight that in order to manage these
difficult challenges, there needs to be sufficient pragmatism and agility by central bankers. Most
importantly,  policymakers  have  to  be  given  sufficient  space  and  autonomy  to  address  rising
challenges to our respective economies.
I am reminded by John Baldoni’s article on “The Secret to Team Collaboration: Individuality”. The
author warned about the risks of confusing between collectivism and collaboration. Collectivism
leads to confined “group-think” and decisions; collaboration on the other hand breeds innovation.
While  collectivists  do  work  towards  a  single  goal,  they  ignore  alternate  paths  to  achieve  that
purpose.  Collaborators,  however,  while  similarly  focused  on  a  single  purpose,  arrive  at  their
goals by incorporating different points of view and creative solutions. In short, collectivists value
ideology over results. Collaborators are pragmatists that look for alternative ways to get things
done.
As we move forward and fight for greater policy autonomy, we might be tempted to think that
integration and collaboration come at the expense of individuality and domestic autonomy. In my
opinion, it is the exact opposite. Collaboration thrives with individuality and autonomy. This is not
wishful thinking. With the right instruments and tools, and considerable agility, policy autonomy is
not only attainable; it can be the perfect catalyst for powerful collaboration as we move forward.
Let us collaborate rather than be restrained by collectivism.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
