Rameswurlall Basant Roi: The role of accountants in the process of
economic development
Address  by  Mr  Rameswurlall  Basant  Roi,  Governor,  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Forum  of
Accountants organized by the Mauritius Institute of Professional Accountants, Flic en Flac, 20
July 2017.
Hon Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms
Chairman, Mauritius Institute of Professional Accountants
 Distinguished guests
Ladies and gentlemen
 Good morning
Thank you for having invited me to speak to an audience of accountants. It’s a first for me. On the
occasion of this Forum organized by the Mauritius Institute of Professional Accountants (MIPA),
it’s my pleasure to share with you some of my thoughts on the role of accountants in the process
of economic development.  Let me at the very outset stress that contributions of accountants to
the  process  of  economic  development  are  generally  not  direct.  But  their  services  as  external
auditors of financial institutions make direct contributions to the efficient functioning of financial
markets which, in turn, allocate scarce resources to economic sectors and facilitate the process
of economic development.
I am an economist and a central banker by profession. An economist who is also a regulator of
financial institutions does not always make a delightful company with accountants in the external
auditing profession. A Cambridge University economist, Joan Robinson, who happened to have
lectured me at one point in time, had once observed that the reason one must study economics
is  “to  avoid  being  deceived  by  economists.”  Decades  ago,  when  I  had  joined  the  Bank  of
Mauritius which is also the regulator of various types of financial institutions in the country, I had
told to myself that I need to have a good understanding of accountancy in order to avoid being
deceived  by  accountants.  I  am  sure,  you  must  be  familiar  with  the  phenomenon  that  some
people  talk  in  their  sleep.  Economists  are  sometimes  said  to  talk  in  other  people’s  sleep.  In
November 2015, the year when the banking license of the Bramer Banking Corporation Limited
was revoked, I had given an address wherein, I hope, I had not talked in other people’s sleep. And
I hope, I will not do so today.
More  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  I  was  asked  to  speak  briefly  on  the  causes  for  the
deteriorating conditions of a financial institution at a Rotary Club meeting. The laws of the land did
not and still do not allow me to speak on matters that are classified as confidential. I chose to
speak,  in  general  terms,  on  the  failures  of  in-house  accountants  and  of  external  auditors  to
caution boards of directors of financial institutions on a number of vitally important issues even
when the issues are clearly driving them to the edge of a cliff. A few years before this particular
event, the Bank for International Settlements had already come up with the Cooke Committee
Report,  referred  to  as  the  Basel  I  nowadays.  I  had  expected  any  accountant  present  there  to
have already taken cognizance of the Report. Sadly, an accountant, seated in the crowd, listened
to me – restlessly and visibly quite irritated. When I was over with my very brief intervention, it
was question time. Unhappy with my remarks, he tirelessly gave a lengthy exposé on the origin
of  the  word  audit,  which  I  approvingly  found  scholastic,  but  ended  with  a  strong  conclusive
statement that it is not the duty of auditors to caution board directors of financial institutions on,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
for  example,  their  deteriorating  prudential  ratios.  I  later  learned  that  the  accountant  had  spent
most of his professional life in a car dealer’s warehouse.
This narrative is illustrative of how many of our accountants had failed to recognize how fast the
auditing  profession  was  evolving  and  how  critically  important  are  their  roles  in  an  economic
system. I am more inclined to believe that, today, our accountants are very much aware that
there are more differences, indeed very many important differences, than similarities between
auditing  a  corner  shop  and  a  financial  institution.  When  a  corner  shop  goes  bankrupt  for
whatever reason, it’s not news. The owner or owners of the shop and the creditor or creditors, if
any,  are  the  only  ones  who  are  the  losers.  When  a  financial  institution  goes  bankrupt,  it’s
headline news. The differences of importance and of implications for a society cannot be much
clearer. If the financial institution is systemically important, the entire industry, the economy and
the  society  as  a  whole  bear  the  brunt  of  losses,  in  one  way  or  the  other.  We  have  been
witnessing  for  a  decade  how  the  banking  industry  across  the  world  has  been  forced  to
reconstruct its balance sheet at the same time. Lord William Rees-Mogg has put it fittingly that,
“it is like the married couple who both feel chilly at night when they only have a single bed blanket
on a double bed. Everyone is trying to maximize their cash take from everyone else.” I need not
elaborate on how the process of economic development is arrested and the economic well-being
of the vast majority of people takes a buffeting once financial instability sets in. Accountants are
one  of  the  several  key  players  whose  role  in  the  promotion  of  financial  stability  is  decisively
crucial.
At the pinnacle of the accountancy profession lies the International Accounting Standards Board,
the IASB, whose mission is testimony to the importance of the profession. As you are aware, the
IASB  is  the  standard-setter  tasked  with  the  responsibility  of  developing  International  Financial
Reporting Standards that bring transparency, accountability and efficiency to financial markets
around the world. The Constitution of the IASB is unambiguous about the need to promote public
interest.  Its  work  serves  the  public  interest  by  fostering  trust,  growth  and  long-term  financial
stability in the global economy. Accountants are, indeed, a vital cog in the successful carriage of
the endeavour.
Accountants perform several roles in an economic system including, amongst others, auditors,
consultants,  financial  analyst,  tax  planners  and  business  advisers  and  influence  the  lives  of
millions of people globally. Their skills and competence are sought by companies, ranging from
the  smallest  ones  to  the  large  multinationals  and  their  audit  reports  are  viewed  by  millions,
including shareholders, governments, regulators, investors and the public at large. They must
inspire trust at all times in the eyes of the people.
Trust is the cornerstone on which our society, as any other society, operates. It is essential to
commerce. Trustworthiness gives the accountancy profession its touch of honour. A lack of trust
is generally fatal to business success. Without trust, we end up having what is called a “bazaar
economy.”  Without  trust,  economic  prosperity  disintegrates.  Way  back  in  1913,  J.P.  Morgan
testified to the US Senate that “a man I do not trust could not get money from me on all the bonds
in  Christendom.”  Trust  is  a  precondition  for  mobilizing  capital  and  ensuring  its  efficient  re-
allocation to different sectors of the economy. Savers will only be willing to entrust their funds to
other economic agents if they can trust the information provided by the recipients of these funds.
As such, accountants’ responsibility is to give comfort that the financial information provides a
true  and  fair  picture  of  the  affairs  of  the  borrowers.  Any  misrepresentation  of  the  financial
condition eventually perpetrates distortions in financial markets.
In the globalized world we find ourselves, accountants are expected to have thorough knowledge
of the financials of companies and to be familiar with the numerous economic and political forces
at work. The risks are too many. They certainly need to have in-depth knowledge of the drivers of
performance  and  provide  independent  opinion  on  the  opportunities  and  risk  profiles  of
companies. It is the quality, reliability and objectivity of such information which stakeholders rely
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
upon to make informed judgment and allocate resources efficiently, which is so essential to the
process of economic development.
Let me digress to remind the accountants present here of the BAI Group episode. You will recall
that the Bank of Mauritius had hired the services of nTan Advisory Ltd of Singapore to investigate
into the various causes that led to the demise of the BAI Group. I personally went through a bulky
document of more than 10,000 pages attached to the main Report. Suffice it to say, they do not
speak well of the in-house accountants and the accountants in the external auditing profession.
Had the external auditors given a true and fair picture of the financial standing of the Group, I am
sure  the  nonsensical  game,  to  use  a  very  polite  phrase,  would  have  been  avoided  and  the
disruptive  forces  unleashed  by  its  failure  prevented  from  stalling  the  growth  process  of  the
economy.
When  external  auditors  validate  the  books  of  fraudulent  companies,  the  bill  of  indictment
becomes burdensome. When auditors issue favourable opinions knowingly on doctored balance
sheets,  they  stop  serving  public  interest.  They  do  not  facilitate  the  process  of  economic
development;  they  destroy  it.  Accountants,  like  some  economists,  are  artists.  They  have  a
noticeable tendency to paint what their patrons, who pay them, want to see. I glossed over quite
some files on the revocation of banking licenses by the Bank of Mauritius over the years. In all of
the  cases,  external  auditors  had  been  regularly  issuing  a  clean  bill  of  health.  Remember  one
thing: forget economic development, nations are often made bankrupt by fraudulent practices in
financial institutions. In-house accountants and those in the external auditing profession have an
immense  responsibility  to  maintain  rigors  and  financial  discipline  in  financial  as  well  as  non-
financial enterprises.     
In the banking business, the so-called ‘disaster myopia’ that characterized many of the external
auditors  who  had  oversight  responsibilities  over  these  banks  may  lead  to  malevolent  financial
stability  consequences.  Three  issues  come  to  the  fore  in  these  cases.  First,  many  external
auditors  have  often  limited  themselves  to  the  microcosmic  world  of  compliance  and  failed  to
comprehend the new financially engineered risks that banks undertake. Second, there may have
been an agency issue similar to credit rating agencies: as I mentioned earlier, external auditors
are often remunerated by those very banks that they oversee. They may, thus, be tempted not to
report evidence of any simmering malfeasances for fear of losing their business and third they
may  not  fully  endogenise  the  financial  stability  implications  and  may  limit  themselves  to  audit
rules while discharging their duties.
 An externally audited account undoubtedly constitutes a thumbmark of the quality of reporting.
However competently conducted, it cannot be interpreted as a blanket cover that everything is
perfect in an organization. The instances of corporate failures that had escaped the radar screen
of external auditors and gained notoriety afterwards as with Enron, WorldCom, Nortel, Tyco and
Parmalat are still vivid in our minds. Accounting irregularities at leading corporate entities are a
stark  reminder  as  to  how  much  the  absence  of  accurate,  timely  and  comparable  financial
information can impede the effective working of markets. Auditors were the first ones to face a
backlash and in some instances, their independence was even questioned.
I  cannot  overlook  the  criticality  of  international  standards  in  my  remarks  this  morning.  The
implementation of international standards provides credence to our financial system and facilitate
comparison  across  jurisdictions.  Countries’  financial  systems  are  increasingly  built  on  a
compendium  of  best-practice  international  standards.  The  International  Financial  Reporting
Standards (IFRS) form part  of  them.  IFRS  optimizes  the  decision  making  process  by  helping
investors better identify opportunities and risks. These investors not only include individuals but
also  the  big  powerhouses  such  as  sovereign  wealth  funds,  pension  funds  and  asset
management companies, with billions of dollars and thousands of employees concerned. They
need  to  maximize  returns,  minimize  risks  and  maintain  a  diversified  portfolio.  As  funds  are
invested in many countries, the adoption of IFRS has simplified matters when compared to the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
pre-IFRS world of wildly diverging national accounting standards.
I  have,  so  far,  highlighted  the  importance  of  accountants  in  the  process  of  economic
development of a country. As a final remark, let me very briefly reflect on a subject that many of
us refrain from referring to for fear of being politically incorrect. It’s on greed, governance and
ethics. In financial markets, devoid of proper institutional rules and discipline, there is the law of
the jungle – because of greed. In my view, depending on how the concept of greed is understood,
there  is  nothing  wrong  with  greed.  In  fact,  our  capitalist  system  can  be  interpreted  as  being
based on the concept of greed. It’s only when you are far removed from the domain of wisdom
that greed takes a strong and pre-dominant foothold in your profession. Greed, the predator’s
gene, has to be tempered by fear of losses.
Unfortunately, we do not have the philosophical capacity to issue a guideline on greed but we
have,  years  ago,  issued  a  guideline  on  corporate  governance.  I  urge  you  all  to  pay  special
attention to governance while conducting audits. I am particularly happy to note that there are
increasingly more interactions between the accountants in the auditing profession and the Bank
of  Mauritius,  not  only  on  matters  relating  to  governance  but  on  many  aspects  of  the  auditing
profession. The Bank of Mauritius gladly welcomes the interactions.
And, finally, a few words on ethical behaviour in the auditing profession. Remain loyal to your
profession  and  always  guide  your  clients  to  the  best  practices.  Yours  is  an  honourable
profession. Maintain the standard required of you. Some high profile corporate failures in the past
have been caused by creative accounting and concealing the true risks of the companies which
were, in certain cases, moved off balance sheet. In some cases, accountants working for these
companies  devised  such  financial  shenanigans  which  were  facilitated  by  compliant  or
complacent  auditors.  These  short  term  gains  often  result  in  long  term  pains,  both  for  the
individuals and the economy, too. Never condone such practices.
We cannot compromise our reputation by resorting to such questionable practices. A strong and
stable banking system is vital to the robustness of an economy. You, as auditors, must refrain, at
all  cost,  from  producing  audit  reports  that,  instead,  contribute  to  a  weakening  of  the  banking
system. I am pretty well aware that the Bank of Mauritius is said to have been very tough and
often quite rude with some of you as with others. As I have always said, the Bank of Mauritius is
“cruel only to be kind” to you and our jurisdiction.
I urge the accountants to reflect on emerging challenges that the profession is facing and request
the MIPA to collectively take steps to meet those challenges. You must be aware that a lack of
skills  in  certain  areas  of  auditing  is  now  being  palpably  felt.  Your  association  is  having  a
formidable agenda for action. May I wish you all very fruitful deliberations during the Forum.
I thank you for your attention and wish you well in taking the profession forward.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
