Carl-Ludwig  Thiele:  Closing  remarks  -  Focus  Session  by  the
European Central Bank and Deutsche Bundesbank
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the Focus Session by the European Central Bank and Deutsche Bundesbank,
Frankfurt am Main, 28 March 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen
 You were invited to this Focus Session today by the European Central Bank and the Deutsche
Bundesbank.  As  is  customary  at  these  sessions,  discussions  centred  around  our  common
objective  of  improving  the  security  and  efficiency  of  payments  and  securities  settlement
operations.
A  joint  task  is  most  certainly  what  this  is,  in  our  opinion.  It  is  for  that  reason  that  we  seek  to
promote  dialogue  between  central  banks  and  market  participants  and  between  infrastructure
providers and users. You will be aware, I imagine, that the term “central bank” originally came
about on account of the central role which the institution plays in the world of payments. The
other functions performed by central banks – issuing currency and acting as the lender of last
resort – didn’t come along until later.
That central role is one we continue to perform to this day. And I don’t mean that in the sense of
being a central agent wielding control over developments, but more in terms of bearing a high
degree of responsibility for efficiency and security in the payments and settlement space.
Our mission is to serve the market with secure and efficient infrastructures. And with a stable
currency and robust supervision, too, of course.
The most important asset we can draw on in this regard is trust. And trust is forged by acting
credibly and transparently and in the spirit of mutual understanding. Technology alone will not
nurture trust – I’m certain of that.
That’s why events like today’s, which promote lively interaction, are so important to us. What can
we take away from today’s Focus Session?
 
1. What does the market need?
We spoke today about the needs of the market.
One  major  talking  point,  of  course,  was  instant  payments.  The  market  consultation  on  TIPS,
which will pave the way for settling instant payments in safe central bank money, was the cue for
our discussion today.
I would use the words approving and encouraging to sum up the outcome of the consultation.
Judging by your market responses, I am confident that we can come up with solutions which will
also be attractive in terms of the cost of settlement.
One  major  hurdle  which  instant  payments  face  is  the  question  of  liquidity  management.  In
addition,  due  to  the  new  regulations  and  due  to  the  general  interest  in  reducing  exposures
markets will need more collateral in the future.
That is why the Eurosystem will roll out solutions which help the market cope with the liquidity
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
challenges.
Our  thoughts  are  not  confined  to  the  Eurosystem,  of  course.  Multi-currency  capability  is  an
enduring system feature which might prove worthwhile in the integration of European markets,
for example.
The  issue  of  TARGET2  and  T2S  consolidation  was  another  area  in  which  we  discussed  the
outcome  of  the  consultation.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  your  numerous  contributions  today  were
insightful and thought-provoking. The Eurosystem is currently liaising with the potential users of
our services to formulate a set of user requirements. We cannot, of course, make every wish
come true, nor would it be right for us to do so, because at the end of the day, we are a provider
that needs to cover its costs, and those wishes will have to be paid for.
The  trick  will  mainly  be  to  use  consolidation  as  a  way  of  driving  down  costs.  Investment  in
consolidation  will  push  costs  higher  initially,  but  over  the  medium-term  horizon,  it  will  yield
significant savings in the running of T2 and T2S. 
All our projects can’t go live overnight, of course, and building Rome in one day is something we
can’t be expected to achieve, either.
 
2. Technical innovation
Another topic we spoke about today was innovation and transformation. There are a great many
technological  innovations  which  could  potentially  unleash  change  in  the  market.  Blockchain,
distributed ledger technology, cloud computing, big data analytics and artificial intelligence are
already firmly established in the way we think and, in some cases, how we act, too.
Plato once said that “necessity is the mother of invention". But in the case of blockchain, it is the
exact opposite we are seeing. The invention, ie blockchain, has already been born. Now people in
many quarters are looking for the necessity – that is, for specific areas where it can be put into
practice.
The  initial  sense  of  euphoria  over  the  potential  which  blockchain  and  distributed  ledger
technology  offer  has  now  given  way  to  disillusionment  over  the  problems  surrounding  their
practical implementation.
Central banks, too, are testing a variety of ways in which the potential offered by blockchain can
be harnessed. At the Bundesbank, it’s all about moving further along the learning curve. We are
running hands-on, practical experiments to explore whether, and if so, how, a blockchain-based
application can feasibly be used to settle securities transactions.
The  prototype  we  have  developed  in  conjunction  with Deutsche  Börse  works.  It  can  settle
payments,  both  delivery-versus-payment 
(FoP)  securities
transactions,  and  it  can  process  straightforward  capital  measures  such  as  interest  payments
and redemptions of maturing bonds.
free-of-payment 
(DvP)  and 
The  challenge  we  are  facing  now  is  to  engineer  the  prototype  to  a  degree  that  yields  robust
insights into its performance. Being a provider of market infrastructure, we are naturally curious
to  know  whether  the  technology  is  scalable,  what  it  will  really  cost  when  it’s  up  and  running,
which technical issues might crop up when settling large numbers of trades, and much more
besides.
In our view, it has not yet been proven beyond doubt that blockchain-based settlement systems
are superior to the methods in use today. That’s why we’re open-minded about this issue – as I
said earlier, we are looking to learn more. But we’re not looking to compare apples and oranges,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
hence our efforts to base the experiment on today’s real-world conditions. Blockchain needs to fit
into the real world, not vice versa.
Earlier on, I mentioned the sense of disillusionment which has now clouded many blockchain
projects. But let me reiterate our commitment to exploring these issues with an open mind – it
would be wrong to overlook any opportunities that might arise.
Just remember: the first motorised seagoing vessels lagged behind the fastest sailing boats of
the day. But field testing improved that technology to such an extent that no-one today would
seriously regard sailing boats as a realistic means of transporting goods by sea.
Remember, too, that we tend to follow set behavioural patterns and pigeonhole issues according
to our existing business models and processes. It might be that we don’t yet grasp the merits of
a  new  technology  because  they  only  really  come  to  the  fore  in  different  business  models  or
processes.  Perhaps  merely  discussing  the  new  technology  will  spark  the  emergence  of  new
business models and more efficient settlement models.
In  short,  new  technologies  –  and  by  that  I  mean  blockchain  and  beyond  –  offer  opportunities
which we need to explore with an open mind, but without losing touch with reality.
 
3. German market migrates to T2S
T2S showed us just how complex innovations can be in the settlement world. We all breathed a
huge sigh of relief when the German market, with its central securities depository Clearstream
Banking AG, migrated to the single shared platform (SSP) as scheduled at the close of business
on 6 February 2017. Transition work went smoothly, as did the first days of business.
It truly was a resounding success – a masterpiece in cooperation across an entire industry. It’s
always the case that success has many fathers, and that bon mot really is quite apt when it
comes to the settlement of securities which, after all, is a network industry.
Every  single  stakeholder  –  the  4CB,  Clearstream,  all  the  banks  and  other  customers  of
Clearstream – had to migrate simultaneously and adjust their systems accordingly. That’s why
thanks are also due to everyone involved. I firmly believe it was an impressive accomplishment.
All in all, 18 central securities depositories and their markets have now migrated to T2S since the
platform was launched in June 2015. This means that T2S is a major step closer to the vision of
it becoming a hub for European securities settlement.
This migration was particularly noteworthy because the size of the German market effectively
doubled the volume of business settled via the T2S platform.
T2S  has  demonstrated  that  it  can  cater  for  whatever  standards  market  participants  expect  a
European securities settlement platform to meet.
For  German  market  participants,  the  SSP  not  only  eases  settlement  by  standardising  and
harmonising procedures but also offers them opportunities to optimise their liquidity and collateral
management.
 
4. Invitation to reception
Ladies and gentlemen
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today’s Focus Session was a very special one for me. We made a conscious decision to host
this session, following the German market’s transition to T2S, here in Frankfurt am Main. The
migration of Wave 4 to the SSP marks a huge step forward for each and every one of us. Of
course, that’s an achievement we need to celebrate.
However, today’s session did more than just dwell on past achievements – we also looked to the
future  and  the  challenges  it  holds  in  store.  Because  as  a  Chinese  saying  goes,  the  roads  of
tomorrow must be built today.
We,  the  central  banks,  organised  this  Focus  Session  for  you,  the  market  participants.  You
engaged with us, and you debated with us. Thank you all for getting involved. My gratitude also
goes out to all those who made our Focus Session such a success – everyone who spoke and
participated in discussions, and of course the many helping hands in the background whose job
it was to prepare and organise today’s event.
Ladies and gentlemen
Securities settlement and payments are a network industry. What would be more apt, then, to
network at a joint reception to which you are now all cordially invited.
Join me there in celebrating the successful migration of the German market to T2S.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
