Amando Tetangco: Of central banking, art and legacies
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  launching  of  the  books  “Philippine  Central  Banking: A
Strategic Journey to Stability” and “Likha: Enduring Legacies of Filipino Artistry”, The Decorative
Arts Collection of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Manila, 25 May 2017.
 The Members of the Monetary Board of the BSP thank all of you for accepting our invitation to
the launching of two important books.
The  first  book  “Likha:  Enduring  Legacies  of  Filipino  Artistry”  celebrates  our  heritage  by
showcasing  the  decorative  arts  collection  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  which  includes
artifacts from 2000 years ago.
Both  functional  and  aesthetically  pleasing,  the  decorative  art  pieces  include  intriguing  pre-
Hispanic pottery, finely crafted Hispanic gold, expressive religious art, exquisite embroidery and
cleverly  designed  furniture.  They  provide  insights  into  our  evolution  as  a  nation  and  instills  a
strong sense of identity as a people. These enduring works of art are testaments to the artistry,
creativity,  adaptability,  strength,  competitiveness  and  tenacity  of  our  people.    They  make  us
proud to be Filipinos. 
This is important. In this time of globalization, it is important that we do not lose sight of who we
are as a people, what we have achieved and what we can achieve. 
The second book “Philippine Central Banking: A Strategic Journey to Stability” looks at the core
aspects of central banking from the point of view of professional central bankers  with broad and
deep experience in the science and the art of central banking. 
The two books represent very different disciplines. If you look around this hall therefore, you will
see that aside from bankers, there are quite a number of individuals from diverse fields.
Many  would  probably  think  that  central  banking  and  the  arts  share  little  in  common.  To  us,
however, both are linked by their capacity to reflect the story of our past.  This is important.
At the BSP, we believe that history must inform our country’s journey; we must learn from the
past so that we will be better and stronger for the future.
For this reason, the BSP has a continuing program to share information, document its learnings
and promote appreciation of our country’s rich culture and history across the country. 
Thus, these two books are the latest in a series of publications under the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas. 
On  central  banking,  our  earlier  books  include  “Money  and  Banking  in  the  Philippines–
Perspectives from the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas,”  the next was “The BSP and the Philippine
Economy”    followed  by  Central  Banking  in  Challenging  Times.    We  have  also  published
annotated books on “The New Central Bank Act,”   “The General Banking Act” and the “Special
Banking Laws.”
This latest book on central banking compiles in one volume the challenges we faced over the
past  decade  and  how  we  managed  the  evolving  conditions,  all  for  the  singular  purpose  of
coming out better than before. The charts and tables provide us a succinct view of the myriad of
details before us but it is the accompanying narrative from our subject matter experts that allow
readers a front row view of our operations and our resulting track record.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Central Banking in Perspective
Perhaps more than most, central bankers appreciate the dynamics that is inherent with time.
After all, the decisions we take with respect to monetary policy will take several quarters to fully
take effect. Thus, our actions today are based on the evidence over the recent past, but our
policy stance is always directed towards the future.
On the part of banking policy, we craft regulations and guidelines to influence prudent behavior
within an enabling environment. The actual impact of this regulatory framework will also take
time  to  develop,  both  on  the  operating  condition  of  banks  and  on  the  well-being  of  financial
consumers.
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, this book reflects the outcome of the interaction of the
central bank with the banking industry and other sectors of the economy. Simply put, this is our
story.    
Our journey to stability has been challenging but with the support and collaboration of our key
stakeholders we continue to reap the benefits from our past actions and decisions that have
been strategic.
Thus, even as international crises afflicted the global economy and roiled markets with volatility,
the Philippine economy continued to grow as sound monetary and banking policies provided a
stable environment for our economy – we have low inflation, a sound and stable banking system
as well as a safe and reliable payments system.     
We beefed up our macroeconomic analysis and surveillance tools, introduced crucial and timely
reforms such as the Interest Rate Corridor framework, and increased public engagement in our
policymaking process. At the same time, BSP and the banking industry continued to pursue a
broad reform agenda to strengthen their ranks in terms of capitalization, risk management, and
corporate  governance.  This  successful  collaborative  strategy  has  given  the  banking  system
sustained growth momentum.
 Indeed, we have made great strides in various aspects of our operations. Ours is a narrative of
proactive management and reform to advance our vision for the country.
Moving Forward
With all that we have achieved so far, are we then set for the future?
Well,  no  environment  is  ever  static.  As  the  central  monetary  authority,  our  role  is  always
evolving. This is the de facto norm in central banking amidst the transformation of the global
environment, our country’s objectives and its needs. This task is not straightforward, as it has to
contend with unexpected financial shocks, political upheavals, and natural calamities.
Nevertheless, amidst the tides of change, we will continue to remain focused on ensuring price
and  financial  stability  in  the  country.  We  will  find  better  ways  to  adapt  the  Flexible  Inflation
Targeting framework to the lessons of the Global Financial Crisis —  that price stability, on its
own,  cannot  guarantee  overall  financial  stability.  Thus,  sustained  monitoring  and  active
surveillance of monetary linkages will consider more granular relationships within the financial
market.  This  will  allow  us  the  added  perspective  of  identifying  pressures  that  may  be  quietly
building-up.  New  tools  may  be  considered  based  on  our  very  own  experience  to  ensure  the
delivery of the BSP’s mandate.
This requires us to organize ourselves, strengthen our ranks, refine our tools and innovate in our
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
approach to ensure that we secure the interests of our stakeholders and keep pace with the
shifts in the environment. We will continue to be strategic in identifying a vision and setting down
a framework to achieve it.
In this connection, an S&P report on the banking system, dated May 14, 2017 makes us proud
of what the men and women of the BSP- past and present – have achieved. The report said:
“The  central  bank  has  a  record  of  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  responding
appropriately to changing economic circumstances. Its ability to maintain macroeconomic and
price  stability  through  an  economic  cycle  has  been  tested,  including  a  period  of  exogenous
shocks."
For this I thank and congratulate everyone under TEAM BSP!
The Journey Continues
Ladies and gentlemen, my term as Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas ends in July 2 or
38 days from today.
I take this opportunity therefore to thank all institutions, individuals, family and friends who have
contributed to our continuing success at the BSP.   You all deserve a round of applause.
At the BSP, we move to great lengths to develop our people to be world class central bankers
through a continuous program of staff development, strategic training and effective succession.
Thus,  we  have  developed  in  our  midst  a  highly  qualified  successor    —  I  refer  of  course  to
Deputy  Governor  Nestor  Espenilla,  Jr.,  a  career  central  banker  for  36  years  now,    who  will
assume the post of BSP Governor on July 3, 2017.
Nesting has described his term as “continuity plus, plus.”
Indeed, we have a firm pipeline of policies and programs across the BSP that we have identified
as critical, moving forward.  This includes further refinements of our Interest Rate Corridor, the
implementation of our National Retail Payment System, the continuing banking sector reform
agenda, and ASEAN integration.
We can therefore say that the BSP Journey to Stability continues.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  Philippine  economy  is  in  the  cusp  of  a  demographic  window  of
opportunity,  with  our  young  population  holding  so  much  promise  to  reset  and  accelerate  the
country’s growth and development.
We sincerely hope therefore that our books – with their lessons of the past —  will serve not
only inform but also inspire our readers, academics, and future generations of BSPers to do
their share in our continuing journey to stability.
Maraming pong salamat!
Mabuhay  ang  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas!  Mabuhay  ang  ating  mahal  ng  bansang  Pilipinas! 
Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
  3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
