William C Dudley: Benefits and challenges from globalization
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Bombay Stock Exchange, Mumbai, India, 11 May 2017.
 Thanks,  Ashish,  and  thanks  to  the  U.S.-India  Business  Council,  the  Confederation  of  Indian
Industry, and the Bombay Stock Exchange for organizing this event.  As always, what I have to
say reflects my views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the
1
Federal Reserve System.
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity today to talk about the issue of globalization.  Although the
debate about the benefits and challenges of globalization is not new, it has recently come into
sharper focus.  This debate is important to all of us, and I think it is particularly relevant to India
given its growing role in the global economy. 
Globalization means different things to different people.  In my remarks today, I will focus on the
role of globalization as a force for international economic integration and economic development. 
I will highlight three themes:
First, the important role that trade plays in promoting higher standards of living globally. 
Second,  how  changes  in  trade  can  create  challenges  for  industries  that  become  less
competitive.  We have not adequately considered and remedied the very large costs this can
impose on certain communities and households. 
Third, the answer to those challenges is not greater protectionism.  Instead, we need to provide
greater support to displaced workers so they can obtain the skills needed to find new well-paying
jobs.  We need to do better in preparing workers to deal with the challenges of globalization and
technological change.  
These issues are important to me as a central banker, as they affect the long-term health and
productivity of the economy, and the economic opportunities available to our people. 
The debate around globalization, particularly in advanced economies, reflects a range of factors. 
Undoubtedly, the global financial crisis and subsequent slow recovery have been significant.  But,
just as important have been longer-term trends, such as growing income inequality, the loss of
middle-income jobs, and the rise of large emerging market economies such as China and India. 
Although the debate about globalization is not new, I believe we are at a particularly important
juncture.    If  support  for  liberalized  trade  and  an  integrated  global  economy  were  to  suffer  a
significant  setback,  the  consequence  could  be  slower  economic  growth  and  lower  living
standards around the world. 
While considerable effort has gone into liberalizing trade and developing the existing set of trade
agreements, that does not mean they cannot be improved upon.  I have no doubt some trade
agreements could be enhanced or updated.  Some may not adequately address recent changes
in the global economy—such as the rise of digital trade—and may need to be refreshed.  And,
important  trade  barriers  still  remain  and  should  be  addressed.    In  particular,  from  a  U.S.
perspective, the access of U.S. firms to some foreign markets and the protection of intellectual
property  rights  are  issues  that  deserve  close  attention.    But,  in  addressing  these  issues,  we
should  take  care  to  preserve  the  vital  benefits  of  trade  to  higher  standards  of  living  in  both
advanced and emerging market economies.  Our focus should be on further strengthening an
open trade regime, and, as appropriate, amending and improving these agreements.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Pace of Globalization
To begin, let me briefly describe the pace of globalization as a reminder of what is at stake. 
Global economic integration has increased dramatically in recent decades.  Trade, for example,
has grown from nearly 40 percent of global GDP in 1990 to 57 percent in 2015.  Over the same
period, the stock of foreign direct investment has increased from roughly 10 percent of global
2
GDP to 34 percent.  Ultimately, economies have become more integrated and interdependent.
This rapid growth in trade reflects falling trade barriers, declining transport costs, and improved
information  and  communication  technology.    These  trends  have  enabled  the  development  of
complex global supply chains that allow companies to manage their production more efficiently.
Emerging  market  economies  now  make  up  a  much  larger  share  of  global  trade,  the  global
economy and global growth.  As an illustration, emerging market economies have accounted for
3
70 percent of global output growth since the crisis—double their share from two decades ago.   
This  growth  has  provided  much-needed  support  to  world  economic  activity,  as  advanced
economies have recovered slowly from the crisis. 
Rising economic integration is also very evident when we examine the trade relationship between
India and the United States.  Bilateral trade flows have risen tenfold, from $11 billion in 1995 to
almost  $110  billion  in  2015.    In  particular,  half  of  U.S.  imports  of  computer  services  are  now
sourced from India.  In 2015, the stock of bilateral foreign direct investment in both countries was
$37 billion, up from $4 billion in 2002.  The potential for further increases has been reinforced by
the  liberalization  measures  India  announced  last  year  to  encourage  greater  foreign  direct
investment. 
Benefits of Open Trade
4
Increased  trade,  through  its  longer-term  impact  on  productivity,  has  been  a  key  contributor  to
global  growth  and  prosperity  since  the  Second  World  War.    Openness  to  trade  brings  many
benefits to the supply side of the economy.  These include:
larger  markets,  greater  specialization  opportunities,  and  the  increased  ability  to  exploit
economies of scale and scope;
faster transmission of technology and innovation; and
greater competitive pressure on domestic firms to increase their productivity. 
Collectively, these forces lead to a more efficient allocation of a country’s scarce resources—
one that is more closely aligned to its international comparative advantage. 
As a consequence, consumers can benefit from lower prices, higher real incomes, and greater
variety and quality of goods and services.  Increased openness may also reduce wasteful rent-
seeking behavior on the part of protected industries and the related costs of corruption.
These  benefits  from  open  trade  are  very  evident  in  India.    Academic  research  has  found
substantial  gains  for  India  following  its  dramatic  trade  reforms  in  the  1990s,  which  benefited
consumers via lower prices and firms via higher markups.  These higher profit margins spurred
innovation  and  provided  funds  for  the  development  of  new  products.  Looking  ahead,  the
upcoming implementation of the goods and services tax in India—which will create a common
market internally—is expected to provide many of the same benefits as trade liberalization does
internationally. 
Openness to trade has certainly played a large role in the economic ascent of Asia.  Following
the rise of Japan, Korea, Taiwan and others, fast growth in China and India has lifted hundreds of
millions of people out of extreme poverty—an unprecedented feat in human history.  The benefits
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of economic integration and other reforms are exemplified in India’s higher growth rate since the
introduction of market reforms in 1991.  Growth has averaged 6.5 percent annually in the post-
reform period, compared to about 4 percent annually over the prior 40 years.  Indeed, India is the
fastest-growing  major  economy  in  the  world  today.    Reflecting  these  gains,  a  number  of
emerging market countries have been strong supporters of open trade, a sign of how much the
world has changed in recent years. 
A  few  examples  can  help  to  illustrate  some  of  the  benefits  of  globalization.  India’s  green
revolution—which helped to greatly increase its agricultural productivity and food security—was
facilitated by U.S. technology and scientists working with their Indian counterparts.  Similarly, as
is  well  known,  Indian  engineers  and  entrepreneurs  have  played  a  key  role  in  the  technology
sector’s tremendous achievements in recent decades and now lead some of America’s largest
companies, including Google and Microsoft.  This success, in turn, has had important benefits
for India as well, including increased foreign investment flows and employment opportunities that
have helped develop a vibrant information technology ecosystem. 
But, increased openness to trade is not a panacea in and of itself.  Actual benefits depend on a
range  of  other  critical  factors,  including  macroeconomic  policy,  the  business  and  regulatory
environment,  the  legal  regime,  the  quality  of  infrastructure,  and  the  quality  of  public  services,
including  education.    While  the  gains  from  a  liberalized  trade  regime  are  not  guaranteed,  the
alternative  of  trying  to  achieve  a  high  standard  of  living  by  following  a  policy  of  economic
isolationism will fail.  Trade has played a key role in nearly all of the high-growth success stories
since the middle of the last century.
Challenges of Open Trade
It  is  important  to  recognize  that  while  trade  and  international  integration  tend  to  increase  the
overall economic pie, the distribution of the larger pie may be very uneven.  In fact, slices for
individual groups may shrink.  Some workers—particularly those in industries that are less able
to  compete  and  whose  skills  have  become  less  relevant—can  be  hurt  and  find  it  difficult  to
adjust.  This often requires individuals to change industries and to relocate to different regions. 
So,  while  trade  is  almost  always  a  win  for  a  country’s  economy,  not  everyone  within  that
economy will be a winner.  This is especially the case where there are no policies to cushion the
negative consequences of trade and to facilitate adjustment. 
Effects  are  also  country-  and  industry-specific,  and  depend  on  initial  endowments  and
conditions.  Low-income workers in emerging markets, for example, may find it more difficult to
adapt  given  weaker  safety  nets  and  less  financial  resources  available  to  deal  with  adverse
economic shocks.  The bigger the adjustment process, the more the gains from trade will tend to
be eroded. 
While the rise in the skill premium from trade liberalization has been well established for both
developed and developing countries, determining the aggregate impact of trade on jobs has been
more challenging.  To date, the evidence has been mixed.  We need further research in this area
to  determine  with  more  confidence  a  reasonable  range  of  estimates  for  these  employment
effects.   Although  evidence  on  the  extent  to  which  jobs  have  been  lost  due  to  global  trade  is
inconclusive, job losses that are attributed to trade tend to be viewed differently.  That is, they are
seen as having been “lost to foreigners” and are often viewed as a consequence of the policy
decision to liberalize trade in the first place.
Having said that, the challenge of adjusting to open trade is a serious issue that has not received
the degree of attention it fully deserves.  This may partly reflect the fact that the burden has been
borne  unequally  and  spread  out  over  a  long  time  period.    It  also  may  reflect  the  fact  that  the
winners from trade have often tended to have a stronger voice than those who have been the
losers. 
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Research  has  documented  that  the  effects  on  individuals  of  job  dislocation—including  those
resulting  from  trade—can  be  significant  and  long  lasting.    Older  workers  tend  to  suffer  larger
earnings  losses,  and  may  face  larger  transition  costs.    Displaced  workers  may  not  have  the
appropriate skills to find good jobs in other areas of the economy, including in growing export
sectors.  When the affected industry represents a large share of the local economy, the damage
is  often  magnified.    In  this  case,  the  burden  is  more  widespread  because  wages  across  the
community are likely to be hit as well.  And, this doesn’t begin to capture the full human toll—
including the impact on workers who have lost confidence in the future and the poorer health
outcomes that occur because of increased stress.  For too many individuals in the United States,
for  instance,  the American  dream  has  been  put  at  risk,  with  parents  increasingly  pessimistic
about whether their children will have the opportunity to do better than they did. 
We should find better ways to help communities that are struggling because of the effects of free
trade.  In the United States, we have historically experienced a high degree of geographic labor
mobility—much higher than in other advanced economies.  The ability to move in search of better
opportunities, when possible, has helped to mitigate some of the adverse effects of trade.  But,
mobility has declined in the United States in recent years, implying that the adjustment costs to
trade may have increased.
Protectionism Is Not the Answer
Given these costs of global integration and more liberalized trade, what is the best path forward? 
Protectionism can have a siren-like appeal.  Viewed narrowly, it may be potentially rewarding to
particular segments of the economy in the short term.  Viewed more broadly, it would almost
certainly be destructive to the economy overall in the long term. 
Countries need to compete better, not compete less.  Trade barriers are a very expensive way to
preserve  jobs  in  less  competitive  or  declining  industries.    They  blunt  opportunities  in  export
industries and they reduce the affordability of goods and services to households.  Indeed, such
measures often backfire, resulting in harm to workers and diminished growth. 
A  better  course  is  to  learn  from  our  experience.    From  a  U.S.  standpoint,  we  should  work  to
reduce remaining foreign trade restrictions that impair our ability to capitalize on our comparative
advantages.    For  example,  market  access  restrictions  can  mean  that  certain  U.S.  industries
cannot realize their full potential.  Similarly, weaknesses in the protection of intellectual property
rights limit the ability of U.S. producers to realize the full returns from their investments.  This
lowers profits and diminishes incentives to grow the business and employ more workers. 
If we are going to enhance the benefits of free trade and better manage its costs, it is critical that
we continue to strengthen the global rules-based system.  On the positive side, I would point to
the  WTO’s  recent  Trade  Facilitation  Agreement,  which  addresses  customs  procedures  and
could reduce global trade costs by almost 15 percent.  But, at a broader level, the momentum
behind global trade reform has clearly waned in recent years.  This has occurred notwithstanding
the fact that there are substantial areas in need of further reform, such as agriculture, services
and  non-tariff  barriers.    That  momentum  needs  to  be  rekindled  and  reaffirmed.    Although
advanced economies historically have tended to lead the way, it is important that large emerging
market countries now play a greater role.  This is appropriate given their growing prominence in
the global economy. 
There  are  many  approaches  to  dealing  with  the  costs  of  globalization,  but  protectionism  is  a
dead end.  Trade restrictions address the symptoms and not the underlying problems, and they
introduce other costs and distortions.  While such measures might generate temporary boosts to
growth  from  greater  domestic  production  and  consumption,  these  would  likely  be  offset  by  a
range of other costs.  Over time, such measures would retard productivity growth and thereby
shrink  the  economic  pie.   As  an  illustration,  import  substitution  models  that  were  pursued  by
many emerging market economies following the Second World War eventually led to lower long-
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
term growth outcomes.  This was the experience in India, which helped trigger the reforms of the
early 1990s. 
In assessing the benefits and costs of trade, it is important to understand that a nation’s trade
balance reflects much more than its trade policy.  Just as important are the country’s saving and
investment  spending  proclivities,  which  are  affected  by  many  factors,  including  tax  and  fiscal
policies.  For example, in the United States, we have a chronic trade deficit because domestic
investment spending exceeds our domestic saving.  Foreign capital inflows make up the gap.  In
this  process,  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  plays  an  important  equilibrating
mechanism.  If the domestic saving/investment imbalance is unchanged, then any reduction in
the  trade  balance  from  higher  trade  barriers  will  be  offset  by  lower  exports.    The  domestic
currency will appreciate to cause the trade deficit to widen to accommodate the desired capital
inflows.  Thus, trade restrictions affect the composition of trade but not the gap between exports
and imports, which is determined by the difference between domestic savings and investment.
 At the end of the day, the protectionist country would produce more goods in sectors protected
by higher trade barriers but also fewer goods for export.
The expectation that higher trade barriers would save jobs ignores these critical second-round
effects.  Moreover, the story may not end there.  What happens if another country that now faces
higher trade barriers responds by raising its own barriers?  That would push production even
further out of high-value-added exports that are now deterred by the higher foreign trade barriers
and into those exports that face lower trade barriers, or into the goods protected by the higher
domestic trade barriers.  Raising trade barriers would risk setting off a trade war, which could
damage economic growth prospects around the world. 
Measures that raise trade barriers typically would protect lower-wage, import-competing jobs, but
would also weigh on the prospects for jobs in the more efficient export sector, which tend to be
higher-paying.  The outcome would be countries producing more where they have a competitive
disadvantage, and less where they have a competitive advantage—the exact opposite of what
we should be aiming for.  For example, in the United States, one of our largest manufacturing
exports  is  aerospace  parts  (which  requires  skilled  labor)  and  one  of  our  largest  imports  is
apparel (which requires less skilled labor). 
These second-round effects would also likely hurt productivity growth.  Scarce resources would
be used less efficiently and trade protection would likely lessen the level of competitive pressure
that  helps  drive  innovation.    Moreover,  lower  productivity  growth  would  likely  lead  to  a  slower
improvement in a nation’s living standards over time. 
This  negative  consequence  of  higher  trade  barriers  can  be  illustrated  most  starkly  by  the
estimates of the costs per job saved through protectionist measures.  Researchers that have
studied  this  closely  estimate  that  the  costs  per  job  saved  from  protectionist  measures  in  the
United  States  typically  run  into  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars  per  year.    To  illustrate,
consider the case of import restrictions on Chinese tires.  The cost of a job saved was estimated
at  $900,000  per  year  while  the  measures  were  in  place,  or  more  than  20  times  the  average
5
worker’s compensation.
Better Approaches to Deal With Globalization
Rather than protectionism, a better policy would be to help domestic workers and companies
compete more effectively, rather than compete less.  We need additional mechanisms that allow
us to more fully capture the benefits from liberalized trade and to more proactively mitigate its
costs.    Ideally,  policy  should  also  better  address  job  losses  and  income  inequality  from
automation and other technological advances.
How  we  respond  should  depend  on  regional  and  industry  circumstances.    These  include  the
nature of trade impacts, the skill sets and location of the workers that have been affected, and
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the amount of resources that can be mobilized to facilitate adjustment. 
Increasing  specialization  brings  real  economic  benefits,  but  can  also  leave  workers  more
exposed to shifts in demand for their services, potentially on short notice.  These issues are not
going  away,  especially  as  emerging  market  economies  take  on  a  larger  role  in  the  global
economy and automation continues apace.  If we are to maintain a more open trade regime,
globalization must be socially and politically sustainable.  For that to be the case, we have to
provide greater support to those who are hurt by trade. 
Policies should include more assistance with job retraining, help with job search and mobility,
and broader unemployment support.  We need to do more research into what measures have
been effective in economies around the world, and we should encourage greater experimentation
with new approaches.  Getting the balance right between providing assistance and making sure
that individuals hurt by trade can get back on their feet and achieve their earning potential will be
a challenge, and we need a better understanding of what actually works. 
More generally, we need to do a better job positioning our workforce to cope with globalization
and technological change.  This will involve improvements across a range of areas, including not
only  education  and  training,  but  also  the  business  regulatory  environment  and  infrastructure
investment  that  could  support  greater  worker  mobility.    These  measures  would  also  promote
higher productivity growth.  While the scope and scale of issues differ substantially by country,
many of these policy areas may also be relevant in India. 
Lastly, there are various measures available in current trade agreements, such as antidumping
measures and countervailing duties for dealing with “unfair” trade, as well as escape clauses that
provide safeguards for industries that face a sudden surge of imports.  Again, the challenge is to
ensure that such measures are effective, that they help facilitate rather than retard adjustment,
and  that  they  are  not  abused  so  as  to  avoid  foreign  competition.    But,  both  sanctions  and
temporary relief have been provided for in global trade rules.  We should be willing to use them
when their use would lead to more equitable outcomes and would help sustain political support
for a more open trade regime. 
Conclusion
Free  trade  is  a  concept  that  remains  compelling  but  periodically  will  be  tested  by  economic
change.  That is an inescapable fact of life and is a good thing because it requires the economics
profession to articulate anew the value of a liberalized world trade regime.  While the value from
trade is very high, the associated adjustment costs can be significant and will require greater
attention if globalization is to work for all of us.
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to take some questions. 
1
2
3
4
5
Mary Amiti, John Clark, Gerard Dages, Matthew Higgins, Tom Klitgaard and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing
these remarks.
Figures  from  UN  World  Investment  Report,  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  Database,  World  Bank  World
Development Indicators. 
IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2017, in market exchange rate terms. 
Figures from Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, UN World Investment Report. 
Hufbauer  and  Lowry,  “US  Tire  Tariffs:  Saving  Few  Jobs  at  High  Cost”,  Peterson  Institute  for  International
Economics, April 2012.                           
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
