Yannis Stournaras: The metamorphosis of Greece and the role of
the insurance industry - guardians of the future?
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  The  Economist  First
Insurance Forum, Athens, 30 March 2017.
 It is a great pleasure to be here today and have the chance to share with you my thoughts on the
role of the insurance industry in the midst of challenging times lying ahead, not only in Greece,
but in the entire world. 
Over the past seven years Greece has indeed undergone a profound change in form, as the
Greek  word  metamorphosis  succinctly  describes.  Policies  implemented  in  the  context  of  the
three  adjustment  programmes  since  2010  have  helped  address  large  fiscal  and  external
imbalances, turning double-digit deficits to positive balances in recent years. I would like to draw
your attention to just two of them. First, adjusting for the effect of the recession, the improvement
in the “structural” primary balance over the period 2009–2016 reached 17 percentage points of
potential GDP, twice as much as the adjustment in other Member States that were under EU-IMF
programmes. Second, the current account in the last two years has been effectively in balance.
This  marks  a  significant  turnaround  of  the  current  account  balance  by  about  15  percentage
points of GDP since 2008. 
Alongside  this  impressive  performance,  remarkable  structural  improvements  have  been
achieved in labour and product markets, as well as in public administration. These reforms are
expected  to  boost  the  growth  potential  of  the  Greek  economy  in  the  long-term  through  higher
productivity and employment growth. 
The  metamorphosis,  however,  is  not  complete.  Greece  has  not  as  yet  managed  to  return  to
sustainable  growth  and  a  prerequisite  for  this  is  the  completion  of  the  second  review  with  no
further delays and the consistent and determined implementation of the programme. This is the
current  challenge  as  the  intense  reform  effort  has  taken  its  toll  on  society,  making  the
implementation of structural reforms difficult and at times even leading to policy reversals. 
The long-suffering Greek pension system is a prime example in this respect: while at least three
notable  reforms  have  been  legislated  since  2010,  many  provisions  remain  to  be  fully
implemented, while the system remains costly, distortive and unfair. This is the topic I would like
to focus on during the first part of my speech, as I believe this is one of the areas where the
insurance industry may have a major role to play in the future. 
In doing so, I will start by outlining the key characteristics of the Greek pension system and offer
you a brief review of recent reforms. 
Although an institutional basis for the development of a multi-pillar system exists since 2002 (Law
3029/2002), the Greek pension system essentially remains single-pillar, with a mandatory first
pillar providing main, auxiliary and other pension benefits; it works on a pay-as-you-go basis, with
revenue shortfalls financed by the State budget. It is thus predominantly public in nature. 
Concerns over the long-term explosive path of pension expenditure alongside strong fiscal and
financing pressures brought about a comprehensive reform of main pension schemes in 2010.
The  2010  reform  tightened  pension  entitlement  rules  (e.g.  it  increased  the  early  and  statutory
retirement age to 60 and 65 respectively, raised the required years of contributions from 35 to 40)
and also introduced a structural change via the specification of a unified, less costly, pension
formula that was prescribed to be applied as of 2015. This formula specified a basic, essentially
universal,  component  and  a  proportional  one  corresponding  to  the  amount  of  insurance
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
contributions  pertaining  to  lifetime  earnings  (rather  than  the  best  five  of  the  last  ten  years  of
service  that  was  earlier  the  case).  All  in  all,  the  reform  strengthened  the  link  between
contributions and benefits and decreased the generosity of pensions. 
Further reforms in 2011 and 2012 were legislated in order to contain pension expenditure. These
included: (i) abolition of the 13th and 14th pensions for all pensioners ; (ii) a freeze on nominal
pensions  up  to  2016;  (iii)  pension  cuts  affecting  monthly  amounts  over  €1,000  ;  and  (iv)  an
increase in early and statutory retirement ages to 62 and 67 years, respectively. Furthermore, in
2012 auxiliary pension funds were merged into a single entity (ETEA), which was to operate on a
Notional Defined Contribution (NDC) basis as of 2014. The NDC system included a sustainability
factor, which under a full pay-as-you-go principle required maintaining a zero deficit every year. 
The  2010  and  2012  pension  reforms  were  expected  to  lead  to  a  substantial  correction  in  the
financial  course  of  the  social  security  system,  reducing  the  projected  increase  in  pension
expenditure for the period 2010–2060 from 12.5% of GDP (2009 EC Ageing Report ) to just 1.3%
of GDP (2015 EC Ageing Report ). The gross replacement rate (the ratio of the average pension
of new retirees to the average wage at retirement) was expected to fall from 64% to 49% for
main pensions and from 15% to 8% for auxiliary pensions in the period 2014–2060 . 
However,  these  reforms,  as  judged  ex  post,  were  not  consistently  implemented;  neither  the
unified benefit rule for main pensions nor the zero balance rule for auxiliary pensions was applied
as planned. The pension cuts (expected to yield 2¼% of GDP in gross fiscal savings) were ruled
unconstitutional  by  a  Council  of  State  judgment  in  2015.  The  increases  in  the  retirement  age
thresholds  lacked  effectiveness  in  the  presence  of  extensive  grandfathering  of  previous  early
retirement options, which led to a massive wave of early retirements to take advantage of the
previous more generous rules. Such spending pressures combined with falling contributions due
to high levels of unemployment put the system under financial strain, requiring significant annual
transfers from the State budget; according to Eurostat (ESA 2010 data), total payments made to
social security funds by other sub-sectors of general government amounted to 7.1% of GDP in
2015 (compared with a euro area average of 3.3% of GDP). 
Alongside  persistent  costs,  the  system  continued  to  face  structural  challenges,  with  merging
funds retaining different degrees of autonomy (and own benefit and contribution formulas), while
pension provision remained multiple-layer, with basic, contributory and minimum pensions in the
main  funds  being  topped  up  by  auxiliary,  lump-sum,  dividend  and/or  targeted  pensions  (e.g.
EKAS). 
As part of the agreement to close the first review of the current programme, all of the above were
addressed afresh by the 2015 and 2016 reforms which, among other measures, legislated: (i)
simplification of the social security system via the consolidation of main funds into a single social
security entity (EFKA); (ii) a unified pension formula which calculates pensions as the sum of a
basic component (€384, corresponding to the 2014 poverty level, at 20 years of contributions)
and a contributory component applying marginal accrual rates to lifetime pensionable earnings;
(iii) new rules for calculating supplementary pensions applying, among other measures, selective
cuts  and  freezing  pensions  as  long  as  the  funds  remain  in  deficit;  (iv)  a  change  of  the
contribution base for the self-employed and farmers from notional to actual earnings from self-
employment subject to a minimum income limit; (v) harmonisation of main pension contributions
at 20% of earnings; (vi) an increase in health contributions for retirees to 6%; (vii) an increase in
supplementary  pension  contributions  until  mid-2022;  (viii)  phasing  out  of  the  non-contributory
social  solidarity  benefit  EKAS  by  end-2019;  and  (ix)  a  new,  less  generous,  formula  for  the
calculation of lump-sum pension benefits. 
This brings us to the current juncture, in March 2017, with the second review in progress and the
pension  system  still  high  on  the  reform  agenda.  Why?  Because,  despite  the  numerous
interventions outlined above, the system remains costly. According to the 2017 Budget report,
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
State budget transfers to social security funds/EFKA amounted to 7.6% of GDP in 2016 and are
expected to reach 9.9% of GDP in 2017 as civil servants’ pensions are now provided by EFKA.
This amounts to more than a third of ordinary budget expenditure in 2017. Note also that this
forecast is subject to upside risks as (i) there is currently a significant number of retirees with
outstanding  pension  payments  not  accounted  for  in  the  projections;  and  (ii)  EFKA  revenue
collection so far faces numerous challenges and is likely to fall short of the 2017 target. 
Such  budgetary  pressures  may  inevitably  have  to  be  relieved  via  adjustments  in  certain
pensions. This is because, on the one hand, in some cases pension benefits in Greece remain
relatively generous both from a domestic and from an international point of view. Specifically: 
In several cases, they are high relative to the contributions that have been paid to acquire
them. Recent research by the Policy Analysis Research Unit of AUEB shows that, prior to
the  various  pension  cuts  legislated  in  the  period  2010–2013,  on  average  50.7%  of  IKA
pensions  were  financed  by  contributions,  the  remaining  49.3%  being  a  social  transfer,  or
else  a  State  subsidy.  Incorporating,  the  2010–13  pension  cuts  the  State  subsidy  falls  to
35.8%. 
The  relative  generosity  of  the  system  is  also  reflected  in  high  gross  replacement  rates
compared with European peers: the gross replacement rate was about 81% at end-2013,
the highest in the euro area, and almost 30 pp higher than the euro area average . 
More  recently,  data  published  by  Eurostat  showed  that  in  2014  expenditure  on  old  age
pensions  in  Greece  is  the  highest  among  EU  countries  (13.3%  of  GDP,  compared  to  an
EU28 average of 9.8% of GDP). 
While  the  2015  and  2016  reforms  did  attempt  to  further  curtail  pension  benefits,  they
exempted  old  retirees  until  July  2018. As  a  result,  the  fiscal  adjustment  delivered  by  the
latest reforms is borne by new generations of retirees with longer careers, thus worsening
benefit-contribution links and raising issues of intergenerational fairness. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  system  can  no  longer  finance  itself  through  rising  contributions;  high
social security contributions increase the tax burden on labour and lead to a fall in GDP in the
medium term. Note also that under the current supplementary NDC scheme they generate future
pension obligations too. 
This  context  of  unfolding  pension  cuts  shows  that  an  adequate  and,  at  the  same  time,
sustainable “social security only” system is not affordable under the present circumstances in
Greece.  Ownership  of  reform  efforts  is  difficult,  but  may  be  strengthened  by  policies  that
increase incomes for pensioners in the future, thus providing appropriate social safety nets and
mitigating  socio-political  resistance  or  the  risk  of  reversal  .  Such  policies  include  extending
working lives and improving the employability of older workers, encouraging private savings or,
most  commonly  and  to  the  point,  supplementing  pension  accumulation  from  public  first  pillar
schemes  with  occupational  pensions  of  second  pillar  and  personal  pension  of  third  pillar
schemes. 
Retirement  financial  security  should  not,  and  cannot,  be  provided  from  one  source:  social
security funds, employer-sponsored retirement plans and personal savings should all be seen as
indispensable and complementary parts of a single system that secure its affordability, adequacy
and sustainability. 
In order to form such an integrated system, all stakeholders should understand their respective
roles:  the  State  should  not  insist  on  retaining  the  monopoly  of  retirement  benefits;  employers
should cease misinterpreting their role in providing security to their employees only during their
labour time but should extend it, most importantly, after their retirement; and citizens should not
forget  about  the  role  their  personal  savings  play  in  ensuring  their  own  retirement  financial
security. 
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The benefits of an occupational pension system are obvious: first and foremost, it increases the
post-retirement  financial  resources  of  the  labour  force.  It  increases  the  productivity  of  the
workforce as it constitutes an efficient means of deferred remuneration and, finally, it increases
the total investments in the country by being an alternative to banks, but very efficient, way of
financing the real economy. 
Occupational  pension  funds  (or  else  called  IORPs)  were  introduced  in  Greece  by  Law
3029/2002. Unfortunately, the current legislation does not include the subtle, but very important,
distinctions of the different components of an effective occupational pension system: that of a
pension institution, a pension fund, a pension scheme and the entity that operates the funds. In
addition, it misinterprets the role of the pension institution with regard to its responsibility towards
its members, giving them the false sense of “social security-like” full protection, irrespective of
the financial capacity of the sponsor. Finally, the current legislation does not recognise Greek
economic  reality,  as  the  economic  burden  of  establishing  an  occupational  pension  fund  is
excessive, even for the bigger employers, let alone small and medium-sized enterprises, which
constitute the backbone of the Greek economy. 
The  transposition,  during  the  coming  months,  of  the  new  EU  Directive  “IORPs  II”  to  Greek
legislation should be seen as an opportunity for a new metamorphosis, with a view to making the
occupational pension system work properly and fulfil its purpose. I am confident that the Greek
labour force could reap major benefits from the occupational pension system, should: 
- the role of each distinctive component be identified and duly recognised; 
- the role of the occupational pension institution be restored as a trustee of the employer’s
promises to its employees, discarding any “social security-like” features; 
- in line with Greek economic reality, greater flexibility be introduced. For example, the law
could allow more than one employers (even from different industries), each with its own
pension scheme, to contribute to the same pension fund that is operated jointly with other
funds by a single entity; 
- it be acknowledged that an authorised entity may be responsible for operating a pension
institution; 
- due recognition be given to the very important notion of the mobility of pension rights; 
- procedures be determined for an orderly liquidation or disbursement of benefits in case of
insolvency of an IORP, its sponsor undertaking or the entity that operates the IORP; and 
- last but not least, the unnecessary fragmentation of IORPs supervision be eliminated. 
It is only under such conditions that the occupational pension system would serve its purpose
and that the private insurance sector could assume its role in operating IORPs by lending its
expertise  and  experience  to  the  IORPs  (in  areas  such  as  underwriting  risks,  collecting
contributions,  disbursing  benefits,  designing  and  implementing  liability-driven  investment
strategies)  and  provide  actuarial  and  accounting  services;  that  is,  provide  added  value  to  the
members and beneficiaries of the system. 
The  third  part  of  the  retirement  financial  security  system  is  related  to  the  third  pillar  personal
pension  products.  Since  2012,  a  debate  has  been  initiated  at  EU  level  on  developing  an  EU
Internal  Market  for  personal  pension  schemes  or  products.  Currently,  the  discussion  has
intensified and the debate is now focusing on the development, with the active involvement of
EIOPA , of a so-called pan-European personal pension product (PEPP). Unfortunately, this is an
area  where  Greece  does  not  have  any  significant  progress  to  report,  as  it  lacks  a  relevant
legislative  framework.  I  am  confident  that  Greek  citizens  would  surely  benefit  from  the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
introduction of a tax-incentivised simple framework for personal pensions, allowing for reduced
cost  structures  that  will  be  managed  using  robust  and  modern  risk  management  tools.  Full
transparency to its members and beneficiaries should be considered as a prerequisite. Finally,
the  Greek  economy  would  benefit  as  a  whole,  as  these  products  may  focus  on  long-term
investments, thus contributing to sustainable economic growth. I consider the following period to
be very critical for the effective design of such a system, as it is aligned with the current debate
at EU level that I mentioned previously. 
But pensions is not the only area where insurance undertakings are active. 
Another  sensitive  area  that  is  related  to  the  services  of  insurance  undertakings  and  has
undergone  a  major  metamorphosis  over  recent  years  is  the  Greek  health  care  system.  All
modern, well-developed health care systems share a common goal for those who depend on
their services: hope for full and healthy lives. 
However,  it  is  unrealistic  –  if  not  impossible  –  to  aim  to  provide  “all  possible  health  care  for
everyone”. This is because not only the potential array of health care services grows worldwide,
but also the cost of providing these services to everyone increases faster than economic growth.
In this regard, governments increasingly reach fiscal limits on services they can afford to deliver. 
As  publicly  funded  health  care  systems  are  forced  to  contract  and  will  hence  not  be  able  to
provide full services to everyone, the private sector is expected to play an increasingly important
role in meeting citizens’ health care demand. If the first priority is to provide services to all, then
not all health care services can be provided. An acceptable, but less comprehensive, standard
would  instead  differentiate  between  medical  care  “needs”  for  citizens  to  achieve  high-class
outcomes  and  medical  or  non-medical  “wants”  that,  while  valued  by  patients,  contribute  only
indirectly to population health. It is exactly at this juncture that private insurance is able to play a
major role in the health system. 
Designing  a  health  care  system  inevitably  requires  choosing  between  or  mixing  public  and
private approaches, particularly in terms of financing. I am confident that Greek citizens would
benefit  from  the  introduction  of  a  Greek  public  universal  health  care  system  that  covers
population “needs” and leaves funding for, and coverage of, population “wants” to an adequately
regulated private health insurance market. If we reach consensus on this concept of a two-tier
health  care  system,  the  next  step  will  be  to  agree  upon  the  differentiation  of  “needs”  versus
“wants”. 
Of course, we should not forget that private insurance markets are characterised by information
asymmetry as buyers (consumers) know much more about their risks than sellers (insurance
companies) do. 
There  are  generally  two  alternative  ways  to  overcome  these  market  imperfections.  The  first
approach  makes  participation  voluntary  and  lets  insurance  undertakings  cope  with  the  above
characteristics, by introducing, probably, aggressive risk management practices (e.g. rigid risk
selection procedures or rate increase decisions). Under the second approach, participation is
made mandatory: when the entire population is included in the risk pool, uncertainty about the
level of risk caused by choice is totally eliminated. 
Of course, if the choice is a mandatory private insurance market, law and regulation must be
geared towards minimising and properly compensating for remaining aspects of risk selection,
risk rating and renewal risk management that run counter to the smooth functioning of a universal
health insurance system. This  must  be  done  in  a  thoughtful  manner,  which  ensures  effective
government  stewardship  of  private-sector  health  insurers  and  their  use  of  risk  management
tools. 
Last but not least, I would like to refer to natural catastrophes. 
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The climate of Greece can be characterised as Mediterranean, having mild winters, with sudden
and heavy rainfalls and dry summers. In addition, Greece lies in a land that the mythical Giant
Enceladus shakes very frequently. All three situations constitute physical hazards that intensify
the perils of flood, fire and earthquake. These perils, fortunately, do not materialise frequently, but
when they do, they tend to create catastrophic damages. 
Historically, due to the characteristic low level of insurance penetration in Greece, the cost of
damages  is  borne  by  citizens  who  suffer  losses  and  whose  compensation  is  dependent  on
politics  and,  most  importantly,  on  available  funds  in  the  government  budget.  Undoubtedly,  the
State  should  care  to  protect  its  citizens.  But  its  paternalistic  services  to  citizens  who  suffer
should be exercised in a way that protects taxpayers. One of the most efficient ways of achieving
this  goal  is  to  create  a  mandatory,  adequately  regulated,  private  insurance  market  for  these
risks. 
Concluding, I would like to emphasise that all of the above – pensions, health care and natural
catastrophes  –  constitute  very  sensitive  areas  for  the  policymaker.  But  what  I  hope  I  have
highlighted  in  my  speech  is  that,  despite  their  idiosyncratic  features,  these  are  areas  that  will
benefit  from  synergies  between  the  public  and  the  private  sector.  Needless  to  say,  such
collaboration should not depend on the short-term goals of each government, but rather be part
of national policies designed with a long-term perspective. It is also imperative that the terms of
this collaboration are clear to all participants and transparent to the members and beneficiaries of
each system. 
Of course, such systems should be reinforced with minimum legislative requirements for best-
class standards with regard to the insurance undertakings that would be allowed to participate.
Proper  authorisation,  adequate  additional  capital  buffers,  employment  of  best  practices  in  risk
management, high credit rating obtained from a recognised credit rating institution, all constitute
effective gatekeeping tools that should be tailor-made, taking into account the specific roles that
private insurance would assume. 
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
