Erkki  Liikanen:  Is  the  post-crisis  financial  system  more  resilient?
What remains to be done?
Text of the SUERF Annual Lecture by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the
44th  Economics  Conference  of 
the  Republic  of
Austria/Oesterreichische  Nationalbank),  jointly  organized  with  SUERF  –  The  European  Money
and Finance Forum, Vienna, 30 May 2017.
(Central  Bank  of 
the  OeNB 
 This  summer,  it  will  be  10  years  since  the  first  phase  of  the  global  financial  crisis  started  in
August 2007.
I have looked through reports from early 2007. In April 2007, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF)  reported  that 'favourable  global  economic  prospects  continue  to  serve  as  a  strong
foundation  for  global  financial  stability’.  However,  the  report  did  include  a  scenario  analysis
concerning subprime mortgages and financial stability.
When  discussing  risks  to  the  global  economy  in  June  2007,  the Bank  for  International
Settlements (BIS) noted that ‘at least four sets of concerns can be raised, even if our capacity
to  calculate  both  their  probability  and  possible  interdependence  remains  limited.’  Later  on  BIS
has been commended for issuing risk reminders on a regular basis ahead of the crisis.
But overall, neither the world nor economists were in a crisis mode back then as these examples
show.
The  global  financial  crisis  has  had  a  profound  impact  on  a  range  of  issues.  Financial  market
regulation  has  been  stepped  up  in  the  advanced  economies.  Economics  as  a  science  has
engaged in some serious introspection. We recognise today that macroeconomic models should
be designed so as to better capture severe financial market disruptions and their consequences
for the real economy.
The financial crisis has served as a reminder of the great losses of economic growth suffered
during  severe  financial  market  disruptions.  The  stable  functioning  of  the  financial  system  is  a
precondition for sustainable economic growth. This should be borne in mind now amid all the
criticism over the regulatory reforms.
Let us recollect the key causes and lessons of the financial crisis. They will help us appreciate
the value for national economies of the regulatory reforms.
 1. Causes and lessons of the global financial crisis: a synthesis
  The  causes  of  the  financial  crisis  can  be  divided  into  three  closely  entangled  categories:  1)
underlying  macroeconomic  factors,  2)  deficient  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  in  the
years leading up to the crisis and 3) problems of financial market development, regulation and
supervision.
 First explanation: Underlying macroeconomic factors
 A key macroeconomic factor behind the crisis was the current account imbalances, especially
between the United States and China. The abundant supply of external capital pushed US long-
term interest rates down.
In the environment of falling yields, pressure was put on developing new high-yield investment
instruments,  including  subprime  loans,  which  also  enjoyed  political  momentum  in  the  United
States.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another  macroeconomic  factor  underlying  the  crisis  was  the  time  of  the  so  called  “Great
Moderation”. This was largely ascribed to modern monetary policy.
Ever  since  the  stock  market  crash  of  1987,  we  had  also  become  used  to  the  central  banks
stepping in with liquidity injections, where necessary, to restore stability on the markets.
Although  positive  as  such,  these  developments  came  with  the  downside  of  a  false  sense  of
security and a lower awareness of risk.
Second  explanation:  Non-existent  macroprudential  policies  and  deficient  monetary
policies
The  second  explanation  for  the  financial  crisis  relates  to  the  non-existent  macroprudential
policies but, in hindsight, also to deficient monetary policies in the years leading up to the crisis.
US  monetary  policy  had  been  relaxed  in  response  to  the  September  11  attacks  and  other
millennium shocks. The accommodative stance of monetary policy was sustained by concerns
over deflationary trends. Housing markets showed signs of overheating, but when the series of
interest rate hikes began, this did not, in retrospect, seem to be effective enough.
Should  more  determined  measures  of  monetary  policy  have  been  adopted  to  burst  the  US
housing market bubble?
According to Jan Tinbergen’s famous principle, a certain number of policy targets requires an
equal number of policy instruments.
The challenge was that monetary policy had one tool to offer, but there were two objectives to
meet, i.e. price stability and financial stability. There were no macroprudential tools in place for
ensuring financial stability.
Banking regulation tools were, in principle, available, but decision-making was impaired by the
fragmentation  of  the  US  regulatory  framework.  Ben  Bernanke,  Greenspan’s  successor,  also
addresses this issue in his memoirs.
As Finnish Parliamentarians met with Bernanke during his last week in office in Washington in
January 2014, we asked him what was surprising or new about this crisis. His answer was that
they  knew  that  speedy  interest  rate  cuts  had  to  be  made  and  a  strong  economic  stimulus
introduced. But they had not anticipated the complexity of international financial institutions.
Third explanation: Imbalances in financial market developments
The third explanation for the financial crisis thus relates to the liberalisation of the global financial
system, and problems relating to financial innovations and regulation.
The liberalisation of the global financial markets and deregulation intensified in the 1980s. This
was  partly  a  natural  consequence  of  developments  in  information  technology  and  the
management of financial risks.
An underlying factor was also the growing emphasis on the virtues of free markets in all areas of
economic activity.
At the end of the 1990s, the Glass-Steagall Act was repealed in the United States. The Act had
separated  investment  and  commercial  banking  activities.  Moreover,  the  large  Wall  Street
investment  banks  that  had  traditionally  operated  as  partnerships  were  converted  into  limited
companies one after the other.
More research on the role of these regulatory and structural changes in the development of the
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial crisis would still be welcome, but it is quite likely that they increased risk taking.
As is now well-known, one of the changes that took place in banking in the pre-crisis decade was
the increasingly widespread use of the ‘originate and distribute’ business model.
This was justified by more efficient diversification of credit risks of bank loans. Unfortunately, it
also broke the traditional link between borrower and lender, which led to a loosening of lending
criteria.
This  business  model  made  use  of  the  so  called  “off-balance  sheet  channel”  which  also  had
another motive: it enabled lower capital requirements, within the regulatory rules in force at that
time, even though risks had remained virtually unchanged.
Tim Geithner,  the  first  Treasury  Secretary  in Barack Obama’s  administration,  argues  in  his
memoirs that the key cause for the crisis was the business model applied by investment and
commercial banks, a model which was a combination of a low level of equity and very short-term
market funding.
Regulation also allowed banks to use low-quality capital to fulfil part of the capital requirements,
which did not provide a buffer against losses. This turned out to be a key mistake.
There is a broad consensus on Geithner’s views on both sides of the Atlantic. But what were the
underlying factors that led to banks’ excessive leverage and an increase in short-term market
funding?
According to one explanation, this was a case of the typical euphoria that occasionally sweeps
the financial markets. The euphoria was also fuelled by the aforementioned, seemingly benign
macroeconomic environment that prevailed before the crisis.
The overheating was also fuelled by confidence in the ability and incentives of the major financial
institutions to manage their risks.
I  witnessed  an  historic  debate  on  the  matter  in Jackson  Hole  in  2005,  as  the  then  Chief
Economist  of  the  IMF,  Professor Raghuram  Rajan,  questioned  the  faith  in  self-regulating
financial markets.
Professor Rajan analysed three problems: front-loaded bonuses gave incentives for higher risk-
taking,  too  much  confidence  was  placed  in  risk  diversification,  and  it  was  believed  that  there
would be an endless amount of liquidity available. He concluded that these developments have
not  made  the  global  financial  system  safer;  they  have  made  it  even  riskier.  He  was  criticised
strongly, even called a Luddite. History has proven Professor Rajan right.
Finally, there was the problem of ‘too-big-to-fail’: financial institutions that had become too large
and complex, with potentially excessive risk-taking incentives.
What has been done to prevent the recurrence of the problems?
 2. Major changes in financial regulation and supervision
At least four reforms in particular deserve closer attention.
First, banks’ loss-absorption capacity has been significantly strengthened.
Second,  banks’  ability  to  withstand  liquidity  crises  has  also  been  strengthened.  The  global
financial crisis began as a liquidity crisis when banks lost their confidence in one another. Banks
have also been required to reduce the share of short-term funding in their funding profile.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, no bank can be regarded as too big to fail any more. Supervision and capital requirements
have  been  strengthened  the  most  for  banks  that  are  systemically  important. Authorities  have
been granted new powers to resolve banks efficiently. In relation to that, requirements on banks’
total loss absorbing capacity have been introduced, especially in the form of debt that can be
‘bailed-in’.
Fourth, the global financial crisis demonstrated that price stability-oriented monetary policy and
supervision that controls individual financial institutions’ capital adequacy and risk-taking do not
automatically safeguard financial stability. Authorities needed a stronger mandate to ensure the
stability of the financial system as a whole.
Identification of risks alone is insufficient to prevent financial crises. The authorities also need
macroprudential tools to react to financial system imbalances. Examples of these tools include
counter-cyclical capital buffers and loan-to-value constraints.
Banking Union strengthens supervision and crisis resolution in Europe
Although the seeds of the global financial crisis were sown in the United States, many European
countries seriously suffered from the financial crisis and from the euro area sovereign debt crisis
that came to a head thereafter.
Experiences  from  the  financial  crisis  revealed  that  it  was  unsustainable  to  have  integrated
European  banking  and  financial  markets,  on  one  hand,  but  nationally  fragmented  banking
supervision  and  crisis  resolution,  on  the  other.  If  large  financial  institutions  are  engaged  in
significant cross-border activities, their supervision and crisis resolution must also be based on a
broader framework.
As  a  result  of  the  establishment  of  the  Banking  Union,  today  we  have  the  Single  Supervisory
Mechanism (SSM) that has the mandate to ensure rigorous and consistent supervision of cross-
border banks. At the same time, it draws on the local expertise of national financial supervisors.
Secondly,  the  common  crisis  resolution  framework  aims  to  ensure  coordinated  and  orderly
restructuring of failing multinational banks.
There is some evidence that implicit government guarantees have recently declined. This means
that markets have begun to take governments’ goals seriously.
However, the third element of the Banking Union, the common deposit guarantee scheme, is still
incomplete. I will return to that at the end of the presentation.
 3. Outlook for the future
 Risks are changing
  Have  the  regulatory  reforms  been  effective?  There  are  good  reasons  to  believe  that  global
financial system has become more stable and safer post-crisis.
 Even so, the risks threatening stability are like constantly mutating viruses. They often become
more  virulent  when  reacting  to  medication  developed  for  earlier  diseases.  Expressed  in  ice
hockey  terminology,  the  challenge  of  financial  market  supervision  is  ‘to  skate  in  the  direction
where the puck will go next, not where it is now’.
Central  banks  have  in  recent  years  kept  their  policy  rates  at  exceptionally  low  levels.
Expansionary  monetary  policy  has  been  indispensable  in  a  world  slowly  recovering  from  the
crisis.
As a side effect, low interest rates can increase incentives for risk-taking and feed the elevation
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
of asset prices. Lending in some countries has begun to grow at a potentially excessive pace.
This is when macroprudential tools need to be deployed.
The  financial  industry  is  also  undergoing  change.  The  boundaries  between  banking  and  other
corporate activity are blurring.
In  addition,  banks  are  being  challenged  by  new  market  participants  harnessing  the  latest
technology. Digitalisation will bring benefits. Benefits also include new risks, some of which are
still hard to identify.
On the other hand, in recent years, international financial activity has also become simpler in a
1
sound way. A few examples:
 Banks are engaged in short-term securities trading to a lesser
2
extent than in earlier years.  Many large international financial conglomerates have streamlined
and simplified their structures.   The use of complex, artificial financial instruments producing no
real added value has declined.  The markets for financial derivatives are more transparent.
3
4
Many of these changes have gone a long way in the direction suggested in the High-Level Expert
Group’s report on banks’ structural reform, but not all the way.
Too much of a good thing?
The following question has also been raised: have post-financial crisis regulatory reforms gone
too far in the sense that they have become an impediment to economic growth?
A recent study argues that the recovery of bank stock valuations following the global financial
crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis has been slow compared with previous crises (in
spite of the recent development). The study suggests that the reason for this could be regulation.
(i)
The regulatory reforms have been considerable, but time has also been granted for adapting to
them.  Meanwhile,  the  low  interest  rate  environment  may  have  presented  challenges  for
profitability  of  some  banks,  depending  on  the  interest  rate  linkages  of  their  assets  and  the
composition of their own funding.
However, it is essential that banks’ profitability cannot any longer be based on their own funding
being supported by public safety nets, which enables high leverage and, through that channel, a
seeming improvement in profitability.
Owners and investors need to be prepared for bearing the risks: both profits and losses. The
new bank recovery and resolution legislation offers tools for a genuine transfer of risks to bank
owners and investors in bank debt markets.
This may lead to bank owners and investors requiring higher risk premia in the future. There is,
however,  no  return  to  times  of  ineffective  regulation  and  the  practice  of  taxpayers  ultimately
bearing the risks involved.
‘Shadow banking’
An  important  question  in  the  assessment  of  post-crisis  regulation  is  whether  revised  bank
regulation drives banking and its risks increasingly to ‘shadow banks’. These are businesses that
offer financial services and are engaged in activities resembling banking, but are subject to more
relaxed regulation.
Shadow banks had a significant role to play in the build-up of the financial crisis, as part of banks’
actual  risks  did  not  appear  on  their  own  balance  sheets,  being  hidden  as  off-balance-sheet
items.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Various views on the management of risks in the shadow banking sector have been put forward
since the crisis. Significant regulation of shadow banks has not been introduced so far. Instead,
banks’ links with the shadow banking sector are regulated more effectively.
This helps transform shadow banking into “resilient market-based finance” (ii)  that can stand on
its own, and will not transmit excessive risks to the banking sector via either direct financial links
or the fire sales-induced balance sheet channel.
In  the  United  States,  the  Dodd-Frank  legislation  adopted  following  the  financial  crisis  allows
authorities to put under supervision a shadow bank that has become a system-level threat. This
possibility does not exist in Europe for the time being.
SUERF and the Bank of Finland will organise in September this year a conference on shadow
banks; this will provide a forum for discussing the theme more closely. (Welcome!)
Finalising the Banking Union
A key remaining task for Europe is finalising the Banking Union.
As I already discussed above, two pillars of the Banking Union, single banking supervision and
the bank recovery and resolution framework, have largely been implemented, but the third, single
deposit protection, is unfinished.
A single deposit guarantee scheme has been a controversial issue, but I share the view that an
insurance-type deposit protection implemented in an appropriate manner is a consistent element
of Banking Union. (iii) Most benefit would accrue to small and concentrated banking systems with
correlated banking risks among different actors.
The  European  financial  system  is  highly  bank-based  with  a  relatively  limited  role  for  market-
based financing. This structural feature adds to the fragility of the European financial system. For
this reason, it is also important to implement the Capital Markets Union, which complements the
Banking Union.
There are already signs of a recovery in risk capital investments in Europe. It is vital we continue
work  to  ensure  that  the  expansion  of  promising  new  businesses  do  not  face  unnecessary
barriers created by bottlenecks in financing. 
4. Concluding remarks
The  financial  regulation  and  market  infrastructure  reform  agenda,  initiated  by  G20  in  the
aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  has  been  a  great  achievement.  We  must  not  let  regulatory
‘fatigue’  bring  it  to  a  premature  end.  I  share  the  view  of  Mario  Draghi  from  January  when  he
emphasized commitment to the completion of Basel III, in his capacity as the chairman of The
Group of Central Bank Governors and Heads of Supervision. (iv) At the same time, we need to
be clear, to the extent possible, as regards what remains to be done, in order to facilitate existing
and new financial institutions’ planning for their future investments.
I thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
Chousakos, K., Gorton, G. (2017). Bank Health Post-Crisis. Paper prepared for the Banque de France Financial
Stability Review.
See Mark Carney (2017). What a difference a decade makes. Bank of England speech.
See  e.g.  the  report  by  a  working  group  chaired  by  Dr. Antti  Suvanto,  Improving  the  resilience  of  Europe’s
Economic and Monetary Union, Ministry of Finance Publications – 37b/2015, Finland.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
Finalising Basel III reforms, Press release 3 January 2017. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
