Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Raising awareness of financial knowledge
in Malaysia
Welcoming remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at Karnival Kewangan 2017, Kuala Lumpur, 13 January 2017.
 It  is  my  honour  to  be  here  this  morning  for  the  Opening  Ceremony  of  the  inaugural  Finance
Carnival.  The  carnival  is  an  initiative  formed  through  the  collaboration  of  various  ministries,
agencies  and  financial  institutions.  It  aspires  to  raise  the  level  of  public  awareness  in  three
important  areas:  financial  services;  knowledge  of  financial  management;  and  consumer
protection.
I would like to extend my appreciation to Yang Berhormat Datuk Johari bin Abdul Ghani, Second
Finance Minister, who has graciously agreed to join us today in officiating the Carnival.
Finance has the power to transform lives
The  pursuit  of  financial  knowledge  is  a  key  economic  imperative.  It  also  has  the  ability  to
transform  lives.  In  today’s  world,  the  ability  and  knowledge  to  save,  invest  and  borrow  are
essential  life  skills,  be  it  for  individuals  or  businesses.  For  businesses,  including  small
enterprises,  financial  knowledge  is  particularly  important  in  generating  income  and  to  secure
financing.
Various efforts have been undertaken to improve financial inclusion in Malaysia. The results so
far are promising. Currently, the majority of Malaysians (over 90 percent) have access to formal
financial services. 92% of adults have a savings account, while 98% of users have performing
financing  accounts.  Based  on  a  survey  that  was  conducted,  consumer  satisfaction  towards
financial services increased significantly from 61% in 2011 to 73% in 2015. We will continue to
invest efforts towards improving the performances in this area.
With  loans  amounting  to  RM1.5  trillion  as  at  end-November  2016,  the  banking  industry  is  the
main source of funds to households and businesses, including small and medium enterprises
(SMEs).  Recognising  the  pivotal  role  of  the  banking  sector  in  our  economy,  Bank  Negara
Malaysia will continue to develop the financial sector in a progressive and inclusive manner to
ensure that all segments of society can benefit from this financing ecosystem.
Financial knowledge among businesses and individuals must be continuously improved
While  results  are  promising,  our  efforts  in  achieving  financial  inclusion  need  to  be  further
intensified.  There  remain  gaps  in  access  to  financing  for  certain  segments  of  society,  which
require  collective  efforts  from  all.  The  Bank  is  receptive  towards  these  needs  and  remain
committed to assist the public at all times.
Among  the  issues  raised  by  businesses  are  the  difficulties  in  obtaining  funding  to  start  a
business,  particularly  for  SMEs  and  new  companies.  The  factors  cited  for  this  include  the
absence  of  collateral,  or  insufficient  track  record,  especially  for  businesses  involved  in  new
growth areas.
On the consumer end, examples of the common issues faced include –
Misrepresentation  or  mis-selling  of  financial  products,  including  incidences  of  product
pushing;
Disputes on interest rates, loan balances or settlement of insurance claims due to the lack
of transparency and understanding in relation to the terms and conditions, or contract ‘fine
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
print’;
The lack of capacity and poor discipline in financial management, resulting in high household
indebtedness.
The measures taken to overcome financial difficulties
Beyond the banking industry, the Bank and other agencies such as the Securities Commission,
the Malaysia Co-operative Societies Commission, Amanah Ikhtiar Malaysia and TEKUN will also
continue to focus on enhancing the role of non-bank financing in addressing these issues. This
includes the utilisation of factoring, leasing and market-based financing such as crowd-funding
and peer to peer lending as a means of alternative financing for small businesses that do not
have adequate financial records.
From  the  aspect  of  consumer  protection,  the  Bank  continues  to  devote  efforts  towards
strengthening  trustworthy  and  user-friendly  redress  mechanisms  through  the  Financial
Ombudsman  Scheme,  in  addition  to  strengthening  policies  on  market  conduct  of  financial
institutions to ensure fair dealings to consumers.
The  Bank  will  also  continue  to  accelerate  initiatives  on  financial  literacy  to  ensure  that  the
financial  advisory  services  provided  by  financial  institutions,  Laman  Informasi  Nasihat  dan
Khidmat (LINK) and the Credit Counselling and Debt Management Agency (AKPK) will continue
to  enhance  the  overall  skills  and  knowledge  in  finance.  Various  initiatives  are  also  being
undertaken  at  the  school  and  university  level,  as  well  as  targeted  and  high-impact  financial
education programmes catered towards teenagers and adults by AKPK.
Key imperatives for businesses and consumers
Nevertheless, the goal of attaining financial literacy cannot be achieved solely by the efforts of
authorities  alone.  Consumers,  too  have  an  equally  important  role  in  shaping  the  quality  and
delivery of financial services. Indeed, it is the actions and behaviour of consumers that will be
powerful determinants of how financing can be fully utilised. In this regard, I would like to suggest
some key imperatives for both businesses and financial consumers.
Business  owners  should  ensure  that  documents  and  business  records  are  accurate  and
complete to facilitate the ease of credit assessment. Business competency in important areas
such  as  marketing,  finance  and  inventory  management,  and  e-commerce  should  also  be
continuously strengthened. This will reinforce the assessment by banks and other investors on
the long-term growth prospects and competitiveness of the particular business, thus facilitating
the provision of finance. It is important to emphasise that the banking industry is in the business
of lending. Thus, banks will only generate profits if they continue to provide credit. This is a point
worth  reflecting  upon,  to  avoid  misperceptions  that  banks  are  intrinsically  refusing  to  lend.  If
businesses have potential, there should not be any issues in obtaining financing. If any of these
issues persist, businesses should seek advice from LINK at Bank Negara Malaysia.
Consumer interest groups and business associations also need to be proactive in updating and
disseminating  information  on  the  availability  of  financing  options  such  as  guarantees,  special
schemes, and other forms of alternative financing. There are many micro enterprises that still
rely  on  personal  loans  to  finance  business  operations  due  to  the  lack  of  information  and
awareness  on  the  existence  of  such  financing  options  in  the  market.  As  a  result,  these
enterprises  are  required  to  pay  high  interest  rates  to  settle  personal  debts  taken,  while  more
cost-effective financing facilities remain underutilised.
Business  associations  should  strengthen  their  role  by  deepening  understanding  on  the
underlying causes before raising issues on access to funding. More often than not, the issues
raised by business associations are channeled in the form of general complaints that have yet to
be studied thoroughly or specifically. This compounds the difficulty of resolving the issues given
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the lack of supporting details. In addition, business associations can act as an important point of
reference in advising members on matters concerning efficiency and competitiveness, the use of
technology  and  the  adoption  of  electronic  payments  to  achieve  greater  security  and  cost
efficiencies.
For consumers, priority should be placed on taking charge of their financial futures and ensuring
that the financing options available are utilised responsibly. This can be achieved by conducting
due  diligence  and  research  on  the  features  of  a  potential  financial  product,  which  will  lead  to
better understanding to facilitate informed decision-making.
The  inability  of  consumers  to  meet  scheduled  loan  repayments  can  result  in  the  bank  taking
actions  to  cancel  or  terminate  the  loan.  Therefore,  if  consumers  are  faced  with  financial
difficulties, please consult your financial institution immediately in order for alternative repayment
arrangements to be discussed. Early identification can avoid the instigation of legal action. The
Bank has established various channels and mechanisms to assist the public for this purpose.
The public is advised to engage both LINK and AKPK for advice on this matter.
Given  the  rising  potential  of  technology  in  various  aspects  of  our  lives,  consumers  should
leverage on this opportunity to simplify your daily banking activities. This includes strengthening
awareness  and  closing  information  gaps  on  the  dos  and  don’ts  concerning  the  use  of
technology. With this in mind, the banking industry and other government agencies have held
several roadshows to educate and assist the public and the business community. Do take the
opportunity to attend such events.
Current issues regarding the ringgit exchange rate
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  today  to  address  current  issues  regarding  the  ringgit
exchange  rate  that  has  garnered  considerable  attention  from  fellow  Malaysians.  In  2016,  the
ringgit depreciated by 4.3% against the US dollar. In that year, the ringgit reached the lowest level
of RM4.486 to the US dollar. The ringgit depreciation sparked some concern among Malaysians,
to the point that it was seen as a reflection of a weakening Malaysian economy. I would therefore
like to clarify that under a flexible exchange rate regime, movements in the ringgit exchange rate
reflects both external and domestic factors, including the strength of the domestic economy and
the  flow  of  foreign  capital  in  the  financial  market.  Our  economy  remains  resilient  with  a
respectable  growth  performance  within  the  range  of  4  –  5%,  relative  to  the  performance  of
regional and emerging market countries.
The ringgit depreciation is not a unique and isolated event. It is a global phenomenon. The strong
appreciation of the US dollar has led to similar depreciation pressures in all global and regional
currencies. This is due to several factors including the uncertainties surrounding monetary policy
in the US as well as global economic and political developments. These global developments
have affected sentiments in global financial markets that led to capital outflows from emerging
markets. The currencies of many countries have underperformed and the ringgit was also not
spared. The ringgit was affected given the structure of our economy and financial market that is
one  of  the  most  open  among  emerging  market  countries.  Our  market  was  exposed  to  global
financial market uncertainties that led to the reversal of portfolio investments. There were also
other specific factors that affected the ringgit.
First, some investors had taken advantage amid the market turmoil and uncertainty to gain profit
through speculative activities in the offshore ringgit non-deliverable forward (NDF) market. This
was  proven  when  legal  action  was  taken  on  a  few  foreign  banks  that  were  severely  fined  for
being involved in manipulative price fixing.
Second, the pressure on the ringgit intensified when there were demand and supply imbalances
in the domestic foreign exchange market. Our country has been a net exporter and the current
account position in the balance of payments has always been in a surplus since more than a
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
decade  ago.  However,  when  the  imbalances  formed  as  a  result  of  foreign  exchange  export
proceeds not being converted into ringgit, conditions deteriorated and thus reduced the demand
for  the  ringgit.  Imbalances  also  occurred  due  to  other  specific  factors.  For  example,  in  2015,
capital  outflows  due  to  the  spending  of  Malaysians  abroad  amounted  to  RM41  billion,  while
outflows from foreign worker remittances amounted to RM34 billion. Hence, when the demand
for the currency falls, the currency will consequently depreciate.
To  address  these  challenges,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Financial  Markets  Committee
(FMC) had taken intervention measures to mitigate speculative activities in the offshore market
and  rebalance  the  demand  and  supply  in  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market.  In  addition,
measures to liberalise the domestic foreign exchange market will be intensified to spur market
development and strengthen the ringgit‘s resilience and stability.
As  a  result  of  these  proactive  steps,  several  positive  developments  can  be  observed.  The
disruptive influence of speculative activities on the ringgit in the offshore market has subsided. In
addition,  imbalances  in  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market  have  improved  while  ringgit
volatility has also reduced.
Given the openness of our market, we will always be exposed to uncertainties in global economic
developments and geopolitical tensions. Therefore, we need to take prudent steps in facing these
global challenges. Bank Negara Malaysia and the FMC will continue monitoring the activities in
the financial market and, if deemed necessary, will introduce appropriate measures to strengthen
the policies that are already in place.
There are also views among observers and analysts that suggest a certain ringgit level as the
equilibrium value. They seem to suggest this value as the target level for us to achieve in order to
ensure an economy that is in balance. This is not accurate and unproductive.
In  my  view,  it  is  clear  that  the  current  ringgit  level  does  not  reflect  the  fundamentals  of  our
economy.  Nevertheless,  we  should  not  be  too  focused  on  an  equilibrium  value  of  the  ringgit
because this will always change in a global economic environment that is challenging, uncertain
and dynamic. I believe that the measures introduced on 2 December 2016 will bring the ringgit
value closer to its underlying economic fundamentals.
It is important in the current economic environment for us to collectively put in effort, knowledge
and expertise and continue to drive the development of the national economy. The strength of an
economy relies heavily on the level of productivity of the rakyat. I believe that we can enhance our
levels of productivity by maximizing knowledge, especially in the subject of finance.
Over these three days, a total of 100 booths will be featured during this carnival, each offering a
variety  of  finance-related  activities  and  opportunities.  This  includes  facilities  to  open  a  bank
account, assistance in loan applications, CCRIS checks, debt management advice (by AKPK
and  the  Small  Debt  Resolution  Scheme),  platforms  that  allow  consumers  to  seek  redress
solutions,  opportunities  for  innovative  SMEs  to  submit  business  proposals  as  well  as  group
lecture sessions.
On behalf of the Bank and other related stakeholders, I sincerely hope that you may fully utilise
the wealth of opportunities available in this Finance Carnival by visiting the exhibition booths and
participating in dedicated activities designed for fellow visitors. Our aspiration is for this event to
be  a  powerful  enabler  to  increase  knowledge  and  awareness  on  the  importance  of  financial
management, which, if done wisely, possesses the distinct potential of uplifting lives. 
Finally,  allow  me  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  gratitude  and  appreciation  to  the
committee,  the  ministry  of  finance,  relevant  government  agencies  and  financial  institutions,
whose efforts have all contributed towards realising the success of this Carnival.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
