Luci  Ellis:  Opening  remarks  to  Plenary  Panel  at  the Australasian
Housing Researchers Conference
Opening  remarks  by  Ms  Luci  Ellis,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia, to the Plenary Panel at the Australasian Housing Researchers Conference, Melbourne,
16 February 2017.
 Thanks to Stephanie Parsons, Hannah Leal and Tahlee Stone for assistance with the graphs.
I’d like to thank RMIT and the organisers of this conference for inviting me to participate in this
session. I’m very glad to be here and to share the stage with Dr Rogers.
Looking at the program, I see many interesting papers. A huge range of housing-related topics
are  represented,  many  well  outside  the  Reserve  Bank’s  remit.  But  housing,  as  a  sector,  is
crucial to a number of our core policy functions.
In financial stability, my old role, housing is certainly crucial. Housing is the biggest asset most
households will own and the bulk of household sector wealth. Lending against housing is also a
large part of financial sector assets. Housing outcomes are therefore central both to the welfare
of households and the stability of the financial system.
The housing sector is also crucial on the monetary policy side, my new role. As a sector, it is
especially sensitive to interest rates. It is a key part of the transmission mechanism of monetary
policy.  Housing  prices  respond  to  interest  rates,  and  in  turn  affect  household  consumption
through wealth and collateral effects. And the housing construction industry is one of the most
interest-sensitive.
The theme of this conference is ‘Housing and Inequality’. I’d like to talk about two aspects of that.
First,  there’s  the  inequality  –  or  rather,  diversity  –  between  countries.  Second,  there’s  the
inequality represented by the distribution of housing outcomes across residents of a particular
country.
Institutions Matter: The Cross-country Dimension
On the first, we can summarise by saying that institutions matter. Country-specific features are
very  important  to  housing  outcomes,  including  the  outcomes  most  relevant  to  monetary  and
financial stability policymakers.
A range of institutions determine the idiosyncratic risk that households face, and thus the
credit  risk  they  pose  to  lenders.  These  include  labour  market  institutions,  the  funding  of
health care, and the structure and generosity of the social safety net.
Geographic and other factors determine the urban structure, which in turn affects the relative
price of housing. We know from economic geography that as city populations rise – and the
amenities that go together with that – housing prices rise even relative to the higher incomes
that often go along with big-city living. So urban concentration affects macro-level variables,
like the ratio of housing prices to household incomes, as well as individual-level outcomes,
such as people’s lifetime housing experiences.
The structure of the mortgage market matters, for example whether fixed or variable-rate
mortgages  predominate.  These  features  are  in  turn  affected  by  a  range  of  tax  and  other
institutional factors. An example of a feature quite specific to Australia is the popularity of
linked offset accounts. These change the interpretation of debt data that do not adjust for
balances  in  these  accounts.  They  also  change  assessments  of  the  resilience  of  the
household sector to various kinds of shocks.
 1 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Taken  together,  these  factors  suggest  that  we  can’t  assume  a  single  value  of  any  particular
macro-level ratio exists that is ‘right’ for all countries or for all time. It depends. We can’t assume
that a particular level of debt is always and everywhere sustainable. It depends on who has the
debt and what kind of credit risk they pose. We can’t assume that a particular level of prices is
‘correct’ or ‘sustainable’ in all circumstances.
What we can do is get some sense of the relativities between countries that you might expect,
given  those  institutional  and  other  differences.  For  example,  we  can  reasonably  expect  that
countries where much of the population lives in smaller, cheaper cities will have lower national
aggregate ratios of housing prices to incomes than other countries. That might partly explain why
the price-to-income ratio for the United States is relatively low (Graph 1). By contrast, Australia is
somewhere around the middle of the pack of mid-sized countries on this metric.
1
Similar comparisons of household debt-to-income ratios across countries also put Australia in
the middle of the pack.  The United States is lower, consistent with the lower average price-to-
income ratios there. Several small European countries, such as Sweden and the Netherlands,
have much higher ratios than Australia does. I would not expect or want Australia’s ratio to be as
high as it is in those countries. Their institutions are different. In particular, a wider range of debt
is tax-deductible in those countries, so households have less incentive to pay debt down.
 2 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Distributions Matter: The Micro-level Dimension
The concept of inequality perhaps of most interest to this conference, though, is the differences
across households. The way people access housing is not the same. These distributional issues
can be considered over several dimensions.
We  can  consider  the  distribution  of  outcomes  in  the cross-section of  households:  how
outcomes differ for different types of households at a point in time.
We  can  consider  outcomes  for  different cohorts:  whether  the  experience  of  people  in  a
particular age group changes over time.
We  can  consider  issues  of intergenerational  distribution:  whether  outcomes  for  people  in
one generation depend on the experiences of their parents.
It  turns  out  that  these  sorts  of  distributional  issues  matter  for  policy.  Certainly  they  matter  for
financial stability policy. It is rarely the median borrower who defaults. Risk comes from the tails
of the distribution. But even something as ‘macro’ as the transmission of monetary policy turns
out  to  depend  strongly  on  distributional  considerations  (Hughson et al  2016).  So  the  Reserve
Bank spends a lot of time and resources examining household survey data and other micro-data
to inform our macro understanding; some of that work has explicitly touched on inequality as the
subject  of  interest  (Dollman et al  2015),  while  other  work  has  noted  the  effect  of  macro-level
developments on inequality (La Cava 2016). The rest of my talk today will cover a few interesting
findings from this type of analysis. I’m not setting out to be comprehensive here, because that
would not be feasible in the time available. But hopefully it will give a flavour of what’s possible
and the kinds of issues we’ve looked at.
Firstly, and unsurprisingly, housing ownership and housing wealth are not equally distributed
across the cross-section of households.
Secondly, fewer young people  are  home  owners  now  than  previous  cohorts  at  the  same
age. This is partly about demography. If it were purely a story of people being priced out,
other outcomes would be different.
Finally,  concerns  about  access  to  appropriate  housing  aren’t  only  about  ownership.  We
should also think about how housing is experienced, including security of tenure.
One issue of inequality that generates a lot of public discussion is whether people can purchase
their  own  home.  Housing  affordability  is  clearly  a  concern  more  generally,  because  adequate
shelter is so important to human welfare. But clearly there is great social interest in how that
housing  is  delivered,  who  owns  it,  and  who  pays  for  it.  Of  the  many  inquiries  into  housing
affordability  over  the  past  decade  or  so,  at  least  two  –  the  Productivity  Commission’s  2003
Inquiry and the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics Inquiry in 2015 –
were specifically on home ownership.
2
At a national level, Australia actually has a home ownership rate that is neither unusually high nor
unusually low.  Many of the countries that have higher rates seem to manage it by having very
high  proportions  of  young  adults  living  with  their  parents,  even  into  their  thirties,  rather  than
renting. But the outcomes do vary across households. We can see this in several independently
collected data sets, but for today I’m going to rely mainly on the HILDA survey.
Unsurprisingly, higher-income households are more likely to own their own home, whether with a
mortgage or outright (Graph 2). The highest-income group are not only more likely to live in their
own home; the wealth represented by their own home, net of debt, is also higher than for lower-
income and middle-income households.
 3 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
More important than income, though, is life stage. Not many teenagers or young adults are heads
of households; those that are, are not that likely to own their own home.  Over time, people do
start purchasing their home. Home ownership rates rise rapidly with age, reaching 80 per cent
for households headed by someone aged 55 or more (Graph 3). Housing wealth has the same
pattern, largely because the older you are, the longer you have had to pay your mortgage down.
3
 4 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Because higher-income households are more likely to be owner-occupiers, they are also more
likely to have mortgage debt (Graph 4). This is why we say that most of the mortgage debt in
Australia  has  been  borrowed  by  those  most  able  to  service  it.  That  said,  the  lower-income
households  that  do  have  debt,  tend  to  have  quite  a  lot  of  debt  relative  to  their  incomes.
Sometimes this is because they have temporarily low incomes, but overall it does speak to the
need to be aware of pockets of potential stress within a more benign overall picture.
 5 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Participation in the housing market need not be about owning your own home. Many people rent;
someone else has to own those dwellings as well. In Australia, most private rental properties are
owned  by  other  households.  In  other  words,  there  are  not  many  companies  operating  as
residential  landlords. A  good  indication  of  who  owns  rental  properties  comes  from  looking  at
people who have housing debt other than debt on their own primary residence. In this graph, we
have split up the share of people who have any housing debt into those who have only debt on
their own home, and those who have some other kind of housing debt; most, but not all, of this
second group also have owner-occupier debt. As you can see, this other property debt is even
more likely to be held by high-income earners than owner-occupier debt is.
The pattern of rising ownership rates for older age groups does not give everyone comfort that
most people will be able to afford a home eventually. People worry that it is becoming harder to
achieve  home  ownership  at  a  given  life  stage  than  it  used  to  be.  This  would  be  an  issue  of
inequality across cohorts. It is true that home ownership rates have fallen for most age groups
over time (Graph 5). The overall ownership rate has stayed fairly steady because the population
is ageing. It is also true that ownership rates shifted down between 2006 and 2011; we’ll know
what happened in 2016 when the Census data come out in a few months.
The 25–34 age group is typically seen as the core group of first home buyers. We can see that
ownership  rates  in  this  group  have  fallen  by  a  bit  more  than  10  percentage  points  since  the
 6 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
1970s. But we can also see that most of the decline had already happened by the early 1990s,
before the big increase in housing prices relative to incomes. What changed during that earlier
period was that people started partnering and settling down later in life. The post-war Baby Boom
had been characterised by  an  anomalously  young  average  age  at  first  marriage.  Through  the
1970s  and  1980s,  the  normal  historical  pattern  started  to  reassert  itself.  Ownership  rates  for
young people declined as a result, because many people wait to settle down before they buy a
home.
By saying this, I’m not suggesting that people should not worry about whether households can
achieve their desired housing tenure. I am suggesting that the situation is more complex than
would be suggested by a single-minded focus on a single metric of affordability, such as median
housing prices.
Much of the commentary around the difficulty of achieving home ownership centres on the task
of accumulating the deposit. It seems common to assume that everyone needs a 20 per cent
deposit  when  they  first  buy.  This  isn’t  actually  true:  although  lenders  require  some  deposit
coming from genuine savings, it doesn’t have to be as high as 20 per cent. So it’s surprising that
as  housing  prices  have  risen,  the  distribution  of  loan-to-valuation  ratios  –  the  converse  of  the
deposit – hasn’t shifted up over time (Graph 6). If anything it has declined in the past few years
for which we have data. It’s not entirely clear why this is. And because a high loan-to-valuation
ratio does imply higher risk both for the borrower and the lender, it might not be such a bad thing.
 7 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
But it does suggest that, again, the situation is more complex than a simple summary statistic
can capture.
One reason why first home buyers haven’t needed to increase loan-to-valuation ratios might be
that more of them are getting help from friends and family to accumulate the deposit. Careful
analysis of the HILDA Survey dataset shows that the share of first home buyers receiving that
help has been increasing over the decades, but it actually remains low (Graph 7).
 8 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is common to focus on the different outcomes for owners versus renters in purely financial
terms. Another aspect of inequality I would like to talk about today is security of tenure. A range of
different data sources confirm that although young people move more often than older people,
the big difference is between renters and owners (Graph 8). A similar pattern occurs in countries
such as the United States (Bachmann and Cooper 2014).
 9 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Looking just at the group of households who can be tracked through the whole life of the HILDA
survey, and who didn’t switch between owning and renting at any stage, you can also see that
renters were also more likely to have moved many times in that 13-year period (Graph 9).
 10 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some earlier literature has suggested that transaction costs induce home owners to move less
often  than  they  might  otherwise  do,  which  makes  it  harder  for  them  to  take  advantage  of
changing  labour  market  opportunities  (Oswald  1999).  That  effect  doesn’t  seem  clear  in
Australian data, so I would not draw that conclusion here (Flatau et al 2002). Yet even without the
transaction costs of selling a home – including tax, legal fees and agent commissions – we know
that moving house can be disruptive and costly. So I question whether all those moves by renters
were  desired  by  those  households.  Many  renters  are  happy  with  their  current  home,  but  are
required  to  move  because  the  lease  expired  or  the  landlord  sold  the  property.  If  we  are
concerned about inequality of housing outcomes, perhaps we should focus less on the type of
tenure, and more on security of tenure.
That’s just a brief round-up of some of the issues we have been looking at recently. Housing
issues will always be with us, and will always be important to the functions of the Reserve Bank.
That’s  why  we  value  conferences  like  this:  the  diverse  perspectives  offered  help  us  see  the
bigger picture. I’m certainly looking forward to the rest of the discussion in this session.
Thank you for your time.
 11 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Bibliography
Bachmann R and D Cooper (2014), ‘The Ins and Arounds in the U.S. Housing Market’, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston Working Papers 14–3.
Dollman  R,  G  Kaplan,  G  La  Cava  and  T  Stone  (2015),  ‘Household  Economic  Inequality  in
Australia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 15.
Flatau P, M Forbes, G Wood, PH Hendershott and L O’Dwyer (2002), ‘Home Ownership and
Unemployment:  Does  the  Oswald  Thesis  Hold  for  Australian  Regions?’,  Murdoch  University
School of Management and Government Working Paper 189.
Hughson H, G La Cava, P Ryan and P Smith (2016), ‘The Household Cash Flow Channel of
Monetary Policy’, RBA Bulletin, September, pp 21–30.
Oswald AJ (1999), ‘The Housing Market and Europe’s Unemployment: A Non-Technical Paper',
University of Warwick, mimeo, unpublished manuscript.
RBA  (Reserve  Bank  of  Australia)  (2015),  ‘Submission  to  the  Inquiry  into  Home  Ownership’,
House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics  Inquiry  into  Home  Ownership,
June.
Yates  J  (2011),  ‘Explaining  Australia’s  Trends  in  Home  Ownership’,  Housing  Finance
International, 26(4), pp 6–13.
1
2
3
Graphs showing this comparison are regularly published in the Financial Stability Review.
See Graph 3 in RBA (2015).
Who ‘heads’ a household is a matter of judgement. In these graphs, the head of each surveyed household is
determined by applying certain criteria, in order, until a unique person is selected. These criteria are: in a
registered marriage or de facto relationship (and still living together); a lone parent; the person with the highest
income; the eldest person.
 12 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
