Philip  R  Lane:  Examination  of  Tracker  Mortgage  related  issues,
motor insurance market reform, and Brexit
Introductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Joint
Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach, Dublin, 4 April 2017.
Chairman, Committee members,
  I welcome the opportunity to appear before you today. I am joined by the Acting Deputy Governor
(Financial Regulation), Bernard Sheridan, and the Director of Enforcement, Derville Rowland.
In  my  introductory  statement,  I  will  focus  on  three  topics:  the  Central  Bank’s  Tracker
Examination; the role of the Central Bank in supporting initiatives to reform the motor insurance
market; and Brexit. I will address each issue in turn.
 
Examination of Tracker Mortgage Related Issues
Let me begin by stating that I fully share the Committee’s concern about tracker mortgage related
issues.  Where  these  issues  have  arisen,  it  is  clear  that  lenders  have  failed  their  customers.
Moreover, I am acutely aware of the unacceptable impact that these failures have had on tracker
mortgage customers, from the burden of paying more than they should, up to instances involving
loss of ownership of mortgaged properties.
I  recognise  that  Committee  members  are  frequently  dealing  with  such  cases  in  their
constituencies and acknowledge the Committee has heard powerful testimony about the effects
that these failures have had on individuals and families. We too are aware of these cases from
callers  to  our  own  public  helpline  and  from  our  ongoing  engagement  with  consumer
representatives, and these important sources of information continue to inform the Examination.
The Central Bank is pursuing a comprehensive industry-wide examination precisely to ensure
lenders  identify  every  impacted  customer,  stop  the  harm,  and  pay  appropriate  redress  and
compensation.
The fair treatment of tracker mortgage borrowers has been a key supervisory and policy focus
for the Central Bank over the past number of years. In line with our mandate to ensure that the
best interests of consumers are protected, the Central Bank intervened with a number of lenders
over the 2008–2015 period on a range of different issues in relation to tracker mortgages. These
interventions  ranged  from  lender-specific  supervisory  and  enforcement  actions  to,  more
generally,  strengthening  the  statutory  protections  for  tracker  mortgage  customers  (specifically
the Consumer Protection Code and the Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears).
During  this  period,  we  dealt  with  a  range  of  lender  specific  issues  resulting  in  approximately
7,100  customer  accounts  affected  by  various  tracker  issues  being  resolved  prior  to  the
commencement  of  the  Examination.  We  also  intervened  in  a  number  of  additional  cases  to
prevent  detriment  to  tracker  customers  before  it  actually  occurred.  Other  issues  were  being
actively investigated at the time of commencement of the Examination and are now being dealt
with  as  part  of  the  Examination  or,  where  necessary,  have  been  escalated  for  enforcement
action.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Where  appropriate,  the  Central  Bank  required  certain  lenders  to  offer  affected  customers  the
right to return to a tracker rate and/or payment of redress and compensation. The Central Bank
also  commenced  enforcement 
tracker  mortgage-related  matters  at
Permanent TSB plc and its subsidiary Springboard Mortgages Limited. As a result, these lenders
were  required  to  implement  a  comprehensive  Mortgage  Redress  Programme  to  address  the
issues identified.
investigations 
into 
Although  the  underlying  characteristics  of  each  issue  differed,  the  Central  Bank  decided  to
launch a system-wide examination in 2015, due to the nature and potential customer impact of
the issues identified. Importantly, the Examination’s scope also now requires a robust review to
identify  and  deliver  fair  outcomes  for  all  other  affected  customers,  in  addition  to  those  cases
known to the Central Bank at commencement.
 The Tracker Examination is the largest, most complex and significant supervisory review that the
Central  Bank  has  undertaken  to  date  in  respect  of  its  consumer  protection  mandate.  It  has
involved  an  initial  review  of  the  total  mortgage  book  by  lenders  in  the  relevant  period  which
amounted to more than two million mortgage accounts. In line with our commitment given at the
commencement of the Examination, we have been publishing regular status updates in respect
of this ongoing supervisory work, the most recent of which was published last month and has
been provided to the Committee.
The aim of the Examination is to ensure that all relevant lenders conduct a comprehensive and
robust review, which delivers fair outcomes for all customers. 
I note that several lenders have recently apologised to the customers whom they failed. Let me
be very clear on the Central Bank’s position: a lender’s apology is meaningless unless the lender
both  stops  the  harm  to  all  impacted  customers  and  provides  appropriate  redress  and
compensation for the suffering caused. Lenders now need to demonstrate that they are doing
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
everything possible to ensure this happens.
For our part, this is precisely what the Central Bank is determined to ensure.
We have put in place a comprehensive framework for lenders to conduct the Examination and
provide  appropriate  redress  and  compensation  to  impacted  customers.  The  framework  also
requires  each  lender  to  appoint  an  external  independent  party  to  oversee  the  conduct  of  its
examination.
The framework for the Examination is a phased approach. Phase 1 involved the development
and submission of detailed plans by relevant lenders. This phase has been completed.
 Phase  2  requires  lenders  to  conduct  the  review  of  their  mortgage  loan  books  in  line  with  our
framework.  These  reviews  are  extensive  in  that  lenders  must  review  the  underlying  loan
documentation  and  customer  files  for  the  in-scope  accounts  to  determine  their  specific
contractual obligations, and also to determine if the documentation that each customer received
had the potential to confuse or mislead the customer, both on a stand-alone basis and when
read  in  conjunction  with  other  communications  –  be  they  written  or  verbal  –  made  to  the
individual customer.
In  this  respect,  the  Central  Bank  invoked  its  powers  under  Section  22  of  the  Central  Bank
(Supervision and Enforcement) Act 2013 to set specific timelines for lenders to complete Phase
2 of the Examination, the last of which will be completed by no later than end September 2017.
The timelines have necessarily taken account of the size of the relevant lender’s loan book, the
scale and complexity of issues in the lender, and the complexities associated with completing a
thorough review, in line with the key objectives of the Examination.
By  this  date,  the  Central  Bank  expects  all  lenders  to  have  identified  all  affected  accounts,
stopped further harm, and have commenced engagement with most impacted customers. The
Central Bank is rigorously monitoring the completion of this work.
Phase  3  of  the  Examination  relates  to  the  calculation  of  redress  and  compensation  for
customers identified as having been affected by tracker mortgage related issues.
Phase 4 relates to the implementation of a redress programme in respect of these customers.
Phases  3  and  4  may  run  concurrently  with  Phase  2  and,  as  such,  the  Central  Bank  expects
lenders to commence Phases 3 and 4 as affected customers are identified.
In  that  regard,  and  in  accordance  with  our  recent  update,  approximately  €78  million  has  now
been provided in redress and compensation to circa 2,600 impacted customers identified as part
of  the  Examination.  Separately,  sums  of  €36.8  million  and  €5.8  million  in  redress  and
compensation have been paid by PTSB and Springboard Mortgages Limited in respect of 1,374
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
accounts impacted as part of the aforementioned Mortgage Redress Programme announced in
July 2015, which predated the Examination.
Due  to  legal  requirements  which  restrict  the  degree  to  which  I  can  discuss  individual  firms,  I
cannot provide a detailed breakdown by lender as to precise numbers of customers and redress
and compensation paid to date. I can detail aggregate amounts, however, and for the benefit of
the Committee, I have provided the relevant tables in this statement.
It is also important to note that the Central Bank does not have the statutory power to compel
lenders  to  implement  redress  and  compensation  programmes  in  respect  of  failures  that
occurred prior to the introduction of the Central Bank (Supervision and Enforcement) Act 2013.
We were granted such powers, having sought them, in the 2013 Act.
However, I believe the Central Bank’s robustness of approach in this matter is evident from the
Principles of Redress we have laid down and published, and with which we expect lenders to
comply.
Our robustness of approach is also evident in the fact that it is not only our Consumer Protection
Directorate, but our separate Enforcement Directorate, which is actively involved in the Tracker
Examination. Where regulatory breaches are suspected, cases may be referred to Enforcement.
We are committed to taking robust enforcement action aimed at promoting principled and ethical
behaviour by and within regulated entities.
To  date,  the  Central  Bank  has  concluded  an  enforcement  investigation  in  respect  of  tracker
mortgage failures identified at Springboard Mortgages Limited and imposed a monetary penalty
of €4.5 million on that entity in respect of the failures. The monetary penalty paid by the entity is
the highest penalty ever collected by the Central Bank. This penalty is in addition to the figure of
approximately €5.8 million which Springboard Mortgages Limited paid to affected customers as
part of the Mortgage Redress Programme.
In addition to the investigation into tracker mortgage-related matters at Springboard Mortgages
Limited and Permanent TSB plc referenced above, the Central Bank has also commenced an
enforcement investigation into tracker mortgage-related matters at Ulster Bank Ireland DAC. We
may  also  commence  other  investigations,  as  appropriate,  into  other  lenders  and  persons
concerned in the management of such entities where there is evidence of non-compliance with
regulatory requirements. In this regard, enforcement activity will be influenced by the outcome of
the reviews currently being conducted as part of the Tracker Examination.
In  short,  all  possible  enforcement  angles,  including  potential  individual  culpability,  will  be
thoroughly  investigated  and  analysed  in  the  context  of  the  legal  framework.  Enforcement
measures will be deployed as appropriate, including investigating issues and taking cases under
the Central Bank’s Administrative Sanctions Procedure together with the use of our fitness and
probity powers.
Boards of lenders are expected to ensure appropriate control, governance and management in
those firms. In line with international regulatory standards, we operate a risk-based framework for
the supervision of regulated firms. In its regular supervisory work, the Central Bank cannot pre-
approve every single commercial decision taken or contract entered into by a regulated firm.
Supervision entails challenge of firms, judgment of the risks they pose to the economy and to the
consumer,  and  mitigation  of  those  risks  we  judge  to  be  unacceptable.  Targeted  enforcement
action against firms whose poor behaviour risks jeopardising our statutory objectives, including
financial  stability  and  consumer  protection,  underpins  this  framework.  Consumers  are  further
protected by the other relevant State bodies in this area: the Financial Services Ombudsman, the
Competition  and  Consumer  Protection  Commission,  and  the  courts.  These  form  part  of  the
State’s protection for individuals.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I acknowledge the Committee’s reflection that the Examination has taken some time and it will
take some further time to complete, but I will reiterate that lenders are working to the specific
timelines which we have imposed, and are required to examine all relevant individual contracts.
Given the harm that the actions of some lenders have caused, it is essential that the Examination
be both comprehensive and robust.
The  Central  Bank,  for  our  part,  is  determined  to  ensure  that  every  impacted  customer  is
identified, and appropriately redressed and compensated.
 
Motor Insurance
Turning to motor insurance costs, the Central Bank welcomes the focus that this Committee and
that of the Cost of Insurance Working Group led by Minister Eoghan Murphy has brought to bear
on  this  issue. As  you  know,  the  Central  Bank  appeared  before  this  Committee  in  relation  to
insurance in 2016.
The Central Bank recognises that volatility in the price of insurance has an unwelcome impact on
consumers.  While  the  Central  Bank  does  not  have  a  role  in  the  setting  of  premiums  and,  in
common  with  all  supervisory  authorities  in  the  European  Union,  is  explicitly  prohibited  by
European  law  from  having  one  by Article  181  of  the  Solvency  II  directive,  the  Central  Bank  is
committed  to  working  with  this  Committee,  the  Cost  of  Insurance  Working  Group  and  other
stakeholders on aspects related to this issue in ways that are appropriate to our mandate.
There were a number of common themes between the findings of this Committee’s final report
and  the  work  of  the  Department  of  Finance  Cost  of  Insurance  Working  Group,  of  which  the
Central Bank was a member.
For example, both the Committee and the Working Group found there was scope to improve the
renewal  process  to  assist  consumers  in  their  purchase  of  insurance.  Similarly,  both  the
Committee and Working Group recommended substantive work be undertaken to improve data
availability.
The  Central  Bank,  through  the  Working  Group  process,  is  the  lead  owner  for  a  number  of
recommendations and actions in these areas and work has begun on implementation.
In  the  area  of  renewals,  the  Working  Group  recommended  that  insurers  provide  additional
information on the premium breakdown to consumers and that the renewal notification period be
extended from 15 to 20 working days to make it easier for motorists to compare pricing when
purchasing insurance.
Requirements for provision of information in non-life renewal notices are set out in the Non-Life
Insurance (Provision of Information) (Renewal of Policy of Insurance) Regulations 2007. In order
to amend these regulations, the Central Bank is required to undertake a standard consultation
process, including engagement with consumer stakeholders and industry. The consultation will
be conducted in Q4 this year, in line with the timeframes set out by the Working Group, with
regulatory change, if required, in 2018.
In  the  area  of  data  availability,  the  Working  Group  has  recommended  the  establishment  of  a
national claims information database. The Central Bank is currently working with the Department
of Finance and other stakeholders to define key aggregated statistical data on motor claims for
publication in the near future, which will, in turn, assist with the development of the database in
2018 as recommended. It should be noted, however, that the database function will represent an
extension of the Central Bank’s mandate and will therefore require legislative change.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  I  said  at  the  outset,  the  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  working  with  this  Committee,  the
Department of Finance Cost of Insurance Working Group and other stakeholders in relation to
this issue in ways that are appropriate to our mandate.
 
Brexit
Let me now turn to another priority area for the Central Bank: dealing with the implications of
Brexit and the impact of this on the financial system and the economy.
Our  forecasts  are  for  relatively  favourable  growth  in  the  near  term,  supported  by  continuing
recovery  in  underlying  domestic  demand.  Consumption  and  underlying  investment  is  set  to
remain robust, supported by a strong labour market.
The  outlook  for  the  Irish  economy  however  remains  subject  to  uncertainty  that  pertains  to  a
number of external risks, but most materially to Brexit and uncertainty regarding the post-Brexit
trading relationship.
Last week the UK government triggered Article 50 of the Treaty, starting the two-year negotiation
period. The European Commission has suggested that agreement would need to be completed
by October 2018 to allow ratification by the UK and European Parliament before the two-year
timeframe elapses. It is clear that this timeframe is very ambitious given the volume of issues
which must be negotiated. It can however be extended if all Member States agree to this.
For the domestic banking sector, Brexit has to date had a relatively benign impact. Banks have
not  seen  any  funding  impact  or  deterioration  in  credit  quality.  We  continue  to  engage  with  all
regulated entities to ensure they are adequately prepared.
It remains too early to accurately predict any Brexit-related effects on foreign direct investment.
The Bank has however increased engagement with a range of entities including banks, markets
firms, insurance authorisations and queries regarding payments and electronic money. Enquiries
have  taken  the  form  of  discussions  on  potential  new  authorisations,  possible  balance  sheet
expansion or changes to business type.
Where the Bank is asked to consider the authorisation of a firm in Ireland, the Bank will want to
be satisfied that we are authorising a business or line of business that will be run from Ireland
and  which  we  will  be  effectively  supervising.  The  Bank  will  expect  there  to  be  substantive
presence  here.  For  financial  services,  the  Bank  operates  under  a  common  framework  for
regulation  and  supervision. At  a  European  level,  regulatory  authorities  operate  as  part  of  the
European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  (ESFS)  which  promotes  consistent  application  of
European legislative requirements.
Potential  new  entrants  pose  a  challenge  to  us  as  an  organisation  in  terms  of  planning  and
prioritisation. However, we are meeting this challenge.
To fulfil our mandate in safeguarding stability, using a risk-based approach to supervising firms,
and  ensuring  a  robust  and  transparent  authorisation  and  approval  process,  we  established  a
Brexit  taskforce  within  the  Bank  prior  to  the  referendum.  Our  internal  taskforce  is  a  cross-
departmental  structure  involving  fifteen  divisions  across  the  Bank.  This  functional  approach  is
necessary  given  the  potential  for  a  more  diverse  cross-section  of  entity  types  and  business
models of entities supervised across all sectors.
We have increased our capacity to deal with this, and contingency resourcing plans have also
been developed.
  6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
To  conclude,  our  vision  is  for  a  well-functioning,  well-managed  and  well-regulated  financial
system.
However,  legacies  of  the  past  are  material  and  continue  to  be  worked  through.  Trust  in  the
system remains very damaged and reflects the need for continued improvements, including in
underlying culture.
We endeavour to foster a strong culture of compliance, with firms and individuals within firms
acting  in  the  best  interests  of  their  customers  backed  up  by  comprehensive  and  enforceable
legislation, rigorous supervision, a credible threat of enforcement and powers of redress when
consumers have suffered detriment. As I have stated, although the Tracker Examination will still
take  some  time,  the  Central  Bank  is  determined  to  ensure  that  every  impacted  customer  is
identified and appropriately redressed and compensated.
On  the  issue  of  insurance,  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  work  with  this  Committee,  the
Working Group and other stakeholders in ways that are appropriate to our mandate.
Looking ahead, Brexit poses a number of risks and challenges for the economy, for institutions
and for businesses. In line with our mandate, we will continue to highlight these risks, engage
with  institutions  so  they  are  adequately  prepared,  and  provide  a  transparent  and  efficient
authorisation process for any potential entities that choose to establish here.
I look forward to discussing these issues further with you as well as the other issues you raised
in my invitation.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
