  OPENING ADDRESS DELIVERED 
 AT 
THE 2017 CONTINENTAL SEMINAR OF THE ASSOCIATION OF AFRICAN 
CENTRAL BANKS (AACB) 
BY 
                                  DR JOHNSON P. ASIAMA 
SECOND DEPUTY GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
THEME: CREDIBLE COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES OF CENTRAL BANKS 
IN THE FRAMEWORK OF MONETARY POLICY AND FINANCIAL STABILITY 
AT  
MOVENICK AMBASSADOR HOTEL 
ON 
MAY 03, 2017 
 Mr. Chairman,  
The Executive Secretary, AACB, 
Facilitators on the theme & sub-themes, 
Technical Experts from our respective Central Banks 
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
1. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  join  you  at  this  all  important  Continental  Seminar  of  the 
Association  of  African  Central  Banks  (AACB).  I  wish  to  first  thank  the  AACB  for 
choosing Ghana as the host and also warmly welcome all delegates, especially the 
first time visitors.   
 2.  Mr.  Chairman,  I  consider  the  sub-theme  for  this  seminar  session,  “Credible 
Communication Strategies for Central Banks in the Framework of Monetary Policy 
and Financial Stability,” timely because of the emerging role of communication as 
a  tool  to  shape  expectations  towards  achieving  the  core  mandate  of  price 
stability.  Therefore,  my  opening  remarks  will  briefly  touch  on  monetary  policy 
formulation  in  Africa  and  the  move  towards  incorporating  communication  in  the 
monetary policy formulation process.   
Monetary Policy in Africa 
3.  Mr.  Chairman,  Africa  is  a  continent  of  developing  and  emerging  economies 
therefore  policies  are  broadly  aimed  at  promoting  economic  growth,  poverty 
reduction  and  development.  In  the  recent  past,  most  African  central  banks 
assumed  developmental  roles  by  directly  intervening  in  the  real  sector  of  the 
economy.  With  this  role,  monetary  policy  formulation  in  the  early  1970s  was 
directed  at  financing  large  fiscal  deficits  incurred  in  the  pursuit  of  accelerated 
growth  and  development.  The  monetary  accommodation  of  fiscal  deficits  and  in 
some instances direct controls on interest and exchange rates resulted in severe 
financial repression.   
 4. 
The independence of central banks then was largely non-existent and government 
economic  policies  were  mostly  directives  for  state  institutions,  including  the 
central  bank.  Central  bank  communication  was  limited  to  regulatory  and 
supervisory guidelines issued periodically to financial institutions under its control. 
Economic  agents  seeking  information  had  to  depend  on  ex-post  publications  to 
conjecture the stance of monetary policy pursued during the course of the year.    
 5.  Mr.  Chairman,  with  paradigm  shifts  on  monetary  policy  making  in  the  global 
economy,  it  became  clear  that  the  direct  instruments  were  not  only  devoid  of 
market  or  price  signals  but  also  distortionary  in  the  allocation  of  resources.  The 
prevalence  of  state-owned  banks  in  Africa  at  the  time  further  perpetuated  such 
distortions  as  political  directives  informed  the  allocation  of  financial  resources  to 
the economy. Thus, there was the need to move away from the direct control to 
market-based  regimes  introduced  in  the  late  1980s  under  the  structural 
adjustments  and  financial  sector  liberalization  policies  pioneered  by  the  IMF  and 
World Bank.  
 6. 
These  had  significant  impact  on  the  economies  of  most  African  countries. 
Financial  markets  have  deepened  with  innovative  products  alongside  increasing 
integration of African markets to the global financial markets.  
7. 
As  time  progressed,  it  became  imperative  for  African  central  banks  to  pursue 
forward-looking  monetary  policy  to  tackle  price  stability  which  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  sustainable  growth.    In  so  doing,  some  of  our  members  such  as 
Ghana, South Africa, and Uganda adopted the Inflation Targeting monetary policy 
framework,  while  other  central  banks  de-emphasized  the  role  of  monetary 
aggregates  and  started  incorporating  elements  of  forward-looking  monetary 
policy frameworks.   
 8.  Mr.  Chairman,  forward-looking  monetary  policies  can  only  be  effective  if  the 
central bank is able to shape inflation expectations of the public to align with the 
medium  term  inflation  target.  To  do  this,  the  central  bank  needs  to  be 
transparent  with  regard  to  the  monetary  policy  objective  and  provide  a  clear 
policy  direction  on  how  to  achieve  it.  Communication  and  transparency  helps 
shape and anchor inflation expectations as well as build policy credibility towards 
delivering the core mandate of the central bank.  
 9. 
In  the  case  of  financial  stability,  central  bank  communication  strategy  should  be 
developed  with  utmost  care  in  order  not  to  incite  unnecessary  and  unintended 
reaction  from  the  market.  There  is  therefore  the  need  to  maintain  a  delicate 
balance  between  transparency  and  accountability  on  one  hand,  and  the 
probability  that  the  information  being  communicated  could  unsettle  markets.  A 
transparent  and  credible  communication  strategy  is  feasible  in  a  context  of  a 
stable market underpinned by effective regulatory and supervision regime.  
 Central Bank Communication and Challenges 
10.  Mr.  Chairman,  transparency  and  policy  credibility  that  underpin  forward-looking 
monetary  policies  and  market-based  prudential  regulations  call  for  effective 
central  bank  communication.  To  quote  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  “central  banks’  pronouncements  have  economic 
and  social  impact”.  Therefore,  central  bank  communication  strategies  must  be 
underscored  by  accountability  and  transparency.  This  involves  deepening 
understanding  of  economic  relationships  and  their  ultimate  impact  on  inflation, 
and signalling monetary policy actions which provide forward guidance to market 
participants.  
 11. 
It  is  for  these  reasons  that  communication  has  become  an  additional  tool  in  the 
kitty  of  the  central  banker.  In  several  instances,  central  banks  communicate 
interest rate policy decisions, risk assessments of inflation horizon and changes in 
inflation forecasts relative to the actual outturns. These are all intended to shape 
expectations and build credibility in the delivery of the central banks’ mandate. 
 12.  However,  communication  in  some  African  countries  faces  some  challenges.  As 
democratic  processes  take  root  alongside  media  pluralism  and  the  explosion  of 
social  media,  there  is  a  potential  for  central  bank  actions  and  inactions  to  be 
misrepresented and in the process, erode the central bank’s reputation and lower 
market and public confidence in monetary policy decisions.  
 13.  As  central  bankers,  we  must  appreciate  new  communication  trends  and  develop 
communication  strategies  to  leverage  existing  media  technology  to  build 
confidence  of  market  players.  African  central  banks  should  also  develop  a 
framework  for  comprehensive  education  packages  to  improve  financial  literacy 
across  all  the  sectors  of  the  economy.  This  will  enhance  market  appreciation  of 
monetary policy decisions and central bank actions for appropriate response.   
 Monetary Policy Credibility 
14.  Mr.  Chairman,  monetary  policy  credibility  is  crucial  for  attaining  monetary  policy 
objectives,  particularly,  in  a  rational  expectations  environment  where  economic 
agents  have  full  information  on  how  the  economy  works.  It  is  a  solution  to  the 
time dynamic inconsistency problem, where the expectations of economic agents 
are  shaped  by  the  actions  or  inactions  of  the  central  bank  in  the  delivery  of  its 
mandate.  In  Africa,  the  time  dynamic  inconsistency  problem  is  made  worse  by 
fiscal dominance and inadequate central bank operational autonomy.  
 15.  Monetary  policy  credibility  in  several  advanced  economies  has  been  the 
cornerstone for anchored inflation expectations, and lower variability of monetary 
policy outcomes as market participants believe the central bank’s commitment to 
achieving  its  policy  objectives.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  credibility  does 
not  preclude  flexibility.    In  the  pursuit  of  policy  credibility,  the  central  banker 
should  also  have  the  flexibility  to  adjust  previous  commitments  in  the  face  of 
internal and external shocks that may shift the realisation of policy objectives.  
 16.  There  is  the  need  to  build  monetary  policy  credibility,  especially  in  a  number  of 
African central banks to support monetary policy making. Efforts must be made to 
remove  both  technical  and  political  constraints  which  are  pervasive  within  the 
African central banking context. Some of these technical constraints include data 
unreliability  and  untimeliness  with  monetary  policy  decision  or  forecasts,  over-
optimistic policy objectives, and uncontrollability of policy instruments.  
 17.  Political  constraints  such  as  inadequate  legislation  to  back  the  operational 
independence  of  the  central  bank  also  hinder  policy  credibility.  Addressing  these 
constraints would require financial and technical support to state institutions that 
generate  the  economic  and  financial  data,  and  constitutional,  legislative  and 
operational reforms to strengthen monetary policy formulation. 
 18.  Mr.  Chairman,  going  through  the  programme  for  this  seminar,  I  have  no  doubt 
that  much  will  be  learned  to  greatly  enhance  communication  in  our  respective 
central  banks.  I  urge  all  of  you  participants  to  note  the  important  take-away 
points  from  this  seminar.  For  example,  how  does  effective  communication 
enhance  central  bank  credibility  and  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy?  How 
should we manage communication in times of crisis? And what lessons should we 
learn from cross-country experiences in central bank communications? 
 19.  Mr.  Chairman,  these  foregoing  remarks  are  just  a  few  pointers  to  set  off  the 
discussions  on  the  topic.  I  do  hope  that  by  the  end  of  this  seminar,  the 
presentations  and  detailed  discussions  will  deepen  our  understanding  of  central 
bank  communication  and  monetary  policy  credibility.  On  this  note,  let  me  once 
again thank the Executive Secretariat and the Planning Committee for putting this 
seminar together.  
 
I wish you all fruitful discussions. Thank you. 
20. 
  