 Grant Thornton Europe Regional Meeting 
 What monetary policy cannot do 
Address by Dr Mario Vella, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta 
24 May 2017 
   Almost ten years have passed since the outbreak of the global financial crisis, triggered by 
the collapse of Lehman Brothers in the autumn of 2008.  During this period, central banks 
have  become,  according  to  The  Economist,  “the  most  powerful  financial  actors  on  the 
planet”.  Central banks have often been portrayed as the only institutional players with the 
knowledge and capability to prevent a global financial crisis from turning into a second Great 
Depression, on par with the one seen in the 1930s. 
And yet, despite this aura of power, central banks are both fallible and constrained. 
In  this  address,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  what  monetary  policy  can  do  and,  equally 
importantly,  what  monetary  policy  cannot  do.    As  you  know,  Malta  has  formed  part  of  the 
euro area since January 2008.  Therefore, the Central Bank of Malta no longer formulates 
and executes a monetary policy of its own.  Rather, as one of 19 members of the Governing 
Council of the European Central Bank, the Governor of the Central Bank of Malta takes part 
in the formulation of monetary policy for the euro area as a whole.  At the same time, the 
Bank is responsible for implementing the Council’s monetary policy decisions in Malta.   
Monetary policy in the euro area aims at price stability.  According to the Treaty this is the 
primary objective of the European Central Bank.  In turn, the Governing Council adopted a 
more precise, quantitative definition of its objective.  It aims for an annual rate of inflation of 
“below, but close to, 2% over the medium term” as measured for the euro area as a whole.  
The  medium-term  orientation  of  monetary  policy  is  important,  because  in  the  short  term 
1 
 actual  inflation  can  fluctuate  due  to  temporary  factors,  such  as  spikes  in  oil  prices  or 
changes in indirect taxes.  At the same time, it is also worth noting that the focus is on the 
euro area as a whole, and not on particular member states within it.   
But  why  should  monetary  policy  focus  on  price  stability?  In  the  view  of  classical 
economists, money is neutral.  On this view, the quantity of money in an economy affects 
nominal variables, such as the price level, the exchange rate and the nominal interest rate.  
However,  changes  in  the  money  supply  have  no  effect  on  real  variables,  such  as  output, 
incomes or relative prices.  Monetary policy has, within this theoretical framework, no effect 
on the real economy at all. 
Today, most economists would consider that the neutrality of money holds only in the long 
run.    In  the  long  run,  the  economy  reaches  its  steady-state  equilibrium,  with  output  at  its 
potential.  Any monetary expansion at this point, with the economy operating at full capacity, 
would merely push up prices.  This is evident during episodes of hyperinflation, where rapid 
increases in the money supply lead to ever-increasing consumer prices. 
In  the  long run,  the  level  of  output  that  an  economy  can  generate  depends  on  the  capital 
stock, the labour supply and the productivity of factors of production.  In the steady state, all 
these factors are outside the scope of monetary policy.  Given that monetary policy cannot 
determine the long-run values of real economic variables then, the argument goes, it is best 
to  let  monetary  policy  focus  on  what  it  can  really  control,  namely  nominal  variables  or,  in 
other words, prices. 
This brings me to my first proposition: by and large monetary policy cannot affect real 
economic  developments  in  the  long  run.    The  long-run  potential  output  of  an  economy 
depends on structural features of the economy, including demographic developments, labour 
force participation rates, levels of educational attainment and efficiency in product and labour 
markets.  It also depends on the transformation of savings into investment, that is, the proper 
functioning  of  banks  and  financial  markets.    Success  in  these  domains  depends  on  other 
 2 
policy makers, notably governments, which can undertake structural reforms and often play 
a major role in the provision of education.  
So what can monetary policy actually do?  In the near term, monetary policy nevertheless 
has a role to play.  By influencing aggregate demand, it can cushion the economy from the 
impact of adverse shocks.  In this way, it can limit the volatility of output from its long-run, or 
potential, level.  Moreover, by sustaining demand in the short run, it can prevent a cyclical 
downswing in the economy from becoming entrenched.  If such a downturn were to persist, 
the  economy  would  risk  suffering  permanent  damage  as  unemployed  workers  drop  out  of 
the labour force, for example, or as relevant skills are lost.  In this sense, monetary policy 
can  safeguard  the  economy  from  structural  damage  and  help  avoid  permanent  losses  to 
potential output. 
In  the  euro  area,  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  monetary  policy  has  been  at  the 
forefront of efforts to sustain a healthy rhythm of economic activity and ensure that the price 
stability  objective  is  reached.    The  ECB  has  used  a  range  of  tools  in  its  policy  arsenal  to 
support aggregate demand in the euro area and secure price stability.   
During  this  period,  paradoxically,  the  greatest  danger  that  the  Governing  Council  had  to 
confront was not the one that the founders of the single currency had feared.  The ECB is 
institutionally  hard-wired  to  combat  inflation.    This  was  the  key  preoccupation  of  the 
architects of the euro, born out of the German experiences with hyperinflation, both during 
the inter-war years and in the aftermath of the Second World War.  From this preoccupation 
stem  essential  features  of  the  set-up  of  the  single  currency  area:  a  fiercely  independent 
central bank, with a clear mandate to pursue price stability and robust safeguards to stop the 
ECB from monetising budget deficits, historically the root of runaway inflation. 
During the financial crisis, however, the nature of the problem the ECB faced was entirely 
the  opposite.    Time  and  again,  the  ECB  had  to  act  to  prevent  an  unduly  sharp  fall  in 
economic  activity  and  head  off  the  risk  of  deflation.    Deflation,  which  is  a  widespread  and 
ongoing  fall  in  prices,  may  lead  consumers  to  postpone  spending  and  firms  to  slash 
3 
 investment.    Both  factors  lead  to  a  reduction  in  aggregate  demand,  lower  output,  higher 
unemployment and further downward pressure on prices.  This is arguably as dangerous a 
situation as spiralling inflation. 
In late 2008, the ECB faced a situation in which firms, households and governments were 
carrying excessive debt, at the same time as the banks had to reduce their own leverage.  
With  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  immediate  problem  was  a  shortage  of  liquidity 
and  the  breakdown  of  the  money  market.    This  threatened  the  health  of  the  euro  area 
economy  as  a  whole,  with  declining  output,  rising  unemployment  and  weaker  inflationary 
pressures.    In  response,  between  October  2008  and  May  2009,  the  Governing  Council 
lowered  key  interest  rates  by  275  basis  points,  bringing  the  rate  on  the  main  refinancing 
operations  down  to  1.0%.    Many  of  these  measures  were  taken  in  concert  with  the  major 
central banks around the world. 
Under  normal  economic  conditions,  such  a  reduction  in  short-term  interest rates  is quickly 
transmitted  to  bank  lending  and  deposit  rates.    In  turn,  lower  interest  rates  encourage 
households and firms to consume and invest more, supporting aggregate demand directly.  
Moreover,  lower  interest  rates  on  euro-denominated  assets  lead  to  a  depreciation  of  the 
exchange rate of the euro, stimulating exports.  This smooth transmission of the impulses 
from  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy  depends  critically  on  the  health  of  the  financial 
system.   In  Europe,  this  primarily  means  the  banks.    Since the  banks  themselves  were  in 
trouble, however, the impact of these monetary policy measures was much weaker than it 
should have otherwise been. 
The next wave of the financial crisis in Europe hit in 2010.  Financial market tensions rose, 
resulting from growing market concerns about the sustainability of public finances, especially 
in  Greece.    The  strong  links  between  banks  and  their  sovereigns  led  to  contagion  that 
eventually  also  engulfed  Ireland,  Portugal  and  Cyprus  –  all  of  which  needed  international 
rescue  programmes.    Banking  systems  in  vulnerable  countries  lost  access  to  funding, 
 4 
financial intermediaries retreated behind national boundaries and markets began to bet on a 
breakup of the euro area.   
In  July  2012,  President  Draghi  announced  that  the  ECB  would  do  “whatever  it  takes”  to 
preserve the integrity of the euro area.  This announcement was followed up in September 
with the launch of the Outright Monetary Transactions programme, aimed at stabilising jittery 
sovereign  bond  markets.    One  could  argue  that,  in  the  absence  of  a  robust  political 
response, the ECB stepped beyond the normal remit of monetary policy to counter a threat 
to  the  very  existence  of  the  euro  area  itself.    Although  the  programme  itself  was  never 
activated, the fact that it was in place reduced tensions in financial markets and the risk of a 
breakup of the single currency area receded. 
Economic activity began to recover in mid-2013.  Since then, real GDP in the euro area has 
expanded steadily, if moderately, until by the second half of 2015 it had reached its pre-crisis 
level.  However, the unemployment rate in the euro area remains relatively high, though it 
has fallen from a peak of above 12% in 2013 to below 10% today. 
Against the backdrop of a tentative recovery, and with euro area banks having to clean up 
their  balance  sheets  and  restrict  lending,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  began  a  prolonged 
downward trend.  Inflation in the euro area fell to 0.4% in 2014, zero in 2015 and just 0.2% 
last year.  At these rates, inflation was considerably below the ECB target.  Indeed, by mid-
2014 disinflationary pressures in the euro area were clear.  The concern was that Inflation 
expectations, which were firmly anchored until then, could lose their moorings.  This would 
lead to a self-sustained deflationary spiral that would further weaken the euro area economy. 
At this stage, the conduct of monetary policy ran into another constraint.  As we have seen, 
by May 2009 the Governing Council had cut the main refinancing rate to 1.0%.  The main 
refinancing  rate  was  lowered  to  0.25%  in  November  2013,  while  the  rate  on  the  ECB’s 
overnight deposit facility was reduced to zero.  The Governing Council now faced a dilemma: 
although the economic situation demanded further monetary stimulus, official interest rates 
could  not  fall  much further.    Nominal  interest  rates  cannot fall  far  below  zero.    Otherwise, 
5 
 households and firms would simply withdraw money from the banking system and hold cash.  
This ‘zero lower bound’ is another constraint on monetary policy and one that had not been 
envisaged when the monetary policy framework for the euro area was designed. 
In response, the ECB embarked upon a range of non-standard measures.  First, following 
the  example  of  several  other  central  banks,  the  Governing  Council  pushed  the  overnight 
deposit rate into negative territory and the rate on the main refinancing operations down to 
zero.  Second,  the  ECB  launched,  and  then  extended,  an  asset  purchase  programme, 
pushing down long-term sovereign bond yields and lowering borrowing costs for the private 
sector  as  well.    Third,  the  ECB  began  offering  banks  a  series  of  targeted  long-term 
refinancing operations on favourable terms, aimed at prompting them to lend to the private 
sector.  These measures were aimed at stimulating economic activity, staving off the threat 
of deflation and pushing inflation back up towards its target of below, but close to, 2%.   
These  unconventional  policy  measures  have  been  instrumental  to  provide  additional 
accommodation  to  the  economy  and  prevent  a  self-sustaining  fall  in  inflation.    However, 
although  economic  activity  has  firmed,  inflation  still  has  not  converged  with  the  ECB’s 
objective.  Underlying inflation pressures remain subdued.  The Governing Council continues 
to  hold  that  such  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  must  remain  in  place  until  a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation has been achieved.  Until now, we do not have 
sufficient evidence that we have reached this critical point. 
This  brings  me  to  my  second  proposition.    Because  of  the  existence  of  the  zero  lower 
bound,  it  is  far  easier  for  monetary  policy  to  fight  inflation  by  raising  interest  rates 
than  to  combat  deflation  by  lowering  them.    Although  central  banks  world-wide  have 
used a range of non-standard measures to stimulate economic activity and push inflation up 
to the target, in practice, this has proven to be extremely difficult. 
Moreover,  as  I  pointed  out  earlier,  the  institutional  set-up  of  the  euro  area  rules  out  the 
easiest  policy  option  to  raise  inflation,  namely  the  monetisation  of  budget  deficits.  
Furthermore,  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  monetary  policy  was,  for  a  long time, “the  only 
6 
 game in town”.  With many sovereigns weighed down by excessive debt burdens, there was 
no  space  for  fiscal  policy  to  play  its  part  in  supporting  monetary  policy  in  stimulating  the 
economy.  Rather, in many countries, the necessary focus on austerity measures meant that 
monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  were  operating  at  cross-purposes.    Unfortunately,  those 
euro area countries with space to manoeuvre chose not to do so. 
To  sum  up,  monetary  policy  can  influence  nominal  economic  variables.    In  the  long  run, 
however,  it  cannot  influence  real  economic  variables,  which  depend  on  the  economy’s 
endowments of factors of production and the efficiency with which they combine to produce 
output.    This  highlights  the  importance  of  structural  reforms  to  ensure  that  the  economy 
operates as efficiently as possible. 
I  have  also  argued  that  monetary  policy  was  crucial  in  preventing  the  dual  shock  of  the 
financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis from having even more negative consequences 
for the euro area as a whole.  The ECB’s extremely accommodative monetary policy stance 
sustained the ongoing economic recovery, while heading off the threat of deflation.  I would 
like  to  stress,  however,  it  is  much  harder  to  sustain  economic  activity  and  attain  the  price 
stability objective  when interest rates reach the zero lower bound.   Although the ECB has 
made ample and imaginative use of non-standard monetary policy measures, inflation in the 
euro area has not yet risen in a sustained way towards the inflation target. 
I would like to conclude with a few words about the Maltese economy.  Malta weathered the 
global financial crisis and the euro area sovereign debt crisis well.  Malta has been outpacing 
other  members  of  the  euro  area  since  2012.    We are  the  fastest-growing  economy  in  the 
euro area, registering extremely rapid growth rates over the past three years.  In part, this 
was because we avoided the problems that dragged down some euro area member states: 
the  banking  system  remained  liquid  and  well-capitalised  throughout,  while  fiscal  discipline 
ensured that public debt never rose to unsustainable levels.  Malta also benefited, of course, 
from the accommodative monetary policy stance that I have just described.  Crucially, Malta 
enjoyed the gains from a range of structural reforms that increased labour force participation, 
 7 
raised  efficiency  in  key  economic  sectors  and  led  to  the  diversification  of  activity  into  new 
niche areas, particularly in services.   
Monetary  policy  on  its  own  cannot  deliver  the  full  range  of  desirable  economic  outcomes.  
When it is accompanied by complementary and consistent fiscal policy actions, as well as by 
well-designed structural reforms, then monetary policy can deliver on its primary objective of 
price  stability,  while  maintaining  economic  activity  and  employment  close  to  their  potential 
levels. 
 8 
