Kevin  Stiroh:  Introductory  remarks  at  2017  Community  Bankers
Conference
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution
Supervision Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the 2017 Community Bankers
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 6 April 2017.
Introduction
 Good morning. I’d like to welcome you to the 2017 Community Bankers Conference. The Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  is  pleased  to  once  again  host  this  conference  and  to  continue  to
foster  a  robust  dialogue  on  key  industry  trends  and  supervisory  issues  affecting  community
banks.
In addition to about 130 representatives of community and smaller regional banks in the Second
District of the Federal Reserve System, we are happy to welcome fellow supervisors from the
states of New York, Connecticut and New Jersey; representatives of the FDIC and the OCC; and
colleagues  from  the  Board  of  Governors  and  Philadelphia,  Cleveland,  Chicago  and  Atlanta
Federal Reserve Banks. In all, we have record attendance with 178 participants.
As  in  past  years,  our  goal  for  this  conference  is  to  promote  a  constructive  dialogue  between
senior managers and directors of smaller financial organizations in our District and federal and
state supervisors. This type of constructive engagement helps us reach our shared objective of
resilient financial institutions operating  in  a  safe  and  sound  financial  system  that  supports  the
growth and stability of the U.S. economy.
During my brief remarks this morning, I’d like to highlight three related topics that I believe are
relevant to you as community bankers: the critical role that community banks play in the U.S.
economy, particularly at the local level; trends in small business lending; and recent efforts to
enhance the efficiency of the regulatory and supervisory framework.
My comments today are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
The critical role of community banks
Let  me  begin  with  some  thoughts  on  what  we  seek  to  achieve  through  supervision. A  core
objective for safety and soundness supervision is to ensure that supervised entities are resilient.
That is, a firm should be able to continue to operate and provide financial services across a wide
range  of  economic  and  financial  conditions.  Supervisors  and  regulators  can  support  this
objective through our focus on stronger capital and liquidity, comprehensive risk management
and robust governance and controls.
All of this makes firms resilient to unexpected shocks and allows them to continue to serve their
customers and communities. Resilience, however, is not the end objective. Rather, we seek to
ensure  that  banks  of  all  sizes  contribute  to  the  sustained  and  efficient  provision  of  credit  and
other financial services to consumers and businesses that support the growth and stability of the
economy.
Community  banks  play  a  distinctive  role  in  the  provision  of  financial  services,  offering  a  wide
range  of  products  and  serving  specific  segments.  Community  banks  often  use  a  unique
“relationship-based”  approach  that,  for  example,  leverages  personal  knowledge  of  their
customers’ creditworthiness and local business conditions to customize lending decisions and
meet  demand  for  credit  and  other  financial  services.  This  allows  both  consumers  and  small
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
businesses to contribute to economic activity.
1
Community banks also provide important financial services to key – often underserved – sectors
of the economy. For example, a study from a few years ago found that almost one out of five
U.S.  counties  has  no  other  physical  banking  offices  except  those  operated  by  community
banks.  As a second example, in the typical county in the Second District (excluding Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands), community banks account for about half of all banking deposits. It is the
ability  of  smaller  institutions  to  leverage  “soft  information”  in  important  ways  and  reach
underserved sectors that gives community banks a unique and critical role in driving sustainable
economic growth.
Supervisors are also keenly aware of the potential unintended consequences of the supervisory
and regulatory framework. One of our goals as supervisors is to ensure that our efforts are not
having  an  adverse  effect  on  the  ability  of  firms  to  provide  credit  and  financial  services  that
supports economic growth at businesses of all sizes. As I said in an earlier talk, in my view, it is
entirely appropriate to continuously evaluate and rigorously debate whether the supervisory and
regulatory framework is meeting its objectives efficiently.  I’ll return to this topic shortly.
Trends in small bank and small business lending
2
As we evaluate the financial system and the broader economy, we regularly examine firms from
a horizontal and aggregate perspective to gain insight on the trends in the provision of financial
services in the Second District. Today, I’ll say a few words on trends in small business lending.
Of course, looking at trends is not sufficient to identify causal relationships, but it does provide
one perspective on these developments and identifies areas for future inquiry.
The overall level of commercial and industrial (C&I) lending at Second District firms with under
$50 billion in total assets has grown steadily in recent years (Chart 1). Since the financial crisis,
these loans have increased by just over 80 percent, which is somewhat faster than growth at the
national level of 64 percent over the same period.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Within  commercial  and  industrial  (C&I)  lending  for  these  banks,  small  business  lending  is
particularly important, given the traditional role of small businesses in job creation. While data are
not immediately available on borrower size, we can look at a simple proxy for small business
lending by isolating individual C&I loans to commercial borrowers that are each under $1 million.
These data show that while the dollar value of small C&I loans has grown since 2010, the pace
of growth has not been as high as overall C&I lending growth. As a result, small C&I loans now
constitute a smaller portion of total C&I lending, both in the Second District and nationally (Chart
2).  This  is  likely  due,  in  part,  to  nominal  factors,  but  could  also  reflect  underlying  economic
conditions.
Turning  to  community  banks,  they  have  historically  held  a  disproportionate  amount  of  small
commercial loans, and this is a trend that has continued post-crisis. Among all Second District
firms with less than $50 billion in total assets, community banking organizations (CBOs) hold 54
percent of total assets, but 66 percent of total small commercial loans. This share has declined
somewhat  since  2011  (Chart  3).  Within  small  commercial  lending,  CBOs  are  especially
important when it comes to small commercial real estate (CRE) loans, providing 79 percent of
total CRE loans under $1 million.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given the importance of small businesses to employment and growth in so many communities
around our District, we welcome hearing your views on what might be driving these trends. More
generally,  we  are  interested  in  your  assessment  of  business  and  lending  conditions  in  the
communities  that  you  serve.  What  are  the  key  challenges  and  opportunities  that  community
banks  face?  Your  insight  will  provide  a  key  supplement  to  our  quantitative  research,  and
combining these two perspectives will support our efforts to understand what we are seeing in
small business lending. Our supervisory teams are interested in your insights when we visit your
organizations to conduct examinations and in venues like this conference.
Enhancing the framework
As I’ve said earlier, supervisors recognize it is important to ensure that the oversight framework
continues  to  function  efficiently.  In  that  regard,  the  Federal  Reserve  recently  participated  in  a
review, as mandated by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996
(EGRPRA),  to  identify  rules  that  are  outdated,  unnecessary,  or  unduly  burdensome.  The  full
report covers 430 pages, so I’d like to highlight three of the recommendations that may be of
interest to Second District community bankers. They relate to simplifying capital requirements;
reducing regulatory reporting; and reducing the frequency of examinations for certain qualifying,
smaller firms.
Capital is in many ways the foundation of the health of the banking system. It’s important to note
that  more  than  500  banks  failed  during  and  after  the  financial  crisis  because  they  lacked
sufficient capital, and many of them were community banks. Nonetheless, we have consistently
heard since then that some of the capital rules are too complex for community banks and not
commensurate  with  their  size  and  risk  profile.  This  link  with  the  risk  profile  is  critical  and  an
important part of our efforts to “tailor” our supervisory approaches.
As part of the EGRPRA process, we are continuing to think about ways to simplify the capital
rules. The agencies are developing a proposal and are planning to seek industry comments on
certain  proposed  amendments  to  the  capital  rules.  Such  amendments  could  include  (1)
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
replacing the framework’s complex treatment of high volatility commercial real estate exposures,
(2)  simplifying  the  current  regulatory  capital  treatment  for  mortgage  servicing  assets  and
regulatory  capital  instruments  issued  by  financial  institutions;  and  (3)  simplifying  the  current
limitations on minority interests in regulatory capital.
I should note that, in April 2015, the Board approved a final rule that raised the asset threshold of
the Small Bank Holding Company (BHC) Policy Statement from less than $500 million in total
consolidated  assets  to  less  than  $1  billion  in  total  consolidated  assets  and  expanded  the
application of the policy  statement  to  savings  and  loan  holding  companies  (SLHCs). After  the
issuance of the final rule, 89 percent of all BHCs and 81 percent of all savings and loan holding
companies were covered by the policy statement and were excluded from certain consolidated
capital requirements.
A second relevant topic reflects the challenges and burdens for smaller firms to file Call Reports.
In response to industry concerns, the agencies began in 2014 the process to streamline the Call
Report  for  community  banks  and  subsequently  published  a  series  of  proposals  for  comment.
The result is that, effective March 31, 2017, Call Report requirements have been streamlined for
community banks. This new Call Report will reduce the number of report pages from 85 to 61
pages  and  will  remove  approximately  40  percent  of  the  data  items  currently  included  in  the
capital schedule.
A third example concerns the frequency of examinations. Some firms proposed lengthening the
period  of  time  between  examinations,  including  increasing  the  asset  size  limit  for  community
banks  to  qualify  for  the  18-month  cycle.  In  response,  the  agencies  supported  a  change  to
statutes that govern examination frequency. Subsequent legislation enacted in 2015 permitted
qualifying firms under $1 billion in total asset size to be subject to an 18-month examination cycle
for safety and soundness examinations. The final rule for this legislation was issued at the end of
last year and is now in force.
I should emphasize that a longer exam cycle does not mean we are neglecting our supervisory
responsibilities and we will remain focused on the core drivers of safety and soundness. That is
our responsibility as supervisors. While it was some time ago, it is useful to recall the FDIC study
of the financial crisis in the 1980s that highlighted how quickly financial health can deteriorate and
concluded  that  delayed  recognition  via  less-frequent  examinations  contributed  to  the  scale  of
3
losses and failures in the 1980s.
In  addition  to  our  review  of  regulations,  supervisors  periodically  review  existing  supervisory
guidance to evaluate relevance and effectiveness. The Board completed a policy review of the
supervision programs for community and regional banking organizations to make sure that these
programs  and  related  supervisory  guidance  appropriately  align  with  current  banking  practices
and risks. As a result of this review, the Board eliminated 78 guidance letters that are no longer
relevant.
As I mentioned, one of the core objectives of supervision and regulation is to support resilience in
supervised  firms  so  that  they  can  contribute  to  the  sustained  provision  of  credit  and  other
financial  services.  We  strive  to  do  that  in  the  most  effective  and  efficient  manner  possible.  I
mentioned just a few examples of our work in this area, and I look forward to continued dialogue
on this key topic.
Conclusions
We at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Federal Reserve System have a strong
interest in understanding the issues facing community banks and ensuring that they continue to
play their critical role in the U.S. financial system. We hope that today’s conference sparks an
informative discussion around many of those issues.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
I’ll  conclude  by  noting  that  this  conference  is  just  one  of  several  initiatives  to  encourage
communication  and  outreach  with  the  industry.  The  Federal  Reserve  Board  also  has  initiated
numerous  industry  outreach  opportunities  to  provide  resources  on  key  supervisory  policies,
including the development of two programs—"Outlook Live” and “Ask the Fed"—as well as the
publication  of  three  newsletters—Community  Banking  Connections,  Consumer  Compliance
Outlook, and FedLinks. We hope you are able to utilize these resources, and our team will be
happy to provide instructions on how you can subscribe to them.
Thank you for joining our conference today; I hope you will find today’s presentations useful and
informative.
1
2
3
FDIC Community Banking Study (December 2012).
A Perspective on Supervisory Objectives and Trade-offs, February 23, 2017.
The Banking Crisis of the 1980s and Early 1990s: Summary and Implications, FDIC.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
