Ibrahim:  Outstanding  contributions 
Muhammad  bin 
development of Islamic finance in Malaysia
Welcoming remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Royal  Award  for  Islamic  Finance  Gala  Dinner  and  Award
Presentation, Kuala Lumpur, 14 November 2016.
the
to 
Bismillahhirahmanirrahim.
 Mengadap Seri Paduka Baginda Yang di-Pertuan Agong Almu’tasimu Billahi Muhibbuddin Tuanku
Alhaj Abdul Halim Mu’adzam Shah ibni Almarhum Sultan Badlishah,
Seri Paduka Baginda Raja Permaisuri Agong Tuanku Hajah Haminah.
Ampun Tuanku beribu-ribu Ampun, sembah patik mohon diampun.
Patik  serta  seluruh  dif-dif  jemputan  pada  malam  ini  dengan  penuh  hormat  dan  takzimnya
merafak sembah menjunjung kasih atas limpah perkenan Seri Paduka Baginda Tuanku berdua
berangkat bercemar duli ke Majlis Makan Malam Anugerah Diraja Kewangan Islam Tahun 2016.
Ampun Tuanku.
Seterusnya patik ingin memohon perkenan Seri Paduka Baginda Tuanku untuk menyampaikan
ucapan kepada para hadirin dalam Bahasa Inggeris.
KeBawah  Duli  Yang  Maha  Mulia  Paduka  Seri  Sultan  Nazrin  Muizzuddin  Shah  Ibni Almarhum
Sultan Azlan Muhibbuddin Shah Al-Maghfur-lah, Sultan of Perak Darul Ridzuan, and Duli Yang
Maha Mulia Raja Permaisuri Perak Tuanku Zara Salim.
Your Royal Highnesses, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests,
Ladies & Gentlemen.
It is my pleasure to welcome the distinguished audience to the Gala Dinner for the Royal Award
for  Islamic  Finance  (RAIF)  tonight,  which  is  held  to  honor  an  individual  for  outstanding
contributions to the growth and development of Islamic finance. Allow me to express our utmost
gratitude to His Majesty Seri Paduka Baginda Yang di-Pertuan Agong and Her Majesty, and His
Royal Highness Sultan of Perak Darul Ridzuan, the Royal Patron of Malaysia International Islamic
Financial Centre (MIFC) and Her Royal Highness, for gracing tonight’s Gala Dinner. Our sincere
appreciation to Securities Commission Malaysia, for jointly hosting this dinner with Bank Negara
Malaysia, under the Malaysia International Islamic Financial Centre (MIFC) initiative.
Since the introduction of the Royal Award for Islamic Finance (RAIF) in 2010 as a biennial event,
it has given due recognition to three individuals. Tonight, another individual will be awarded the
2016 RAIF, for outstanding contributions in the development of Islamic finance.
The Islamic finance industry has continued to gain strength and stature, recording robust global
growth of between 10 to 12 percent annually over the past decade. Amidst a highly challenging
global economic environment, the growth reflects the steady advancement and maturity of the
industry in meeting the needs of the economy. As we progress into the new era of growth, our
endeavour to enhance the vibrancy of the industry warrants a new way of thinking in the face of
increasing competition and profound changes brought about by technological advancements. In
facing these challenges successfully, one of the prerequisites is a pool of talent that is dynamic,
adaptable and visionary.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
In Malaysia, we have invested substantially in cultivating talents equipped with the required skill
sets and knowledge needed to compete, to think and to innovate. Over the last three decades in
our  journey  to  develop  Islamic  finance,  a  holistic  infrastructural  ecosystem  devoted  towards
talent development has been conceptualised.
To move forward, we need to continuously create distinct value propositions for Islamic finance
to chart into new areas of growth. In the case of Malaysia, the need for a new breed of talent is
pressing, as we embark on an ambitious target of 40 percent market share for Islamic finance by
2020. The need is also evident at the global level, as many jurisdictions aspire to develop an
Islamic finance centre of their own. It is from this perspective that it becomes even more critical
for us to nurture the right talents with the best minds to propel the industry into the future, that is
1
estimated to grow its financial assets to USD3.2 trillion by 2020 .
There  is  much  we  can  derive  from  the  lessons  of  history.  Historical  evidence  showed  that
Islamic civilisation was driven by visionary thinkers and their propensity and ability to engage in
vigorous intellectual discourses. Indeed, many of the breakthrough thinking, concept and ideas
were only possible because of the conducive environment that emphasised intellectual rigour.
Their contributions were immeasurable. Their wisdom and foresight were unsurpassed and far
superior to others. In many cases they were a few hundred years ahead of their time. Ibnu Sina,
Ibnu Rushd and Al Jabir were among the many legendary thinkers who not only excelled in one
specific  area  of  study,  but  in  multiple  areas  of  knowledge  such  as  philosophy,  science  and
theology.
The great thinkers of the past have indeed demonstrated exemplary intellectual qualities for us to
emulate. The current highly competitive and demanding operating environment requires present-
day  Ibnu  Sina,  Ibnu  Rushd  and Al  Jabir  to  formulate  and  develop  solutions  to  the  challenges
faced by the ummah. Today, the definition of Shariah scholars is often understood in a narrow
context  where  recognition  is  largely  attributed  to  one’s  proficiency  in  the  field  of  Islamic
theocracy. However, the nature and challenges faced by society today demand a broader context
of scholarly endeavours that necessitate a new cadre of Islamic finance scholars.
Such scholars, not only excel in their depth of Shariah knowledge and wisdom, but also possess
knowledge in other related disciplines such as economics, finance and law.
The  combination  of  technical  knowledge  and  Shariah  wisdom,  together  with  a  strong
understanding  in  other  disciplines  would  produce  great  thinkers  who  are  able  to  translate
theoretical  reasoning  into  practice.  These  thinkers  could  contribute  to  the  society  with  their
contemporary  innovative  solutions,  starting  from  even  small  ideas  that  could  potentially  bring
incremental changes with bigger positive impact over the long run. Great thinkers of yesteryears
were known for the audacity to think beyond the sphere of conventional wisdom to shift into a
new paradigm that molded civilisation into the next leap forward.
A high standard of professionalism, laced with strong ethical values and integrity also form the
prerequisites  to  create  a  new  cadre  of  Islamic  finance  scholars.  The  pursuit  for  intellectual
diversity  and  professionalism  among  scholars 
through  Shariah
interpretations  and 
that  evolve  with  peculiarity  of  circumstances,
demonstrating a high degree of tolerance and respect of other Shariah school of thoughts. It is
only  by  having  talents  with  these  ingrained  ethics  and  characteristics  that  we  could  elevate
Islamic finance to greater heights in our endeavour to improve the wellbeing of the ummah. 
is  best  demonstrated 
lines  of  reasoning 
Tonight, as we commemorate this prestigious award, let us celebrate this year’s and past years’
winners  for  their  contributions  to  drive  the  Islamic  finance  agenda  forward.  It  is  not  just  their
academic and working credentials that merit them this award, but it is also their relentless pursuit
of al-falah (success) through their drive, knowledge and wisdom.
I believe that this year’s RAIF winner and past winners have paved the path for future talents of
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Islamic finance to embark on breakthrough ideas and thinking. It is for this very reason, that this
year’s  award  is  conferred  to  the  visionary  talents  that  had  made  impactful  and  significant
contributions to Islamic finance.
On that note, I would also like to take this opportunity to record my appreciation to all steering
committee members and the panel of jury of the Royal Award for Islamic Finance 2016, led by
Yang Amat Berbahagia Tun Musa Hitam for their unwavering support and commitment.
Ampun Tuanku,
Demikianlah  sahaja  sembah  ucapan  patik,  dan  sebelum  mengundur  diri,  patik  sekali  lagi
merakamkan  ucapan  menjunjung  kasih,  kepada  Seri  Paduka  Baginda  Tuanku  di  atas  limpah
perkenan berangkat ke majlis pada malam ini. 
1
Thomson Reuters estimation, June 2016.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
