Mario Draghi: Response on receipt of an Honorary Doctorate from
Tel Aviv University
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the  receipt  of  an
Honorary Doctorate from Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 18 May 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It  is  my  privilege  to  speak  to  you  tonight,  on  behalf  of  all  those  whom  you  distinguished  by
awarding an honorary doctorate of the University of Tel Aviv.
We  come  from  different  fields  of  human  endeavour.  Politics,  policy,  business,  history  and  of
course fundamental research. Our achievements are diverse. But they are all based on careful
accumulation, experimentation and exploitation of knowledge. Knowledge created and fostered
by universities such as yours.
And I cannot but detect the profound influence of this search for knowledge in my memory of
recent events. The eruption of the global financial crisis in 2008, and the subsequent sovereign
debt crisis in Europe, caused a deep recession worldwide, a sharp increase in unemployment
and  exposed  the  incompleteness  of  some  parts  of  the  EU  institutional  architecture.  Fertile
conditions to give voice to populist and nationalistic rhetoric.
But that period of crisis was also conducive to improving our understanding of economic and
political forces, and to translating this new knowledge into action. The crisis has thus resulted in
a form of creative destruction, where established paradigms have been critically revisited, where
flawed practices have been exposed and replaced by sounder ones and where new research
addressed previously neglected aspects of our societies. This renewed effort has both greatly
deepened our understanding of economics and shaped our policy response.
The crisis is now behind us. The recovery in the euro area is resilient and is increasingly broad-
based  across  countries  and  sectors.  Domestic  demand,  supported  by  the  ECB’s  monetary
policy, is the mainstay of that recovery. Five million more people are employed now than were in
2013, and unemployment though still too high is at an eight-year low. Worldwide, the financial
sector is now more resilient. The global economic outlook is also improving, and downside risks
are moderating.
However,  what  we  need  in  Europe  to  ensure  that  economic  growth  and  higher  prosperity  is
sustained through time are structural reforms and a renewed sense of purpose for the EU.
Started in the aftermath of the Second World War, European integration was the response to
citizens’  desperate  need  for  peace.  The  system  of  treaties  between  governments  that  had
dominated European relations between the two wars and even before had utterly failed to deliver
what governments are mainly for: security and prosperity. Pooling sovereignty on issues of direct
common interest became the new basis for cooperation between the European nations. At the
time such a project seemed bold and optimistic – just as calling for further, deeper integration
seems  bold  and  optimistic  today.  But  our  founders  were  right.  Europe  has  delivered  peace,
prosperity and political stability for a period of time that has no precedents in its modern history.
This year marks the 60th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome that created the European Union and
the 25th anniversary of the Maastricht Treaty that created the Monetary Union.
Further progress is needed. The institutional architecture of the Economic and Monetary Union
remains incomplete in a number of aspects. The crisis has exposed structural weaknesses in
our construction and has forced us to address them. The repair has started with the creation of
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
the banking union.
But the work is far from over and the challenges we face go beyond Economic and Monetary
Union. They pertain to security, migration, defence, and generally all those challenges that can be
addressed only by pooling sovereignty. And these challenges are greater than in the past.
Today we can sense a rising wave of energy in demanding joint European action. The European
Union and the euro always commanded the support of the majority of European citizens, but,
often, it was only the vocal opposition that was heard. Now this silent majority has regained its
voice,  its  pride,  and  its  self-confidence.  Only  by  working  together  can  the  nations  of  Europe
overcome these challenges. The opportunity for progress is real.
Values and judgement lie at the heart of all our undertakings. But they need to be supported by
continuing research, ever increasing knowledge, and uncompromising examination of facts. This
was  true  in  addressing  the  great  financial  crisis,  designing  and  implementing  policies  that
improve the world economy and building institutions that deliver peace and prosperity in Europe.
But it is also true in all the fields represented today by my fellow recipients. That is why we must
be grateful to all places of knowledge, and today to the University of Tel Aviv.
Thank you once more, not only for the honour that you are bestowing upon us, but also for your
ongoing contribution to our common good.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
