Karnit Flug: Implementing reform benefitting the public in Israel
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Knesset Reforms Committee,
Tel Aviv, 14 December 2016.
Mr. Chairperson, Honored Members of Knesset:
 I have come here today, moments before the vote on the law, to say several things:
Together,  we  have  advanced  a  very  significant  and  extensive  reform,  which  was  formulated
through agreement after about a year of discussions. The Bank of Israel leads and will continue
to lead this reform, professionally, with integrity, and focusing exclusively on the benefit of the
public. The Bank of Israel has in fact already adopted very important steps to begin implementing
the reform, some of them even before the Strum Committee completed its work (for example,
defining the terms for control of acquirers by the entities that will buy the credit card companies),
and  others  even  before  the  legislative  process  was  completed  (for  example,  the  directive  to
separate the boards of directors of credit card companies from those of the banks that control
them). There are several reservations, not all of which were examined sufficiently deeply. For
some of them, it is quite probable that their negative impact will outweigh their benefit—referring,
of course, to the negative impact to the public. It is important to explain that ultimately it will be the
Bank of Israel that will be charged with the responsibility to implement most parts of the reform,
so it is therefore important that the Bank of Israel will lead, together with the Ministry of Finance
and the Ministry of Justice, the enactment of the regulations in various areas.
Specifically, with regard to the Financial Information Sharing Law, I note that several days
ago  we  discussed  the  issue,  in  view  of  its  complexity,  and  formulated  an  agreement—the
Minister of Finance, me, Committee Chairperson Eli Cohen, and others—on the outline that we
felt is responsible and appropriate. This outline is completely undone in the proposal, that I am
surprised  to  understand  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Committee  Chairperson  support,  on
which you are about to vote. I will explain: the addition of information on interest on credit facilities
to the section dealing with the sharing of financial information is meant to serve precisely the
same end that the Credit Data Law is meant to serve, which is to lead to enhanced competition
in credit. It is absolutely clear that including this information adversely impacts the realization of
the  objective  of  the  Credit  Data  Law.  This  negative  impact  was  focused  on  yesterday  by  the
Deputy Attorney General and the Committee’s Legislative Counsel. I emphasize that we support
the  sharing  of  information,  and  are  already  working  in  joint  teams  to  promote  it.  However,
Knesset members, you legislated the Credit Data Law a year ago, and imposed on the Bank of
Israel  the  task  of  establishing  the  Credit  Data  Register.  We  are  working  intensively  on  that,
investing huge quantities of manpower and resources. In the current legislation you are liable,
with the snap of your fingers—and without allowing the professional entities even the two months
(!)  that  we  requested  to  examine  the  issue—to  lead  to  the  Credit  Data  Register,  that  will  be
established  at  tremendous  effort  and  great  expense,  being  a  white  elephant.  This,  of  course,
without  any  of  us  being  able  to  say  today  if  one  model  is  preferable  to  another,  and  without
adequately  considering  the  various  aspects  of  privacy  and  information  security  that  the
Economic Affairs Committee discussed over many months with regard to the Credit Data Law.
The Minister of Finance and I agreed that the information to be transferred, and how it is used,
will not conflict with the Credit Data law, and it was clear to us that the formulation of the details
of the Bill (nature of the information, for what use, manner of transmitting the information, etc.)
that will be established in amendments will be through agreement, because these are the areas
of  the  Bank  of  Israel’s  professional  expertise,  because  it  is  the  entity  that  is  establishing  the
Credit  Data  Register,  and  because  the  entity  that  issues  guidelines  to  banks  is  the  Banking
Supervision Department at the Bank of Israel and not the Minister of Finance with the approval of
the Governor. Here too, the bill contradicts the agreement.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
The final thing that brought me here today is to refer to the manner in which some of you
addressed  Bank  of  Israel  employees  during  the  course  of  the  discussions.  Bank  of  Israel
employees are public servants who come here to present to you their professional position as an
input to the legislative process, and to contribute to the laws you are legislating being better and
for the benefit of the public. Lashing out at them, when they say something you don’t want to
hear,  insulting  and  hurtful  comments,  raising  voices—although  all  these  did  not  deter  them,
ultimately they are liable to deter excellent professional people from arriving here and telling you
their professional truth. Such a situation certainly will not improve the laws you are legislating,
and is beneath the dignity of the Knesset and you. I advise you to keep this in mind.​
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
