     New Zealand’s net foreign liabilities: 
What lies beneath, and ahead? 
 A speech delivered to MOTU, at the Royal Society of New Zealand, Wellington 
 On 17 July 2017 
 By Geoff Bascand, Deputy Governor1 
                                                  
1 I am very grateful to Rebecca Williams for her considerable help in the preparation of this speech, along 
with assistance from Sarah Drought and other Bank colleagues.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
 2 
 New  Zealand’s  net  foreign  liabilities  (NFL)  –  what  we  owe  the  rest  of  the  world,  broadly 
speaking – reached nearly 85 percent of GDP at the start of 2009. Eight years later, they sit 
at 58.5 percent of GDP, their lowest level since the late-1980s (figure 1). Today I’m going to 
put this improvement into some international and domestic context. I’ll discuss some of the 
reasons for the improvement, and offer some thoughts on how sustainable the improvement 
might be.  
 Figure  1:  New  Zealand’s  NFL  since  1972  (share  of  annual  GDP,  recessions  indicated  by 
grey bars) 
Source:  Statistics  New  Zealand,  RBNZ  estimates,  Lane  and  Milesi-Ferretti  (2007)  for  data 
prior to 1989. Recessions based on estimates by Hall and McDermott (2016).   
   What  are  ‘net  foreign  liabilities’,  and  why  should  New  Zealanders  care  about  them? 
Essentially,  one  can  think  of  NFL  as  being  New  Zealand’s  net  external  debt.  NFL  are  the 
difference between what we owe the rest of the world (our liabilities) and what the rest of the 
world owes us (our assets).2 These assets and liabilities include equity (direct investment in 
companies, for example) and debt (e.g. loans), but in New Zealand’s case in net terms they 
are largely made up of debt (55 percent of GDP). NFL change through our transactions with 
the  rest  of  the  world  and  through  revaluations  of  the  stock  of  assets  or  liabilities  (figure  2 
provides an overview of these dynamics). Most of our international transactions are through 
the  current  account,  which  essentially  reflects  the  difference  between  what  people  in  New 
Zealand  save  (current  income  less  current  expenditure)  and  invest.  Nationally,  we’ve 
invested  more  than  we’ve  saved,  with  the  difference  being  met  by  the  savings  of  non-
residents. This has accumulated into a large NFL position over several decades. 
                                                
2 Statistics New Zealand terms net foreign liabilities as the net international investment position (NIIP). 
Since New Zealand’s NIIP is negative, we describe it as net foreign liabilities. 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
    Figure 2: The external accounts 
3 
  Source: Adapted from Statistics New Zealand. 
 Borrowing from the rest of the world isn’t automatically ‘bad’. It can be a good thing if it leads 
to productive investment that enhances New Zealand’s economic performance and leads to 
high  per-capita  incomes  over  time,  but  debt-fuelled  consumption  is  less  sustainable.3 
However,  relying  on  non-residents  to  fund  our  level  of  investment  makes  us  vulnerable  to 
changes  in  the  availability  or  cost  of  that  funding.4    That  vulnerability  may  be  exposed  in 
times  of  acute  financial  stress  –  triggered  by  global  or  domestic  events  –  if  non-residents 
become  much  less  willing  to  provide  funding.  For  example,  we  saw  during  the  Global 
Financial Crisis (GFC) how quickly previously liquid sources of funding dried up, with access 
to  funding  cut  off  or  available  only  at  much  higher  interest  rates.  Because  financial 
intermediaries  –  particularly  banks  –  facilitate  most  of  the  financial  flows  between  New 
Zealand  and  the  rest  of  the  world,  high  levels  of  offshore  debt  increase  the  risk  that  the 
                                                
3 Measurement of net foreign liabilities should not be confused with measures of net worth.  New 
Zealand’s notional balance sheet is a much more comprehensive concept that would include tangible, 
intangible, and contingent assets and liabilities, such as physical assets/liabilities (e.g, roading, housing, 
plant and machinery, disaster risks), natural assets (e.g land, water and atmospheric emissions), human 
capital and social capital (e.g legal and communal).  New Zealand’s NFL reflects cross-border investments 
in, and income and debt servicing flows associated with, these assets and liabilities.  For the household 
sector alone, net worth as at December 2016 is estimated at $1,365 billion. This comprises financial 
assets of $801 billion (which includes net equity in rental properties held by unincorporated businesses) 
and non-financial assets (owner-occupied housing and land) of $758 billion, offset by financial liabilities 
of $195 billion. 
4 See Steenkamp (2010) and Smith (2011) for further discussion of the vulnerability arising from high net 
foreign liabilities, and the importance of the composition of the gross positions underlying it. 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   4 
 banking sector and financial system more broadly come under pressure in times of financial 
stress.  In  that  type  of  situation,  the  Reserve  Bank  would  act  in  the  usual  way,  providing 
liquidity to the banking sector, and lowering the Official Cash Rate to mitigate the impact on 
interest  rates  faced  by  households  and  businesses  in  order  to  meet  our  inflation  target. 
Nonetheless, households and businesses might still have difficulty in accessing finance. Of 
course, just how vulnerable we are is also influenced by the type of offshore funding  – with 
equity  generally  seen  as  less  risky  than  debt  –  and  by  the  maturity  and  currency 
denomination of that funding.5 Our floating exchange rate would also act as a buffer in the 
event of deterioration in market sentiment.  
 How significant is the improvement in New Zealand’s NFL? 
 In  dollar  terms  the  value  of  NFL  has  not  fallen  substantially  –  it  stood  at  NZ$159  billion  in 
March  2009,  and  at  NZ$155  billion  in  March  2017.  But  relative  to  GDP,  over  the  same 
period,  NFL  fell  by  25  percentage  points, from  nearly  85  percent  to  just  below  60  percent. 
How does this improvement compare to other countries? 
 Figure 3 illustrates that New Zealand’s improvement is unexceptional amongst the advanced 
economies  shown.6  That  several  other  countries  have  seen  an  improvement  could  reflect 
common/global  factors  such  as  low  rates  of  investment  since  the  GFC,7  and  lower  global 
interest  rates.  An  improvement  across  many  economies  also  implies  deterioration  in  the 
position of others (as conceptually the NFL positions of all countries should sum to zero).  
                                                   
5  Hargreaves  and  Watson  (2011)  discuss  some  of  these  mitigating  factors,  such  as  New  Zealand’s 
liabilities largely either being denominated in domestic currency or hedged so that they effectively are. 
6  Other  advanced  economy  central  banks  have  also  recently  investigated  changes  in  their  external 
positions  since  the  GFC.  See  Bruneau,  Leboeuf  and  Nolin  (2017)  and  Debelle  (2017)  for  Canada  and 
Australia respectively. 
7  Bascand  (2016),  “Changing  dynamics  in  household  behaviour:  what  do  they  mean  for  inflationary 
pressure?” 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   5 
 Figure 3: Change in NFL between December 2009 and December 2016 (percentage points 
of GDP) 
 Source:  IMF,  Statistics  New  Zealand,  Ireland  Central  Statistics  Office,  Statistics  Norway, 
RBNZ estimates.  
Note: A decline in NFL is equivalent to an increase in the net international investment position 
(NIIP)  and  vice  versa.  The  China  value  is  the  change  in  NFL  between  December  2010  and 
December 2016, due to comparable IMF data being unavailable prior to 2010. 
 New  Zealand’s  NFL  relative  to  GDP  remains  large  compared  to  that  of  many  advanced 
economies, albeit similar to that of Australia and the United States (figure 4).  
 Figure 4: NFL as at the December 2016 quarter (share of annual GDP) 
Source: IMF, Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates.  
Note: A negative NFL position (shown in blue) is equivalent to a positive NIIP.     
  While the improvement in our NFL is moderate by international standards, it is unusual when 
compared to New Zealand’s experience in past expansions. Changes of a similar magnitude 
have been seen in the past, but have been partially reversed by this point in the economic 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   6 
 cycle. In the current expansion the current account deficit has remained fairly stable relative 
to  GDP,  whereas  it  had  usually  begun  to  widen  at  this  point  in  previous  expansions      
(figure 5). Indeed, reflecting these episodes, the Bank and others had been forecasting the 
current account deficit to widen throughout most of the post-GFC period (figure 6).  
 Figure 5: Current account over GDP expansions (annual total, share of GDP) 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates.  
 Note: Expansions based on estimates from Hall and McDermott (2016), with data shown as 
quarters from the trough. Comparisons with earlier expansions are complicated by significant 
structural  changes  –  for  example,  restrictions  on  New  Zealand’s  then  capital  account  (now 
known as the financial account) were removed at the end of 1984, and the exchange rate was 
floated in early 1985. 
 Figure 6: RBNZ current account forecasts (annual total, share of GDP) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates.  
Note: This figure includes any statistical revisions to the current account. 
    Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   7 
 What accounts for the improvement in our NFL position? 
 Understanding  what  has  driven  the  improvement  can  help  us  assess  how  sustainable  the 
improvement  might  be.  I  will  explore  this  through  two  lenses:  a  balance  of  payments 
perspective and a saving and investment perspective.  
  (i) 
Balance of payments perspective 
A balance of payments perspective reveals that much of the improvement in our NFL can be 
accounted  for  by  lower  interest  payments  on  our  debt,  the  recent  strength  in  tourism  and 
education  exports,  and  favourable  net  revaluations.  Figure 7  decomposes  the  current 
account  balance  into  the  goods,  services  and  investment  income  balances  (primary  and 
secondary – see figure 2 or the note below figure 7).  
 Figure 7: Current account decomposition (annual total, share of GDP) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 Note:  The  primary  income  balance  includes  transactions  such  as  interest  payments, 
dividends  from  owning  shares  and  profits  from  directly  owning  a  company;  the  secondary 
income balance includes current transfers such as taxes and donations. 
 The  narrowing  of  the  primary  income  deficit  (which  reflects  what  we  are  repaying/paying 
non-resident lenders and investors) as a share of GDP since the GFC is a key reason why 
the current account deficit has not widened as in the past. Since 2009, the primary  income 
deficit  has  averaged  just  over  4  percent  of  GDP  (and  has  been  closer  to  3  percent  more 
recently)  –  a  marked  improvement  from  the  average  deficit  of  nearly  6  percent  over  the 
previous decade.  This improvement mainly reflects reduced interest payments offshore,  as 
global interest rates have fallen and have remained low and the stock of our external debt 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   8 
 has  fallen  as  a  share  of  GDP.  In  contrast,  the  income  New  Zealand  has  earned  from 
investment abroad (an inflow) has been stable relative to GDP. 
 In  the  years  following  the  GFC,  the  improvement  in  the  goods  balance  also  contributed  to 
the narrowing of the current account deficit, supported by the recovery in the terms of trade 
(the  price  of  our  exports  relative  to  our  imports).  Although  the  annual  goods  balance  has 
been in deficit over the past two years – but not to the same extent as prior to the GFC – it 
has  been  more  than  offset  by  an  improvement  in  the  services  balance  (figure  7).  This 
improvement is due to the strong performance of the tourism and education export sectors.  
 While  most  of  our  international  transactions  occur  through  the  current  account,  there  are 
other  channels.  For  example,  offshore  insurance  claims  arising  from  the  Canterbury 
earthquakes  resulted  in  a  large  increase  in  the  capital  account  in  2010/11  (figure  8).8 
Between 2013 and 2015, net errors and omissions also played a large role. This can be due 
to  coverage  issues  (it  may  take  some  time  for  new  firms  to  be  captured  in  surveys)  or 
measurement  errors  (misreporting  by  survey  respondents,  or  errors  during  compilation).  A 
risk  is  that  these  net  errors  and  omissions  reflect  an  inflow  of  non-resident  funding  not 
captured in the financial account, which would imply a larger NFL position than current data 
suggest. 
 Figure 8: Decomposition of the financial account (annual total, share of GDP) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
                                                  
8  While  this  resulted  in  a  material  improvement  in  NFL  immediately  following  the  earthquakes,  it  was 
subsequently unwound through the current account as reconstruction took place. Statistics New Zealand 
(2011) explains how the insurance claims arising from the Canterbury earthquakes have been treated in 
the international accounts. 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   9 
 Our NFL position can also be significantly affected by revaluations of the stock of domestic 
and  foreign  assets  and  liabilities.  Figure  9  shows  the  cumulative  value  of  transactions 
(through  the  financial  account)  together  with  revaluations  between  March  2009  and  March 
2017. This figure highlights that revaluations caused by market price changes have played a 
large role in how our NFL position has evolved since 2009. In particular, the market values of 
our foreign assets were revised higher to a much greater extent than our foreign liabilities, 
resulting in a positive net valuation effect. That likely reflects the relatively sharp increase in 
global equity markets over this period (including relative to New Zealand), and the fact that 
equity  accounts  for  a  higher  share  of  New  Zealand’s  foreign  assets  than  foreign  liabilities. 
Were it not for these favourable revaluations, our NFL as a share of GDP would have been 
about 8 percentage points larger. 
 Figure  9:  Cumulative  contributions  of  financial  account  flows  and  revaluations  to  New 
Zealand’s NIIP, March 2009 to March 2017     
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 Note:  Additional  valuation  changes  include  exchange  rate  changes,  financial  derivative 
valuation changes and other valuation changes. 
  (ii) 
Saving and investment perspective 
Figure 10 illustrates the contributions of the government, household and business sectors to 
the current account.9 Underlying these contributions is what I’ll refer to as net saving  – the 
                                                
9 Recent statistical developments, including the release of institutional sector accounts, have supported 
better understanding of sectoral contributions. ‘Business’ includes producer enterprises (corporate and 
non-corporate), private non-profit institutions serving households and financial intermediaries.  
Producer enterprises make up most of the gross saving and investment in ‘business’. 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   10 
 difference  between  gross  saving  and  investment  in  each  sector.10  Overall,  improved 
contributions  from  the  business  and  government  sectors  have  offset  the  widening  gap 
between household saving and investment in recent years. 
 Figure 10: Sectoral contributions to the current account (March year, share of GDP)  
 Source: Statistics New Zealand (Income and Expenditure account), RBNZ estimates.  
Note: (1) Income and Expenditure data by sector is available only to March 2016. Within this, 
business  sector  data  is  only  available  to  March  2015,  so  the  March  2016  contribution  is 
estimated as a residual; (2) consistent gross saving and investment data for non-government 
sectors  are  only  available  from  1999,  so  their  contribution  is  captured  in  the  ‘private  sector’ 
data prior to this.  
 During  the  mid-2000s,  the  imbalance  in  the  saving  and  investment  positions  of  the 
household  and  business  sectors  weighed  heavily  on  the  current  account,  whereas  the  net 
saving  of  the  general  government  sector  provided  some  offset.  While  investment  by  the 
household  and  business  sectors  increased  only  modestly  as  a  share  of  GDP  over  this 
period, the saving of each sector declined by over 5 percentage points  of GDP. The  result 
was a large saving-investment gap that needed to be met by external funding.  
 Since 2009, the business sector has provided a small boost to the current account. This has 
largely been due to increased saving as a share of GDP, although investment as a share of 
GDP remains lower than in the mid-2000s. The government sector net saving position began 
                                                
10  Technically  the  difference  between  gross  saving  and  investment  is  referred  to  as  net  lending,  and  it 
captures  current  and  capital  transactions.  Capital  transactions  have  been  removed  from  this  chart  to 
illustrate  the  contributions  of  each  sector  to  the  current  account  only.  The  capital  account  is  almost 
entirely  dominated  by  insurance  flows  resulting  from  the  Canterbury  earthquakes.  Note  that  I  use  the 
term  ‘net  saving’  differently  to  Statistics  New  Zealand  that  defines  net  saving  as  gross  saving  less 
consumption of fixed capital. 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   11 
 to  reverse  in  the  aftermath  of  the  GFC,  due  to  the  fiscal  stimulus  provided  during  the 
recession  and  following  the  Canterbury  earthquakes  in  2010/11.  Since  2012,  government 
investment  has  remained  steady  as  a  share  of  GDP,  and  along  with  the  gradual  fiscal 
consolidation  has  meant  that  the  government’s  contribution  to  the  current  account  has 
improved from being negative to neutral currently.  
 Increased  saving  and  lower  investment  by  the  household  sector  after  the  GFC  meant  that 
the sector’s contribution to the current account was fairly neutral until 2012. Since 2013, the 
household sector’s net saving position has reversed (due to both a decline in saving and an 
increase in investment) and the sector’s imbalance is again weighing on the current account. 
In part, this may reflect the positive supply shock from high levels of migration, which raises 
the  demand  for  capital  and  thereby  would  be  expected  to  boost  investment  (by  both 
households and businesses) relative to saving in the short term. 
 What might the improvement in New Zealand’s NFL position mean for the Bank? 
 From a financial stability standpoint, the reduction in NFL-GDP has helped lower risks to the 
financial  system.  That’s  because  financial  intermediaries  –  particularly  banks  –  facilitate 
most  of  the financial flows  between  New  Zealand  and  the  rest  of the  world,  accounting for 
most of the offshore borrowing. Banks decide how much credit to provide to households and 
businesses, how to fund the provision of credit, and how much to charge relative to their cost 
of funding. As the predominant financial intermediaries, banks have accounted for much of 
the  reduction  in  NFL-GDP  since  2009,  as  credit  growth  was  funded  to  a  greater  extent  by 
domestic deposits than was the case prior to the GFC (figure 11).11 
                                                   
11 The acceleration in deposit growth post-GFC was boosted by insurance inflows from the Canterbury 
earthquakes.  
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   12 
 Figure 11: Annual increase in credit and deposit funding 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ SSR, RBNZ liquidity survey. 
Note: Deposits counted as core funding includes haircuts made as part of the liquidity policy, 
which increase according to the size of the deposit. 
  It remains unclear how much of the reduction in NFL as a share of GDP reflected changes in 
bank  behaviour  and  how  much  reflected  lower  demand  for  credit.  Banks  actively  reduced 
reliance on offshore funding – particularly at short maturities12 – in order to reduce risk and 
respond to regulatory changes (such as the liquidity policy introduced by the Bank in 2010). 
However, lower demand for credit and relatively strong growth in retail deposits also meant 
that less offshore funding was required in the wake of the GFC. Taken together, the reduced 
reliance on offshore funding and the lengthening maturity of banks’ offshore borrowing have 
helped reduce the risks to the financial system from a funding shock.  
 Since a large NFL position generally makes the economy more vulnerable to domestic and 
global  shocks,  the  improvement  in  our  NFL-GDP  after  2009  suggests  that  New  Zealand 
might  have  become  a  slightly  less  risky  proposition  for  overseas  lenders  and  investors. 
However, the perceived riskiness of the New Zealand economy and its institutions should be 
reflected in its credit ratings, which have not yet improved.13,14 In part, this reflects  that the 
reduction  in  New  Zealand’s  NFL-GDP  is  average  compared  to  other  countries,  and  the 
absolute level remains high. In theory, lower perceived risk would put downward pressure on 
the  risk  premium  component  of  interest  rates  that  New  Zealand  faces  on  its  external 
                                                
12  The  share  of  New  Zealand’s  non-equity  liabilities  with  residual  maturity  of  one  year  or  less  declined 
from over 50 percent just prior to the GFC to 31 percent in the March 2017 quarter. 
13 See Widdowson and Wood (2008) for discussion on credit ratings. 
14 New Zealand’s sovereign credit rating has been stable since a downgrade by two rating agencies in 
2011. The credit ratings of New Zealand’s four largest banks were also downgraded by two rating 
agencies in 2011, with a further downgrade by one agency in June 2017 as a result of the downgrade to 
their Australian parent banks.  
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   13 
 funding.15  However,  the  effect  is  likely  to  be  small compared  to  all  of  the  other factors  that 
influence  New  Zealand’s  interest  rates,  and  in  practice  it  is  very  difficult  to  identify  such 
effects – especially in a world of quantitative easing and other unconventional policies.  
 To  the  extent  that  the  lower  NFL  position  reflects  an  enduring  improvement  in  New 
Zealand’s  savings-investment  balance,  there  are  wider  impacts.  If  sustained,  higher 
domestic savings relative to investment demands would help to lower New Zealand’s neutral 
real interest rate. Estimates of neutral rates have been declining internationally (including in 
New Zealand) in response to changes in saving and investment trends since the GFC. 
 A striking feature of the improvement in New Zealand’s NFL relative to  GDP since 2009 is 
that  it  has  occurred  despite  the  real  exchange  rate  being  high  over  much  of  this  period 
compared  to  previous  expansions.16  We  typically  expect  a  higher  real  exchange  rate  to 
contribute to a widening of the current account deficit, as exports become less competitive 
and lower import prices encourage substitution away from domestically produced goods and 
services. However, the strength of the real exchange rate since 2010 is partly related to the 
increase in the terms of trade over this period (figure 12), which provided some offset to the 
dynamics noted above.  
 Figure 12: Real TWI and the merchandise terms of trade (OTI) 
Source:  RBNZ  (real  analytical  TWI  17  post-1984,  real  analytical  TWI  5  pre-1984),  Statistics 
 New Zealand. 
 The  improvement  in  NFL-GDP  suggests  that  the  exchange  rate  may  be  more  sustainable 
than  previously  assumed.  However,  the  improvement  has  been  from  a  very  high  starting 
                                                
15 See Orr, Edey and Kennedy (1995) and OECD (2013).  
16 See figure 5 in Williams (2017). 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   14 
 point. NFL-GDP near 60 percent remains high by international standards, and continues to 
be  a  concern  of  rating  agencies,  especially  given  our  exposure  to  commodity  exports  that 
can be subject to large price swings. There are a number of ways to look at whether a real 
exchange rate is in equilibrium, including the assessment from various models, and whether 
growth  and  debt  servicing  paths  are  sustainable.  One  model  (of  several)  the  Bank  uses  is 
the  macro-balance  model,  which  assesses  the  degree  to  which  the  exchange  rate  is 
currently  too  high  or  low  in  order  to  stabilise  NFL-GDP  at  its  current  level.17  This  model 
indicates that the current level of the real exchange rate is consistent with NFL remaining at 
about 60 percent of GDP, given the Bank’s medium-term outlook for key economic variables 
(including  a  continuing  upward  trend  in  the  terms  of trade  and  a  slight  improvement  in  the 
household  saving  rate).  However,  it  yields  no  further  reduction  from  the  current  NFL-GDP 
level.  A  lower  New  Zealand  dollar  would  be  needed  to  lower  NFL-GDP  and  our  external 
vulnerabilities further. Indeed, from a growth point of view, a lower exchange rate would help 
rebalance  growth  towards  the  tradables  sector,  especially  as  not  all  traded  industries  are 
benefitting from the current high terms of trade. 
 How sustainable do we believe the improvement in New Zealand’s NFL position might 
be? 
 Turning from the past to the future, where might New Zealand’s external position head from 
here?  
 Our current medium-term forecast (from the May 2017 Monetary Policy Statement) has NFL-
GDP remaining at about its current level of just below 60 percent over the forecast horizon 
(to 2020). Many assumptions about the domestic and global economy underlie this forecast; 
some of the most relevant are that:  
 the terms of trade continues its gradual upward trend;  
  exports of services continue to increase at the same rate as GDP;  
 the  implied  interest  rate  on  our  foreign  debt  increases  only  gradually,  and  remains 
below its pre-GFC peak; 
  annual  household  consumption  growth  moderates  gradually  over  the  medium  term, 
and is outpaced by income growth (implying a slight  improvement in the household 
saving rate); and, 
  nominal business investment remains low as a share of GDP. 
 
                                                
17 Graham and Steenkamp (2012) provide an updated description of the RBNZ’s macro-balance model of 
the exchange rate, which was previously presented in Brook and Hargreaves (2000).   
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   15 
 The  Bank  has  used  scenario  analysis  to  test  the  sensitivity  of  the  NFL-GDP  outlook  to 
changes  in  these  (and  other)  assumptions,  through  the  lens  of  its  main forecasting  model, 
NZSIM.18  Running  a  series  of  scenarios,  each  with  various  adjustments  (either  higher  or 
lower) to the main forecast assumptions listed above,19 doesn’t imply a dramatic change to 
our  NFL-GDP forecast.  It  would  require  a  combination  of  these factors, moving  NFL  in the 
same direction, to see a material change in the medium-term outlook.  
 That said, NZSIM is a business cycle model designed to aid the Bank in its monetary policy 
formation and communications,  and is not naturally  well-suited to assessing longer-term or 
structural issues such as NFL sustainability. Another way to consider the sustainability of the 
improvement  is  by  looking  at  some  of  the  broader  risks  around  it.  Over  history,  the 
underlying factor behind large changes in NFL appears to be big swings in the saving and 
investment  behaviour  of  the  various  sectors.  For  example,  the  sharp  deterioration  in  New 
Zealand’s  NFL  position  in  the  first  half  of  the  1990s  occurred  at  a  time  of  declining 
government  saving  (that  resulted  in  large  fiscal  deficits)  and  a  surge  in  private-sector 
investment.20  The  mid-2000s  also  saw  NFL  rise  notably  as  a  share  of  GDP  and,  as  noted 
earlier, this was a period of declining saving from both the household and business sectors. 
Revaluations also play a role in changes in NFL over time, with their importance increasing 
as the stock grows larger.21 
 In  the  absence  of  a  large  economic  shock,  we  can  be fairly  confident  that  government  will 
provide  a  positive  contribution  to  New  Zealand’s  current  account  going  forward.  The  main 
political  parties  are  committed  to  prudent  fiscal  management.  The  Government  plans  to 
reduce its net debt from about 24 percent of GDP currently to between 10 and 15 percent of 
GDP over the long term,22 and the Labour Party’s stated objective is to reduce net debt to 20 
percent of GDP within five years if elected.23  
                                                 
18 See Austin and Reid (2017) for a description of NZSIM. 
19 For example, the terms of trade being 5 percent higher or lower than assumed in the May Statement, or 
the implied interest rate on NFL rising back to its 2003-08 average. 
20 The earlier liberalisation of capital flows and easing of restrictions on foreign investment played an 
important role in facilitating the rise in investment in the 1990s.  Given New Zealand’s historically low 
savings rate, it seems unlikely that the surge in investment could have been funded from domestic 
sources. See Brook, Collins and Smith (1998). 
21 Fidora, Schmitz and Tcheng (2017) examined  138 episodes of sizeable NFL reductions across 
advanced and emerging economies to identify the factors underlying those reductions that were 
sustained over the medium term.  The authors conclude that sustained reduction in NFL is more likely for 
advanced economies when a current account surplus and strong real GDP growth are experienced. 
22 Fiscal Strategy Report, published 25 May 2017. The Government intends to be within the 10-15 percent 
of GDP band by 2025. 
23 Labour and Greens Party Budget Responsibility Rules in government after the 2017 election, accessed 
at http://www.labour.org.nz/budgetresponsibility.  
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   16 
 The business sector has been providing a small boost to the current account in recent years 
mostly  through  an  increase  in  saving  as  a  share  of  GDP.  Business  investment  relative  to 
GDP  has  remained  broadly  stable. While  this  dynamic  has  contributed  to  the  narrowing  of 
New Zealand’s current account deficit, it may not necessarily be a desirable feature over the 
longer  term.  Lower  business  investment  as  a  share  of  the  economy  would  likely  lead  to  a 
deterioration in the capital stock and lower growth in productivity. Over the long term, such a 
development would lower potential GDP growth and could result in a higher NFL-GDP ratio 
as actual GDP growth slowed.  
 A key source of risk surrounding the outlook for New Zealand’s NFL – and the economy and 
financial system more widely – is the saving and investment behaviour of households. Real 
household  consumption  has  been  less  responsive  to  housing  wealth  since  the  mid-2000s, 
and  household  consumption  was  weaker  than  the  Bank  anticipated  in  recent  years, 
particularly on a per capita basis.24 However, household spending has been much stronger 
in  the  past  few  quarters,  and  recent  downwards  revisions  to  household  saving  estimates25 
have  led  to  a  widening  of  the  household  sector’s  saving-investment  gap  (as  seen  in 
figure 10).  
 Much  of  the  investment  undertaken  by  the  household  sector  is  in  the  form  of  new  house 
builds  and  renovations  to  existing  homes.26  If  the  housing  demands  associated  with 
population pressure and existing shortages cannot be met by increased household sector or 
domestic saving more broadly, it will be reflected in a deterioration in our NFL position.  
                                                   
24 Bascand (2016) and Wong (2017). 
25 These downward revisions were included in the annual Income and Expenditure accounts for the year 
to March 2016. Household saving was revised significantly lower for the years 2013 to 2015, in part due 
to  a  correction  in  how  income  was  allocated  across  sectors  (the  income  was  reallocated  from  the 
household to the business sector). 
26 Purchase of existing homes is not regarded as investment by the household sector as a whole, as buying 
and selling of existing homes is a transfer between households.  
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   17 
 This brings me to my final observation, which is the role the financial system plays in these 
dynamics.  Domestic  deposit  growth  has  slowed  over  the  past  year  and  continues  to  be 
outpaced  by  credit  growth,  meaning  the  banking  system’s  exposure  to  offshore  funding 
markets  has  increased  recently,  albeit  at  longer  maturities.  If  the  gap  between  credit  and 
deposit growth is sustained,  banks will likely become more dependent on offshore markets 
to sustain credit growth and replace expiring funding. However, banks have recently begun 
to compete more aggressively for deposits and tighten lending standards, which should help 
alleviate offshore funding pressures and prevent a significant increase in NFL. The Bank will 
be following closely the extent to which banks: 
  source required funding domestically (which could be driven by ‘sector-led’ behaviour 
  and/or the incentives provided by higher deposit rates); 
tighten lending standards to constrain credit growth; or 
return  to  a  situation  similar  to  that  of  the  previous  expansion,  when  banks  met 
demand for credit through increasing reliance on offshore funding.      
 Conclusion 
 In summary, the large improvement in New Zealand’s NFL-GDP since 2009, and the stability 
of the current account deficit through a prolonged expansion, provide tentative evidence of 
reduced  vulnerability  of  the  New  Zealand  economy  and  the  sustainability  of  the  current 
growth phase. New Zealand’s reliance on offshore funding has fallen over the past decade, 
and the maturity of bank borrowing has lengthened, reducing the risks from a funding shock. 
The  macroeconomic  factors  that  have  driven  the  improvement  in  our  NFL  position  are 
varied, some potentially more transient or fortuitous than others.  At least in part, however, it 
reflects  a  lower  saving-investment  imbalance,  relative  to  the  mid-2000s.  Looking  ahead,  it 
appears  that  it  would  take  a  combination  of  factors,  working  together,  to  see  NFL-GDP 
diverge materially from its current level of about 60 percent.  
 That  said,  we  have  seen  big  changes  in  NFL-GDP  in  the  past,  and  these  appear  to  have 
been driven by large swings in the saving and investment behaviour of the various sectors. 
Significant  uncertainty  remains  regarding  household  behaviour  and  the  contribution  of  the 
sector to New Zealand’s saving-investment gap, and the extent that banks as intermediaries 
might  increase  their  reliance  on  offshore  funding.  As  always,  the  Bank  will  be  monitoring 
these developments closely. We welcome the improvement in New Zealand’s NFL position 
since the GFC, but do not see it is a reason to become complacent.   
 Ref #7076865 v2.1 
   18 
 References 
 Bascand, Geoff (2016), “Changing dynamics in household behaviour: What do they mean for 
inflationary  pressures?”,  a  speech  delivered  to  the  Australia  National  University,  22 
November 2016. 
 Brook, Anne-Marie, Sean Collins and Christie Smith (1998), “The 1991-97 business cycle in 
review”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 61(4), pp. 269-290. 
 Brook,  Anne-Marie  and  David  Hargreaves  (2000),  “A  macroeconomic  balance  measure  of 
New  Zealand’s  equilibrium  exchange  rate”,  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  Discussion 
Paper, DP2000/09. 
 Bruneu,  Gabriel,  Maxime  Leboeuf  and  Guillaume  Nolin  (2017),  “Canada’s  International 
Investment  Position:  Benefits  and  Potential  Vulnerabilities”,  Bank  of  Canada  Financial 
System Review June 2017, pp. 43-57. 
 Debelle, Guy, “Recent Trends in Australian Capital Flows”, speech delivered to the Australia 
Financial Review Banking and Wealth Summit, Sydney, 6 April 2017. 
 Fidora,  Michael,  Martin  Schmitz  and  Celine  Tcheng  (2017),  “Reducing  large  net  foreign 
liabilities”, European Central Bank Working Paper No. 2074  
 Graham,  James  and  Daan  Steenkamp 
(2012), 
“Extending 
the  Reserve  Bank’s 
macroeconomic  balance  model  of  the  exchange  rate”,  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand 
Analytical Note, AN2012/08. 
 Hargreaves,  David  and  Elizabeth  Watson  (2011),  “Sudden  stops,  external  debt  and  the 
exchange rate”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 74(4), pp. 17-27. 
 Holston,  Kathryn,  Thomas  Laubach  and  John  C.  Williams  (2016),  “Measuring  the  Natural 
Rate  of  Interest:  International  Trends  and  Determinants”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San 
Francisco Working Paper 2016-11. 
 Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2007), “The external wealth of nations mark II: 
Revised  and  extended  estimates  of  foreign  assets  and  liabilities,  1970-2004”,  Journal  of 
International Economics 73, November, pp. 223-250. 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
    19 
 OECD (2013), “Chapter 1: Policies to support sustainable long-term growth in New Zealand 
–  Correcting  large  macroeconomic  imbalances  that  may  harm  long-term  growth”,  OECD 
Economic Surveys: New Zealand, June 2013, pp.83 87. 
 Orr, Adrian, Malcolm Edey and Michael Kennedy (1995), “Real long-term interest rates: the 
evidence from pooled-time-series”, OCED Economic Studies, No. 25, II, pp. 75-107. 
 Smith, Christie (2011), “Conference summary – New Zealand’s macroeconomic imbalances 
– causes and remedies”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 73(4), pp. 11-21. 
 Statistics New Zealand (2011), “Revised treatment of the Canterbury earthquakes’ insurance 
claims in New Zealand’s international and national accounts”, Statistics New Zealand, June 
2011. 
 Steenkamp, Daan (2010), “New Zealand’s imbalances in a cross-country context”, Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 73(4), pp. 37-49. 
 Widdowson, Doug and Andy Wood (2008), “A user’s guide to credit ratings”, Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand Bulletin, 71(3), pp.56-62. 
 Williams, Rebecca (2017), “Characterising the current economic expansion: 2009 to present 
day”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 80(3). 
 Wong,  Martin  (2017),  “Revisiting  the  wealth  effect  on  consumption  in  New  Zealand”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2017/03. 
Ref #7076865 v2.1 
  