 46th ACU Board of Directors Meeting 
 Colombo, Sri Lanka    /     13 July 2017 
Address Delivered by Dr. Chiranjibi Nepal, Governor of Nepal Rastra Bank 
 
Honorable Chairperson Mr. Indrajit Coomaraswamy,  
Fellow Governors and Members of the ACU Board of Directors,  
ACU Secretary General Mrs. Lida Borhan-Azad,  
Distinguished Delegates and Observers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 1. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
  It  gives  me  immense  please  to  participate  and  address  this  46th  Annual  Meeting  of 
Board of Directors of the Asian Clearing Union in this beautiful city of Colombo. At the 
outset,  I  would  like  to  extend  my  sincere  appreciation  to  Governor  Mr.  Indrajit 
Coomaraswamy  and  the  entire  team  of  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  for  the  warm 
hospitality  extended  to  us  and  also  for  the  excellent  arrangements  made  for  this 
Meeting in Colombo.  
 
Fellow Governors and distinguished delegates 
 
2. 
Allow  me  now  to  shed  some  light  on  some  current  developments  of  the  Nepalese 
economy.  After  almost  20  years,  elections  for  the  local  governments  concluded 
recently following the promulgation of Constitution of Federal Democratic Republic of 
Nepal.  The  provincial  and  national  level  elections  are  to  be  held  within  21  January 
2018. The political uncertainty has now vanished and the economy is now ready for  
high growth trajectory. 
Most  of  the  macro-financial  data  of  the  first  ten  months  of  2016/17  show  that  the 
economy is gaining traction. Nepal is the third fastest growing economy in the world in 
2017 according to a report of the World Economic Forum. The economy rebounded 
strongly in 2016/17 following a good monsoon, reconstruction efforts after the 2015 
earthquake  and  normalization  of  trade  with  India.  The  GDP  growth  estimate  of  6.9 
percent demonstrates optimistic growth outlook at least in the short term.  
The government is targeting a growth of 7.2 percent in 2017/18 as economic activities 
are expected to expand due to increased government expenditure from the elected 
local governments. Acceleration in reconstruction works will potentially increase trade 
deficit further at least in the near term. Expected increase in foreign aid and foreign 
direct investment will, however, be instrumental in keeping the country’s balance of 
payments 
is 
moderating  deposit  growth.  Going  forward,  bridging  the  gap  between  deposit  and 
credit growth is the key for reducing the financial frictions. 
in  migrant  workers'  remittances 
in  surplus.  Decelerated  growth 
The  consumer  price  inflation  has  been  hovering  below  4  percent  since  the  last  six 
months. This is attributed to the previous year's base price effect and improved supply 
situation.  
1 
 6. 
 
7. 
 
9. 
 
10. 
 
11. 
 
12. 
  
Fellow Governors and Distinguished Delegates,  
 
8. 
On the external sector front, both exports and imports dropped by 17.8 percent and 
0.1 percent respectively, leading to a small expansion in trade deficit by 2 percent to 
USD  6.61  billion  in  FY  2015/16.  However,  exports  rebounded  by  9.8  percent  while 
imports surged by about 34.9 percent during the ten months of the current fiscal year, 
further  widening  the  trade  deficit  by  37.5  percent.  The  export-import  ratio  has 
declined  to  7.5  percent  arising  from  high  growth  of  imports  compared  to  slower 
growth  of  exports  in  the  review  period.  Still,  improvements  in  the  service  incomes, 
grants and remittance inflows have contributed in marginal surplus in current account.  
The overall balance of payments registered a surplus of USD 1.78 billion in FY 2015/16 
and  USD  504  million  during  the  ten  months  of  FY  2016/17.  Lower  current  account 
surplus  emanating  from  increased  imports  and  lower  remittance  inflows  were  the 
principal  contributing  factors  to  the  current  balance  of  payments  situation. 
Consequently, the gross foreign exchange reserves of the banking system surged by 17 
percent to US$ 10.31 billion as on mid-May 2017. Based on the trend of imports of the 
first ten months of the current fiscal year, the existing level of reserves is sufficient for 
financing  merchandise  imports  of  more  than  13.2  months  and  merchandise  and 
service imports of more than 11.4 months.  
 
Monetary  aggregates  are  within  the  expected level  in  the current  fiscal  year.  Broad 
money  (M2)  increased  by  10.4  percent  during  the  ten  months  of  this  fiscal  year 
compared  to  a  growth  of  12.3  percent  in  the  corresponding  period  of  the  previous 
year. Bank credit to the private sector grew at a rate of 16.6 percent this year. On the 
other  hand,  deposit  mobilization  of  depository  institutions  increased  by  9.3  percent 
during this year compared to a growth of 11.9 percent in the previous year.  
In  the  fiscal  sector,  a  higher  rate  of  growth  in  resource  mobilization  relative  to 
government  expenditure  led  to  a  surge  in  budget  surplus  during  the  review  period. 
The  country  remains  low  indebted,  as  outstanding  total  public  debt,  both  domestic 
and foreign, accounts for 24.1 percent of GDP.  
Nepal’s  financial  sector  has  grown  by  leaps  and  bounds  since  the  economy  was 
liberalized  in  the  1990s.  Yet,  financial  services  have  not  become  much  effective  till 
date. Also, the growth of this sector has remained lopsided, as many still do not have 
access to finance due to low financial literacy rate.  
Safe,  sound  and  self-regulated  BFIs,  transparent  and  consumer  friendly  banking 
transactions,  adoption  of  international  best  prudential  norms  and  best  supervisory 
practices, mitigation of the systemic risks through advanced approach of supervision, 
and  ultimately  safeguarding  financial  stability  have  always  been  the  prime  aims  of 
Nepal Rastra Bank as a regulator and supervisor. 
NRB has taken a number of initiatives to consolidate the financial system. It introduced 
Merger  and  Acquisition  Policy  a  few  years  ago  for  preserve  financial  stability.  This 
policy  has  encouraged  the  merger  of  urban-centered  institutions  while  according 
priority to the expansion of rural branches in the underserved areas. Till now, 138 BFIs 
2 
  
13. 
 
14. 
 
15. 
 
17. 
 
18. 
 
19. 
were  involved  in  merger  and  acquisition.  Out  of  this,  the  license  of  94  BFIs  was 
revoked thereby forming 44 BFIs.  
In July 2015, NRB quadrupled the minimum capital requirements for BFIs in order to 
promote  financial  stability,  mobilize  the  resources  needed  for  the 
long-term 
development financing as well as to encourage merger and acquisition of BFIs. 
The NRB is of the view that the expansion of the financial sector will be constrained 
without  the  growth  of  the  real  sector.  Thus,  priority  has  been    accorded  to  the 
productive use of bank credit to the promotion of the real sector and this demands the 
judicious use of credit and macro-prudential policies. As a competitive, efficient and 
healthy  financial  system  is  vital  for  enhancing  growth,  ensuring  economic  efficiency 
and maintaining macro-economic stability, a reasonable growth of the real economy is 
equally important to sustain the expansion of the financial services.  
In  order  to  establish  finance-growth  nexus,  NRB  is  pursuing  the  Financial  Sector 
Development Strategy (FSDS) that aims to further consolidate the banking institutions, 
reduce  the  interest  spread,  introduce  provisions  on  credit  insurance  and  raise  the 
banking sector’s contribution to the gross domestic product (GDP) to eight per cent.  
 
Fellow Governors and Distinguished Delegates, 
 
16.  While going through the overall ACU transaction, trade routed through ACU in 2015 
has declined significantly by about 9 percent while in 2016, trade increased by about 
21 percent. Similarly, following the trend of preceding years, total transactions have 
surged by about 19 percent during the first ten months of the current year on y-o-y 
basis compared to the corresponding figure of last year. Further, trade is concentrated 
primarily within a few member countries. All these facts warrant member countries to 
evaluate the trend and I urge all the Fellow Governors to rethink on how we can better 
serve the enshrined objectives of establishment of the ACU. 
Since  the  establishment  of  ACU,  Nepal  has  always  been  an  active  member.  With 
regard to our activities under ACU, the share of Nepal on total transactions of the ACU 
member  countries  routed  through  ACU  mechanism  accounts  for  roughly  1  percent, 
which has remained almost the same over the last few years.  
In this opportune occasion, I would like to reiterate my firm commitment and belief in 
the mission of our Union. Apart from improving the existing operational mechanism of 
ACU to enhance efficiency of the Union, I am optimistic that this Forum would also 
explore new avenues of co-operation that will further simplify the existing payment 
mechanism  in  order  to  facilitate  trade  amongst  member  countries  and  enhance 
monetary as well as technical cooperation among us.  
Before concluding, I would like to once again express my utmost thanks to the  Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka for the kind hospitality and excellent arrangements rendered for this 
important Meeting.   
Thank you very much! 
 3 
