Juyeol  Lee:  Opening  address  –  2017  Bank  of  Korea  International
Conference
Speech by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the 2017 Bank of Korea International
Conference, Seoul, 1 June 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I  am  delighted  to  bid  a  warm  welcome  to  you  all,  our  participants  in  this  Bank  of  Korea
2017  International  Conference.  I  wish  to  express  my  sincerest  appreciation  to  our  keynote
speakers, Professor Thomas Sargent of New York University and President John Williams of the
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,  as  well  as  all  of  our  moderators,  presenters  and
discussants. Special thanks to Professor Sargent also for his great help to us again this year
in organizing the conference. 
It has been nearly a decade now since the Global Financial Crisis. And looking back over these
years, the global economy did not emerge from conditions of low growth and low inflation for a
long time, even under the unprecedented accommodative fiscal and monetary policies carried
out around the world. To make matters worse, financial imbalances increased, mainly in EMEs,
as  international  capital  flows  into  EMEs  surged,  against  a  backdrop  of  continuing  low  interest
rates worldwide, and private debt levels in these countries soared. 
Fortunately,  the  global  economy  seems  to  have  regained  some  growth  momentum,  and  the
international financial markets are stable. However, trade protectionism and geopolitical risks are
increasing  in  some  parts  of  the  world,  and  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  the  US  is
expected to continue. Productivity growth has also not yet returned to its pre-crisis level. In view
of all this, we cannot be sure that the current global economic recovery and financial stability will
be sustained. And the structural problems that have built up since the pre-crisis period make
it even more difficult to be confident. 
In this situation, I think we can take this year’s conference as a very meaningful opportunity to
look into the challenges that lie ahead for us in the next decade, and to discuss ways of dealing
with them. Today, I would like to talk just a bit about some of the challenges that many countries
face in common, and about possible policy responses to address them. 
First, income inequality has risen as an important global policy agenda. Income gaps among the
different social classes have been widening in many countries, and this could impair the virtuous
circle by which economic growth leads to increases in employment and income, which then help
growth  to  strengthen  further.  Recently,  globalization  and  technological  innovation  are  being
held responsible for this worsening income inequality. Notably, in the era of the Fourth Industrial
Revolution, now in progress, there are concerns that the number of unskilled jobs could decline
rapidly. However, we cannot go against the flow of globalization and technological innovation. And
in  this  regard,  international  organizations  such  as  IMF  and  World  Bank  recommend  that  we
should  pursue  “inclusive”  growth,  which  ensures  that  many  people  can  share  the  benefits  of
growth. More specifically, creating more jobs, increasing household incomes and expanding the
social safety net are recognized as relevant policies for promoting inclusive growth. We can talk
more about this topic during Session Two today, on “Inclusive Growth and Employment.”
Another challenge that we must tackle is population aging, which is progressing rapidly now in
many countries. Population aging is likely to undermine economic growth as it reduces the labor
supply and saps aggregate demand at the same time. For Korea, in particular, as the pace of our
population aging is rapid, but our preparations for it insufficient, the negative effects of population
aging on growth seem likely to be substantial. In response to this, proper policy measures need
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  be  put  in  place,  to  ease  the  rapid  drop  in  elderly  consumption  while  we  at  the  same
time strengthen social support related to child birth and child care. The theme of our first session
today was chosen to be “Population Aging”, which I think may suggest just how important and
urgent this issue is.
Finally, we need to also address the issue of financial imbalances. Since the Global Financial
Crisis,  international  efforts  to  ensure  financial  stability  have  strengthened,  as  seen  in  the
introduction of global regulatory frameworks such as the Basel III accord and the OTC derivatives
market  reforms.  However,  the  financial  imbalances  in  major  EMEs  have  accumulated  further,
driven  by  greater  household  and  corporate  debt  leverage  in  these  economies.  Financial
institutions have been seeking high-risk, high-return investments, in response to their worsening
profitability  due  to  the  low  interest  rate  environment.  In  Korea,  household  debt  is  already  at  a
historic  high,  and  has  been  growing  faster  than  incomes,  so  that  it  poses  a  major  risk  to
financial  stability.  I  hope  that  we  will  obtain  valuable  insights  related  to  this  tomorrow,  in  the
special session led by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on ways of securing financial
stability and the role of monetary policy.
So  far,  I  have  raised  three  policy  issues  —  income  inequality,  population  aging  and  financial
imbalances. Besides these, of course, there are many other structural problems that we must
face. And the proper policy for dealing with such problems is structural reform, although that is
not  so  easy  to  carry  out,  due  to  factors  such  as  the  resulting  unemployment  and  conflicts  of
interest  among  different  social  classes.  International  organizations  such  as  the  OECD,  as
well as academia, have assessed the structural reforms undertaken in many countries until now
to  have  been  insufficient.  However,  in  order  to  sustain  our  fledgling  growth  momentums,  our
structural reforms need to be intensified. And of course, our macroeconomic policies should also
support  structural  reform.  I  believe  that  the  theme  of  Session  3,  “Structural  Reform
and Macroeconomic Policy,” will be helpful to policy makers in the government and the central
bank.
Ladies and gentlemen!
The world economy stands at a turning point now. It has shown signs of moving away from the
long lasting low growth and low inflation seen since the Global Financial Crisis, but we cannot be
sure yet that this recovery will continue going forward. It is my sincere hope that this year’s very
opportune Bank of Korea Conference will serve as a fruitful venue for looking back on the last
decade since the Global Financial Crisis, for gaining insights into the next decade before us, and
for generating constructive policy ideas. I look forward to this Conference being a great success
once again.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
