Norman Chan: Sound banking
Closing remarks by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at  the  HKMA  Conference  for  Independent  Non-Executive  Directors  (INEDs),  Hong  Kong,  16
March 2017.
 What is sound banking?
Sound banking is not
(a) excessive risk taking;
(b) irresponsible or unfair treatment of customers and counter-parties; and
(c) maximisation of short term profits.
Sound banking is:
(a) Prudent and profitable;
(b) responsible and fair to customers; and
(c) sustainable.
Trilogy of sound banking
(I)  Robust  Regulation  and  Supervision  –  it  will  provide  an  externally  imposed  set  of  rules  and
codes that define what is acceptable and what is not.  However, no matter how well designed
and robust the regulatory regime is, it normally works better in setting minimum standards for
compliance and is not so effective in promoting good or best practices.
(II) Good Corporate Culture – culture consists of a set of formal and informal values that guide
the  mindsets  and  behaviours  of  management  and  staff.    Unlike  externally  imposed  rules  and
regulations, which normally entail sanctions if breaches are detected, good corporate culture and
values reflect the attitude that “we do things the right way not because we are afraid of being
caught but because this is the way it ought to be done”.  A simple illustration of the importance of
culture and values is the example of combatting littering on the streets.  It is a lot easier to ensure
that our streets are clean when people don’t think it is morally right to litter rather than having
thousands of street cleaners sweeping the streets day and night, or having thousands of health
inspectors giving out penalty tickets to those who litter. 
(III) Appropriate  Incentives  System  –  it  refers  mostly  to  financial  incentives  but  there  could  be
non-financial incentives, that accrue to the staff members at different levels within a bank.  It is
crucial that the incentive system aligns with the letter and spirit of the rules, codes and culture
statement of the bank in order to induce the appropriate staff behaviour to produce the desired
outcomes consistently over time.
It  is  not  possible  to  achieve  sound  banking  without  all  the  three  components,  as  they  tend  to
support and reinforce each other.  Quoting the famous words of Mencius, supplemented by a
modern  economics  overlay,  I  would  like  to  conclude  today’s  Conference  with  the  following
phrases:
徒善不足以為政
徒法不能以自行
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
徒利不可以為繼
which, using my interpretation in the context of sound banking, basically mean that it is neither
possible to depend solely on good laws or solely on high moral principles or ethical values to
produce the desired policy outcomes nor sustainable in the long run if one solely pursues profit
maximisation.  We will need the trilogy to produce sound banking and I hope that you, the INEDs
of banks in Hong Kong, will join hands and work together to accomplish this important common
goal.  I look forward to seeing you, fellow INEDs, this time next year at the 2nd Annual  INED
Conference.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
