Sharon  Donnery:  Setting  the  standard:  NPL  workout  in  the  euro
area
Remarks by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at an event
entitled  "Tackling  Europe's  non-performing  loans  crisis:  restructuring  debt,  reviving  growth",
organised by Bruegel, Brussels, 3 February 2017.
 I would like to thank Donata Faccia and Mícheál O’Keeffe for their contribution to my remarks.
1. Introduction
Good  morning,  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  at  Bruegel  to  discuss  the  resolution  of  Non-
Performing Loans (NPLs) in the euro area.
Different  factors  have  contributed  to  the  formation  of  non-performing  loans  across  individual
Member  States.  In  Ireland  and  Spain,  for  example,  NPLs  were  mainly  driven  by  idiosyncratic
shocks, namely the collapse of real-estate bubbles.  Conversely, the roots of Italian NPLs can be
found  in  the  prolonged  deterioration  of  the  economy  more  generally  and  in  the  persistent
2
reduction of its competitiveness.
1
Regardless, the deliberate and determined reduction in non-performing loans is essential for the
viability  of  the  European  banking  sector.  It  therefore  constitutes  a  necessary  condition  for  the
recovery of the euro area economy.
The diverse causes underlying NPL formation, the multiple channels by which they can affect
macroeconomic performance, as well as the high degree of heterogeneity across the European
banking  sector,  call  for  a  flexible  approach  in  addressing  Europe’s  NPL  problem.  However,
saying that an appropriate response should take into account the different context in which euro
area  banks  operate,  does  not  mean  that  we  cannot  adopt  a  consistent  approach  to  the
supervision  of  non-performing  loans.  This  includes  applying  a  common  framework  for  NPL
resolution across the Banking Union.
The  most  effective  response  should  turn  best  practices  into  common  standards  for  NPL
management  across  the  banking  sector,  while  at  the  same  time  recognising  the  need  for  a
granular approach. In this context, the ECB Guidance ‘sets the standard’ for NPL management
3
going forward.
Today, in my brief introductory remarks, I will focus on how the Guidance provides a common
standard  for  NPL  management  across  the  euro  area,  yet  allows  for  the  differing  position  of
individual banks and takes into account the varying contexts in which they operate. I will highlight
the necessity for experience and ownership at board level, the capacity gaps that exist in terms
of  implementation,  and  explain  how  we  expect  these  to  be  addressed.  Finally,  I  will  briefly
discuss  a  number  of  national  practices  that  still  pose  a  considerable  challenge  to  the  timely
reduction in non-performing loans in some Member States. In this context, concerted action from
all relevant stakeholders is needed to tackle this important issue.
2. The framework going forward
Following  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  in  2014,  ECB  Banking  Supervision  continued  to
focus on issues relating to asset quality through its ongoing supervisory engagement. Through
the  work  of  the  SSM  it  became  evident  that  different  banks  had  been  subjected  to  different
intensities  in  the  supervision  of  non-performing  loans  and  that  different  Member  States  had
implemented varying guidance in how banks should deal with workout and resolution. Therefore,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  High  Level  Group  on  Non-Performing  Loans  –  which  I  have  the  honour  to  chair  –  was
mandated to develop a consistent supervisory approach to the treatment of NPLs. The Guidance
–  which  represents  ECB  Banking  Supervision’s  expectations  going  forward  –  is  an  important
4
step towards NPL reduction across the euro area.
The  publication  of  the  Guidance  on  NPLs  was  accompanied  by  an  extensive  consultation
process which ended on 15 November 2016. We received nearly 700 comments on all chapters
of  the  Guidance,  all  of  which  will  be  published.  Since  then,  we  have  been  reviewing  both  the
comments submitted in written form and those provided during the public hearing, and we are
now aiming to publish the final Guidance in Spring 2017.
Through the work of the High Level Group we identified a number of best practices relating to
NPL management. These have been incorporated into the Guidance as the standard for NPL
management  going  forward.  A  central  principle  of  the  Guidance  is  ‘tone  from  the  top’.  The
resolution of non-performing loans rests firmly with the institutions themselves.
Management bodies must take full ownership of this problem. This includes the development,
and approval of a strategy and operational plan to deliver the progress required. Furthermore,
frequent  and  regular  reporting  to  the  board  is  necessary  to  ensure  progress  versus  agreed
targets is achieved.
However, in order to develop ambitious, yet realistic strategies to reduce NPLs, boards first need
to gain a clear understanding of the full context in which they operate. It is clear, at present, many
boards  have  not  yet  established  this.  From  the  bottom  up,  banks  also  need  to  examine  the
drivers and scale of non-performing loans. In doing so, they are expected to adopt an extremely
granular approach. A careful assessment of the external environment, the resources available to
debtors, as well as the internal operational capacities, will contribute to the identification of the
most appropriate strategy to reduce non-performing loans.
To ensure effective implementation, we also expect banks to review their governance structures
and operational arrangements against the benchmark laid down in the Guidance. Drawing from
international best practice, the Guidance prescribes that banks should establish dedicated NPL
workout units, separated from the loan granting functions.
The main rationale for this important separation is the elimination of potential conflicts of interest
and  to  ensure  the  presence  of  staff  with  dedicated  expertise  and  experience  in  NPL
management. This separation of duties should encompass not only client relationship activities
(e.g. negotiation of forbearance solutions with clients), but also the decision-making process. In
this context, dedicated NPL committees should also be established.
Given the existing heterogeneity across the European banking sector, setting generic quantitative
targets for NPL reduction in the strategies would have inevitably resulted in unrealistic targets for
a number of banks. By contrast, if adapted to suit all situations, targets would have not been very
ambitious. Therefore, we explicitly decided not to set a single threshold for NPL reduction.
Rather, taking into account the specificities in which banks operate, targets are required to be set
using a portfolio-by-portfolio approach. The standard – outlined in the Guidance – prescribes that
banks must articulate their NPL targets along three dimensions – (i) across time, (ii) by portfolio
and, (iii) by implementation option chosen to drive the projected reduction.
Clearly defined quantitative targets in their NPL strategy, approved by the management body, will
ensure ‘extend and pretend’ situations will not persist. The targets will require banks to segment
non-performing  loans  and  effectively  manage  them  towards  likely  resolution  outcomes
(depending on borrower cooperation and business viability). Retail NPLs can remain stubbornly
high, and commercial debt resolution strategies are likely to be complex and take significantly
more  time  to  devise  and  implement.  Therefore,  a  case-by-case  assessment  is  required  to
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
develop and agree bespoke sustainable solutions with distressed borrowers.
Allowing  for  bank-specific  quantitative  targets  for  NPL  reduction  does  not  mean  that  ECB
Banking Supervision will not implement consistent supervisory standards.
The Joint Supervisory Teams (JSTs) will treat all banks in the same way when assessing both
the  degree  of  implementation  and  the  ambitiousness  of  banks’  strategies.  Furthermore,  using
peer analysis tools and techniques:
(i) we will analyse all banks strategies in a comparative context,
(ii)  we  will  compare  granular  sets  of  indicators,  allowing  for  a  single  and  relative  view  on
progress, and
(iii) we will benchmark by portfolio, by peer group and by Member State, to assess progress.
Our intrusiveness will depend on the scale and severity of the NPL challenges different banks
face. With the JSTs, we will also organise regular onsite inspections of banks with high levels of
NPLs to gauge progress. However, we will also take a proportionate approach where necessary.
For example, banks with a high NPL concentration in certain parts of the business will be asked
to  put  in  place  portfolio-specific  non-performing  loan  reduction  strategies,  despite  having  an
overall NPL level not considerably above the EU average.
Should  supervisors  find  that  the  NPL  strategies  are  either  not  appropriately  implemented  nor
sufficiently  ambitious,  additional  supervisory  measures  can  be  triggered  on  a  case-by-case
basis. Although the Guidance at present is non-binding in nature, any deviations from it will need
to  be  explained.  Supervisory  expectations  can  be  turned  into  binding  requirements  by
implementing them as part of the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process.
We  expect  the  Guidance  to  become  embedded  in  the  ECB  supervisory  manual,  thereby
becoming business as usual supervision. We also expect markets to exert pressure on banks to
take action, resulting from greater disclosure.
3. Capacity gaps
Looking at the operational capacity of banks, it is clear that many deficiencies exist. Turning first
to the important issue of ‘tone from the top’, in some cases, the skills to deal with this issue at
board level are significantly lacking. Board members will either need to upskill, or people with the
appropriate skill-set will need to be appointed.
This is essential to ensure NPL strategies get sufficient attention and drive, and become fully
embedded in the overarching objectives of banks.
Similarly,  at  an  operational  level,  some  institutions  simply  do  not  have  enough  people  with
effective  arrears  management  experience  to  deal  with  this  problem.  Centralised  specialist
resources are needed. Therefore, realistically, some banks will have to bring in outside expertise.
We saw this previously in some programme countries.
In terms of management and decision-making, full consideration of all available long-term options
is  necessary.  However,  this  requires  segmentation  aligned  to  NPL  workout.  It  also  demands
accessible documentation and considerable financial analysis, as well as frequent site visits to
verify business and collateral. Complete and up-to-date data to assess performance and track
KPIs is also essential to monitor workout progress and is critical to the effective implementation
of the NPL strategies more generally.
However, it is clear considerable gaps in IT infrastructures also exist in some banks. In many
cases data is simply not reliable or granular enough. For example, a key issue reported between
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the bid/ask price is data. Loan tapes need to include all the necessary information relating to the
collateral and legal process to allow for cross-section and segmentation analysis.
The standard we have set in the Guidance, prescribes that all non-performing loan related data
are securely stored in central IT systems. Where systems are not ‘fit for purpose’, banks will
have to quickly put in place remediation plans to address these capacity gaps. As you know IT
infrastructure plans can take some time to implement and require investment. Those plans will
therefore also be subject to scrutiny by our Joint Supervisory Teams.
4. Coordinated response
Tackling Europe’s non-performing loan problem, however goes beyond the supervisory domain.
Some reductions in non-performing loans have been noted across the euro area and a number
of  countries  have  taken  proactive  and  coordinated  prudential,  judicial  and  other  measures  to
tackle the issue. However, as shown by the Stocktake report, in some Member States a number
of national practices and legal and judicial aspects still pose a considerable challenge to timely
5
NPL reduction.
The inefficiencies of judicial systems are considered by the majority of the countries surveyed,
as an obstacle to the speedy resolution of non-performing loans, due to capacity constraints of
the  courts.  Other  aspects  that  need  to  be  addressed  include  (i)  the  lack  of  a  modern  legal
framework for enabling timely out-of-court settlement, (ii) challenges related to both the corporate
and  the  household  insolvency  system,  and  (iii)  factors  –  such  as  the  taxation  regime  or  the
accounting framework – that can also discourage NPL resolution.
The focus of the Guidance is on workout. And working out NPLs can create a pipeline for future
sales, where possible. However, the underdevelopment of secondary debt markets also impedes
non-performing loan resolution in most of the countries surveyed. Specific obstacles in the legal
and regulatory framework appear to be the cause of such a market stagnation. This despite the
fact that the majority of jurisdictions surveyed appear to have a framework favourable to transfer
non-performing loans to third parties.
Joint action from all relevant stakeholders – including Member States, the Commission and EU
fora – is therefore critical. In this context, we welcome initiatives – such as this – to connect the
market,  policy,  and  supervisory  discussions  on  this  topic  and  promote  a  dialogue  between
respective professional communities to define a shared agenda for NPL workout and resolution.
5. Conclusion
To conclude, we were given a clear mandate to deliver a consistent supervisory approach to the
treatment of non-performing loans across the euro area. The Guidance delivers on this objective,
by  setting  the  standard  for  NPL  management  going  forward.  It  ensures  supervisors  have  the
necessary  tools  available  to  them,  and  banks  have  the  necessary  capacity  to  tackle  NPL
problems.
However, publishing the Guidance is only the first step. Implementation is our next challenge and
this will not happen overnight. We also need strong and clear support from Member States to
tackle legal and related issues.
Boards will play a crucial role in developing, owning, and implementing bank specific strategies,
and we expect pro-active engagement going forward.
As  Madame  Nouy  has  repeatedly  emphasised,  this  will  be  reinforced  by  tough  but  fair
supervision.
Thank you for your attention, I look forward to the discussion.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
For Ireland see ‘The Irish Banking Crisis: Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy 2003–2008. A Report to the
Minister  for  Finance  by  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank.  For  Spain,  see  for  example  Cuerpo,  Carlos  and
Pontuch,  Peter,  (2013),  ‘Spanish  housing  market:  adjustments  and  implications’,  European  Commission–
ECFIN, 10(8).
See Garrido, José, Anke Weber, and Emanuel A. Kopp, (2016), ‘Cleaning-up Bank Balance Sheets: Economic,
Legal, and Supervisory Measures for Italy’, IMF Working Paper WP/16/135.
The Draft Guidance to banks on non-performing loans can be found here.
See 'The hard road: NPL workout and resolution in the euro area', address by Sharon Donnery at the Peterson
Institute for International Economics, 6 October 2016.
The ECB Stocktake of national supervisory practices and legal frameworks related to NPLs can be found here.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
