          A p r i l   1 3 ,   2 0 1 7 
B ank  o f   Japa n 
  AI and the Frontiers of Finance 
Remarks at the Conference on   
"AI and Financial Services/Financial Markets" 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
Introduction 
Today's  conference  focuses  on  the  overlapping  areas  of  new  information  technology, 
such  as  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  and  financial  services,  which  now  constitute  the 
frontier  of  finance.  Indeed,  the  fact  that  experts  in  various  fields  are  gathering  in  this 
meeting room of a central bank symbolizes the current trend in finance. 
I. AI, Big Data Analytics, and Finance 
Information processing as a basic function of financial services 
Today, concepts such as AI and big data analytics are seen ubiquitously on the news and 
in magazines. These new information technologies have been utilized in the marketing 
of  consumers'  attribute  analysis  and  applied  in  various  areas  such  as  system  control, 
bio-medical sciences, economic analytics, and weather forecasting. 
The financial field is also attracting significant attention as promising areas in which AI 
and big data analytics  are expected to explore new frontiers. Indeed, various measures 
have  been  taken  to  utilize  these  technologies  in  a  wide  range  of  financial  businesses, 
such  as  providing  innovative  services  called  "FinTech,"  high-tech  oriented  trading  in 
various markets, risk management, and the operation of call centers for retail customers. 
It  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  such  new  information  technologies  are  expected  to  be 
utilized  in  various  financial  services,  considering  that  the  basic  function  of  finance  is 
information processing. 
Financial  infrastructure,  including  financial  markets  and  payment  systems,  efficiently 
processes  large  amounts  of  information.  For  example,  it  is  impossible  for  a  single 
individual to assess the risks and returns of a vast number of projects spreading all over 
the world. In financial markets, the assessment of projects by many market participants 
are aggregated and shared in the form of "price," where each participant is able to use 
the assessment made by many other participants. In this way, financial services, through 
efficiently  processing  large  volumes  of  information,  continuously  allocate  limited 
economic  resources  to  promising  projects,  thereby  supporting  economic  development. 
In  this  respect,  AI  and  big  data  analytics  is  considered  to  have  a  great  potential  for 
 1 
making  the  information  processing  function  --  which  is  the  fundamental  function  of 
finance -- even more efficient and advanced, as they enable to generate new value added 
through processing large volumes of information. 
Further data utilization   
Another motivation for applying AI and big data analytics to various financial services 
is  that  finance  activities  generally  accompany  large  data  volumes,  which  have  great 
potential to be utilized in wide-ranging businesses. 
For example, if transaction data associated with payments and settlements -- in terms of 
"who  bought  what,  when,  and  where"  --  could  be  collected  and  analyzed,  such  data 
would  have  significant  value  for  various  businesses.  In  this  circumstance,  recent 
innovation  in  information  technology  and  consequent  business  developments,  such  as 
the popularization of loyalty cards, have made it even easier to collect and analyze big 
data related to payments and settlements. 
Response to changing environment 
The  third  source  of  motivation  for  applying  AI  to  financial  activities  is  that  the 
environment  surrounding  financial  markets  and  services  continuously  changes, 
reflecting the complex mutual interactions of various factors. 
For  instance,  financial  markets  do  not  always  show  similar  responses  to  similar  news. 
Financial  markets  of  today  may  strongly  react  to  the  news  it  did  not  react  to  at  all 
yesterday.  The  risks  and  returns  of  various  projects,  as  well  as  the  needs  of  financial 
service users, change from day to day in accordance with the changes in the economic 
environment.  AI  is  expected  to  support  efficient  responses  to  changes  in  the 
environment  surrounding  market  transactions  and  financial  businesses  by  swiftly 
providing guidance based on the analysis of large volumes of new information observed 
in economy and markets. 
    2 
II. New Issues 
Impact on market structure and price formation 
Although AI and big data analytics are expected to provide multiple benefits, new issues 
have  been  identified  for  market  stakeholders  and  policymakers  when  applying  such 
technologies to financial activities. 
High-frequency  trading  (HFT)  and  algorithmic  trading,  which  use  high-speed 
communications  and  computer  programs,  have  already  been  employed  in  financial 
market  transactions.  There  are  arguments  that  these  types  of  trading  improve  market 
liquidity.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  also  concerns  that  HFT  and  algorithmic  trading 
may  increase  market  volatility,  especially  if  massive  trading  is  based  on  a  similar 
algorithm,  or  that  a  possible  exiting  of  market  participants  who  cannot  employ  HFT 
would  ultimately  reduce  its  diversity.  As  such,  the  application  of  AI  and  big  data 
analytics  to  HFT  and  algorithmic  trading  might  intensify  these  negative  impacts.  In 
view  of  these  various  opinions,  policymakers  should  carefully  monitor  the  impacts  of 
possible  application  of  new  information  technologies  on  market  structure  and  price 
formation. 
Ensuring "information security" and "data privacy" 
As previously mentioned, one of the motivations for applying AI and big data analytics 
to financial services is the potential benefits obtained through effective and efficient use 
of  data  associated  with  financial  activities.  This  implies  that  information  security  and 
data privacy would be even more critical in providing financial services. In this respect, 
the  sincere  efforts  of  stakeholders  would  be  key  to  ensuring  users'  trust  in  innovative 
financial  services  utilizing  new 
information 
technologies,  and  promoting 
the 
developments of such services. 
Ensuring "trust" and "governance" 
There is also concern voiced about whether the extensive application of AI might take 
financial  market  infrastructure  beyond  the  control  of  human  beings.  Such  a  concern 
might  be  based  on  human  beings'  ambivalence  toward  AI,  which  was  elegantly 
described  in  "2001:  A  space  odyssey,"  a  film  released  almost  half  a  century  ago.  The 
reason why such concern arises in the application of AI to financial services, is probably 
 3 
because "trust" is a critical factor in financial services, along with several other sectors, 
such as medical services. 
Although  we  already  have  highly  intelligent  and  skilled  robots,  few  individuals 
welcome,  without  hesitation,  undergoing  completely  robotic  surgeries  without  any 
human  intervention,  as  we  cannot  completely  get  rid  of  tail  risks.  To  facilitate  the 
application  of  AI  to  financial  services,  it  would  be  important  for  relevant  entities  to 
establish  reliable  structures  for  effective  governance  and  responsibility  in  case  of  tail 
events to ensure public trust to innovative financial services. 
III. AI and the Frontiers of Finance 
Keeping  these  issues  in  mind,  new  information  technologies  such  as  AI  and  big  data 
analytics  have  the  potential  to  broaden  the  frontiers  of  finance  and  contribute  to  the 
economy.   
Ever since the creation of money, finance has continuously developed through utilizing 
available  technologies  such  as  minting,  printing,  telecommunication,  and  computers. 
For  instance,  securities  were  originally  based  on  paper  and  printing  technologies. 
Although  the  developments  in  information  technology  have  replaced  paper  securities 
with digital signals, the securities market continues to contribute to the economy. Rather, 
as  securities  have  been  dematerialized  by  digital  signals,  their  market  has  further 
developed, since dematerialization freed securities from geographical limitations. Now, 
advanced  securities  markets  have  become  a  core  financial  infrastructure,  linking  the 
supply and demand of funds not only domestically but also across borders.   
In  the  economy,  finance  functions  to  connect  various  economic  entities,  wide-ranging 
goods and services created by them, as well as investors and projects beyond time and 
space.  I  believe  such  a  function  of  finance  will  become  more  important  in  view  of 
globalization  and  technological  innovation.  Since  AI  and  big  data  analytics  enable 
advanced  information  processing,  they  inherently  have  the  potential  to  strengthen  the 
functions  of  finance.  For  example,  they  could  contribute  to  the  growth  of  the  global 
economy  through  matching  investors  and  projects  worldwide  more  effectively,  and 
 4 
increasing  the  number  of  projects  to  be  carried  out.  Additionally,  new  information 
technologies  would  enable  financial  service  providers  to  offer  more  personalized  and 
customized services to users, thereby increasing economic welfare. 
In  view  of  such  potential  benefits  of  new  technologies  to  the  economy,  public 
authorities, including central banks, should be cautious not to deter the development of 
new  information  technologies  by  focusing  solely  on  their  negative  side  effects.  We, 
policymakers,  should  always  try  to  maximize  the  benefits  of  new  technologies  while 
minimizing  their  negative  impacts,  and  I  firmly  believe  we  can  do  so  by  taking  the 
appropriate actions. 
Moreover, it is also essential for us to constructively consider desirable ways  in which 
humans  and  AI  complement,  rather  than  confront,  each  other.  For  instance,  human 
judgment  is  not  completely  free  from  existing  paradigms,  and  thus  is  sometimes 
negligent to changes. In this regard, AI could adjust our bias by neutrally analyzing and 
finding  new  correlations  among  a  myriad  of  data.  Meanwhile,  humans  could 
compensate for AI's weakness with their intuition, common sense, and imagination. 
IV. Concluding Remarks 
When I think about AI and human beings, I think of Blaise Pascal, a French philosopher 
and mathematician of the 17th century, as the forerunner who expressed advanced ideas, 
such as automated processing of large numbers of data and innovative algorithm, which 
took  the  lead  in  developing  today's  information  technology.  Almost  400  years  ago, 
Pascal  invented  the  first  computing  machine,  an  ancestor  of  today's  computers.  Pascal 
also came up with an idea of an omnibus coach as the first public transportation in the 
world.  This  was  based  on  an  algorithmic  idea  to  efficiently  transport  many  people  by 
establishing routes that crisscrossed and surrounded the city of Paris. This should have 
been a much more epoch-making idea in those days than today's idea of car-sharing. 
At the same time, Pascal emphasized the importance of independent thinking for human 
beings in his famous phrase: "Man is a reed, the weakest of nature, but he is a thinking 
reed."  I  believe  this  phrase  has  great  implications  for  us  in  dealing  with  new 
 5 
technologies. 
If  there  is  any  risk  the  role  of  human  beings  are  overwhelmingly  replaced  by  AI,  that 
would  be  when  human  beings  stop  thinking  independently  and  autonomously.  From  a 
financial perspective, it is  most  important  for us  to  think independently  and positively 
on how to make an efficient and effective use of  new technologies such as AI and big 
data analytics to further develop and improve financial markets and services. 
From this viewpoint, today's conference is a great opportunity, where numerous experts 
with various backgrounds gather to discuss the most advanced issues in finance, such as 
the interactions between AI, financial services, and markets. 
I would like to close by hoping that today's conference will generate fruitful discussions, 
and that the exploration of financial frontiers by utilizing new information technologies, 
including AI, will greatly contribute to the development of the economic society. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 6 
