Regional Forum on "Emerging Opportunities and Challenges  
of Financial Inclusion in Asia-Pacific Region" 
Kathmandu, 9 November 2016 
Keynote Address by Dr. Chiranjibi Nepal, Governor, Nepal Rastra Bank 
Chairman of APRACA and Deputy Governor of Bangladesh Bank  
Mr. Shitangshu Kumar Sur Chowdhury  
Deputy Governors of Nepal Rastra Bank Mr. Chintamani Siwakoti  
and Mr. Shiba Raj Shrestha, 
Chairman of National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development  
Dr. Harsh Kumar Bhanwala, 
Eminent Resource Persons, 
Executive Directors from Nepal Rastra Bank,  
Chiefs of Financial Institutions of Nepal, 
Forum Participants, 
Friends from the Media, 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  gives  me  immense  pleasure  to  address  this  august  gathering  at  this  opening  session  of  this 
regional forum on "Emerging Opportunities and Challenges of Financial Inclusion in Asia Pacific 
Region". The theme of this Forum is something that is close to our hearts, and is a very topical issue 
in recent days.  The need to address this issue has never been more significant primarily due to the 
benefits it will bring to our countries. I am confident that this Forum  will help in deepening the 
understandings on the emerging issues of financial inclusion.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Now, let me move on to the main theme of this forum.  
Financial  inclusion  has  emerged  as  a  key  global  priority.  Governments,  international  agencies, 
academics and the private sector have all brought financial inclusion to the top of the agenda.  The 
G20 made the topic one of its pillars at the 2009 Pittsburgh Summit. Financial inclusion has been 
recognized in the Istanbul Programme of Action and the Sustainable Development Goals as a key 
enabler  for  a  host  of  development  objectives.  Likewise,  the  World  Bank  in  2015  also  laid  out  a 
vision for achieving universal financial access by 2020 which means that basic access to the formal 
financial  system  –  for  example,  through  debit  cards  or  mobile  money  –  should  be  possible  for 
everyone. 
Overall,  gaps  in  access  to  finance  are  slowly  being  lowered,  thanks  to  the  implementation  of 
financial  inclusion  policies  in  different  countries.  Between  2011  and  2014,  the  global  unbanked 
population dropped by 20 percent, from 2.5 billion to 2 billion. Still, more than half of adults in the 
poorest 40 percent of households in developing countries were still without accounts in 2014. 
Though  some  degree  of  success  was  achieved  by  financial  institutions  in  rendering  services to 
millions  of excluded  people throughout  Asia-Pacific, the  region is  still  home  to  an  estimated 1.2 
billion  people  who  do  not  have  access  to  a  bank  account  or  formal  financial  services.  About  84 
percent  of  firms  in  developing  Asia  possess  a  checking  or  savings  account,  which  is  lower  than 
Latin  America’s  89  percent.  Still,  in  the  case  of  Asia  and  the  Pacific,  a  recent  study  by  Asian 
Development  Bank  of  37  selected  developing  Asian  economies  in  2015  revealed  that  financial 
inclusion significantly reduces poverty and also reduces income inequality. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
As most of you are aware, there is no universal definition of financial inclusion. Financial inclusion 
is  about  making  banking  services  available  and  affordable  to  one  and  all  irrespective  of  their 
economic status. In other words it implies access to finance and financial services for all in a fair, 
transparent and equitable manner at an affordable cost. 
 
Similarly, there is also no single measure of financial inclusion as individuals and firms can utilize a 
host  of  financial  services  including  savings,  borrowings,  money  transfers  and  payments.  Thus, 
several  indicators  are  utilized  simultaneously  including  savings  accounts  at  formal  financial 
institutions, the use of Automated Teller Machines (ATMs), mobile banking or the use of debit and 
credit cards, among others.  
 
The benefits of financial inclusion and inclusive growth have been clearly ascertained. Access to 
financial services opens doors for families, permitting them to smooth out consumption and invest 
in  their  futures  through  education  and  health.  Access  to  credit  enables  businesses  to  expand, 
creating  jobs  and  reducing  inequality.  Financial  inclusion  is  the  bridge  between  economic 
opportunity and outcome.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
While  the  responsible  factors  for  lack  of  financial inclusion  vary  between  countries  and  regions, 
there  exist  a  number  of  common  themes.  These  include,  among  others,  geographical  distance, 
governance problems, restrictive regulations, lack of financial literacy, absence of strong payment 
system, inappropriate products, low level of technological development and dearth of reliable data. 
As most of these issues will be discussed in the other sessions, I would just like to limit my focus on 
two issues, that is, financial literacy and technological advances that hold promise in the expansion 
of financial inclusion.  
 
Financial  literacy  is  one  of  the  major  challenges  facing  countries  across  the  globe  and  has  been 
receiving significant attention from policy makers worldwide. Financial literacy and inclusion are 
issues of critical importance as we all strive for a more transparent, robust and sustainable economy, 
and a fairer society.  The financial crisis in 2009 brought the need for increased financial literacy to 
the  world’s  attention.  The  crisis  proved  that  even  advanced  countries  suffer  from  low  levels  of 
financial literacy, which can have a potent impact on both local and global economies.  
 
Government authorities can find it hard to reach excluded groups, and many have identified trusted 
intermediaries with access to the target group to deliver financial education. This approach can be 
effective, provided that the goals of the intermediary are aligned with the financial education goals, 
and  that  the  staff  are  properly  trained  and  incentivized  to  provide  financial  education.  Countries  
need  to  design  programs  to  ensure  people  can  make  sound  financial  decisions,  select  financial 
products,  which  best  suit  their  needs,  and  know  how  to  use  related  channels,  such  as  ATMs  or 
mobile banking.  
 
However,  more  research  and  evaluation  is  necessary  to  further  explore  the  relationship  between 
financial literacy and financial inclusion, and to identify the impact of financial education initiatives 
on financial inclusion. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
With  respect  to  technological  advances,  digital  technologies  are  important  for  inclusion,  as  they 
enable innovative and lower-cost business models for providing financial services, making it viable 
 2
to reach the poor. About 260 million unbanked adults in the developing world receive private sector 
wage payments in cash. Switching to digital payments could potentially save significant time and 
resources for businesses and workers alike. Likewise, agricultural payments present another chance 
to  expand  access  to  the  formal  financial  system,  as  roughly  440  million  unbanked  adults  in  the 
developing world are paid in cash for farm goods.  
 
By  moving  away  from  cash  and  using  digital  payments  to  distribute  social  benefits  and  wages, 
governments can reduce costs and leakage. In the developing world, about 120 million unbanked 
adults  receive  government  transfers  in  cash,  according  to  the  World  Bank’s  Global  Findex 
Database 2014. At the same time, more than 31 million unbanked adults in emerging countries are 
paid government wages in cash. Digitizing these payments could bring millions of adults into the 
financial system for the first time. 
Likewise,  355  million  adults  in  developing  countries  with  an  account  send  or  obtain  domestic 
remittances in cash or over the counter. Further, 1.3 billion adults with an account  in developing 
countries  pay  their  trash,  water,  and  electric  bills  in  cash,  and  over  half  a  billion  adults  with  an 
account  in  developing  countries  pay  school  fees  in  cash.  Access  to  digital  payments  generates 
opportunities to provide more convenient and affordable payment options. 
As  we  continue  to  adopt  innovative  financial  inclusion  models,  we  need  to  be  positioned  at  the 
forefront  of  these  developments  in  order  to  identify  and  manage  the  associated  risks.  More 
importantly, we need to be equipped with thorough knowledge of  innovative business models to 
develop  an enabling ecosystem  for  innovative financial inclusion  to  flourish  in a  safe  and  stable 
manner. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Allow  me  now  to  share  with  you  some  of  the  experiences  from  Nepal.  Under  Nepal’s  financial 
system,  there  are  four  types  of  financial  institutions  licensed  by  the  Nepal  Rastra  Bank  (NRB), 
namely commercial banks (A class), development banks (B class), finance companies (C class) and 
micro  finance  institutions  (D  class).  As  at  mid-July  2016,  the  number  of  commercial  banks, 
development banks, finance companies and micro finance institutions (MFIs) stood at 28, 67, 41 
and 42 respectively. Likewise, the branch network of commercial banks stood at 1869, followed by 
1378  branches  of  MFIs,  852  branches  of  development  banks  and  175  branches  of  finance 
companies.  The  population  per  branch  of  financial  institution  was  6,562  at  mid-July  2016. 
However,  the  financial  institutions  are  still  basically  dispersed  around  the  urban  or  semi-urban 
areas. 
 
Nepal Rastra Bank is presently implementing its second five-year Strategic Plan (2012-2016), in 
which financial inclusion has been identified as a strategic priority.  Likewise, the Monetary Policy 
of 2016/17 has also accorded emphasis towards deepening financial inclusion through enhancing 
financial literacy and access to finance. 
 
A survey undertaken by the UNCDF in 2014 showed that 61 percent of Nepalese adults have access 
to  formal  financial  services,  while  21  percent  resort  to  informal  channels  only  and  18  percent 
remain financially excluded. Moreover, 52 percent of adults claim to save and 45 percent claim to 
borrow money.  Likewise, 29 percent of adults borrow from an informal institution and 18 percent 
borrow  from  a  formal  institution.  Similarly,  40  percent  of  adults  save  with  a  formal  financial 
provider and 31 percent save in informal savings group. Likewise, 33 percent of transactions are 
made through digital channels.  
 
 3
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Nepal Rastra Bank and the Government of Nepal have been according due priority in enhancing 
financial  inclusion.  Some  policy  models  were  introduced  in  the  past  for  advancing  financial 
inclusion.  These  included  the  Grameen  Bank  Model,  the  Wholesale  Micro  Finance  Model,  the 
Directed  Lending  Model,  Project-Based  Micro Credit  Model,  and the FINGOs  and  the  SACCOs 
Model.  
 
Rather than spending time on these models, I shall focus the remainder of my address on the policy 
measures  that  were  initiated  by  the  NRB  and  the  Government  for promoting  financial  inclusion. 
These  include  liberal  licensing  policy  for  MFIs,  requirements  for  BFIs  (A,  B.  and  C  Class)  to 
allocate certain percentage of their credit for investment in the productive sector, special refinance 
facility  to cottage  and  small  industries,  interest free  loan to  extend  bank  branches  in  remote  and 
rural  areas,  directives  on  consumer  protection,  and  directives  on  branchless  banking  and  mobile 
banking services, among others.  
 
Let me elaborate on some of these recent policies. First of all, the Government through the Budget 
for 2016/17 outlined some policy directions related to expansion of banking and financial services 
in  the  rural  areas,  promotion  of  mobile  banking  and  branchless  banking,  continuation  of 
government  led  programs  such  as  Rural  Self  Reliance  Fund  (RSRF),  Poverty  Alleviation  Fund 
(PAF),  Youth  and  Small  Entrepreneur  Self-employment  Fund,  and  the  implementation  of 
subsidized agricultural lending program.  
 
Secondly,  the  NRB  has  been  providing  direct  financial  support  to  the  banks  and  financial 
institutions  that  set  up  branches  in  remote  areas  where  the  number  of  banking  units  is  minimal. 
Three,  in  its  Monetary  Policy  of  2015/16,  the  NRB  made  an  arrangement  of  special  refinance 
facility at 1 percent interest with the objective of encouraging BFIs (A, B, and C class) to extend 
loans to agriculture and small business-based income generating activities in poverty-stricken areas 
of the country.  
 
Four,  as  per  Monetary  Policy  of  2016/17,  necessary  provisions  would  be  made  to  support  the 
movement  of  opening  ‘at  least  one  bank  account  for  each  household’  and  the  arrangement  of 
distributing social security allowances through the bank account. 
Five,  the  final  drafts  of  the  National  Financial  Literacy  Policy  and  the  Financial  Sector 
Development Strategy (2015-2020) have been submitted to the Government for approval.  
Finally, the Nepal Financial Inclusion Roadmap (2017–2022), released on July 2016, is expected to 
guide future initiatives around the immediate priorities for financial inclusion.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Let me conclude. 
 
Financial inclusion can empower even the poorest person and bring about a dramatic change in his 
fate. Financial inclusion is not a one-time effort; it is an ongoing process that demands concerted 
and  team  efforts  from  all  the  stakeholders  including  the  Government,  financial  institutions,  the 
regulators, the private sector and the community at large.  
 
There  is  growing  urgency  in  both  the  public  as  well  as  the  private  sector  to  promote  financial 
inclusion. Though country reforms are starting to bear fruit and should enable countries to move 
many steps closer to greater financial inclusion, much still needs to be done.  
 
 4
Finally, by providing a platform for high-level dialogue on financial inclusion, this Forum, I expect, 
would review the current trends, recent achievements, ongoing challenges and opportunities within 
the  region  relative  to  financial  inclusion  and  discuss  how  these  developments  are  impacting  the 
different countries. At the end of the day, we should be able to pinpoint a number of key priorities 
for future initiatives to further support financial inclusion.  
 
With these words, let me wish you all a productive discussion and deliberation in this important 
Forum.  I  would  also  like  to  express  my  best  wishes  for  the  successful  conclusion  of  the  67th 
Executive Committee Meeting and the 20th General Assembly of APRACA. 
 
Thank you very much! 
 5
