Rameswurlall Basant Roi: Acceptance speech - 2017 Central Bank
Governor of the Year Award for Africa
Acceptance speech by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, for the
2017 Central Bank Governor of the Year Award for Africa, Port Louis, 7 April 2017.
Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic Corps
Mr James King, Africa and Middles East Editor for “The Banker”
 Fellow Bankers
Distinguished guests
Ladies and gentlemen
 Good afternoon
It’s an exceptional honour to have been selected for the 2017 Central Bank Governor of the Year
Award  for Africa  by  “The  Banker”  magazine.  I  am  humbled  to  have  received  the  award  this
afternoon.
I thank “The Banker” for giving recognition to the work of the Bank of Mauritius. This accolade
comes as a pleasant assurance that we have not been erring in terms of decisions and actions.
It  also  reflects  the  high  central  banking  standard  that  the  Bank  is  striving  to  maintain.  This
afternoon’s event is also, in some sense, a magnificent celebration of the progress made by our
jurisdiction.
I am summoned to briefly reflect on myself in the central banking profession. I wish not to be
presumptuous and I ask for your forbearance.
It’s just that I am a central banker who has spent his life doing his job with an elevated sense of
duty and devotion. I have been in the central banking arena for about 40 years. And 40 years of
central banking – an honourable profession that imposes rigours and military-like discipline on
the person holding the office – have moulded me into what I stand for today. It has been and
continues to be a weary long march from dripping dusk to drizzling dawn and to dripping dusk
again.
Barely a few months after I had joined the Bank of Mauritius in 1976, I had a very brief encounter
with  the  then  Governor  of  the  Bank.  That  memorable  encounter  had  instantly  made  me,  as
someone neither uber-ambitious nor loquacious as many of today’s young professionals, realize
that the road to success is always under construction. I was made to understand that education
does not always lead to more success in the real world. The better you perform in the world of
academia,  the  worse  you  may  turn  out  to  be  at  solving  real  world’s  problems.  In  academia,
problem solving involves only a part of the brain – the rational part that reads and writes, retains
information and connects the dots. This is the kind of skills that are tested in examinations. They
are, as we must all be knowing, tests of scholastic aptitude. If you succeed in playing the tricks
the tests require, you end up having distinction at schools.
Over  time,  I  found  that  life  throws  out  volleys  of  tests  on  your  paths.  Unlike  the  tests  set  at
schools,  life’s  tests  involve  many  more  variables.  In  fact,  we  get  overwhelmed  by  so  many
variables  popping  up  about  us.  Take,  for  instance,  the  human  face.  It’s  capable  of  so  many
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
different expressions, often beaming in custom-built face for every occasion, open to so many
interpretations. In schools, tests are anticipated. In life outside the schools, we don’t know when
we will be tested and what we will be tested on. But once we are at the workplace, we are faced
with an entirely different set of tests. We might happen to be in the midst of a test and still be
unaware that we are being tested.
Many years later in my career, I realized that I have been tested again and again and again. The
tests have at times been stressful, so unbearably stressful that I had once decided to quit. But a
quitter can never be a winner. And I had swallowed my bitterness and decided not to quit. I was
reminded of Friedrich Nietzsche’s “That which doesn’t kill us makes us stronger.”  I told to myself
that as long as the Almighty wakes me up in the morning, it can’t be over. It’s never over as long
as we have the unerring faith and willingness to give the best of ourselves. This is a game in
which  you  don’t  compete  with  others;  you  compete  with  yourself  and  try  to  outdo  your  own
previous performance, more so when the lie of the land is a sleeping beauty waiting for the kiss
of change.  
Just  for  a  moment,  imagine  a  mathematical  meteorologist.  He  has  come  up  with  a  set  of
wonderful equations for an ideal atmospheric state. No rain. No troublesome snowfall. No fog. No
dark clouds. No high velocity wind. Nothing annoying. It’s just beautiful, pleasant and peaceful
sunshine out there. In theory, such an atmospheric state might exist, but it’s far from reality. The
meteorologist’s job is to study the chaos in the atmosphere, to forecast and to announce to the
public the atmospheric state and weather conditions. He cannot change the weather. He cannot
prevent turbulences. He cannot prevent hurricanes, floods, draughts or earthquakes. Financial
markets are like the atmosphere. There is a meaningful similitude between the two. Interacting
forces in the markets, as in the atmosphere, are abundant. Like the meteorologist, the central
banker has to come up with equally wonderful equations for forecasting purposes and sustaining
a  stable  financial  market.  No  wonder  astro-physicists  and  other  engineers  turn  out  to  be  the
professionals with the right skills for financial markets. But unlike the meteorologist, the central
banker’s job is to prevent turbulences and earthquakes in the financial markets. He is constantly
tested by conditions in the financial markets. Make a mistake. You get soon penalized by the
market. But make no mistake. The job is not at all about tucking files from one table to the other.
Central bankers are often viewed as a ruthless class of people. They are often misunderstood.
Any central banker, made of a solid central banking timber, is religiously guided by the unwritten
principles  of  having  to  conduct  the  business  of  central  banking  in  ways  that  best  serve  the
interests  of  the  economy  and  the  society  at  large,  regardless  of  the  aspersions,  often  very
caustic, cast at him. The humility of central bankers has seldom been an occasional act; it’s
more of a constant attitude. But it’s cast off and dismissed lightly. The central banker is instead
labelled as arrogant. It’s an optical illusion. Quite often, this perception, as amply discussed in
central  banking  literature,  leads  to  clashes  with  the  elected  representatives  of  the  people.
Whereas the central banker, by the very nature of his responsibilities, takes a long term view of
the  economy,  the  elected  representatives  of  the  people  take  a  short  term  view,  shaped  and
limited  by  the  length  of  their  tenure  of  office.    This  is  quite  understandable  for  they  don’t  get
elected on the basis of their beautiful political philosophies. However, it does not go to say that
central bankers always have a highly polished Cartesian rationalism with an impeccably faultless
idea of reality. Although I have had years of experiential learning in the art of central banking, I, like
a couple of my predecessors, have not been exempt from such clashes. One of the virtues of
independent central banks is that, unlike politicians, they do not have to pay attention to opinion
polls. Perhaps, that’s why elected representatives of the people are not charged with the task of
conducting monetary policy, for monetary policy, if systematically misused, could overreact, and
overreact disastrously.
In the process, I have learned two invaluable lessons as a central banker: first, I resolved quite a
few crises from forex market crises to bank failures. I learned what a responsible Governor must
religiously  refrain  from  doing  failing  which  Government  would  feel  the  compulsion  to  have
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
recourse  to  taxpayers’  wallets  later.  Second,  in  situations  that  demand  the  central  banker’s
independent advice and honest actions, a responsible Governor must never nod to the masters
like the cuckoo in a cuckoo clock. Otherwise, the Governor himself ends up holding the paper
bag  full  of  water.  When  it  starts  leaking  society  inevitably  pays  the  price  for  the  leakage.
Domestic  violence  cannot  be  argued  to  mean  love  story.  Those  are  the  moments  when  the
central  banker’s  integrity  is  tested.  The  central  banker  is,  plot-wise,  not  like  the  Roman
playwrights who had recourse to the dramatic device, deus ex machina, in which one of the gods
was hoisted over the stage and dropped in to resolve an inchoate drama. In financial markets,
particularly in an evolving jurisdiction facing numerous challenges in uncertain times, the central
banker is expected to embody credibility – credibility par excellence.
A memorable 1963 event in the UK, even when the concept of independent central banks was
unknown,  crystallizes  the  point  I  am  making.  That  was  the  year  when  banks  in  London  were
treated to a display of the Bank of England’s political muscle. The Bank’s governor Lord Cromer
had  decisively  forced  Britain’s  new  Prime  Minister  Harold  Wilson  to  throw  away  half  of  his
election  promises  and  slash  government  spending.  This  bold  attempt  of  the  Governor  had
prompted Prime Minister Wilson to shout in one debate, “Who is Prime Minister of this country,
Mr. Governor, you or me?” This question gives a full scope and measure of the real world’s direct
as well as infinitely nuanced challenges that Governors of central banks have to regularly deal
with.
Most of us here will recall the decades of political upheavals in Italy that had brought the country
to the edge of a failed state in the no so distant past. Two very influential and powerful institutions
are said to have saved Italy: the Vatican and the central bank of Italy led by intellectual giants as
honourable Governors.
If you plan for one year, you better plant sugar cane. If you plan for 10 years, you better plant
trees. And  if  you  plan  for  more  than  10  years,  you  better  think  and  do  like  responsible  and
visionary central bankers. I believe this best summarizes the long range vision of policy makers
in central banks.
Unhappily,  I  neither  possess  the  poetry  of  imagination,  nor  the  brilliance  of  metaphors  for
expressing all the ups and downs, the successes and failures and the pleasures and pains of a
long standing central banker. Standing here, I seem to be like a lonesome traveller looking back
at his footprints the tone and tint of which vanish with the passage of time. The footprints have
taught me to be unbending in honest failure, but tenderly in success; not to look for the path of
comfort, but to boldly face the challenges; to stand up firmly in stormy situations but to always
have compassion on those unable to cope with; to have a heart that is indeed clean and a goal
that  is  right  and  high;  to  look  through  into  the  future  but  never  ever  to  ignore  the  past;  to  be
modest  so  that  I  never  lose  sight  of  the  simplicity  of  true  greatness,  true  strength  and  true
wisdom.  Those  are  footprints  that  have  given  me  a  temperamental  predominance  of  courage
over  timidity  that  was  my  childhood  characteristic.  They  have  taught  me  to  have  the  right
relationship  with  money.  They  have  taught  me  to  be  an  honest  central  banker  and,  as  far  as
possible, a gentle central banker.
If  my  contributions  as  a  central  banker  have  ultimately  made  people’s  lives  better,  the  Prime
Ministers of the Republic of Mauritius who made the decision for me to get appointed Governor of
the  Bank  are  the  ones  who  first  deserve  the  congratulations.  This  award,  first  and  foremost,
honours my wife and my two daughters who have stood by me in very testing times. Years ago
my elder daughter then about 12 years old used to tease me in a cryptic style of her own: “Dad,
you are a great leader. But you have a big problem; you have no followers.” I do, however, have
an  amazing  staff  and  a  cast  of  highly  capable  and  engaging  people  at  the  Bank  today.  This
accolade goes to them as well. On their behalf and on behalf of the Board of Directors of the
Bank, and on my own behalf, I once again thank “The Banker” magazine for the award.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you very much.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
