 Central Bank of Barbados 
Tom Adams Financial Centre, Spry Street, Bridgetown 
P.O. Box 1016 
Telephone: (246) 436-6870 : Fax. (246) 436-7836 
E-Mail Address: info@centralbank.org.bb  
Website: www.centralbank.org.bb 
 
 Remarks delivered by 
Mr. Cleviston Haynes, Governor (Ag), Central Bank of Barbados 
at the 
Sagicor Cave Hill School of Business and Management Conference 
Risk Management and Competitive Intelligence. 
on 
Hilton Hotel 
June 26, 2017 
Master of Ceremonies, 
Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Let me begin by congratulating the CHSB for hosting this important conference that seeks to empower 
our  leaders  with  the  tools  to  manage  risk  in  the  dynamic  environment  in  which  we  operate  today. 
Understanding  and  adapting  to  emerging  risks  and  opportunities  is  essential  if  firms  are  to  compete 
successfully  in  an  increasingly  technology  driven  competitive  space  where  barriers  to  entry  are  being 
eroded rapidly. Firms which formerly competed in the domestic market only can now, with a touch of a 
button, compete abroad or conversely face competition from abroad.   
It is in this context that I am honoured, therefore, to present this morning on the theme Perspectives on 
Growth  in  the  Caribbean.  As  a  policymaker,  I  am  acutely  aware  that  the  long  term  success  of  our 
business sector depends in part on how quickly and effectively we are able to create a policy framework 
that facilitates growth, builds confidence, stimulates innovation and encourages new investment. This is 
essential because some of the industries that have served us well in the past may not  be viable in the 
new globalised environment. Our capacity to grow strong competitive firms and develop new industries 
will  therefore  be  critical.  Our  responsiveness  to  emerging  risks,  whether  as  policymakers  or  as 
producers, is therefore crucial. Understanding the challenges which each stakeholder faces is key to the 
long term sustainability of the economy and the development of strong competitive enterprises. 
In my presentation, therefore, I propose to share some insights on the recent growth experience in the 
economies of the CARICOM region. I will use the recent Barbados experience to assist in illustrating the 
need for a sound macroeconomic framework to underpin sustainable growth.  
 1 
Discussions on growth in Caribbean economies are now topical. Such discussions are often prefaced by 
the  recognition  that  these  economies  are  constrained  by  their  small  size  in  terms  of  land  mass  and 
population  and  are  vulnerable  to  economic  shocks  and  natural  catastrophes.  In  addition,  Caribbean 
economies are distinguished by an absence of diversity in the goods produced and a heavy dependence 
on imports and a limited range of export products.  
Regional economies are not homogeneous as evidenced, for example, by the characterisation of some 
jurisdictions as commodity based producers and others as services based or the differences in the land 
mass  of  Guyana  and  Suriname  relative  to  the  rest  of  CARICOM.    However,  economic  size  remains  an 
impediment in much that we do. The most recent example has been the loss of correspondent banking 
relationships  by  some  of  our  countries.  This  may  affect  a  jurisdiction’s  ability  to  send  and  receive 
international  payments,  or  drive  some  payment  flows  into  the  unregulated  sector,  with  potential 
consequences on international trade, growth, financial inclusion, as well as the stability and integrity of 
the financial system.  
On  average  small  economies  have  been  the most  affected  by  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  foreign 
correspondent banks serving banks in these countries as the absence of a sufficient volume of business 
may  deter  correspondent  banks,  given  the  fixed  costs  associated  with  opening  and  maintaining  a 
relationship.  
The  challenge  therefore  is  how  do  we  overcome  these  perceived  constraints  to  generate  sufficient 
economic  growth  that  reduces  unemployment  and  poverty  and  raises  the  level  of  socioeconomic 
development  while  enabling  a  sustained  increase  in  living  standards  across  the  region.  The  Human 
Development  Index  Report  for  2016  suggests  that  CARICOM  economies  have  made  progress  in  this 
regard with only Haiti, the largest economy on a population size basis, being classified as having a low 
level  of human development  while Guyana has a medium level of development. Led by Barbados and 
The Bahamas, all other CARICOM countries were deemed to have high levels of development. 
The  progress  in  human  development  reflects  the  emphasis  which  Caribbean  nations  have  placed  on 
human  development  but  in  some  respects  it  is  remarkable  because  rates  of  economic  growth  in  the 
region  have  witnessed  a  marked  decline  since  the  1960s.  In  a  recent  CDB  Working  Paper  entitled 
“Enhancing Productivity and Growth in the Caribbean” it was noted that “the average annual growth 
rate fell from 6% in the 1960s to less than 1% in recent years.” A 2015 IDB study points out that that for 
the preceding 25 years Caribbean economic growth was 1.7% compared to 3.7% for the world and 4.6% 
for emerging markets.  
The secular shift from robust growth to the current anaemic performance that is well below the global 
average has been attributed to several well-known factors such as the oil price increases in the 1970s, 
the  loss  of  preferential  trading  arrangements,  reduced  access  to  official  development  assistance,  the 
impact of recessions in the region’s main trading partners and natural disasters.  
The  recent  global  financial  crisis  is  but  the  latest  of  these  exogenous  factors  that  has  had  a  profound 
impact on regional economies which are yet to recover sufficiently to achieve pre-crisis growth levels. In 
the early stage of the post-crisis period, growth was driven by the commodity-based producers but, over 
 2 
the  last  three  years,  activity  in  the  service-based  economies  has  exceeded,  if  only  modestly,  that  in 
commodity  producers  as  commodity  prices  have  weakened.  To  put  this  in  perspective,  while  the 
average growth for the region recovered to  1.7% in 2014, regional output declined by 0.7% in 2016 due 
to the weak performance of commodity-based economies.  
Forecasts  for  2017  and  2018  are  for  a  moderate  recovery  as  the  world  economic  outlook  remains 
positive  and  the  regional  economic  outturn  continues  to  be  driven  by  international  economic 
developments. However, the regional underperformance suggests that that economic growth cannot be 
linked solely to activity in our main trade partners. Rather it reflects the impact of the structural factors 
identified earlier as well as the slow adaptation to the changing global environment. Of particular note is 
that the region as a whole ranks in the bottom half of most of the World Bank’s Ease of Doing business 
indicators.  This  is  a  source  of  concern  as  foreign  investment  is  a  vital  element  of  regional  growth 
strategies.  
Notwithstanding the exogenous shocks which these economies face, it is increasingly clear that a sound 
macroeconomic  framework  is  a  prerequisite  for  sustainable  growth.  At  the  same  time,  structural 
weaknesses often undermine resilience and compromise the buffers necessary to cope with economic 
shocks. 
Several  regional  economies  face  chronic  external  current  account  imbalances  which  are  funded  by  a 
combination  of  foreign  direct  investment,  public  sector  borrowing  and  the  depletion  of  international 
reserves. Persistent fiscal deficits resulting from deliberate fiscal strategies or the inadvertent outcomes 
resulting  from  economic  or  natural  shocks  have  led  to  the  significant  build-up  of  sovereign  debt  in 
several jurisdictions.  
These trends tend to place pressure on foreign exchange holdings in fixed rate countries and exchange 
rates in floating rate economies and have forced several regional governments to embark on adjustment 
programmes designed to address these imbalances of large deficits and high debt ratios.  Fiscal space to 
use countercyclical policies have been eroded as high interest costs have resulted in the need for large 
primary surpluses in some countries in order to restore balance to the public finances. 
It is in this context that I refer to the Barbadian experience. The Barbadian economy has encountered 
multiple policy challenges in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, as policy makers in a low growth 
environment  have  sought  to  preserve  exchange  rate  stability  through  the  maintenance  of  adequate 
foreign  exchange  buffers,  to  alter  the  path  of  public  sector  debt  dynamics  and  to  create  a 
macroeconomic  environment  for  long-term  sustainable  growth.  The  macroeconomic  strategy  has 
focused on demand management so as to reduce outward foreign exchange flows while alleviating the 
financing pressures that have been placed on government by large fiscal imbalances. This strategy has 
been buttressed by measures to enhance the economy’s long term competitive position through fiscal 
incentives for the foreign exchange earning and saving sectors. 
The Barbadian economy registered relatively buoyant economic activity between 2004 and 2008 when 
substantial  foreign  direct  investment  flows  had  a  favourable  impact  on  the  construction  sector. 
However, since the crisis, economic output has been depressed, induced initially by the dampening of 
 3 
global economic activity with its adverse spill-over effects on the key tourism and international business 
services sectors as well as on private sector investment inflows.  
In response, policy makers avoided any significant counter cyclical thrust, given the size and openness of 
the economy and its vulnerability to foreign exchange leakages that have the ability to undermine the 
credibility of the exchange rate peg. 
A sharp downturn in 2009 when declining activity in the tourism and construction sectors spread to the 
rest of the economy has been followed by tepid growth. The protracted weakness has been influenced 
by the implementation of fiscal adjustment measures targeted at reducing imbalances in the accounts of 
central  government  and  public  enterprises,  slowing  the  surge  in  public  sector  indebtedness  and 
containing the outflow of international reserves.   
Improved tourist arrivals since 2015 have raised hopes of a more vibrant recovery but the slow recovery 
in foreign investment flows associated with planned infrastructural projects continued to contain capital 
formation  which  remained  below  the  level  needed  for  sustained  growth.  For  example,  the  average 
capital formation as a share of GDP was only 13.0% for 2010-2015 compared to 18.2% in 2008 when the 
financial crisis started. 
As  indicated,  Government’s  policy  goals  were  targeted  towards  fiscal  consolidation.  Initial  efforts  to 
contain the central government deficit before 2013 were influenced by the favourable size of the foreign 
reserves buffer and on-going access to external capital markets. However, the sharp deterioration in the 
public finances in FY 2013-14 led Government to embark on a 19 month fiscal adjustment programme in 
second  half  of  2013.  Despite  some  progress,  Government  recently  embarked  on  a  more  aggressive 
adjustment  effort,  including  addressing  interest costs  on  selected  debt on  a voluntary  basis,  to  reflect 
current borrowing constraints.  
The impact of the fiscal developments was manifold. First, fiscal adjustment attempted to compensate 
for  the  substantial  loss  in  taxes  from  foreign  sources  by  substituting  with  domestic  taxes.  As  a  result, 
sequential  reforms  were  made  to  the  personal  income  tax  and  property  taxes,  new  taxes  were 
introduced to stabilise revenue and the value added tax was reformed and the rate increased. 
Secondly,  potential  growth  enhancing  capital  expenditure  absorbed  much  of  the  initial  non-interest 
expenditure adjustment. However, state enterprises were able to cushion the impact on growth through 
their capital works programmes. However, since some of these enterprises lack the financial capacity to 
service the ensuing debt, central government is expected to absorb the costs over the medium term. 
Thirdly,  the  persistence  of  large  deficits  and  rising  debt  led  to  deterioration  in  the  sovereign  credit 
rating,  with  adverse  effects  on  access  to  capital  markets  at  reasonable  costs.  Increased  reliance  on 
domestic financing while servicing debt has added to the depletion of reserves. 
Fourth, government encountered cash flow difficulties that encumbered its ability to make payments on 
a timely basis, including to some of its public enterprises.  
 4 
Fifth, policy makers were forced to review how longstanding entitlement programmes, particularly for 
education  and  health,  should  be  financed  in  an  environment  in  which  financial  resources  were 
insufficient to meet demand.  
Sixth,  policy  makers  have  had  to  review  the  size  of  the  public  sector,  its  scope  of  activities  and  its 
efficiency in delivering its services. Jobs were cut from the public sector roll in 2013 and steps taken to 
identify  agencies  which  could  be  merged  to  avoid  potential  duplication  of  services.  This  review  is  on-
going.  In  addition,  some  state  assets  have  been  identified  for  divestment,  creating  resources  to  ease 
short term financing flows.  
Some of the challenges being experienced in Barbados are being replicated across the region. Deficits, 
debt and access to low cost finance are interrelated. It is important for us to recognise that every dollar 
of  the  fiscal  deficit  has  to  be  financed  or  arrears  will  accumulate.  The  sale  of  state  assets,  when 
judiciously  applied,  can  enhance  cash  flow  by  providing  one-time  revenue.  But  in  general,  only 
productive assets can be quickly sold for what there are worth, while the sale of such assets may have, 
inter  alia,  competition,  relative  prices,  income  distribution  and  foreign  exchange  effects.  Moreover, 
divestment does not substitute for the need for fiscal adjustment. 
Against  this  backdrop,  what  therefore  can  we  conclude  about  the  future  growth  prospects  for  the 
region?  We  need  to  address  our  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Historically,  regional  governments  have 
used deficit financing to stimulate economic activity.  However, the large debt burdens which many face 
and which have led investors to shift away from providing financing could impact this strategy. This does 
not mean that our economies cannot  grow,  but we may need to rely more on private sector flows to 
drive  economic  activity,  at  least  in  the  short  term.  We  need  more  investment  spending  to  drive  our 
productive capacities and raise the ratio of capital spending as a proportion of GDP. 
Current budgetary constraints raise the question of how will governments allocate their resources in the 
future. Social expenditures? Capacity building infrastructure?  
However,  while  macroeconomic  stability  is  necessary  it  is  unlikely  by  itself  to  be  sufficient  to  propel 
regional  economies  forward.  We  will  need  to  inter  alia  raise  productivity  levels  through  process 
improvements and innovation. We need to take advantage of ICT technology and, as old sectors fade, 
we  have  to  encourage  new  sectors  such  as  alternative  energy,  design  services,  cultural  industries, 
animation and software development, for these are areas in which size need not be an impediment. 
Our future can be bright but there will be some bumps along the way. Our ability to recognise and act 
on  these  challenges  in  as  expeditious  a  manner  as  possible  will  allow  us  to  achieve  our  long  term 
objectives. 
 5 
