Stanley Fischer: The low level of global real interest rates
Speech  by  Mr  Stanley  Fischer,  Vice  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System, at the Conference to Celebrate Arminio Fraga's 60 Years, Rio de Janeiro, 31 July 2017.
 I  am  grateful  to  Joseph  W.  Gruber  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  for  his  assistance.  Views
expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
I  am  very  happy  to  be  participating  in  this  conference  celebrating Arminio.  My  tenure  at  the
International Monetary Fund overlapped with the first two and a half years of Arminio’s time as
president  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil,  and  in  our  capacities  at  the  time,  we  had  frequent
opportunities  to  interact  and  converse.  Of  course,  I  watched  with  admiration  the  remarkable
management of the economy by the Malan-Fraga team in the run-up to the election that brought
Lula to power. In particular, Arminio and his Central Bank team’s management of the exchange
rate—which at one point reached 3.95 reais per dollar—was masterly and put in place a sound
foundation for that essential part of Brazil’s economic machinery in the years that followed.
Subsequently, as I was on the brink of transitioning to the world of central banking early in 2005—
that is, prior to taking up my position as governor of the Bank of Israel—Arminio was able to turn
the tables and offered me some hard-edged advice on how to be a central banker. I have kept
that advice close since then. It comes in the form of six commandments on a small laminated
piece of paper. Needless to say, it very much reflects his values and his behavior. Let me quote
just three of his rules: “Number 2. Do [the job] in a way that shows you care, but in a way that
shows you will serenely pursue your goals"—excellent advice, which is easier said than done;
“Number 5. Beware of a tendency to be overly conservative once you start wearing the central
bank hat"; and “Number 6. Remember, most people lose half their IQ when they take a job such
as this one."
Now I will turn to the main topic of my discussion, the low level of global real interest rates, an
important and distinguishing feature of the current global economic environment. In the United
States, the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds is near all-time lows, with the same being true in the
euro area, the United Kingdom, and Japan (figure 1). Yields have also declined in many emerging
markets, with interest rates falling almost 400 basis points in Korea since the financial crisis and
by a similar amount in Israel.
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  shown  in  figure  2,  the  decline  has  been  less  apparent  in  Brazil  and  South Africa,  though
interest rates in both countries remain well below previous peaks.
In this talk, I will address two questions: Why are interest rates so low? And why has the decline
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
in interest rates been so widespread?
Global real interest rates have declined
Lower inflation explains a portion of the decline in nominal interest rates. Longer-term interest
rates reflect market participants’ expectations of future inflation as well as the expected path of
real,  or  inflation-adjusted,  interest  rates. And  while  lower  realized  inflation  and  credible  central
back  inflation  targets  have  likely  stabilized  expected  inflation  at  relatively  low  levels  compared
with much of the 20th century, inflation-adjusted yields have also notably decreased.
The decline in interest rates also does not appear to be primarily an outcome of the economic
cycle. Longer-term interest rates in the United States have remained low even as the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) has increased the short-term federal funds rate by 100 basis
points  and  as  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  below  the  median  of  FOMC  participants’
assessments of its longer-run normal level.
Rather, it appears as though much of the decline has occurred in the equilibrium level of the real
interest rate—also known as the natural rate of interest or, alternatively, r*. Knut Wicksell, in his
1898 treatise Interest and Prices, wrote, “There is a certain level of the average rate of interest
which  is  such  that  the  general  level  of  prices  has  no  tendency  to  move  either  upwards  or
downwards."  In recent years, the coincidence of low inflation and low interest rates suggests
that the natural rate of interest is likely very low today.
1
Wicksell was clearly referring to the natural rate as the real interest rate when the economy is at
full  employment.  The  widely  cited  methodology  of  my  Federal  Reserve  colleagues  Thomas
Laubach and John Williams, attempts to gauge the natural rate in the longer run after various
shorter-term influences, including the business cycle, have played out. In a recent update of their
analysis,  they  find  that  the  natural  rate  of  interest  has  declined  about  150  basis  points  in  the
United  States  since  the  financial  crisis  and  is  currently  about  50  basis  points.  We  must
remember, however, that r* is a function and not a constant, and its estimation is subject to a
2
number of assumptions, the modification of which can lead to a wide range of estimates.
In an extension of this analysis, shown in figure 3, Laubach, Williams, and Kathryn Holston, also
a Federal Reserve colleague, show that the decline in the natural rate of interest is a common
feature across a number of foreign economies.  The fall in equilibrium interest rates was most
pronounced at the time of the financial crisis, but rates have shown little tendency to increase
during the long recovery from the crisis.
3
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
How should we think about the decline in equilibrium interest rates? An investment and
savings framework
There are many factors that could be holding down interest rates, some of which could fade over
time,  including  the  effects  of  quantitative  easing  in  the  United  States  and  abroad  and  a
heightened  demand  for  safe  assets  affecting  yields  on  advanced-economy  government
securities.  I  will  focus  on  some  of  the  more  enduring  factors  that  could  potentially  lower  the
equilibrium interest for some time.
In attempting to explain why real interest rates have fallen, a useful starting point is to think of the
natural  interest  rate  as  the  price  that  equilibrates  the  economy’s  supply  of  saving  with  the
demand  for  investment  in  the  long  run,  when  the  economy  is  at  full  employment.  With  this
framework in mind, low interest rates reflect factors that increase saving, depress investment
demand, or both.
Focusing  initially  on  the  United  States,  I  will  look  at  three  interrelated  factors  that  are  likely
contributing  to  low  interest  rates:  slower  trend  economic  growth,  an  aging  population  and
demographic  developments,  and  relatively  weak  investment.  I  will  then  discuss  global
developments and spillovers between countries.
But first I would like to interject a quick word on why we as policymakers might be concerned
about low interest rates. I highlight three main worries. First, as John Maynard Keynes discussed
in  the  concluding  chapters  of The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, a low
equilibrium interest rate increases the risks of falling into a liquidity trap, a situation where the
nominal interest rate is stuck, by an effective lower bound, above the rate necessary to bring the
economy back to potential.  Relatedly, but more broadly, low equilibrium interest rates are a key
pillar of the secular stagnation hypothesis, which Larry Summers has carried forward during the
past  few  years.   Second,  a  low  natural  rate  could  potentially  hurt  financial  stability  if  it  leads
investors  to  reach  for  yield  or  hurts  financial  firms’  profitability. And,  third—and  perhaps  most
troubling—a low equilibrium rate sends a powerful signal that the growth potential of the economy
4
5
6
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
may be limited.
Slow trend growth
One  factor  contributing  to  low  equilibrium  interest  rates  in  the  United  States  has  been  a
slowdown  in  the  pace  of  potential,  or  trend,  growth. According  to  the  Congressional  Budget
Office  (CBO),  real  potential  growth  in  the  United  States  is  currently  around  1.5  percent,
compared  with  a  pace  about  double  that,  on  average,  in  the  two  decades  leading  up  to  the
financial  crisis.  A  prime  culprit  in  the  growth  slowdown  has  been  the  slow  rate  of  labor
productivity growth, which has increased only 1/2 percent, on average, over the past five years,
compared with a 2 percent growth rate over the period from 1976 to 2005.  A declining rate of
labor force growth has also worked to push down trend growth. The CBO is projecting that the
potential labor force in the United States will grow at about 1/2 percent per year over the next
decade, less than half the pace observed, on average, in the two decades before the financial
crisis.
7
Slower growth can both boost saving and depress investment. As households revise down their
expectations for future income growth, they become less likely to borrow and more likely to save.
Likewise, slower growth diminishes the number of business opportunities that can be profitably
undertaken, weighing on investment demand.
Demographics
The aging of the population can work to lower the equilibrium interest rate beyond its effect on the
size of the labor force and trend growth. As households near retirement, they tend to save more,
anticipating having to run down their savings after they leave the labor force. Federal Reserve
economists, in one study, estimate that higher saving by near-retirement households could be
pushing down the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate relative to its level in the 1980s by as
8
much as 75 basis points.
Investment
Another  factor  weighing  on  equilibrium  real  interest  rates  has  been  the  recent  weakness  of
investment.  What  explains  the  tepid  response  of  capital  spending  to  historically  low  interest
rates? As mentioned earlier, low productivity growth has certainly been a contributing factor, as
firms see fewer profitable investment opportunities. But elevated uncertainty, both political and
economic, has likely also played a role. For one, uncertainty about the outlook for government
policy in health care, regulation, taxes, and trade can cause firms to delay projects until the policy
environment clarifies.
Firms  also  seem  quite  uncertain  about  the  disruptive  capacity  of  new  technologies.
Technological  developments  appear  to  be  rapidly  reshaping  entire  industries in  retail,
transportation, and communications. Elevated uncertainty about the continued viability of long-
standing business models could be weighing on investment decisions. Relatedly, it is possible
that  as  the  economy  evolves  in  response  to  new  technologies,  production  is  becoming  less
9
capital intensive than it was in earlier decades.
Another possible explanation for the weakness of investment in the United States has been a
decrease in competition within industries, as evidenced by decreasing firm entry and exit rates
as well as increased industry concentration.
 Less competition allows firms to maintain high
profits while lowering the pressure on them to increase production to maintain market share.
10
In  an  earlier  discussion,  I  attempted  to  quantify  the  effect  that  these  factors—slow  growth,
demographics, and investment—might be having on the long-run equilibrium rate in the United
States.
 According  to  simulations  from  the  Board’s  FRB/US  model,  the  slowdown  in  growth
11
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
appears  likely  to  be  the  primary  factor  depressing  the  long-run  equilibrium  rate,  although  the
contributions from demographics and weak investment demand were also sizable.
Global links: why has the decline in interest rates been so widespread? 
Up  until  now,  I  have  looked  primarily  at  factors  within  the  United  States.  However,  as  I  have
pointed out earlier, the decline in interest rates is a global phenomenon. Why has the decline in
interest rates been so widespread?
One  important  reason  is  that  many  of  the  same  factors  that  have  been  driving  down  the
equilibrium interest rate in the United States have operated with equal or even greater force in
many  foreign  economies.  The  slowdown  in  labor  productivity  growth  has  been  widespread
across many countries. Likewise, the advanced economies and some emerging markets have
experienced  demographic  shifts  that  are  in  some  cases  much  more  pronounced  than  in  the
United States, with the working-age population in some countries even declining over the past
decade.
Another  explanation  is  that  we  live  in  an  integrated  global  economy  where  economic
developments in one country spill over into other countries via trade and capital flows as well as
prices, including interest rates and exchange rates.
 In the most general sense, these spillovers
are  captured  in  the  pattern  of  current  balances,  shown  in  figure  4.  If  we  abstract  from  a
somewhat sizable statistical discrepancy, the sum of global current accounts should be equal to
zero,  as,  in  the  aggregate,  one  country’s  deficit  must  be  matched  by  a  surplus  in  some
configuration of other countries—but it is not always apparent who is spilling over onto whom.
12
Current account balances and global spillovers
Prior to the financial crisis, it was widely speculated that foreign developments were depressing
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
U.S. interest rates. Former Chairman Bernanke characterized the foreign forces acting on U.S.
interest rates as the “global saving glut,” with particular reference to emerging market economies
that were running persistent current account surpluses, sometimes as a result of specific policy
decisions regarding exchange rates, reserve accumulation, and fiscal policy.
 The global saving
glut was also a factor in the “Greenspan conundrum,” or the observation that a series of Federal
Reserve rate hikes over the period from 2004 to 2006 seemed to have little effect on longer-term
interest rates in the United States. As shown in figure 5, the deterioration of the U.S. deficit in the
early  2000s  was  matched  by  growing  surpluses  in  the  emerging  markets,  particularly  in
emerging Asia and China as well as OPEC. The explosive growth of the U.S. current account
deficit  from  2001  to  2006,  coincident  with  falling  interest  rates  both  in  the  United  States  and
globally, supports the notion that higher foreign saving relative to foreign investment was likely
holding down U.S. interest rates at the time.
13
What can the distribution of global current accounts tell us about international spillovers in the
post-crisis era? As shown in figure 6, the most notable development has been the almost exact
reversal  of  the  expansion  of  the  U.S.  current  account  deficit  observed  during  the  time  of  the
global saving glut. Has the global saving glut of the mid-2000s faded away? Falling interest rates
over  the  period  that  the  U.S.  deficit  narrowed  suggest  not.
  If  a  shrinking  supply  of  foreign
saving, the reversal of the global saving glut, was behind the narrowing of the U.S. deficit, then
the tendency would have been for equilibrium real interest rates to have increased.
  Rather,
falling equilibrium rates suggest that falling U.S. demand for foreign savings has precipitated the
narrowing  of  the  U.S.  current  account  deficit.  U.S.  demand  likely  decreased  for  the  reasons
discussed earlier, including slowing growth, demographics, and weak investment demand.
14
15
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Does the marked narrowing of the U.S. current account deficit post-crisis suggest that the United
States has been the primary source of downward pressure on global interest rates over the past
decade? Certainly, if the United States had maintained its previous deficit, interest rates would
likely be higher around the world. However, the financial crisis revealed that the U.S. capacity to
absorb global savings at the pace observed prior to the crisis was unsustainable.
 Rather, an
alternative explanation would be that the sharp decline in global interest rates post-crisis reflects
factors that were likely well in train before the financial crisis. The downward trend in interest
rates would have been more pronounced earlier in the decade had not elevated, and ultimately
unsustainable, borrowing in the United States slowed the decline in interest rates in the years
immediately  preceding  the  crisis.  This  narrative  is  consistent  with  empirical  evidence  that
suggests  that  the  slowdowns  in  global  productivity  growth  and  labor  force  growth,  both  key
factors  in  the  slowing  pace  of  global  growth  and  the  downward  pressure  on  interest  rates,
predate the global financial crisis.
16
17
It is notable in figure 6 that the euro area has also seen a sizable increase in its current account
position post-crisis, suggesting that developments in Europe have also played a role in pushing
down  interest  rates.  The  increase  in  the  euro-area  current  account  in  part  reflects  sharp
reversals in the current account deficits of Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Ireland—all countries
that had witnessed large increases in their deficits during the global saving glut period prior to the
crisis,  in  a  pattern  similar  to  that  experienced  by  the  United  States.  However,  the  euro-area
increase also reflects increased surpluses in Germany and the Netherlands, countries that were
already in considerable surplus during the pre-crisis period.
What, if anything, can be done about low interest rates?
Given the potential risks around low interest rates I discussed earlier, including the impact on the
effectiveness of monetary policy and financial stability concerns, what should policymakers do to
address the problem?
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Monetary policy has a role to play. Transparent and sound monetary policy can boost confidence
in the stability of the growth outlook, an outcome that can in turn alleviate precautionary demand
for savings and encourage investment, pushing up the equilibrium interest rate.
18
However,  as  I  have  said  before—and  Ben  Bernanke  before  me—"Monetary  policy  is  not  a
panacea."
  Also,  to  repeat  myself,  policies  to  boost  productivity  growth  and  the  longer-run
potential of the economy are more likely to be found in effective fiscal and regulatory measures
than in central bank actions. This statement is true not only in the United States, but also around
the globe. But it is not to say that monetary policy is irrelevant to the growth rate of the economy.
References
Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” speech
delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, April 14.
————  (2012).  “U.S.  Monetary  Policy  and  International  Implications,”  speech  delivered  at
“Challenges  of 
the  Global  Financial  System:  Risks  and  Governance  under  Evolving
Globalization,”  a  High-Level  Seminar  sponsored  by  the  Bank  of  Japan-International  Monetary
Fund, Tokyo, October 14.
————  (2015).  “Why  Are  Interest  Rates  So  Low,  Part  3:  The  Global  Savings  Glut, " Ben
Bernanke’s Blog, April 1.
Clarida, Richard H. (2017). “The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for
Exchange  Rates,  Monetary  Policy,  and  Policy  Coordination,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series
23562. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.
Döttling, Robin, Germán Gutiérrez, and Thomas Philippon (2017). “Is There an Investment Gap in
Advanced Economies? If So, Why? (PDF)” paper presented at the Fourth Annual ECB Forum on
Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 27.
Fernald, John G. (2015). “Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great
Recession,” in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2014, vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 1-51.
Fernald,  John  G.,  Robert  E.  Hall,  James  H.  Stock,  and  Mark  W.  Watson  (2017).  “The
Disappointing Recovery of Output after 2009,” NBER Working Paper Series 23543. Cambridge,
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.
Fischer,  Stanley  (2016a).  “Low  Interest  Rates,”  speech  delivered  at  the  40th  Annual  Central
Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, October 5.
———— (2016b). “Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Causes and Implications,” speech delivered
at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17.
Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). “Understanding the
New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF),”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series
2016–080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.
Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon (2017). “Declining Competition and Investment in the
U.S.,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  23583.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of  Economic
Research, July.
Hilsenrath,  Jon,  and  Bob  Davis  (2016).  “Tech  Boom  Creates  Too  Few  Jobs,"  Wall  Street
Journal, October 13.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). “Measuring the Natural
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Rate  of  Interest:  International  Trends  and  Determinants,”  in  Richard  Clarida  and  Lucrezia
Reichlin, 
2016.
Amsterdam: Journal of International Economics (Elsevier).
International  Seminar 
on  Macroeconomics 
organizers, NBER 
Irwin, Neil (2017). “Rethinking Low Productivity," New York Times, July 26.
Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). “The Expected Real Interest Rate in the
Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound,” FEDS Notes. Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.
Keynes,  John  Maynard 
Money. London: Macmillan.
(1936). The  General  Theory  of  Employment, 
Interest  and
Laubach,  Thomas,  and  John  C.  Williams  (2003).  “Measuring 
Interest," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063–70.
the  Natural  Rate  of
Lewis, Kurt F., and Francisco Vazquez-Grande (2017). “ Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest:
Alternative  Specifications  (PDF),”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2017–059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June.
Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and
the Zero Lower Bound," Business Economics, vol. 49 (April), pp. 65–73.
————  (2015).  “Demand  Side  Secular  Stagnation," American  Economic  Review,  vol.  105
(May), pp. 60–65.
———— (2016). “The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It," Foreign
Affairs, vol. 95 (March-April), pp. 2-9.
Wicksell, Knut (1936). Interest and Prices (Geldzins und Güterpreise): A Study of the Causes
Regulating the Value of Money, trans. R.F. Kahn. London: Macmillan.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Wicksell’s Interest and Prices, published in German in 1898 as Geldzins und Güterpreise by Gustav Fischer
(Jena), was first published in English in 1936—see Wicksell (1936).
See Laubach and Williams (2003). See also Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016) and Johannsen
and Mertens (2016). It is important to point out that r* is not an observable variable and that estimates generally
reflect assumptions about how the economy works and should be modeled. As such, different methodologies
or underlying economic models can come up with a wide range of estimates of r*. Lewis and Vazquez-Grande
(2017)  examine  parameter  uncertainty  and  alternative  specifications  in  the  estimation  of  the  natural  rate  of
interest. Under some specifications, they find an estimated r* at the end of 2016 of close to 2 percent, far higher
than the about 0.5 percent reported by the methodology of Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming).
See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming).
In chapter 23, p. 353, Keynes includes an interesting discussion of the “strange, unduly neglected prophet Silvio
Gesell (1862–1930), whose work contains flashes of deep insight and who only just failed to reach down to the
essence of the matter.” He adds that Gesell was a successful German merchant in Buenos Aires. See Keynes
(1936).
See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016).
See Fischer (2016a) for a fuller discussion of the risks associated with a low equilibrium interest rate.
See Irwin (2017) for an examination of an alternative pattern of causality, where slow growth—and, in particular,
weak wage growth—has led to low productivity growth rather than vice versa. I should also remind the reader of
Herbert Stein’s observation that the difference between a growth rate of 1 percent and a growth rate of 2 percent
is 100 percent.
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12, p. 45.
See Hilsenrath and Davis (2016).
See Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) and Döttling, Gutiérrez, and Philippon (2017).
See Fischer (2016b).
See Clarida (2017) for a model-based discussion of global factors and neutral interest rates.
See Bernanke (2005).
While it is unsurprising that interest rates fell sharply during the recession that followed the financial crisis, it is
less apparent that equilibrium rates should have fallen so sharply or remain so low almost a decade later
following the cyclical recovery in the United States and many other countries.
See Bernanke (2015) for a discussion of the persistence of the global saving glut.
This is not to suggest that the global saving glut was the only factor leading to the financial crisis. Rather,
excessive risk-taking on the part of U.S. households and financial firms, along with structural defects in the
structure of regulation and failures in supervision on the part of government regulators, also played a role.
See Fernald (2015) and Fernald and others (2017).
See Bernanke (2012). Of course, there are no panaceas—except, I have been told by experts, aspirin, and
perhaps also statins.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
