Janet Yellen: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress
Testimony  by  Ms  Janet  L  Yellen,  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington
DC, 14 February 2017.
 Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased
to  present  the  Federal  Reserve’s  semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. In my
remarks today I will briefly discuss the current economic situation and outlook before turning to
monetary policy.
Current economic situation and outlook
Since  my  appearance  before  this  Committee  last  June,  the  economy  has  continued  to  make
progress toward our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. In the
labor  market,  job  gains  averaged  190,000  per  month  over  the  second  half  of  2016,  and  the
number of jobs rose an additional 227,000 in January. Those gains bring the total increase in
employment  since  its  trough  in  early  2010  to  nearly  16  million.  In  addition,  the  unemployment
rate, which stood at 4.8 percent in January, is more than 5 percentage points lower than where it
stood  at  its  peak  in  2010  and  is  now  in  line  with  the  median  of  the  Federal  Open  Market
Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. A broader measure of
labor underutilization, which includes those marginally attached to the labor force and people who
are working part time but would like a full-time job, has also continued to improve over the past
year. In addition, the pace of wage growth has picked up relative to its pace of a few years ago, a
further indication that the job market is tightening. Importantly, improvements in the labor market
in  recent  years  have  been  widespread,  with  large  declines  in  the  unemployment  rates  for  all
major  demographic  groups,  including  African  Americans  and  Hispanics.  Even  so,  it  is
discouraging that jobless rates for those minorities remain significantly higher than the rate for
the nation overall.
Ongoing gains in the labor market have been accompanied by a further moderate expansion in
economic activity. U.S. real gross domestic product is estimated to have risen 1.9 percent last
year,  the  same  as  in  2015.  Consumer  spending  has  continued  to  rise  at  a  healthy  pace,
supported by steady income gains, increases in the value of households’ financial assets and
homes,  favorable  levels  of  consumer  sentiment,  and  low  interest  rates.  Last  year’s  sales  of
automobiles  and  light  trucks  were  the  highest  annual  total  on  record.  In  contrast,  business
investment was relatively soft for much of last year, though it posted some larger gains toward
the end of the year in part reflecting an apparent end to the sharp declines in spending on drilling
and mining structures; moreover, business sentiment has noticeably improved in the past few
months.  In  addition,  weak  foreign  growth  and  the  appreciation  of  the  dollar  over  the  past  two
years have restrained manufacturing output. Meanwhile, housing construction has continued to
trend up at only a modest pace in recent quarters. And, while the lean stock of homes for sale
and  ongoing  labor  market  gains  should  provide  some  support  to  housing  construction  going
forward, the recent increases in mortgage rates may impart some restraint.
Inflation moved up over the past year, mainly because of the diminishing effects of the earlier
declines in energy prices and import prices. Total consumer prices as measured by the personal
consumption expenditures (PCE) index rose 1.6 percent in the 12 months ending in December,
still below the FOMC’s 2 percent objective but up 1 percentage point from its pace in 2015. Core
PCE  inflation,  which  excludes  the  volatile  energy  and  food  prices,  moved  up  to  about  1-3/4
percent.
My  colleagues  on  the  FOMC  and  I  expect  the  economy  to  continue  to  expand  at  a  moderate
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
pace,  with  the  job  market  strengthening  somewhat  further  and  inflation  gradually  rising  to  2
percent. This judgment reflects our view that U.S. monetary policy remains accommodative, and
that the pace of global economic activity should pick up over time, supported by accommodative
monetary  policies  abroad.  Of  course,  our  inflation  outlook  also  depends  importantly  on  our
assessment  that  longer-run  inflation  expectations  will  remain  reasonably  well  anchored.  It  is
reassuring that while market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low, they have
risen from the very low levels they reached during the latter part of 2015 and first half of 2016.
Meanwhile, most survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations have changed little, on
balance, in recent months.
As  always,  considerable  uncertainty  attends  the  economic  outlook.  Among  the  sources  of
uncertainty are possible changes in U.S. fiscal and other policies, the future path of productivity
growth, and developments abroad.
Monetary policy
Turning to monetary policy, the FOMC is committed to promoting maximum employment and
price stability, as mandated by the Congress. Against the backdrop of headwinds weighing on
the  economy  over  the  past  year,  including  financial  market  stresses  that  emanated  from
developments  abroad,  the  Committee  maintained  an  unchanged  target  range  for  the  federal
funds  rate  for  most  of  the  year  in  order  to  support  improvement  in  the  labor  market  and  an
increase in inflation toward 2 percent. At its December meeting, the Committee raised the target
range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, to 1/2 to 3/4 percent. In doing so, the
Committee recognized the considerable progress the economy had made toward the FOMC’s
dual  objectives.  The  Committee  judged  that  even  after  this  increase  in  the  federal  funds  rate
target, monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting some further strengthening
in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation.
At its meeting that concluded early this month, the Committee left the target range for the federal
funds  rate  unchanged  but  reiterated  that  it  expects  the  evolution  of  the  economy  to  warrant
further gradual increases in the federal funds rate to achieve and maintain its employment and
inflation objectives. As I noted on previous occasions, waiting too long to remove accommodation
would be unwise, potentially requiring the FOMC to eventually raise rates rapidly, which could risk
disrupting financial markets and pushing the economy into recession. Incoming data suggest that
labor market conditions continue to strengthen and inflation is moving up to 2 percent, consistent
with  the  Committee’s  expectations.  At  our  upcoming  meetings,  the  Committee  will  evaluate
whether  employment  and  inflation  are  continuing  to  evolve  in  line  with  these  expectations,  in
which case a further adjustment of the federal funds rate would likely be appropriate.
The Committee’s view that gradual increases in the federal funds rate will likely be appropriate
reflects the expectation that the neutral federal funds rate—that is, the interest rate that is neither
expansionary nor contractionary and that keeps the economy operating on an even keel—will rise
somewhat over time. Current estimates of the neutral rate are well below pre-crisis levels—a
phenomenon that may reflect slow productivity growth, subdued economic growth abroad, strong
demand  for  safe  longer-term  assets,  and  other  factors.  The  Committee  anticipates  that  the
depressing effect of these factors will diminish somewhat over time, raising the neutral funds
rate, albeit to levels that are still low by historical standards.
That  said,  the  economic  outlook  is  uncertain,  and  monetary  policy  is  not  on  a  preset  course.
FOMC participants will adjust their assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate
in response to changes to the economic outlook and associated risks as informed by incoming
data.  Also,  changes  in  fiscal  policy  or  other  economic  policies  could  potentially  affect  the
economic outlook. Of course, it is too early to know what policy changes will be put in place or
how  their  economic  effects  will  unfold.  While  it  is  not  my  intention  to  opine  on  specific  tax  or
spending  proposals,  I  would  point  to  the  importance  of  improving  the  pace  of  longer-run
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic  growth  and  raising  American  living  standards  with  policies  aimed  at  improving
productivity. I would also hope that fiscal policy changes will be consistent with putting U.S. fiscal
accounts on a sustainable trajectory. In any event, it is important to remember that fiscal policy is
only one of the many factors that can influence the economic outlook and the appropriate course
of  monetary  policy.  Overall,  the  FOMC’s  monetary  policy  decisions  will  be  directed  to  the
attainment  of  its  congressionally  mandated  objectives  of  maximum  employment  and  price
stability.
Finally, the Committee has continued its policy of reinvesting proceeds from maturing Treasury
securities  and  principal  payments  from  agency  debt  and  mortgage-backed  securities.  This
policy,  by  keeping  the  Committee’s  holdings  of  longer-term  securities  at  sizable  levels,  has
helped maintain accommodative financial conditions.
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
