Elvira  Nabiullina:  Review  of  Russia's  economic  and  financial
developments in 2016
Speech by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the plenary session of the
State Duma of the Russian Federation, Moscow, 9 June 2017.
Dear Vyacheslav Volodin, and deputies of the State Duma!
 The Central Bank is guided in its actions by strategic objectives. I want to note that across the
country, every employee of the Bank of Russia knows what these are. They are the basis on
which key performance indicators for employees are formulated.
These objectives are:
price stability;
financial market sustainability;
availability of financial products and services for households and businesses;
development of the national payment system;
development of technologies and support of innovations in the financial market.
These  objectives  follow  directly  from  the  functions  of  the  Central  Bank,  as  defined  by  the
Constitution and by the law. Yesterday, I took another look at the speech I gave to the Duma four
years  ago.  Yes,  of  course,  life  has  made  adjustments.  No  one  back  in  2013  expected  such
negative  external  factors,  the  sanctions,  and  the  drop  in  oil  prices.  So  the  task  of  ensuring
financial stability has come to the forefront of our activities. But in dealing with this problem, we
have tried not to lose sight of strategically important activities that we assigned ourselves four
years ago, and we must continue to work towards the completion of these.
As regards monetary policy, the Bank of Russia set itself the task of reducing inflation from the
level at that time of 7% to 3-4%. But, as you will see, we also noted that the rate of decline must
be dictated by the economic situation. Therefore, due to external shocks, achieving this target
took longer than expected. However we are already very close to the target level.
The second objective in terms of monetary policy which we set ourselves four years ago was to
increase  the  flexibility  of  the  exchange  rate.  We  have  moved  to  a  floating  exchange  rate  and
consider  this  to  have  been  the  right  decision,  as  the  negative  experiences  of  other  exporting
countries that did not switch to a floating exchange rate prove to us that this needed to be done.
Within  the  banking  sector,  we  set  ourselves  the  tasks  of  strengthening  supervision  and
withdrawing  from  the  market  of  weak  players.  Unfortunately,  accumulated  problems  in  the
banking  sector  turned  out  to  be  more  serious  than  was  assumed  four  years  ago.  And  this
situation has only been aggravated by crisis. The process of cleaning up the banking sector is
not  yet  complete  and,  according  to  our  estimates,  will  take  another  2-3  years.  Strengthening
supervision will require us to restructure internal organisation significantly – a process we are
currently undergoing.
Four years ago we decided to establish a mega-regulator. We were handed responsibility for the
regulation  and  supervision  across  all  sectors  of  the  financial  market,  numbering  20  thousand
supervised units. And, as in the banking sector, we have been consistently focusing on ridding
the  market  of  unscrupulous  players,  and  introducing  new  standards  of  regulation  in  order  to
ensure the sustainability of all financial institutions and to increase businesses’ and individuals’
confidence in the financial market.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Then we were set the task of developing a national payment system. This has become more
pressing in connection with the sanctions, and, as I have mentioned, we managed to achieve this
task ahead of schedule, even before 2016.
Further progress towards these strategic tasks constitutes the main objectives for the coming
five years.
In the sphere of monetary policy, our task is to ensure a stable low rate of inflation: we want not
just to achieve a level of 4% one time, or for one or two months, but to deliver a stable level of low
inflation.
This will also lead to lower interest rates, longer loans, and will give businesses and individuals
the ability to make long-term plans – in rubles, specifically, rather than foreign currency. All of this
ultimately contributes to economic growth.
The key task in the banking sector, as I have mentioned, is to complete the process of cleaning it
up,  improving  the  quality  of  supervision,  increasing  its  proactivity  in  the  early  stages  and
transitioning to consulting oversight, wherein we help conscientious financial market participants
to fix their problems, while there is still time to do so.
We  understand  that  the  task  of  strengthening  and  enhancing  the  financial  stability  of  banks
cannot be single-handedly managed by the Bank of Russia alone. It is important to place more
responsibility for misconduct on the owners and managers of credit organisations themselves, to
ensure the irreversibility of punishments for crimes.
Qualitative changes are in store for the banking industry – these include a transition to a three-tier
banking system, comprised of systemically important banks, banks with universal licences, and
banks with basic licences. This is a radical change in the banking system, which we will need to
implement  with  care  in  the  near  future.  The  three  main  tasks  set  before  us,  which  we  are
currently  resolving,  are:  to  better  manage  risk,  so  as  to  protect  the  rights  of  depositors  and
creditors; to promote the availability of credit, including credit for small businesses; and to ensure
fair competition, wherein a bank of any type will be able to work and earn within their niche in the
market.
Another pressing task is the implementation of a new resolution mechanism. We hope that it will
be in place by autumn, when we will be ready to use it. This will allow us both to reduce the cost
and to speed up the resolution mechanism, in order to make rehabilitated banks more attractive
to investors.
In  the  banking  sector,  as  well  as  in  the  financial  sector  overall,  the  challenge  lies  not  only  in
rehabilitating and cleaning up, but also in creating the conditions for development. This will come
to the fore over the course of the next five years.
Creating conditions for development involves: introducing a system of individual pension capital –
essentially  a  voluntary  system  for  individuals;  developing  non-bank  financing  and  the  bond
market; developing the capital market – in essence, creating long-term money for the country. At
the moment we don’t have long-term money, and so we must and will be doing everything we
can to create it.
Further  development  of  the  payment  system  will  involve  a  smooth  transfer  of  the  salaries  of
public sector employees and social payments on to a card system called “Mir". To make this
transfer smooth and orderly is our task for the near future. We will also be aiming to expand the
acceptance of the Mir card outside of Russia. We have already begun plans and arrangements
with other countries on this front.
Finally, I will return to the topic of financial technology development – I have also spoken about
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
this previously. The development of financial technologies will in large part determine the specific
actions  to  be  taken  by  us  in  the  coming  years.  This  will  involve  active  joint  efforts  with
businesses.  Legislative  support  is  also  important  here,  particularly  in  terms  of  remote
authentication, which will make new technologies and digital technologies possible. This implies
a  transition  to  electronic  document  workflow  in  the  financial  market.  Here  indeed  we  have  a
backlog, and we need to cross over to this new system in order to reduce costs for the financial
sector and ultimately reduce the cost of credit. This will also result in cheaper loans.
We  will  be  carrying  out  tests  on  the  market  of  new  technologies,  such  as  distributed  ledger
technology based on a blockchain technology, and we have already begun this process in order
to implement the regulation of new technologies rationally, protecting the markets from risks.
At the beginning of this speech I mentioned the strategic objectives of the Bank of Russia. These
are our key priorities. You may have noticed that the tasks we set ourselves four years ago and
those for the year 2016, which I have been speaking about today, as well as challenges of the
future, are all, of course, related to each other. We consider it to be very important to respect the
principles  of  continuity,  consistency  and  predictability.  We  will  no  doubt  be  responding  with
flexibility to any given situation. The situation is volatile, there is a lot of uncertainty in the world.
We will have to react in accordance with the challenges presented to us. But the consistency of
our policy, I think, is very important. The preservation of trust is vital to development, as well as to
financial  markets.  This  is  a  key  category  –  trust  in  the  financial  market  and  trust  in  monetary
policy have been the most influential factors in terms of economic growth. We view our policy as
part  of  an  overall  economic  policy  aimed  at  creating  conditions  for  sustainable  long-term
economic growth in our country.
Thank you very much!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
