Benoît Cœuré: Outlook for monetary policy in the euro area
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, to
the Association d'Économie Financière, Paris, 2 February 2017.
Introduction
 In  my  remarks  tonight,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  outlook  for  monetary  policy. As  you  will  be
aware, the Governing Council decided in December to extend the asset purchase programme
with  average  monthly  purchases  of  €60  billion  from  April  this  year  until  December  2017  or
beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment
in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  its  inflation  aim.  That  decision  was  confirmed  at  our
January meeting.
The decision to extend the asset purchase programme was based on our assessment of the
current economic climate, and our view of the amount of stimulus required to reach our inflation
objective. Before I discuss those points in a little more detail, allow me to refresh your memories
of  the  events  that  have  unfolded  since  the  crisis.  In  particular,  I’d  like  to  briefly  recount  why
unconventional monetary policy measures became necessary, and how the ECB has responded
to the crisis.
Why unconventional measures became necessary
The need for unconventional policy measures in the euro area arose from the confluence of a
number of factors. Broadly speaking, these factors fall into three categories: 1) weak domestic
demand and the impairment of the monetary policy transmission mechanism arising from the
financial and sovereign debt crises; 2) other factors weighing on inflation, notably energy prices;
3) the decline in equilibrium real interest rates.
Weak domestic demand and impairment of monetary policy transmission
Let  me  start  with  the  financial  crisis,  which  entered  a  particularly  acute  phase  following  the
collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. The ensuing severe recession across the euro
area increased unemployment and, combined with falling real estate prices, caused large losses
in many national banking sectors.
The  financial  crisis  was  exacerbated  by  the  banking-sovereign  nexus,  sometimes  called  the
diabolical  loop.  The  large  overhang  of  public  debt  in  some  countries,  in  part  a  result  of  the
support provided to their banking systems, resulted in a marked widening of sovereign spreads.
Markets  began  pricing  in  some  risk  of  redenomination:  in  other  words,  the  risk  that  certain
countries would leave the euro area and revert to national currencies.
At  the  same  time,  bank  holdings  of  sovereign  bonds  came  under  increasing  market  scrutiny.
Interbank  lending  markets  in  the  euro  area  became  fragmented  and  certain  national  banking
systems lost access to wholesale market funding.
The fragmentation of the interbank market and sharply rising yields in some countries impaired
the transmission of monetary policy and threatened the unity of monetary policy throughout the
euro area. Credit to the private sector contracted and the euro area entered a further recession,
with  unemployment  peaking  in  early  2013  at  just  over  12%.  The  output  gap  –  the  difference
between current levels of economic activity and its long-run potential – reached a position well
into negative territory.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Additional factors weighing on inflation
Beyond the downward pressure on inflation from domestic sources, a number of other factors
also weighed on inflation. In particular, energy and other commodity prices fell sharply from the
middle of 2014. Headline HICP inflation turned negative in December 2014.
Our mandate is to maintain price stability over the medium term, so short-term movements in
volatile components of the index do not necessarily require a monetary policy response. Indeed,
the full transmission of monetary policy to inflation takes more than a year, but the initial impact of
energy price changes no longer has an effect on the annual inflation rate after a year. So there is
a  real  risk  that  any  monetary  policy  action  might  only  take  effect  when  the  main  impact  on
headline  inflation  has  already  passed. As  such,  monetary  policy  could  exacerbate  volatility  in
inflation.
Conversely,  there  is  a  risk  that  movements  in  headline  inflation  caused  by  a  succession  of
energy  price  shocks  could  become  entrenched  in  wage  bargaining  and  inflation  expectations.
Inflation expectations drifting away from our objective interferes with monetary policy’s ability to
meet that objective. As a result, monetary policy typically reacts to energy price movements by
“looking  through”  their  first-round,  direct  impact,  but  remaining  vigilant  regarding  any  second-
round effects on expectations. This is certainly a description that fits the actions of the ECB at
the time.
While the domestic recession and falling energy prices are the major underlying reasons for the
low rates of inflation recorded since 2014, there are a number of additional contributory factors,
including the flow-through of generally weak global demand and certain industry-specific factors. I
won’t  detail  them  today,  except  to  mention  that  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  has
1
carried out a significant body of research on the subject, which was published last week.
Decline in equilibrium interest rates
Economists  use  a  concept  called,  variously,  the  equilibrium  real  rate  or  the  natural  rate.  It
represents  the  interest  rate  at  which  there  is  neither  upward  nor  downward  pressure  on
economic activity and hence on inflation. Broadly speaking, when inflation is above the objective,
central banks raise short-term real interest rates above the natural rate to bring inflation down.
Symmetrically, when inflation is below the objective, central banks lower real interest rates below
the natural rate.
While  the  equilibrium  real  rate  is  a  useful  concept  in  order  to  frame  policy  discussions,  it  is
unobservable in the real world, and various models used to construct it provide different answers
resulting in a range of uncertainty. What is more certain, however, from these models is that the
equilibrium real rate has been falling, both here and across other major advanced economies. By
some  estimates,  it  might  even  currently  be  negative  in  the  euro  area.  As  I  have  mentioned
previously,  potential  reasons  for  this  decline  include  demographics  and  falling  productivity
3
growth.
2
Policy rates need to shadow this decline in the real equilibrium rate, otherwise monetary policy
would be too tight, dampening activity and causing inflation to undershoot our objective.
How the ECB has responded to the crisis
With these factors in mind, let me briefly summarise how the ECB has responded to the crisis.
We  have  taken  action  within  our  mandate  to  ensure  sufficient  stimulus  is  in  place  to  return
inflation to our objective over our medium-term horizon, and to repair the transmission of that
stimulus across the whole euro area in order to preserve the unity of monetary policy.
In  a  conventional  fashion,  we  gradually  lowered  our  main  refinancing  rate  to  stimulate  the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy,  eventually  reaching  0%  in  March  2016.  However,  the  size  of  the  stimulus  required,
combined with the lower equilibrium real rate, meant that this interest rate cut was not sufficient
to  bring  inflation  back  to  our  objective.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to  introduce  a  number  of
unconventional measures.
First, we introduced forward guidance. We communicated explicitly to the market our expectation
that  interest  rates  would  remain  at,  or  below,  the  current  rate  until  inflation  had  sustainably
returned  to  our  objective.  In  doing  so,  we  were  able  to  influence  market  views  of  our  future
interest rates, thereby reducing interest rates across the curve. Indeed, while economists tend to
talk in terms of one natural rate, there is, in truth, a wide constellation of interest rates that are
relevant for the consumption and investment decisions of businesses and households.
Second,  we  introduced  an  asset  purchase  programme.  By  buying  bonds,  including  covered,
sovereign  and  corporate  bonds,  we  are  reducing  interest  rates  across  a  range  of  horizons.
These  lower  interest  rates  encourage  borrowing,  either  indirectly  through  banks  or  directly  in
terms of greater issuance of corporate bonds.
In terms of the transmission mechanism, we introduced full allotment for our monetary policy
tenders, allowing banks to access all the liquidity they need. We also introduced measures to
encourage banks to lend. We took the interest rate on our deposit facility into negative territory,
meaning that banks have to pay to leave cash deposited with us. In addition, we introduced a
range of targeted long-term repos designed to explicitly reward banks for increasing lending.
Evidence that our monetary policy is working
Let me now turn to the current economic situation in the euro area, and what it means for the
monetary  policy  outlook.  The  monetary  stimulus  put  in  place  by  the  ECB  is  clearly  working,
supporting a broad-based and resilient recovery in the euro area.
Since  the  beginning  of  2015,  euro  area  GDP  growth  has  been  solid  in  every  quarter.  The
preliminary flash estimate for the fourth quarter of 2016 is 0.5%, with similar growth expected in
the first quarter of this year. The December Eurosystem staff projections for GDP growth were
1.7% for this year, and 1.6% for both 2018 and 2019.
The  Economic  Sentiment  Indicator  rose  in  January  to  its  highest  level  since  2011.  Sentiment
improved in industry, services and the household sector, mainly driven by improved sentiment
regarding  future  economic  conditions.  New  industrial  orders  increased  in  November,  with  a
notable pick-up in new export orders over the past year. More broadly, global activity and trade
gathered positive momentum in the second half of 2016.
The recovery has also supported employment growth in the euro area. The unemployment rate
fell to 9.6% in December, its lowest rate since May 2009. Over four million more Europeans are
employed now than was the case three years ago.
There are signs, too, that our measures to restore the monetary policy transmission mechanism
and  unblock  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy  are  taking  hold.  Lending  rates  have  steadily
declined  throughout  the  euro  area  and  the  dispersion  of  rates  across  countries  has
narrowed.   Credit  provision  continues  to  strengthen.  Annual  growth  in  credit  to  euro  area
households increased in December to 2.0% and growth in credit to businesses rose to 2.3% –
the highest growth rates in more than four years. Lower lending rates and the recovery in activity
have bolstered corporate profitability, with a consequent increase in investment.
4
Inflation has also increased. The flash estimate for euro area annual HICP inflation in January is
1.8%, 0.7 percentage points higher than the December final estimate. But most of the increase in
headline  inflation  has  come  from  energy  prices;  core  inflation  in  the  flash  estimate  remained
subdued  at  0.9%,  the  same  as  in  December. As  I  discussed  earlier,  monetary  policymakers
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
have  to  look  through  the  first-round,  direct  impact  of  energy  prices  on  headline  inflation,  and
instead focus on the second-round effects on inflation expectations. As a result, we will treat the
current increase in energy prices in a symmetrical fashion to how we treated the fall in 2013.
Short-term inflation expectations have also increased in recent months, but still remain below our
objective,  while  long-run  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored.  Based  on  this,  the  Governing
Council continues to expect interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended
period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases.
Outlook for monetary policy
Indeed, the Governing Council has said for a long time that appropriate stimulus will remain in
place until inflation has converged sustainably towards our objective of below, but close to, 2%.
What  do  we  mean  by  sustainably?  Well,  it  relates  to  our  objective  and  how  we  have  always
carried  out  our  mandate.  Let  me  highlight  the  four  criteria  that  the  President  set  out  at  the
January press conference.
Inflation needs to converge towards our objective over the medium term. As mentioned earlier,
the  relevant  horizon  for  monetary  policy  is  the  medium  term.  We  do  not  react  to  short-term
fluctuations, particularly those caused by energy and other commodity prices. The convergence
towards our objective needs to be durable – one swallow does not a summer make. We need to
see clear evidence that once inflation returns to our objective, it will remain there.
The  third  criterion  is  that  inflation  needs  to  be self-sustaining.  We  have  witnessed  an
increasingly  resilient  recovery  in  economic  activity,  but  this  has  not  as  yet  translated  into  a
resilient increase in inflation. Inflation in the euro area is still reliant on the substantial amount of
monetary stimulus provided by the ECB, and it would be inappropriate to withdraw the stimulus
while that reliance remains.
Finally,  the  ECB’s  mandate  covers  the whole euro area,  and  our  policy  reflects  that.  What
matters to us is the euro area-wide measure of inflation, not the outturns for individual countries.
Conclusion
In  conclusion,  monetary  policy  is  currently  set  appropriately  to  ensure  a  return  to  our  inflation
objective  in  the  medium  term.  Recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  resilient,  but  risks  relating  to  the
international environment remain elevated. We will continue to monitor closely the evolution of
prices and costs in the coming weeks and months in order to assess any second-round effects
of  energy  prices  and  also  to  judge  the  extent  to  which  the  increase  in  inflation  represents  a
sustainable adjustment towards our objective.
And  let  me  make  one  final  point.  For  the  past  few  years,  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  been
sustained  by  substantial  support  from  monetary  policy.  Yet  in  the  long  run,  growth  is  not
determined by monetary policy, but by innovation and gains in productivity. Structural reforms are
needed  in  the  euro  area,  and  in  each  member  state  to  improve  the  economic  resilience  to
shocks  and  to  boost  productivity  growth.  Higher  productivity  growth  will  raise  equilibrium  real
interest rates and, more importantly, improve welfare for everyone in the euro area.
1
2
3
4
See Ciccarelli, M. and Osbat, C. (Eds.), “Low inflation in the euro area: causes and consequences”, Occasional
Paper Series, No 181, ECB, 2017, and accompanying discussion papers.
Constâncio,  V.,  “The  challenge  of  low  real  interest  rates  for  monetary  policy  “,  lecture  given  at  the
Macroeconomics Symposium, Utrecht School of Economics, 15 June 2016.
Cœuré, B., “Assessing the implications of negative interest rates”, speech given at the Yale Financial Crisis
Forum, Yale School of Management, New Haven, 28 July 2016.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
“MFI lending rates: pass-through in the time of non-standard monetary policy”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 1/2017,
ECB.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
