BANK OF UGANDA 
   Remarks by 
 Louis Kasekende (PhD.) 
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
   At the Graduation Ceremony of the pioneer class of the “Orient 
Bank’s Financial Literacy Programme”  
   Sheraton Hotel Kampala; April 20, 2017 
     The Principal Makerere University Business School (MUBS) 
The Board of Directors and Senior Management of Orient Bank Ltd. 
Members of the Private sector and our graduates, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 It  is  a  great  honour  to  preside  over  the  first  graduation  Ceremony  of 
the  “Orient  Business  Academy”.  Before  I  begin,  let  me  convey  the 
apologies  of  the  Governor,  Prof  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  who 
is  currently  in  Washington  representing  Uganda  at  the  spring 
meetings of the IMF and World Bank.   
  This academy, which I was privileged to launch in August 2016, is an 
initiative  of  Orient  Bank  and  MUBS.  The  main  objective  of  the 
academy  is  to  equip  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises  with  financial 
resource management  skills and knowledge.  As  such  it  complements 
the  financial  inclusion  agenda  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda.  I  wish  to 
congratulate  all  the  graduates  of  the  Orient  Bank  financial  literacy 
programme for having successfully completed their training   
 Our  economy  is  dominated  by  the  micro  and  small  scale  business 
sector,  which  (including  smallholder  farming)  provides  employment 
for  more  than  90  percent  of  the  labour  force.  However,  micro  and 
small  enterprises  face  major  barriers  to  growth.  The  vast  majority  of 
these  enterprises  remain  very  small  and  most  struggle  to  survive  let 
alone expand.  
 2 
A lack of essential business skills on the part of entrepreneurs is one 
of the impediments to the growth of micro and small scale businesses. 
A critical requirement for the success of a micro or small enterprise is 
that it should be able to generate positive cash flows at all times, but 
this is often poorly understood by entrepreneurs.    
  The paucity of business skills extends to the proper use of finance. If 
an entrepreneur is to contract a loan to finance his or her business, it 
is  essential  that  the  entrepreneur  understands  clearly  how  the 
finance  will  be  used  to  add  value  to  the  business,  so  that  he  or  she 
will be able to service the loan in full and also increase the profits of 
the  business.  If  this  is  not  the  case,  the  loan  simply  becomes  a 
burden on the business and may contribute to its collapse.  
  As such, basic financial literacy is essential if entrepreneurs are to be 
able to use finance constructively. They must be able to work out how 
much profit they earn from their businesses, and estimate how much 
additional profit, if any, they will earn if they take out a business loan 
and then fully service that loan. Entrepreneurs must also have a good 
grasp of the risks that they run. Business revenues are often volatile, 
yet  loans  must  still  be  serviced  even  when  revenues  are  lower  than 
expected. Will an entrepreneur still be able to service his or her loan if 
the  business  suffers  a  fall  in  revenues?  These  are  the  types  of 
questions  which  entrepreneurs  must  be  able  to  answer  before  they 
apply for a loan. 
 3 
 I urge the graduates of this pioneer class of the academy to apply the 
skills  acquired  during  the  programme  in  their  businesses  and 
personal lives as well as share the knowledge acquired with the wider 
business community to bolster entrepreneurship.   
 To  conclude  I  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  Orient 
Bank,  the  Management  of  Makerere  University  Business  School  and 
the graduates upon successfully completing the training programme. 
  I thank you. 
   Louis Kasekende (PhD.) 
DEPUTY GOVERNOR 
 4 
