Benoît  Cœuré:  Independence  and  accountability  in  a  changing
world
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank,  at  the  Transparency  International  EU  Event  "Two  sides  of  the  same  coin?
Independence and accountability of the European Central Bank", Brussels, 28 March 2017.
General considerations
 Thank you for your invitation to today’s event. I am looking forward to a discussion with a panel
representing such a wide range of stakeholders and views.
The  ECB  fully  shares  the  values  that  underpin  Transparency  International’s  work,  such  as
integrity  and  accountability. At  a  time  when  many  people  are  expressing  doubts  about  public
institutions, it is clear that these principles are vital for their legitimacy.  And we are convinced
that  greater  responsibility  and  integration  at  euro  area  level,  which  are  much  needed  to
strengthen our Economic and Monetary Union, should go hand in hand with greater democratic
2
accountability.
1
So  Transparency  International’s  work  regarding  the  EU’s  economic  governance  is  certainly
useful. This is why the ECB has facilitated this project by inviting the researchers to a series of
meetings with senior staff. We were offered the opportunity to comment on the draft of the report.
But as the study and its recommendations are entirely owned by Transparency International, we
exclusively provided factual observations and abstained from commenting on the substance.
Before  offering  some  observations  on  the  four  chapters  of  the  report  –  independence,
transparency, accountability and integrity – I would like to make two preliminary, more general
remarks:
First,  and  to  answer  the  question  raised  in  the  title  of  the  report:  yes,  for  the  ECB
independence  and  accountability  are  two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  The  ECB  was  given  a
democratic  mandate. Independence  ensures  that  the  ECB can  act  in  line  with  its
mandate. Accountability, on the other hand, ensures that the ECB does act in line with its
mandate.  This  can  be  measured  ex  post  against  outcomes  –  the  ECB  did  indeed  take
decisive action to preserve price stability during the crisis  – and it relies ex ante on having a
strong accountability framework.
Second,  the  ECB  is  quite  unique  in  the  EU  institutional  context.  I  understand  that
Transparency International has published similar reports on the European Investment Bank
and the European Stability Mechanism. There are important differences between the three
bodies  –  not  only  as  regards  their  mandate  and  purpose,  but  also  in  terms  of  their
institutional  setup,  governance  structures,  funding  and,  in  this  context  more  importantly,
accountability.  Of  course,  we  are  an  EU  institution  (like  the  European  Parliament  or  the
European  Commission).  But  we  are  also  a  central  bank  and,  as  of  2014,  a  banking
supervisor. These specific tasks require a dedicated governance framework considered so
crucial by the EU legislators that it was laid down in the EU Treaty and, as regards banking
supervision, in the regulation establishing the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM).
3
In my remarks I will cover each aspect of the report briefly.
Independence
In  the  European  Union,  the  principle  of  central  bank  independence  has  a  quasi-constitutional
basis. Article 108 of the Treaty establishing the European Community states that: “neither the
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ECB, nor a national central bank … shall seek or take instructions from Community institutions
or bodies, from any government of a Member State or from any other body”.
Looking  at  the  debate  around  independence,  which  is  also  taking  place  outside  the  EU,  it
becomes  clear  that  safeguarding  our  independence  requires  more  than  a  series  of  legal
provisions.
It requires an explanation of why independence is important for a central bank. As guardians of
price stability in the euro area, the ECB creates the foundation for a healthy and stable European
economy. Independence is essential in that respect, as it protects the ECB from any temptation
by governments to seek changes in monetary policy to favour short-term economic gains over
price stability, or to pander to private interest groups.
It is equally important to correct misperceptions, and all stakeholders do have a responsibility in
this  respect.  The  ECB  communicates  clear  conditions  for  accepting  credit  institutions  as
counterparts,  for  quality  of  collateral,  for  emergency  liquidity  assistance  extended  by  national
central banks so as not to interfere with monetary policy, for accepting securities under its asset
purchase programme, etc. These conditions are transparent and equal for all counterparties in
the  euro  area.  Therefore,  the  ECB  does  not  aim  for  political  buy  in,  it  merely  clarifies  the
conditions  which  govern  its  monetary  policy for  all  euro  area  countries,  and  this  is  needed  to
ensure that it stays within its mandate and, thus, to safeguard its independence.
4
As for the ECB’s current role in the macroeconomic adjustment programmes, this is enshrined
in a legal framework  that is not for the ECB to alter. We believe that financial issues are where
the  ECB’s  advice  is  of  particular  relevance.  If  there  were  political  willingness  to  change  the
framework, we would be happy to engage and, based on our experience, help clarify how best to
5
support the other institutions while safeguarding our independence.
Accountability
Independence does not mean arbitrariness. The ECB was given a democratic mandate. It is held
accountable for acting in line with this mandate, both democratically and legally.
From a democratic perspective, the ECB is accountable for its policies to the representation of
EU citizens. As described in the Report, the ECB’s President participates in quarterly hearings of
the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament. As MEP Tremosa
i Balcells knows very well, these are not “dialogues de sourds”. The MEPs do not shy away from
asking critical questions. As the President emphasised at his September 2016 hearing, the ECB
takes these exchanges very seriously.
In addition to the regular quarterly hearings, my Executive Board colleagues and I also participate
in hearings of this Committee to explain the ECB’s reasoning and decisions on specific topics.
Just last year, I visited the European Parliament twice to discuss the proposal for a euro area
budgetary capacity and the ECB’s involvement in Greece.
In about ten days’ time the ECB, as it does every year, will publish its Annual Report and the
Vice-President will present it before the European Parliament. Later in the year, the President will
also attend the plenary debate on it, which precedes the Parliament adopting its official position
on our activities.
This European Parliament Resolution is an important contribution for our work, as it summarises
the views of the representatives of the European people on our actions and policies, also in the
fields  of  independence,  transparency,  accountability  and  integrity.  We  take  the  European
6
Parliament’s comments and suggestions very seriously.
I  could  continue  with  other  examples  showing  the  health  of  the  relationship  between  the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
European Parliament and the ECB: from the Governing Council decision to adopt principles that
increase  transparency  in  developing  ECB  regulations  on  European  statistics,  to  the  ECB’s
readiness to discuss questions on the work it is engaged in in the Basel Committee, of course
within the confines imposed by confidentiality requirements. And I could mention the separate
accountability channels foreseen with the establishment of ECB Banking Supervision, based on
the Interinstitutional Agreement (2013/694/EU) between the European Parliament and the ECB.
Last week, the Chair of the ECB Supervisory Board was at the European Parliament to present
the ECB Annual Report on supervisory activities 2016.
Of course, I leave it to MEP Tremosa i Balcells to express the Parliament’s judgement on the
robustness  of  our  accountability  framework  towards  the  Parliament.  From  the  ECB’s
perspective, our accountability framework as defined in the Treaty is working well, and has been
adapted to the challenges we have faced in recent years by expanding our interactions where
and when necessary.
Transparency
Transparency is crucial to the ECB’s work and it attaches great importance to communicating
effectively  with  the  public.  Transparency  helps  people  understand  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,
and better public understanding, in turn, makes the ECB’s monetary policy more credible and
effective.
Against this background, communication with financial market participants  deserves  particular
attention.  I  see  it  as  a  double-edged  sword.  Clear  communication  with  financial  markets
enhances the implementation and transmission of monetary policy, but on the other hand it may
risk central banks being captured by private interests, or worse, disclosing privileged information.
And even the perception of such risks would be harmful.
Please allow me to present some examples.
The European Central Bank has made significant progress on matters of transparency and good
governance.  This  was  noted  by  the  European  Ombudsman,  who  commended  the  ECB  for
adopting the “Guiding principles for external communication by members of the Executive Board”
and “encourage[d] it to lead the field on all aspects of good governance”. The Ombudsman more
generally  acknowledged,  when  presenting  her  Annual  Report  for  2015  to  the  European
7
Parliament, that the ECB has “boosted its transparency”.
The Guiding Principles provide a more concrete and very practical expression of the rules that
are  already  binding  on  Executive  Board  members.  They  enshrine  the  ECB’s  approach  to
ensuring that financial market-sensitive information is not disclosed to select groups and avoiding
giving the impression that an event organiser has a “prestige advantage” allowing it to benefit
financially from the perception of exclusive contacts with the members of the Executive Board.
The  Guiding  Principles  also  advise  the  Executive  Board  members  to  include,  as  a  matter  of
principle,  an  ECB  staff  member  in  bilateral  meetings.  These  principles  have  also  been
subscribed to by the Chair of the ECB’s Supervisory Board and the other ECB Representatives
to the Supervisory Board.
In  addition,  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  (including  the  Executive  Board  members)
observe  a  “quiet  period”  before  monetary  policy  meetings.  This  means  they  avoid  making
comments  or  attending  meetings  that  could  influence  expectations  about  monetary  policy
decisions  in  the  seven  days  before  a  scheduled  meeting  on  this  issue.  This  also  covers
meetings  with  the  media,  market  participants  or  any  other  outside  parties  with  interests  in
monetary policy matters.
As you probably know, the Executive Board Members – including myself – as well as the Chair of
the Supervisory Board have been publishing their diaries since November 2015. I find that the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
diaries  provide  a  very  comprehensive  overview  of  our  interactions  with  external  parties;  they
cover all  our  professional  meetings  with  the  private  and  public  sectors  (at  national  and
international level). No other EU institution – including via the Transparency Register – or central
bank provides such extensive information in terms of transparency.
The ECB has also established high-level fora such as the Institutional Investor Dialogue and the
Banking  Industry  Dialogue  to  collect  relevant  market  intelligence  from  stakeholders  in  a
transparent  way.  These  fora  are  underpinned  by  a  published  charter  that  sets  out  the
participation  rules;  the  agendas  and  meeting  summaries  are  also  published.  This  makes  the
ECB’s interactions in terms of gathering information from stakeholders highly transparent for the
public.
Since  January  2015  the  ECB  has  also  been  publishing  regular  accounts  of  the  Governing
Council’s monetary policy discussions. They contain an overview of financial market, economic
and monetary developments, followed by a summary of the discussion, in an unattributed form,
on the economic and monetary analyses and on the monetary policy stance. In doing so, we aim
to provide the rationale behind monetary policy decisions and enable anyone who is interested to
read the Governing Council’s assessment of the economy within a short period of time after the
discussion takes place.
Integrity
However, independence, accountability and transparency are not enough if they are not flanked
by a robust integrity system. Or as Mario Draghi put it in an address to staff: a stronger business
culture has to be complemented by a stronger ethical culture.
An  enhanced  ECB  Ethics  Framework  applicable  to  all  staff  members  became  effective  in
January  2015,  and  a  dedicated  Compliance  and  Governance  Office  was  established  to
implement  this  new  framework,  among  other  tasks.  Mandatory  ethics  training  for  all  staff
members  should  further  enhance  our  strong  ethical  culture.  Moreover,  a  high-level  Ethics
Committee has been established to advise Governing Council, Executive Board and Supervisory
Board members on conduct matters.
In my view the ECB’s Ethics Framework is probably the strictest of any EU institution or central
bank. All our staff members – including Executive Board members – need to provide a list of their
bank accounts and powers of attorney conferred on them by third parties, to facilitate regular
compliance checks of their private financial transactions by our external auditor.
While we are convinced of the robustness of our Ethics Framework, such frameworks must, of
course,  be  regularly  reviewed  against 
international  best  practice.  The  review  of  our
whistleblowing regime is just one example in that regard.
Concluding remarks
Let me conclude. While we certainly have to strive constantly for improvements, I believe one
has to admit that the ECB has made tremendous efforts and indeed made significant progress in
strengthening  its  accountability,  boosting  its  transparency  and  further  enhancing  its  integrity
mechanisms and good governance.
The ECB is, and has always been, open to a balanced dialogue with stakeholders, including the
general public, and strives to keep up to date with fast-evolving communication practices, such
as Q&A sessions on Twitter.
This  study,  containing  interviews  of  ECB  senior  managers  and  the  report  by  Transparency
International, is indeed a good example of how the ECB engages in a balanced dialogue with
diverse representatives.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  mentioned  earlier,  we  are  convinced  that  independence  requires  accountability,  and  that
accountability requires transparency. Integrity is a foundation of any good administration.
We are confident about what we have achieved, but as central bankers we are always “vigilant”
and never complacent.
Thank you for listening, and I look forward to hearing your views.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
See The future of the euro area
See “The Five Presidents’ Report: Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”, 22 June 2015.
A more detailed discussion of the measures taken during the crisis can be found in B. Cœuré, “Consolidating
the  euro  area’s  economic  recovery”,  Introductory  remarks  prior  to  an  informal  exchange  of  views  with  the
European Affairs Committee and the Finance Committee of the National Assembly, Paris, 13 May 2015; and
“Outlook for monetary policy in the euro area”, Speech at Association d’Économie Financière, Paris, 2 February
2017
Namely,  the  “two-pack”  regulation  (Regulation  (EU)  472/2013)  and  the  Treaty  Establishing  the  European
Stability Mechanism.
See B. Cœuré, “Strengthening  the  Greek  financial  system”,  Introductory  remarks  at  a  public  hearing  at  the
European Parliament, Brussels, 12 October 2016
This is also why in ten days’ time, alongside the publication of the Annual Report and as requested by the
European Parliament, we will publish our feedback on the European Parliament Resolution, which last year
was prepared by MEP Tremosa i Balcells.
See Address to European Parliament on Annual Report 2015 European Ombudsman, Ms. Emily O’Reilly
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
