Norman T L Chan: Building "Hong Kong" as a brand for financial
services - beyond marketing
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, at the Treasury Markets Summit 2017, Hong Kong, 18 September 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 1. A few months ago when my staff asked me what I would wish to talk about at today’s Summit,
my immediate response was “culture”.  In a rather polite manner, my staff told me that I had
spoken on this subject many times before and it would help the TMA sell the tables if I could talk
about  something  else.    I  didn’t  commit  myself  one  way  or  the  other  and  so  I  hope  it  won’t
disappoint you too much if I am going to talk about culture and ethics again this morning.
2. That said, I am not totally insensitive to the audience’s desire to hear something different from
me, so I am going to start with a true and, I hope, interesting story on what marketing can and
cannot do.  We all know and appreciate the importance of good marketing in the commercial
world.    Rule  number  one  in  marketing:  No  matter  how  good  your  product  is,  you  need  to
undertake an effective campaign to reach out to your target customers to make them aware of
the product and convince them that they should be interested in it.  Recognising the potency of
marketing, I set up in 2010 within the HKMA a new team dedicated to reaching out to promote
Hong Kong as the premier international financial centre (IFC) in Asia.  One of the priority areas
that our team has sought to promote, which is highly relevant to our treasury practitioners, is
clearly  the  use  of  Hong  Kong  as  the  corporate  treasury  management  hub  for  multinational
companies as well as Mainland corporates with increasingly larger business footprint offshore. 
Our team has in the past year alone reached out to nearly 300 companies.
3. Many corporates that we have approached recognise the attractiveness of Hong Kong as an
IFC.  Hong Kong is a major banking centre with mature and sophisticated capital markets.  Our
financial  system  is  resilient  and  is  underpinned  by  a  robust  regulatory  regime.    We  have  first
class transport and communications infrastructure.  There is a large cluster of finance and legal
professionals and talents etc.  Yes, we do have a long list of advantages that we can deploy to
lobby corporates to come to Hong Kong to set up corporate treasury centres (CTCs) to manage
their  cash,  FX,  credit,  hedging,  interest  rates  transactions.    However,  the  HKMA  outreaching
team soon realised that they had run into a major problem.  The problem had to do with the tax
asymmetry that treated CTCs’ overseas interest expenses and income differently.  Simply put, a
CTC  could  not  claim  tax  deduction  for  interest  paid  to  fund  providers  within  the  group  as
expenses,  but  all  its  interest  income  was  subject  to  profits  tax.    This  tax  asymmetry  greatly
diminished the attractiveness of Hong Kong as a CTC hub, especially as our main competitors in
the region and elsewhere do not seem to have this problem. 
4. When faced with this possible deal breaker in our effort to promote Hong Kong as the CTC
hub,  what  did  we  do?    Rule  number  two  in  marketing:  you  cannot  do  good  marketing  if  the
product is not a good one.  You can only fool some people some of the time but not for long.  So
one has to make good a product if it is found defective or inferior.  Thanks to the help from the
TMA, we formed a working group to study the problem and make recommendations to remove
the obstacles undermining Hong Kong’s development as a CTC hub.  We made a report to the
Financial Secretary and obtained his support to change this tax anomaly.  With the support of the
Financial Services and the Treasury Bureau (FSTB) and the Inland Revenue Department (IRD),
and in consultation with the industry, we managed to pass the legislative amendments to remove
the  tax  asymmetry  in  May  2016.    In  addition,  the  Government  has  gone  one  step  further  by
providing additional tax incentive by halving the profits tax rate payable on specified CTC activities
in  Hong  Kong  from  16.5%  to  8.25%.    Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  an  illustration  of  the  keen
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
competition between financial centres in the region, two months before our tax proposals were
approved by the Legislative Council in Hong Kong, Singapore, you know what, announced the
lowering of its concessionary tax rate for eligible treasury activities from 10% to 8%.
5.  Our  story  did  not  end  there.   As  a  member  of  the  OECD’s  Inclusive  Framework  on  Base
Erosion  and  Profit  Shifting,  commonly  known  as  BEPS,  Hong  Kong  is  committed  to
implementing the BEPS standards.  The relevant OECD Forum on tax practices has recently
studied over 100 tax regimes worldwide and taken a view that our newly enacted CTC tax regime
has  a  ring-fencing  feature  in  that  only  corporate  treasury  activities  relating  to  non-Hong  Kong
associated  corporations  are  entitled  to  the  concessionary  profit  tax  rate  of  8.25%.    This  ring-
fencing  feature  is  of  concern  to  the  OECD.    In  view  of  this,  Hong  Kong  has  been  in  close
dialogue with the OECD Forum and has come up with a solution to address OECD’s concern. 
So we are planning to extend the concessionary profits tax rate for specified CTC activities to
onshore entities subject to some appropriate anti-abuse safeguards.  The HKMA is now working
with  the  IRD  and  FSTB,  in  consultation  with  the  stakeholders,  to  work  out  the  details  for
implementing this solution.
  More 
6.  Our  efforts  and  dedication  have  yielded  good  results  lately.    The  responses  from  the
corporates  have  been  very  encouraging. 
than  30  Mainland  and  multinational
conglomerates  have  told  us  that  they  are  actively  considering  establishing  or  expanding  their
CTC  operations  in  Hong  Kong.    These  include  many  household  names  in  energy,  electricity
generation and power grids, infrastructure operators, consumer goods and financiers.  This is
exciting news for Hong Kong’s treasury sector and its practitioners.  We should expect increased
treasury activities taking place here, bigger demand for a wide array of financial products, and
importantly more promising career prospects for the treasury practitioners including our younger,
aspiring professionals.  If we succeed in attracting big corporates to use Hong Kong for their
CTC functions, which I am confident that they will, it should also make it easier to convince them
to locate their regional headquarters’ management activities in Hong Kong too. 
7.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  IFC  is  a  brutally  competitive  business  because  moneys  are  highly
mobile, and asset owners and managers will only congregate in places which provide the best
services.    For  Hong  Kong  to  maintain  its  competitive  edge,  we  must  take  a  two  pronged
approach.  On the one hand, we must continue to strive to improve and excel in the underlying
product, i.e. to be able to deliver the safest and most efficient services in banking and finance. 
On the other hand, we must continue to promote and market Hong Kong as the most sought
after brand in financial services.  In this context, in addition to the intensive work on the CTC
project that I have just described, the HKMA is also busily working on a number of other market
development initiatives.  One of such initiatives that I wish to highlight today is our effort seeking
to modernise the legal framework and tax treatment to make it attractive for private equity funds
to domicile in Hong Kong.  The objective of this project is simple: to strengthen Hong Kong’s
leading position as a private equity fund hub in Asia. 
8.  Market  development  is  a  never  ending  race.    It  is  not  enough  for  us  to  be  making  good
progress and improvements every now and then.  We must be able to improve and move faster
than our peers if we wish to stay ahead of the game.
9. Now that I am talking about ‘brand’, it should be no surprise to you if I now return to the theme
of my first choice, “culture and ethics”.  Just like any luxury goods, a brand in the context of IFC
entails quality and credibility.  Quality requires technical competence in a wide range of financial
services, such as FX, interest rate, credit, hedging, derivatives, ECM, DCM, asset management,
private equity, etc.  I think Hong Kong is in a good position in all these markets.  We have done
rather well in all these markets and should be able to further deepen and broaden them given the
exceptional opportunities emerging from the internationalisation of RMB and the latest Belt and
Road Initiative.  However, I am less sanguine when it comes to the credibility component, which
boils down to trust.  Trust has to be earned over a long period of time, and can be lost overnight. 
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
For  Hong  Kong  to  excel,  it  is  not  enough  for  our  financial  institutions  and  practitioners  to  be
technically competent only.  They must also uphold high ethical standards in order to gain the
trust and respect of customers. 
10. In the past few years, a number of misdeeds by some financial institutions and practitioners
have come to light.  For example, the rigging of LIBOR had led to international reform of interest
rate benchmarks, a process which is still ongoing.  There were also cases of front running and
other irregularities in FX and gold trading that had led to investigation into some banks and senior
bankers.  All these point to the weakness of the tradition of “self-discipline” amongst financial
practitioners.    It  is  now  considered  that  more  comprehensive  and  possibly  more  prescriptive
guidelines on ethical standards and conduct are needed to strengthen the system.  The latest FX
Global Code is the outcome of one of such reforms.  The Code was developed over the past two
years by 16 central banks, including the HKMA, together with private-sector institutions from both
the buy and sell sides.  It is a comprehensive set of global principles on good practice in the FX
market, and it is intended to promote a robust, fair, liquid, open, and transparent market.  The
TMA  has  already  incorporated  the  Code  into  its  own  code  of  conduct.    So  I  would  urge  all
treasury market practitioners to study the Code carefully and ensure that they and their firms fully
comply with its provisions. 
11. As I have said many times before, no external policing or enforcement is a substitute for good
corporate culture that supports high ethical standards and values.  If one asks any of the financial
firms, they will without hesitation say that their corporate culture is to place customers’ interest
before their own.  However, when you probe further, you will find out that not all of the financial
firms  have  promulgated  an  explicit  corporate  culture  statement.    For  those  that  have  such
statements,  not  many  of  them  have  a  systematic  way  of  ensuring  that  the  values  and  ethics
stipulated therein can filter down different levels of the firms and be understood by the staff and
their supervisors.  For those that have made some efforts to promote good corporate culture,
many  have  not  done  enough  to  ensure  that  their  incentive  system,  such  as  pay,  bonuses,
promotion etc, is aligned with the values that the firms seek to promote. 
12.  We  have  seen  far  too  many  examples  that  during  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  how
some financial firms and their employees breached the trust of their customers by selling toxic
products  to  them  due  to  misaligned  incentive  system.    In  these  horrific  examples,  we  often
witnessed that greed or short term profits were the main factor causing the management of the
financial  firms  to  lose  their  perspective  and  common  sense.    However,  in  the  case  of  Wells
Fargo,  which  survived  unscathed  amongst  the  US  banks  during  the  GFC,  it  revealed  another
shocking fact.  Even though there could not have been any meaningful financial gains by the firm,
the incentive system of the bank (i.e. by paying a cash reward for every new account opened)
had  prompted  some  of  its  employees  to  commit  misdeeds  that  breached  the  trust  of  the
customers and seriously harmed the reputation of the bank.  The case is a powerful testimony
that corporate culture, however good, must be aligned and reinforced by the appropriate incentive
system across the entire firm at all levels.  This is why the HKMA issued a circular earlier this
year requiring the boards of locally incorporated banks to form a board level committee focusing
on corporate culture as well as the compensation system.  Many banks have told us that they
have already started reviewing and enhancing their governance arrangements and policies and
procedures  in  relation  to  corporate  culture  to  drive  the  desired  behavioural  changes  on  the
ground.  I truly believe that only when good corporate culture and the incentive system aligns with
each other will there be sustainable impact that helps reduce misconduct risks, a crucial element
in gaining the trust of customers in the long run. 
13. I should also mention that Hong Kong is not alone in this culture campaign.  In October last
year, I was invited by President Bill Dudley of the New York Federal Reserve Bank to join him in a
panel  to  discuss  corporate  culture.    This  was  in  fact  the  third  annual  conference  on  culture
organised  by  the  New  York  Fed.    The  key  takeaway  from  the  New  York  conference  was  that
there is a growing momentum amongst key supervisors as well as large international financial
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
firms to encourage and nurture good corporate culture and ethical values in the industry.  I should
also  add  that,  since  my  appointment  to  chair  the  Standing  Committee  on  Supervisory  and
Regulatory Cooperation of the Financial Stability Board in April this year, I have been pushing for
closer  international  collaboration  in  promoting  good  corporate  culture.    The  priority  of  this
Committee in the next year or two is to place greater emphasis on three aspects of governance,
namely, (i) addressing information gaps and due diligence in employment of individuals with a
history of misconduct, or the so called “rolling bad apples” problem, (ii) responsibility mapping for
senior managers of financial firms, and (iii) the use of governance framework and appropriate
compensation system to address culture risk factors that drive misconduct.  These priorities,
when  implemented,  will  go  a  long  way  in  promoting  the  right  kind  of  culture  in  the  financial
industry and in helping restore public confidence and trust in the financial firms.  By this time next
year,  I  should  be  able  to  report  progress  made  in  Hong  Kong  as  well  as  in  the  international
arena. 
14. Let me conclude my speech with the big picture: Hong Kong, as the premier IFC in Asia, is
uniquely well positioned under the One Country, Two Systems arrangements to benefit from the
internationalisation  of  RMB  and  the  Belt  and  Road  Initiative.    Whatever  you  have  seen  or
witnessed in the past few years is merely the very beginning of a multi-decade long process. 
China has been on average contributing more than one third of global growth in the past 10 years
and is clearly the most powerful engine for growth in the years to come.  China has reached a
stage  that  it  has  the  necessary  technology  and  surplus  capital  for  its  corporates  to  “go  out”. 
Hong Kong, which has been the major hub and springboard for foreign corporates to “go into”
China  since  the  beginning  of  China’s  reform  and  opening  programme,  has  now  taken  up  the
extremely crucial role of serving as the hub and springboard for China’s new “going out” era. 
15. Ladies and gentlemen, it’s a great pleasure to be able to talk to you today.  As a treasury
market practitioner, you are in the right place at the right time.  Hong Kong is a place that will offer
enormous  headroom  for  growth.    However,  the  headroom  is  only  relevant  if  all  of  us  –  the
financial firms, practitioners, regulators – work together to build the “Hong Kong Brand”, a brand
that  is  widely  preferred  and  cherished  by  customers  looking  for  the  best  and  most  reliable
financial  services.    We  in  the  HKMA  are  fully  committed  and  ready  to  build  the  “Hong  Kong
Brand”.  I trust you all share the same commitment and readiness.  Thank you very much!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
