Yves  Mersch:  Digital  Base  Money  -  an  assessment  from  the
European Central Bank's perspective
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  Farewell  ceremony  for  Mr  Pentti  Hakkarainen,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland
(Suomen Pankki), Helsinki, 16 January 2017.
 We are living in digital times. The internet and portable online devices have radically transformed
the way we use and exchange information, and the way we exchange money. Money has been
digitalised in many ways and we can now, for instance, transfer bank deposits electronically and
pay with e-money.
Today I will focus on one type of digital money – Central Bank Digital Currency, or Digital Base
Money  (DBM).  This  is  money  that  is  characterised  by  two  features:  (1)  like  banknotes  in
circulation, DBM is a claim on the central bank; (2) in contrast to banknotes, it is digital.
Of  course,  DBM  already  exists.  Commercial  banks  and  some  other  types  of  institution  hold
digital  claims  on  central  banks  in  the  form  of  deposits.  But  there  has  been  more  recent
discussion about whether central banks should provide DBM to a wider range of counterparties,
allowing  non-banks,  including  households,  to  hold  accounts  at  the  central  bank.  The  People’s
Bank of China, the Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank have published on this topic or have
indicated that they are conducting some work on it.
I see two main reasons why this discussion on DBM has been started.
First,  electronic  payments  have  become  increasingly  popular.  There  are  already  a  number  of
electronic payment methods provided by the financial industry, such as credit, debit and pre-paid
cards. But these methods are based on commercial bank money and people may prefer to hold
claims  on  the  central  bank  to  avoid  the  risk  that  the  commercial  bank  defaults.  From  this
perspective, an increasing demand for DBM could emerge.
Second,  some  technological  developments  may  now  render  the  introduction  of  DBM  much
easier  and  potentially  less  expensive  than  ten  years  ago.  This  includes  Distributed  Ledger
Technology, or DLT, a variant of which is used for Bitcoin.
These are good reasons to start a discussion on DBM and for research to understand better the
options available for DBM and their implications for central banks in fulfilling their mandates. In
some  European  countries,  for  instance  in  Sweden  and  Denmark,  electronic  payments  have
started crowding out the use of cash. This may give the discussion an additional drive. In the
euro area, however, we do not see a trend away from cash. By contrast, in recent years the
growth in demand for banknotes in the euro area has by far exceeded that of economic output.
For the ECB, the discussion is therefore mainly an analytical one. The ECB would in particular
have to understand the impact – positive or negative – of DBM on our primary objective of price
stability before considering introducing it. Moreover, any value judgement on DBM needs to be
assessed  against  a  number  of  high-level  principles,  namely  (1)  technological  safety,  (2)
efficiency,  (3)  technological  neutrality,  and  (4)  freedom  of  choice  for  users  of  means  of
payments.
Today, I would like to outline some of the various options for designing, issuing and managing
DBM, and discuss some of their potential consequences. This will not be an exhaustive list, but it
can give first insights into the complexity of the issue at hand.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Account-based versus value-based Digital Base Money
Let me start with a primarily legal dimension, which is the distinction between account-based and
value-based DBM. Current DBM in the form of commercial bank deposits at the central bank is
account based. A transfer of DBM from one bank to another reaches finality when the funds are
debited from the account of the payer and credited to the account of the payee. The central bank
is directly involved, as it registers the transfer.
Cash is different: it is value based and accounts are not involved. A transfer of cash is final when
the payer hands the cash over to the payee. The central bank does not register transfers of cash,
only the initial issuance and the final return.
DBM held by non-banks could either be account-based – in this case, the central bank would
open an account for every interested non-bank – or it would be value-based like cash. In this
case, interested non-banks would need to be equipped with electronic wallets for holding and
using DBM. A transfer of DBM would require that the funds be debited from the payer’s electronic
wallet and credited to the payee’s device without the involvement of the central bank.
Whether  DBM  is  account  based  or  value  based  might  matter  for  several  reasons.  Let  me
mention  two.  First,  value-based  and  account-based  DBM  may  require  very  different  types  of
technology with specific safety features and costs. DLT may be fit for both, but in different ways.
Second, anonymity towards the central bank can be achieved only with value-based DBM. These
factors may influence the demand for DBM by non-banks and whether DBM would be used more
to substitute cash or bank deposits.
Options for providing DBM
With that distinction in mind, let me now turn to the way DBM could be provided to non-banks.
A  straightforward  approach  would  be  to allow  non-banks  to  convert  commercial  bank
deposits into DBM at a rate of 1 to 1. As cash can always be paid into a bank account, this
would of course also allow non-banks to convert cash into DBM.
It may be argued that with such an approach bank runs could unfold more easily and faster. Non-
banks  could  react  to  bad  news  about  a  certain  bank  by  quickly  switching  their  deposits  into
default-free DBM – there would be no need to keep the cash under the mattress. This would
counteract  important  regulatory  efforts  to  reduce  excess  volatility  in  the  movement  of  funds
between types of investment
Yet it is already easy to switch deposits from a bank hit by bad news to another commercial bank
that  is  perceived  as  safe,  so  I  don’t  see  an  additional  risk  of  bank  runs  in  the  event  of  an
idiosyncratic banking event. The situation would be different in a systemic banking crisis, though.
If depositors perceived the entire commercial banking sector as fragile, a sector-wide run might
be made more likely and severe by DBM, negatively impacting the efficiency of financial markets.
Depending on how attractive DBM is for non-banks, a more gradual substitution of commercial
bank deposits by DBM is of course possible too. This could have different effects on commercial
banks. For example, commercial banks with excess central bank reserves could reduce their
excess reserves when they experience a DBM-induced deposit outflow. This could increase their
profitability in the current situation, as deposits bear a higher interest rate than excess reserves.
But banks without excess central bank reserves might need to replace deposits by central bank
credit. They would need to provide more collateral to the central bank. And the interest rate to be
paid on central bank credit may, at least in normal times, be higher than the average rate on
customer deposits. The profitability of these banks might suffer. A consequence could be higher
interest  rates  on  bank  loans.  These  effects  may  require  an  adjustment  of  central  bank  policy
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
rates and could make monetary policy more difficult until a new steady state is reached.
More restrictive approaches to providing DBM may also be considered. For example, the central
bank could provide DBM to non-banks exclusively in the context of asset purchases. That would
mean that, to obtain DBM, non-banks would need to sell certain assets to the central bank. They
would not be able to convert commercial bank deposits or cash into DBM directly.
With this more restrictive approach, the central bank would keep the amount of DBM under its full
control. It would decide how much assets it would buy. Bank runs or gradual outflows of deposits
from commercial banks would not be induced.
However,  this  approach  would  create  some  difficult  policy  decisions  for  central  banks.  Which
assets should be purchased, how much and at which prices? If the demand for DBM was high
relative  to  the  amount  of  DBM  the  central  bank  would  like  to  provide,  two  different  prices  for
eligible assets could emerge: a market price in trades between two market participants; and a
price below the market price when the same assets are sold to the central bank against DBM. As
a  consequence,  DBM  would  be  worth  more  than  cash  and  commercial  bank  deposits.  DBM
would  truly  be  a  currency  on  its  own.  The  central  bank  would  be  the  issuer  of  two  different
currencies, an outcome that does not seem to be in line with fundamental ECB principles.
If the central bank wanted to avoid such a situation, it would either need to increase the amount
of DBM it provides or make DBM less attractive, for example by lowering the remuneration of
DBM. I will come to this later.
Given  these  challenges,  the  more  straightforward  approach  which  would  allow  non-banks  to
convert bank deposits directly into DBM at a rate of 1 to 1 may therefore appear more attractive,
provided that non-banks mainly substitute cash rather than bank deposits with DBM. As long as
DBM  mainly  replaces  cash,  negative  side  effects  of  DBM  might  be  unlikely.  In  this  context,
consideration could be given to making DBM as cash-like as possible, at least initially, until more
experience is gained.
Remuneration of DBM
This brings us to the next important question: how should the central bank remunerate DBM held
by non-banks?
For the euro area, one option could be to remunerate DBM at the same rate as excess central
bank reserves held by commercial banks, i.e. at the rate on the deposit facility. This would mean
applying a policy rate directly to funds held by non-banks. This could potentially strengthen the
transmission of monetary policy rate decisions to the economy.
The deposit facility rate is currently –0.4%. At this interest rate, demand for DBM may be low. But
in normal times, when it is positive, remunerating DBM at the deposit facility rate may be risky. It
could make it too attractive to convert commercial bank deposits into DBM. As I argued a few
minutes ago, this could have negative side effects.
An alternative option would then be to remunerate DBM at a rate of 0%. This is the rate at which
cash  (i.e.  banknotes  and  coins)  is  de  facto  “remunerated”.  With  a  rate  of  0%,  non-banks  are
unlikely to convert commercial bank deposits or cash into DBM if their motive is only to obtain a
better remuneration. Even in times of negative central bank rates, retail bank customers rarely
receive a negative remuneration on commercial bank deposits.
Even so, a 0% interest rate on DBM held by non-banks is not without policy risks. If banks have
large amounts of excess central bank reserves remunerated at a negative rate, they could try to
find  ways  of  replacing  their  excess  reserves  by  DBM,  such  as  by  setting  up  a  non-bank
subsidiary. This may counteract monetary policy.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
If the central bank considered this risk important, it could combine the two approaches I have
mentioned  so  far.  It  could  remunerate  DBM  held  by  non-banks  at  a  rate  of  0%,  if  the  deposit
facility rate is positive. And if it is negative, we could remunerate at the deposit facility rate. This
may, however, entail strong movements out of DBM when the deposit facility rate turns negative.
Moreover, there is a risk that a negative remuneration of claims of non-banks on the central bank
would substantially undermine the confidence in the central bank.
Technology for DBM
Finally,  let  me  mention  the  technological  dimension  of  DBM.  I  said  that  one  reason  why  the
discussion on DBM for non-banks has started is that we now have technologies that could make
it easier to issue DBM. This includes, in particular, Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT). DLT
carries  great  potential,  but  is  it  already  advanced  enough  to  be  applied  by  central  banks?
Reputation  is  crucial  for  central  banks.  We  cannot  afford  mistakes  in  the  technologies  we
employ. Before the central bank can start providing DBM to non-banks, we need to be sure not
only  that  DBM  is  unlikely  to  have  negative  economic  side-effects,  but  also  that  the  relevant
systems are operationally efficient and safe.
But  we  should  not  be  dogmatic,  either.  If  a  more  efficient,  but  absolutely  safe,  technology  for
central banking operations can be found, introducing it could reduce costs for both the central
bank and users, and therefore for society as a whole.
Conclusions
Let me conclude.
There are many ways to design DBM for non-banks. The different options have potential impacts
– both positive and negative – that need to be studied and considered carefully. Only when the
best way of designing DBM has been identified, can a decision be made as to whether DBM of
non-banks  should  be  introduced  at  all.  The  most  important  question  for  the  ECB  is  whether
introducing a DBM would affect our ability to honour our mandate. The impact may be negative if
non-banks replace commercial bank deposits with DBM to a significant extent. More generally,
any materialisation of DBM would have to be assessed against four principles: (1) technological
safety, (2) efficiency, (3) technological neutrality, and (4) freedom of choice for users of means of
payments.
As there has been some speculation about a possible intention of central banks to abolish cash,
please let me stress one aspect relating to the principle of freedom of choice: if DBM for non-
banks were introduced, it would exist alongside cash for the foreseeable future. It would merely
be an additional option for non-banks to hold funds. In particular, those who are sceptical about
digital devices would naturally continue to use cash.
Even where efficiency gains are possible when people substitute some of the cash for DBM, this
would still require that the technology used for DBM be operationally reliable and secure against
attacks. Technological feasibility and cost considerations alone will not change our mandate.
Thank you!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
