Philip  R  Lane:  Inauguration  of  Ireland's  central  bank  Dockland
Campus
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Inauguration of the
Dockland Campus, Dublin, 24 April 2017.
Minister, former Governor Honohan, distinguished guests,
 I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  to  the  inauguration  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland’s  Dockland
Campus.
Today  marks  an  important  step  for  the  future  of  the  Central  Bank,  as  we  adapt  to  fulfil  our
increasingly complex mandate in a more interconnected and challenging global environment.
There is also a nice parallel with the past.
In  1927,  when  deciding  on  the  first  permanent  premises  of  the  Currency  Commission  –  the
precursor to the Central Bank – members of the Commission emphasised the importance of
1
placing it in close proximity to the Shareholding Banks, and Foster Place was chosen.
In  the  same  vein,  our  Dockland  Campus,  incorporating  North  Wall  Quay  and  Spencer  Dock,
2
again places us firmly at the centre of Ireland’s international financial district.
 The  Central  Bank  is  a  vital  institution  of  the  State.  When  the  Currency  Commission  was
dissolved in 1943, the Central Bank was established with an enhanced role, the most important
of which was “safeguarding the integrity of the currency” and, echoing a phrase from Article 45 of
the  Constitution,  ensuring  that  “in  what  pertains  to  the  control  of  credit,  the  constant  and
3
predominant aim shall be the welfare of the people as a whole”.
In the years since its establishment, both the domestic mandate of the Central Bank and our
European  roles  have  expanded.  Our  European  role  is  critically  important  and  the  Bank  is
recognised as a strong contributor to the work of the European System of Central Banks and
European System of Financial Supervision. 
But while our mandate has expanded and our staff has doubled in recent years, what has not
changed is our core mission of protecting the public interest, and public service is central to the
ethos and culture of the Bank. 
The fact that this site was originally intended to host the new headquarters for Anglo-Irish Bank
has invited much commentary.  In one sense, history is again repeating itself. Foster Place was
leased in perpetuity from Bank of Ireland. Commercial Buildings on Dame Street – as the name
suggests  –  was  formerly  occupied  by  members  of  the  Chamber  of  Commerce,  the  Stock
Exchange, merchants’ offices and brokers.
My  own  view  is  that  this  juxtaposition  is  quite  fitting  in  serving  as  an  ongoing  reminder  of  the
severe economic and social damage caused by financial crises – a reminder to the Bank and
our staff (as much as to the public) of our mission and the critical need to remain ever vigilant.
I hope that our new building can serve as a symbol to the people of Ireland of the importance of
our work to fulfil our mission of safeguarding stability, protecting consumers.
  1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I am especially grateful to Minister Noonan for agreeing to open the building today. The Central
Bank and the Department of Finance have a close working relationship on many fronts, while
recognising  the  independence  of  the  Central  Bank  in  implementing  its  mandate.  Moreover,  a
major lesson from the crisis is that the Central Bank and the Department of Finance both have
vital  roles  to  play  in  maintaining  financial  stability,  which  is  supported  by  the  joint  work  of  the
Financial Stability Group.  In addition, it is always important to keep in mind that the net surplus
income from the Central Bank is an important component in the overall revenue stream accruing
to the Government. This was to the forefront of our minds in ensuring that our new headquarters
was delivered in a timely and cost-effective manner.  
 The  Bank  set  a  number  of  objectives  for  the  design  of  the  building:  to  establish  a  productive
workplace for our city centre staff; to ensure that the building is environmentally sustainable, with
a high energy rating; and to recognise that the new headquarters would be a major city landmark
for the decades ahead. Accordingly, while the shell of the building was already in place, there
was considerable effort to adapt the design to reflect the “One Bank” culture we seek to foster in
the organisation.
I wish to pay particular tribute to former Governor Honohan and members of the Commission for
your  vision  and  commitment  to  this  project,  which  was  initiated  in  2011  and  moved  to  the
implementation phase with the purchase of the site in 2013. At the outset, you recognised that
this  move  would  provide  an  opportunity  to  help  us  work  in  different  and  more  effective  ways,
supported by the adoption of new technologies.
Today, the Dockland Campus brings all our city centre staff previously located in five city offices
into one city centre location. Collectively, we have been here just a few weeks, but already this is
a  vibrant  campus  with  our  staff  embracing  our  new  facilities  and  new  ways  of  working.  It  is
already  evident  that  the  new  environment  is  enhancing  collaboration  and  teamwork  within  the
Bank and helping us to deliver our mandate in a more effective manner. As you move through the
building you will see visual representations of Crann an Óir, which remains the symbol of the
Bank.
The realised design you see today is also a testament to the commitment of our design team, led
by our architect Peter McGovern of HJ Lyons, and to our main contractor, Walls Construction,
who in turn worked with many suppliers and craftspeople to design, construct and deliver the
new headquarters. The list of people to thank is too numerous to mention, but the outcome of
your efforts is very clear. The team fully embraced the Bank’s vision for the premises and this
building  can  take  pride  of  place  here  on  the  river  front,  which  already  is  home  to  so  many
distinguished city landmarks.
I am also pleased that we are joined today by members of Dublin City Council, our neighbours
from the Docklands area, the winners of our national schools competition Generation €uro 2017,
and local schoolchildren who have engaged with the Central Bank through a number of initiatives
including the Early Learning Initiative. The new building will facilitate our ongoing commitment to
our outreach and community programmes, both to our new local community and in the broader
national community.
The  new  building  is  the  first  office  building  in  Ireland  to  achieve  the  Building  Research
Establishment’s  Environmental Assessment  Method  (BREEAM)  ‘Outstanding’  rating  at  design
stage. The building energy rating (BER) is targeted at A2, and will be one of the first commercial
projects in the State to achieve such a rating.
As  an  employer,  we  value  our  work  as  a  knowledge-based,  transparent  public  service
organisation, offering a variety of career choices.  Recognising the importance of knowledge in
the Central Bank, the top floor is dedicated to learning with a new staff library and a learning and
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
development  centre,  while  our  public  space  here  on  the  ground  floor  encompasses  a  visitor
centre and a new archive facility open to the public.
I hope you have had a moment to move through our visitor centre, which will enable us to meet
with the public, explain what we do and why we do it.
Our  two  opening  exhibitions  are  complementary.    The  first  is  the  Euro  Exhibition,  which  was
created by the European Central Bank. This examines the development of euro currency and
includes sections on euro banknotes and their security features, euro coinage and the history of
money. To bring a uniquely Irish focus, we also have created another exhibition, celebrating the
90th anniversary of the Currency Commission, which I mentioned earlier.
These exhibitions are part of a broad programme of activities aimed at increasing transparency
and understanding about the role and work of the Central Bank, in line with our Strategic Plan.
We are pleased to see local schools represented here today and look forward to welcoming you
to the visitor centre.
 To conclude, I am delighted to share the inauguration of our new campus with so many who
have been integral to getting us to this juncture.
I would like finally to thank Chief Operating Officer Gerry Quinn and Director of Facilities Paul
Molumby, who led the programme from inception to conclusion, with the help of many others
who put in extraordinary time and effort over the past four years.
I hope that you enjoy visiting our new headquarters today, and I look forward to our new campus
enabling us to continue to deliver effectively on our mission. 
1
2
3
Moynihan, Maurice (1975), Currency and Central Banking in Ireland 1922–60, Central Bank of Ireland and Gill
and Macmillan
While the Dockland Campus places the Central Bank firmly at the centre of Ireland’s international financial
district, the Currency Centre, which will remain located in Sandyford, continues to be critical to the work of the
Bank.
A Chronology of Main Developments in the Central Bank of Ireland 1943 –2013. Available here.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
