BANK OF UGANDA 
 Remarks 
 By  
 Louis Kasekende (PhD.),  
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 At the Networking Dinner for Saints, Peter & Paul Katale 
Catholic Sub-Parish, Lweza Parish 
 Theme: “The Church, Business and the Economy” 
   June 22, 2017 at Hotel Africana, Kampala 
   1 
His Eminence Cardinal Emmanuel Wamala, 
All Clergy present, 
All Captains of Industry and Businesses present, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 Good evening! 
I am greatly honored to be chosen as a key note speaker at such a gathering of 
men  and  women  that  have  superintended  many  successful  businesses  and 
enterprises.  I  want  to  make  a  few  remarks  this  evening  on  the  topic  of  our 
attitudes  towards  doing  business  and  how  they  affect  our  ability  to  take 
advantage  of  the  opportunities  within  our  economy.  I  know  that  many  of  you 
own or manage businesses; so I hope that you will find something of interest in 
what I have to say.  
 The theme of this dinner is “the church, business and the economy”. Most of us 
here  are  Christians  and  we  take  our  faith  seriously  and  try  to  live  our  lives  in 
line  with  the  teachings  of  the  church.  I  thus  would  like  to  argue  that,  unlike 
what our history has taught us, it is possible to run a successful enterprise while 
living true to the teachings of our faiths.  
 Let  us  recall  the  periods  when  an  economy  has  distortions  such  as  high 
unemployment,  high  inflation,  low  growth  rates,  and  episodes  of  scarcity  of 
 2 
goods or services. In such circumstances like the recent global financial crisis, 
the first group to be blamed by the public are the business people and it is rare 
that  the  public  will  step  back  to  evaluate  the  distortions  in  public  policy  as  a 
plausible  source  of  their  predicament.  May  I  also  remind  you  that  human 
behaviour  has  an  element  of  greed,  most  times,  where  maximising  profits 
irrespective  of  means  and  processes,  tends  to  be  the  driving  force  for  most 
businesses. 
 Combining  the  economic  distortions  and  greed  has  often  implied,  rather 
unfortunately,  that  religion  and  business  are  in  conflict.    Our  history  as  a 
country  is  littered  with  many  of  these  bad  practises  where  business  is 
synonymous  with  such  tag  labels  as  “bamulaze  ekibuga”,  “Bamutomeza”;  and 
has  been  labelled  as  unworthy  of  people  with  values.  Yet  this  is  far  from  the 
truth. Business is a calling and religious beliefs can support rather than disable 
business.  One  such  example  is  Centenary  Bank  which  has  successfully 
embedded its core religious foundation in its business model and yet maintained 
steady growth with a diversity of clientele and employees, irrespective of faith. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  ethics  are  crucial  in  the  world  of  business.  Ethical 
business practises are essential if a business is to flourish in the long term and if 
the business sector is to command the support and confidence of the public.  
 3 
Unfortunately,  ethical  standards  in  business  often  fall  far  short  of  what  is 
desirable.  This  can  be  seen  in  the  way  in  which  businesses  sometimes  evade 
taxes  and  wilfully  default  on  bank  loans,  contributions  to  the  NSSF  or  even 
paying salaries of employees. It is not uncommon for the owners and managers 
of businesses to divert business revenues or loans contracted by the business for 
their  own  personal  use.  To  build  a  thriving  market  economy  in  Uganda, 
dominated  by  private  sector  firms,  major  changes  in  the  ethos  and  culture  of 
business will therefore be necessary.  
 Unless  businessmen  and  women  conduct  their  business  in  an  ethical  manner, 
they will never build trust with their employees, their customers, their creditors 
and their suppliers. In the long term, trust is essential if businesses are to thrive, 
because a lack of trust raises the costs of transacting businesses and this makes 
it much harder for businesses to make profits.  Opportunities like securing funds 
through the capital markets cannot be optimised if we do not run our businesses 
ethically,  with  clear  books  of  accounts  and  transparency.  There  are  also 
opportunities  in  business  partnerships  to  pool  financial  and  human  resources, 
and  gain  economies  of  scale;  to  compete  favourably  for  large  scale  projects. 
However  these  partnerships  cannot  be  sustained  without  ethical  practises  and 
respect to contractual obligations. 
  4 
This event was termed as a networking dinner. Networking in my view entails 
leveraging personal and professional contacts to grow the business through such 
avenues  as  securing  a  market  for  goods  or  products;  optimising  each  other’s 
knowledge  and  expertise including  information  on possible sources of  funding 
or  raw  materials;  management  competencies;  or  access  to  skills.  Without  a 
doubt,  the  church  is  best  placed  to  teach  us  the  key  tenets  of  human  relations 
such  as  accountability,  self-respect  and  respect  for  others;  and  taking  into 
considerations  the  interest  of  others  and  not  only  our  own  as  espoused  in 
chapter 2 of  Philippians.  
 I also think that the Catholic Church and its history teach businesses one critical 
thing  –  that  is  inculcating  the  vision,  goals  of  the  entity  in  each  individual 
involved  in  the  business  or  institution  to  ensure  sustainability  and  survival 
beyond  the  life  or  tenure  of  the  initial  vision  bearer.  There  is  a  paucity  of 
enterprises  in  Uganda  that  transcend  generations.  For  example,  do  any  of  the 
giants  of  the  past  like  Sanyu  Tissue;  Suleiman  Serwanga’s  Bus  Company  or 
Kizito block factory exist today? Therefore, I would like to implore all of you to 
put ethics at the heart of your work; establish credible governance structures and 
systems for your firms; and treat all of your employees, customers and suppliers 
in the same way as you would hope to be treated yourself.  This after all, is the 
teaching of books of Mathew 7:12 and Luke 6:31. 
  5 
Having underscored the importance of ethics; I need also to emphasize the need 
for  our  working  lives,  to  be  guided  by  the  best  professional  practises  of  our 
chosen vocations. If we work in the business sector, business decisions must be 
guided by objective, commercial criteria if our businesses are to be successful. 
For those of us who have the privilege of managing a business or an institution, 
the best way we can contribute to our society is by ensuring that our business or 
institution is managed well, so that it is successful and serves the interests of our 
community and provides employment for the people of this country.  
 I  think  that  we  have  to  accept  the  reality  that  many  of  the  problems  of  the 
business  sector  in  Uganda  can  be  traced  to  weaknesses  in  the  way  in  which 
firms  are  managed.  Bringing  our  religious  values  to  bear  in  our  personal  and 
professional  lives  coupled  with  adherence  to  commercial  principles  should  be 
potent tools in addressing business failure. 
 Your Eminence and distinguished guests; we however live in a multi-faith and 
multi-ethnic  society.  Successful  businesses  cannot  afford  to  discriminate 
between  people  of  different  religious  faiths  in  their  dealings  with  customers, 
suppliers and employees. While the teachings of our faiths are essential guides 
for  our  inter-personal  relations  and  values,  we  cannot  allow  sectarianism  to 
influence the way in which we make business decisions. 
  6 
I will conclude with these words of wisdom from Pope Francis; “Business is a 
vocation, and a noble vocation, provided that those engaged in it see themselves 
challenged by a greater meaning in life; this will enable them truly to serve the 
common good by striving to increase the goods of this world and to make them 
more accessible to all.”  
 Thank you for listening. 
 7 
