Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity, prices
and monetary policy
Speech by Mr Takahide Kiuchi, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting
with business leaders, Yamanashi, 23 February 2017.
I. Economic Activity and Prices in Japan
 A. Current Situation of Economic Activity and Prices and the Baseline Scenario of the
Outlook
The Bank of Japan explains the current situation of Japan’s economic activity and prices and the
baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  in  the  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  which  is  released  after
each Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM), and in the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (the
Outlook  Report),  which  is  published  quarterly.  Next,  I  will  provide  an  overview  of  the  current
developments in and outlook for economic activity and prices based on the latest Outlook Report
released in January 2017.
Japan’s  economy  has  continued  its  moderate  recovery  trend. As  for  the  outlook,  it  is  likely  to
continue growing at a pace above the potential growth rate through the projection period — that
is,  through  fiscal  2018  —  on  the  back  of  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  the
effects of the government’s large-scale stimulus measures, with the growth rates in overseas
economies increasing moderately. Comparing the current projections with the previous ones, the
projected  growth  rates  are  somewhat  higher,  mainly  reflecting  improvement  in  overseas
economies and the yen’s depreciation, in addition to an upward revision to the GDP due to the
comprehensive revision to GDP statistics.
The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food
has been about 0 percent. Regarding the outlook, it is likely to increase from about 0 percent and
become slightly positive, reflecting developments in energy prices. Thereafter, it is expected to
increase  toward  2  percent  as  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  (the  output  gap)
improves  and  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  rise.  Comparing  the  current
projections with the previous ones, the projected rates of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh
food) are more or less unchanged. The timing of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all
items less fresh food) reaching around 2 percent will likely be at the end of the projection period
— that is, around fiscal 2018.
B. My Outlook
I  believe  that  Japan’s  current  growth  rate  and  inflation  rate  are  generally  stable,  in  light  of  the
economy’s growth potential, and that there is a high probability of this stable situation continuing
during the projection period in the January 2017 Outlook Report. However, it can be said that my
view continues to be fairly cautious compared with the medians of the Policy Board members’
forecasts.
Let  me  explain  the  reasons  behind  my  view.  First,  there  is  not  a  driving  force  —  including  in
terms  of  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  —  that  will  bring  about  economic  growth  that  is
sustainable  at  a  level  clearly  higher  than  the  potential  growth  rate,  as  the  phase  of  economic
recovery has been prolonged and the output gap has already almost closed. The economy is
therefore likely to continue growing generally at about the same level as the potential growth rate,
which is estimated to be around 0.5 percent. Second, as a result of these factors, the output gap
is expected to remain more or less at a neutral level. Therefore, in my view, price conditions will
remain consistent with the economy’s growth potential, as it is difficult to expect that there will be
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
a  marked  rise  in  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation,  which  excludes  factors  causing  temporary
fluctuations, such as in fresh food prices and energy prices, as well as in import prices that are
affected by changes in foreign exchange rates.
1. Considerations regarding the economic outlook
I consider that Japan’s economy is likely to continue growing generally at about the same level as
the potential growth rate throughout the projection period that covers through fiscal 2018. In my
view, however, risks are skewed to the downside, especially at the end of the projection period. I
will now explain risks to the economic outlook to which I pay particular attention.
a. Overseas economies and exports
Points to be considered regarding overseas economies include (1) the U.S. fiscal policy and its
global impact, (2) the possibility of protectionist policies spreading around the world, (3) China’s
lagged response to structural problems such as excess debt and excess production capacity,
and (4) the vulnerability of the banking sector in Europe.
Among these, I am particularly paying attention to the U.S. fiscal policy and its global impact.
Since fall 2016, the possible implementation of large-scale fiscal policy in the United States has
been factored into financial markets, which has in some way contributed to the improvement in
the economic sentiment worldwide. However, the detail and scale of such fiscal policy are still
unclear,  and  it  may  take  considerable  time  for  them  to  be  revealed.  Moreover,  reflecting  the
decline  of  the  U.S.  economy’s  presence,  due  mainly  to  growth  in  emerging  economies,  the
effects of the U.S. fiscal policy on the global economy may actually be less than what financial
markets expect. On the other hand, it is also possible to say that, due to the worldwide rise in
long-term  interest  rates,  which  was  triggered  by  a  rise  in  U.S.  long-term  interest  rates,  the
“crowding out” effect of the U.S. fiscal policy has been produced on a global scale. Ultimately, if
negative effects — such as (1) the downward pressure exerted by the worldwide rise in long-
term interest rates on each economy and (2) the destabilization of financial markets caused by
an outflow of funds from emerging markets in response to the appreciation of the U.S. dollar —
outweigh  the  positive  effects  of  the  U.S.  fiscal  policy  on  each  economy,  this  could  cause  a
negative impact on the global economy as a whole.
In  addition  to  such  developments  in  overseas  economies,  it  should  be  noted  that  Japan’s
economy has been increasing its momentum on the back of the pick-up in exports since the
latter  half  of  2016.  I  therefore  consider  that  the  export  environment  poses  the  most  serious
downside  risks  to  Japan’s  economy.  In  relation  to  this,  my  understanding  is  that  there  is  a
possibility that the potential volatility of yen exchange rates has risen toward both appreciation
and  depreciation  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  after  the  introduction  of  Quantitative  and
Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control in September 2016, and I am paying
attention to the possible effects of these developments on the export environment.
b. Business fixed investment
The first point to be considered regarding business fixed investment is developments in foreign
exchange rates. Specifically, if the yen appreciates in the foreign exchange market as a result of
investors’  risk  aversion  having  increased  globally,  due  in  part  to  developments  in  overseas
economies,  this  could  in  turn  deteriorate  corporate  profits,  thereby  having  the  effect  of
constraining business fixed investment.
The second point is that medium- to long-term growth expectations for Japan’s economy might
not be raised as much as expected, depending on, for example, the progress made with respect
to promotion of labor force participation of women and the elderly as well as the government’s
growth  strategy  and  the  private  sector’s  initiatives  in  strengthening  the  economy’s  growth
potential.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
c. Private consumption
The  first  point  to  be  taken  into  account  regarding  private  consumption  is  price  developments.
Namely, given that nominal wages continue to grow only moderately, there is a possibility that, if
there are increases in prices — such as a surge in fresh food prices, a rise in energy prices, and
an increase in import prices due to the yen’s depreciation — households’ outlook for real wages
will deteriorate, thereby exerting downward pressure on private consumption.
Second, if corporate profits decrease due to the yen’s appreciation, or if the economy’s potential
growth rate and firms’ growth expectations for the domestic market wind up being lower than
expected, firms might become more cautious about wage raises, which could in turn restrain
private consumption.
2. Thinking behind the outlook for prices
Let me turn to the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food). The Bank’s
baseline scenario is that the timing of the rate of change reaching around 2 percent will likely be
at the end of the projection period — that is, around fiscal 2018. On the other hand, my view is
much more cautious than the baseline scenario: the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all
items  less  fresh  food)  will  likely  remain  well  below  2  percent  throughout  the  projection  period
through fiscal 2018. I therefore have been casting a dissenting vote on the description on the
price  outlook  in  the  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  and  the  Outlook  Report  and  submitting  a
proposal to change the description at MPMs.
I will explain what lies behind the difference between the Bank’s baseline scenario and my view.
The first is the difference in the outlook for the output gap. The baseline scenario assumes that
the output gap will improve as a trend and upward pressure on prices stemming from demand-
supply conditions is likely to be exerted noticeably. As I mentioned, however, economic growth
that is clearly above the potential growth rate is not easily sustainable, and therefore I consider
that the notable improvement in the output gap is unlikely.
The second is the difference in the outlook for medium- to long-term inflation expectations. The
baseline  scenario  is  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  likely  to  follow  an
increasing trend and gradually converge to around 2 percent. However, the inflation rate is still at
a low level, and this most probably will restrain the rate of increase in wages resulting from the
wage negotiations between workers and management this coming spring. I therefore take the
view that medium- to long-term inflation expectations will be more or less unchanged from the
current level for the time being.
The  third  is  the  difference  in  the  outlook  for  services  prices. Administered  prices  and  some
services  prices  seem  to  be  not  particularly  responsive  to  the  changes  in  demand-supply
conditions, and these prices continue to show dull responses even amid the tightening of labor
market  conditions.  In  particular,  housing  rent  has  declined  at  a  moderately  accelerated  pace
recently, and it is my view that this might possibly constrain the inflation rate.
The fourth is the difference in the outlook for the effects of the yen’s depreciation. According to
the baseline scenario, the observed inflation rate is expected to rise, due in part to the recent yen
depreciation. In this regard, I consider that, in light of the experience since 2013, although foreign
exchange  rates  seem  to  have  an  increasing  impact  on  inflation  through  import  prices  —
reflecting structural changes such as the rise in import share of electrical parts that are used for
the  domestic  production  of  electrical  appliances  —  such  rates  will  affect  inflation  for  only  a
relatively short time and have a limited impact on the underlying trend in inflation.
The fifth is the difference in the outlook for wages. In my view, it is unreasonable to expect a
noticeable rise in the rate of increase in wages from the wage negotiations between workers and
management this coming spring. I also consider that, if the yen’s depreciation and other factors
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
cause  a  temporary  rise  in  prices  of  items  with  high  price  volatility  —  such  as  energy-related
products, food products, and electrical appliances — this more likely could result in a repeat of
the situation in which a deterioration in consumer sentiment will result in weaker-than-expected
private consumption, thereby restraining the inflation rate.
II. Conduct of Monetary Policy
In September 2016, the Bank conducted a comprehensive assessment of the developments in
economic activity and prices as well as the policy effects since the introduction of QQE. Based
on  its  findings,  the  Bank  decided  to  introduce  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control,  which  is  a  new
monetary policy framework.
In my view, the introduction of yield curve control largely aimed at addressing some concerns
that had arisen since the introduction of QQE with a Negative Interest Rate. These include the
possibilities that the flattening of the yield curve at a low level might excessively squeeze banks’
profits and that a substantial decline in interest rates at the long and super-long end will lower the
rates of return on insurance and pension products and thereby might have a negative impact on
economic activity through a deterioration in people’s sentiment.
I consider that there is a positive aspect to yield curve control. For example, the Bank now has
some  latitude  in  terms  of  the  pace  of  its  purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)
because it changed the target for money market operations to short- and long-term interest rates
upon  the  introduction  of  yield  curve  control.  This  leads  to  the  possibility  that  the  pace  of  JGB
purchases will be reduced, thereby increasing the sustainability of such purchases.
However, as I will elaborate on shortly, my view is that there also are many negative aspects to
yield curve control. Based on my examination and comparison of positive and negative aspects, I
have been casting a dissenting vote on yield curve control since its introduction in September
2016 through the most recent MPM held in January 2017.
A. Assessment of Yield Curve Control
1. Issues regarding long-term interest rate control
I  view  the  following  as  issues  with  regard  to  long-term  interest  rate  control.  First,  under  yield
curve control, it is uncertain whether the pace of the Bank’s JGB purchases will slow to an extent
that would be sufficient to enhance the sustainability of such purchases; instead, there is a risk
that  the  Bank  might  need  to  further  increase  the  pace  of  its  purchases.  Since  “quantity”  and
“interest rate” are generally determined simultaneously, my understanding is that it is difficult to
conduct  smooth  money  market  operations  while  setting  explicit  targets  for  both  dimensions.
When the interest rate dimension is to be controlled, control over the quantity dimension could be
lost. Therefore, the Bank’s new policy framework can be explained as having taken this point into
consideration,  and  non-rigid  targets  have  been  set  on  both  the  quantity  and  interest  rate
dimensions — indicating that an annual pace of increase in the amount outstanding of the Bank’s
JGB holdings should be “about” 80 trillion yen, and the target level of 10-year JGB yields is set at
“around” zero percent. However, I regard this as entailing a high possibility that neither target will
be achieved. Such a possibility is likely to materialize when there are external shocks to the JGB
market.  I  therefore  consider  that  the  current  upward  pressure  on  Japanese  long-term  interest
rates, which has been stemming from the rise in such rates in the United States since November
2016, is posing the first challenge for the Bank in controlling long-term interest rates.
Second, of the elements that constitute nominal long-term interest rates, only term premiums are
considered to be directly affected by the adjustments in the pace of JGB purchases. However,
since  term  premiums  have  been  reduced  to  a  considerable  degree  due  to  the  Bank’s  JGB
purchases to date, room for a further reduction is likely to be limited. On this basis, in order for
the Bank to smoothly control nominal long-term interest rates while avoiding large fluctuations in
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the pace of its JGB purchases, one option is to make use of forward guidance regarding the
future path of short-term interest rates. However, I believe that the longer the term of interest
rates, the more likely the credibility of such forward guidance is lessened, thereby making it more
difficult to control interest rates.
Third,  controlling  long-term  interest  rates  at  a  certain  level  could  undermine  the  automatic
stabilizer  function  of  the  economy,  which  operates  through  fluctuations  in  interest  rates.
Compared  with  when  long-term  interest  rates  are  not  controlled,  controlling  these  rates  could
increase the volatility in the economy and destabilize it. For example, in a case where a negative
shock hits the economy and inflation expectations decline, if the Bank conducts an operation so
that nominal long-term interest rates do not decline, such rates in real terms would rise in turn,
thereby causing restraints on economic activity. In contrast, in a case where there is a positive
shock  to  the  economy  and  inflation  expectations  rise,  if  the  Bank  conducts  an  operation  to
constrain a rise in nominal long-term interest rates, such rates in real terms would decline in
turn, thereby possibly producing an excessive stimulus to economic activity. In this regard, the
Bank’s monetary policy framework allows the Bank to make policy adjustments as appropriate,
taking into account developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions.
However, I consider that, in reality, changing the target level of 10-year JGB yields is not easy.
That is, if the target level is reviewed frequently, there is a risk that the credibility of the target
might decline, leading to possible market volatility. Let me also note that, considering that the
Bank is controlling not only short-term interest rates but also long-term ones in order to achieve
the price stability target of 2 percent in a stable manner, it would be unreasonable to raise the
target level of 10-year JGB yields in the near future when the inflation rate remains at a low level.
Fourth, if the Bank continues with its current pace of JGB purchases, I consider that there is a
risk of falling into a spiral in which the liquidity in the JGB market will decline substantially and a
resultant increase in the liquidity premium would lead to a rise in long-term interest rates, thereby
causing the need for the Bank to further increase the pace of its JGB purchases.
Fifth, in my understanding, although the fixed-rate JGB purchase operations and fixed-rate funds-
supplying  operations  with  a  long-term  maturity  could  contribute  to  raising  the  Bank’s  ability  to
control interest rates, they could destabilize the JGB market through significant impairment of
market functioning, as well as distort the pricing mechanism in overall financial markets. That is
why I dissented from introducing these tools of market operations.
2. Adverse effects of the negative short-term policy interest rate
With  regard  to  the  adverse  effects  of  guiding  the  short-term  policy  interest  rate  in  negative
territory,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  financial  intermediation  function  would  be  impaired  through  a
deterioration in financial institutions’ profits. I am concerned about such a risk, although it has not
yet materialized, as this should be kept in mind if the negative short-term interest rate policy is to
be prolonged.
Specifically,  banks  may  take  excessive  risks  at  a  time  of  profit  deterioration  in  an  attempt  to
increase their profits, but they may become excessively risk averse in the future, mainly because
losses will be incurred by a possible worsening of economic and financial developments. This
could  negatively  affect  economic  activity  and  financial  markets  by  exacerbating  firms’  and
households’ borrowing constraints and through banks’ fire sales of assets.
Furthermore,  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  the  impairment  of  banks’  financial  soundness
might also have negative effects on the efficiency and productivity of the economy. To give an
example,  amid  a  continued  decline  in  banks’  profitability,  banks  with  declining  loss-absorbing
capacity might postpone appropriate treatment of borrowers with weak performance. This may
cause a situation in which capital and labor are being allocated to inefficient firms, and thus, in
terms  of  the  overall  economy,  result  in  pushing  down  the  rate  of  increase  in  total  factor
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
productivity over the long run.
In consideration of these points, let me mention the following. Monetary policy is generally thought
to  affect  the  demand  side  of  the  economy.  However,  if  the  policy  impairs  financial  system
stability,  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  —  for  example,  the  productivity  growth  rate  and  the
potential  growth  rate  —  may  also  be  adversely  affected,  causing  significant  losses  in  social
welfare.
B. My Proposal Aimed at Enhancing the Stability and Sustainability of the Bank’s JGB
Purchases
I have been submitting a proposal, which includes the following: the Bank should set the amounts
of  its  asset  purchases  as  the  target  for  money  market  operations,  and  with  regard  to  the
guidelines for asset purchases, it should purchase JGBs so that their amount outstanding will
increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  45  trillion  yen.  Next,  I  will  explain  the  idea  behind  the
proposal.
The Bank has been purchasing large amounts of JGBs under QQE, and the share of its JGB
holdings already has reached about 40 percent of the total outstanding amount of JGBs issued.
On the other hand, financial institutions in Japan need to hold JGBs for a variety of reasons. For
example,  banks  need  to  hold  a  certain  amount  of  JGBs  for  such  purposes  as  collateral  for
transactions  and  compliance  with  financial  regulations.  Pension  funds  are  required  to  hold  a
certain portion of their investment assets as safe assets, like JGBs, with a view to structuring an
appropriate portfolio. It is necessary for life insurance companies to hold a fair amount of JGBs,
particularly  super-long-term  ones,  for  the  purpose  of  asset-liability  management  (ALM)  and  of
meeting  accounting  requirements,  as  they  have  very-long-term  liabilities  because  of  their  life
insurance products.
Therefore,  it  is  not  the  case  that  the  Bank  is  able  to  hold  all  of  the  JGBs  issued.  In  my
understanding, if the Bank continues with the current pace of JGB purchases, it inevitably will
have difficulty in continuing to make such purchases. Moreover, there is a concern that the more
difficult the JGB purchases become, the more easily interest rates will be volatile, as uncertainty
over  the  future  monetary  policy  increases  and  the  liquidity  in  the  JGB  market  declines
excessively.  This  could  have  a  serious  impact  on  financial  markets  and  economic  activity.  In
order to prevent such incidents from occurring, I have been proposing since the MPM held in April
2015  to  reduce  the  annual  pace  of  increase  in  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  Bank’s  JGB
holdings from the current pace of about 80 trillion yen to about 45 trillion yen.
My understanding is that, since the introduction of yield curve control in September 2016, given
that  the  Bank  has  temporarily  reduced  the  pace  of  purchases  of  super-long-term  JGBs,  for
example,  market  participants  widely  share  the  view  that  the  Bank  might  proceed  with  the
reduction in the pace of its JGB purchases as long as circumstances permit. It should be noted
that one of the reasons why financial markets have stayed relatively calm despite such a view is
that market participants are to some degree accepting the stock view — that is, the idea that the
reduction in long-term interest rates and resultant monetary easing effects depend on a central
bank’s holdings of government bonds (stock) rather than the pace of bond purchases (flow).
Under  these  circumstances,  I  believe  that  the  Bank  should  set  the  amounts  of  its  asset
purchases  as  the  target  for  money  market  operations,  and  for  the  time  being  incrementally
reduce  the  pace  of  its  JGB  purchases  to  the  level  at  which  the  amount  outstanding  will  be
unchanged, instead of conducting yield curve control under which the controllability of the amount
of its JGB purchases seems uncertain. This alternative measure will contribute to making the
Bank’s asset purchases more sustainable and enhancing market stability. By doing so, the Bank
can keep long-term real interest rates stably at low levels and thereby secure the accumulated
monetary easing effects seen so far, which I believe is most important for the Bank’s monetary
policy.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
C. My View regarding the Price Stability Target and the Role of Monetary Policy
1. Need for the flexibility of the 2 percent price stability target
In addition to the proposal to change the guidelines for money market operations, I have been
submitting a proposal to reset the time frame for achieving the price stability target of 2 percent to
the medium to long term. I consider it appropriate to implement these two proposals together.
Next, I will explain my view regarding the price stability target that lies behind my proposals.
First of all, I believe that the optimal inflation rate is at a level where households and firms can
engage in economic activity in a stable manner without worrying about price developments. This
rate  is  mostly  consistent  with  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  of  households  and
firms. However, I should note that a wide range of indicators suggest that medium- to long-term
inflation expectations have been clearly below 2 percent for a long time. I therefore consider it
inappropriate at this point to aim at achieving the 2 percent price stability target in a short period
of time — whereby the inflation rate will be maintained at around 2 percent in a stable manner —
not  only  because  this  is  unfeasible,  but  also  because  this  will  have  a  negative  impact  on  the
economic activity of households and firms.
2. Economic structure and the underlying trend in inflation
I  would  note  that  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  is  considered  to  be  determined  by  various
factors, including the supply and demand balances in goods and services, developments in the
labor market, the observed inflation rate, and the level of a central bank’s inflation target. From a
somewhat long-term perspective, it seems to be largely influenced by structural factors of the
economy, such as the productivity growth rate and the potential growth rate.
For  example,  in  a  situation  where  the  economy’s  potential  growth  rate  and  firms’  growth
expectations for the domestic market are at low levels, it is natural for firms to take a cautious
stance toward raising base pay as such a raise could squeeze their profits in the future, and
workers seem to acknowledge such a stance. In this situation, medium- to long-term inflation
expectations of households and firms seem likely to be formed at low levels, thereby restraining
the observed inflation rate at a low level as well. If, under these circumstances, the inflation rate
were to rise temporarily due in part to the effects of monetary policy, consumers might restrain
spending given concerns over the possible slower rate of increase in real wages, and as a result
the observed inflation rate could decline in a short period of time.
In fact, it is difficult for monetary policy to directly bring about a positive change to the economic
structure.  To  achieve  such  a  change,  it  is  necessary  for  firms  to  make  efforts  to  enhance
innovation  and  for  the  government  to  create  initiatives  for  structural  reforms,  including
deregulation  that  will  encourage  firms  to  make  utmost  efforts  in  that  regard  and  measures  to
respond to the population decline. In order for the public to be able to enhance the quality of life in
a sustainable manner, it is absolutely necessary that Japan’s growth potential be strengthened
through an improvement in the productivity growth rate and the potential growth rate.
3. Future role of monetary policy
If Japan’s economy is able to achieve strong growth with further positive changes in economic
structure going forward, households’ and firms’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations will
rise to around 2 percent, and this will support the observed inflation rate continuing to be stable at
around 2 percent. In this situation, it can be expected that it will become appropriate to set the
price stability target at 2 percent. However, as it is difficult to project the time frame in which such
a positive change in the economy will occur, I believe that the price stability target of 2 percent
should be set as the target to be achieved in the medium to long term and be regarded as a kind
of symbol in the Bank’s aim, along with the government and firms, to realize a strong economy
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
that is consistent with the 2 percent price stability target.
That  being  said,  it  seems  difficult  for  the  government  and  firms  to  make  efforts  to  promote  a
positive change in economic structure under unstable financial and economic conditions. In this
sense, my understanding is that the Bank’s role is to ensure financial and economic stability,
thereby consistently providing indirect support for efforts by the government and firms so that the
economy’s growth potential — which is represented mainly by the potential growth rate and the
productivity growth rate — will increase to the level consistent with the 2 percent inflation rate. To
this end, rather than aiming to strengthen monetary easing at any cost, it is more important to
maintain the stable financial and economic environment by keeping long-term real interest rates
at  low  levels  in  a  stable  manner  and  securing  the  monetary  easing  effects  seen  so  far.  My
proposal to change the guidelines for money market operations, which I have been submitting at
MPMs,  is  based  on  such  a  viewpoint.  I  believe  that  this  proposal  is  in  fact  a  quicker  way  of
achieving the 2 percent price stability target.
4. Importance of flexible monetary policy conduct
It is important that the Bank, with the stance of aiming at achieving the price stability target of 2
percent in the medium to long term, conduct monetary policy in a flexible manner while paying
close  attention  to  risks  such  as  an  emergence  of  financial  imbalances,  in  view  of  ensuring
economic and price stability in the medium to long term.
In  fact,  the  Bank  conducts  monetary  policy,  based  on  the  framework  of  assessing  economic
activity and prices from two perspectives, in the context of the price stability target. Specifically,
the  first  perspective  is  examining,  as  regards  economic  activity  and  prices  over  the  next  two
years or so, whether the outlook deemed most likely by the Bank follows a path of sustainable
growth under price stability. The second perspective is examining, in the longer term, various
risks that are most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy aimed at achieving sustainable
growth  under  price  stability.  In  particular,  financial  imbalances  will  be  examined  as  a  risk  that
could  significantly  impact  economic  activity  and  prices  when  they  materialize,  although  the
probability of their emergence is not necessarily high.
It is fair to say that this framework was formulated in light of the lessons learned regarding the
monetary policy conduct during the bubble period of the latter half of the 1980s. That was when
policy action to address the accumulation of financial imbalances had been delayed in a situation
where  attention  was  focused  on  stable  general  prices  at  the  time,  and  policy  measures  to
achieve  economic  stability  in  the  medium  to  long  term  were  not  implemented.  I  consider  it
necessary to recall the background and idea behind why the framework of assessing economic
activity and prices from the two perspectives was established.
5. Responsibility of the Bank
Lastly,  I  will  touch  on  the  Bank’s  responsibility.  I  believe  that  the  Bank  has  an  important
responsibility to make every effort to maintain financial and economic stability under the flexible
price  stability  target  and  policy  conduct.  To  this  end,  the  Bank  needs  to  normalize,  at  an
appropriate  timing,  the  unprecedented  monetary  policy  that  has  been  implemented  since  the
introduction of QQE. The Bank also should carefully address various possible adverse effects of
monetary easing — such as (1) turmoil in the JGB market stemming from a decline in liquidity,
(2) a malfunctioning of financial intermediation under the low interest rate environment, and (3) a
deterioration in the Bank’s financial soundness in the case of a rise in the short-term interest rate
while  having  a  massive  balance  sheet  —  so  as  to  prevent  such  adverse  effects  from
materializing and having significant negative effects on Japan’s economy and people’s lives.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
