Arthur Yuen: Bank account opening and maintenance
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Arthur  Yuen,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, at the Briefing cum networking session on "Bank Account Opening and Maintenance",
Hong Kong, 21 April 2017.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, 
 1.  A very warm welcome to all of you to this briefing and networking session.  We are going to
discuss the important issue of business account opening and maintenance, and this event
is jointly organised by the HKMA and Invest Hong Kong.  I would like to first of all welcome all
the representatives of Chambers of Commerce, who share the same concern as the HKMA
that some SMEs and start-up companies from overseas are finding it difficult to open bank
accounts in Hong Kong.
2.  I am sure you would all appreciate that over the past years, customer due diligence (CDD)
requirements  have  tightened globally,  and  Hong  Kong  followed  this  international  trend.
 Needless to mention is also that a very small number of banks, for a variety of reasons,
need to comply with requirements or standards mandated by their head offices or overseas
authorities,  thus  leading  to  de-risking  efforts  in  some  instances.    Surely  no  one  would
disagree that we are now in a more complex world, and sometimes we indeed have to deal
with  sub-optimal  outcome.    But  I  totally  appreciate  that  knowing  it  is  one  thing,  and
experiencing the effect of it is quite another.
3.  To address this concern of the business community, the HKMA has been working very hard
with banks and various stakeholders in tackling the issue.  Our aim is to maintain a robust
AML  regime  in  Hong  Kong  while  the  system  does  not  undermine  access  by  legitimate
businesses and ordinary citizens to basic banking services.  So we require banks to apply a
risk-based  approach  to  the  CDD  process,  and  also  emphasize  the  importance  of  banks’
engagement  with  customers  to  ensure  that  they  are  treated  fairly.    Since  our  sharing
session last summer and the further guidance we provided to banks last September, it is
now time to take stock of the latest developments.  I will leave it to the banks to talk more
about the improvement measures that they have pursued or are pursuing.  They would also
discuss the various practical aspects relating to account opening and account maintenance
at the panel discussion later on.
4.  While full efforts are being made to improve the situation, there is also feedback that some
foreign companies are under the perception that Hong Kong is not a welcoming place for
business, and have therefore turned to banks in other jurisdictions to open accounts.  This is
very bad for Hong Kong’s reputation.  For those of us who know what is being done, Hong
Kong is clearly and definitely not closed for business.  One of the important points now is
therefore : how can we turn around such a negative perception.
5.  Last month, the HKMA launched a dedicated webpage on our website to provide more
comprehensive information related to bank account opening and maintenance.  At the same
time,  we  have  set  up  a dedicated  email  account  to  facilitate  the  public  and  business
community  to  provide  feedback  directly  to  the  HKMA.    The  HKMA  webpage  contains
information  about  account  opening  and  maintenance  procedures,  documentation  and
information  requirements  for  opening  banking  accounts,  and  contact  details  of  banks. 
Furthermore,  our  webpage  also  provides  information  on  what  banks  should  not  do,  and
useful  tips  for  reference  of  customers  whose  account  opening  applications  have  been
rejected.    There  is  also  a  “What’s  New”  section  to  provide  an  update  of  banks’  recent
initiatives regarding account opening and maintenance.  The feedback we received through
the email account is handled by a dedicated team at the HKMA.
6.  Some of you might have already browsed through our dedicated webpage and noted that
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
some banks have acted on your comments that a dedicated hotline would help improve
customer  experience.    Indeed,  some  unpleasant  experience  might  have  been  caused  by
mis-communication or even just a language issue, and a dedicated hotline resourced with
properly trained front-line staff would be helpful. 
7.  In our outreach to Chambers in recent months, we have also received comments that it is
not  user-friendly  for  business  persons  overseas  to  make  several  trips  to  Hong  Kong  for
opening a bank account.  We fully agree with that.  And I would like to share with you that
some  banks  have  launched  what  we  may  call  a “pre-vetting” process  for  account
opening.    This  means  an  applicant  may  request  to  first  submit  the  documentation  and
information required for opening an account to the bank by mail, fax or email, and the bank
will  “pre-screen”  or  “pre-vet”  them  before  arranging  the  applicant  to  have  a  face-to-face
meeting in Hong Kong.  I trust this change in process flow would be welcome by customers
based overseas. 
8.  We are also working closely with the industry to explore the use of technology to enhance
the  efficiency  of  account  opening  processes,  such  as KYC  Utilities  (“KYCU”)  and
technology to allow remote account opening.  You may have heard about KYCU, which are
third-party platforms that aim to manage data as a strategic asset across banks to reduce
duplication and cost and assist banks in making decisions, on all types of risks, including but
not limited to AML, and as a result to make smarter business decisions.  For example, a
single  source  of  customer  data  or  documents  would  remove  the  need  of  a  customer  to
provide KYC documentation to every bank, and may shorten the turnaround time for new
account opening.  We have had a number of discussions with major banks and relevant
technology providers and steps have already been taken by both the HKMA and some major
banks to take this work forward.  At the same time, we understand that several banks are
looking  at  the  use  of  technology  to  allow  remote  account  application  by  the  use  of  video
conferencing.  We are working closely with those banks and the industry association and we
believe this is another promising development on the horizon.
9.  Admittedly a lot of related work is still in progress, but we hope that you would begin to feel
that customer experience is improving.  The HKMA will continue to work with the banking
industry, business community and stakeholders to deal with this global and very complex
issue.  And if you have any ideas and comments, please feel free to raise it at the panel
discussion,  or  you  may  approach  your  “targeted”  banks  at  the  networking  session  that
follows,  or  make  use  of  the  HKMA’s  dedicated  webpage  and  email  account  to  provide
feedback to us. 
10.  I have talked long enough and now is the time for me to pass the stage to Mr Charles Ng,
Associate  Director-General  of  Investment  Promotion  of  InvestHK,  co-organiser  of  today’s
event, to say a few words.  Charles, please. 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
