Amando  Tetangco:  Empowering  Local  Government  Units  with
knowledge sharing
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the Signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between the
BSP  and  Local  Government  Units  (LGUs)  of  Metro  Manila  to  launch  the  BSP  Knowledge
Resource Network, Manila, 14 March 2017.
 On behalf of the members of the Monetary Board and my colleagues at the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas, I thank the heads and the representatives of the LGUs here in Metro Manila, our fellow
workers in government, and other distinguished guests, for joining us today to launch our latest
project under our National Strategy for Financial Inclusion.  
In particular, we thank our LGUs at the NCR for joining the BSP as our partners in the Knowledge
Resource Network through your respective libraries.
We  look  forward  therefore  to  share  with  your  libraries,  BSP  information,  reports,  publications,
research and online research assistance on the subjects of economics, banking and finance. 
For free.  
Our objective is to help Filipinos become better informed and empowered with reliable and up-to
date sources of information so that they can make better economic and financial decisions.
Our  plan  is  to  set  up  partnerships  for  KRN  across  the  country  with  other  LGUs,  national
agencies, universities and colleges. This is in addition to the Economic and Financial Learning
Centers which the BSP has set up in our regional offices in La Union, Cebu and Davao, as well
as in our 19 branches all over the country. 
The KRN and our EFLCs complement each other: our KRN is based in our partners’ libraries
while EFLCs are based in BSP offices and branches.
The BSP continues to expand its network to reach out to more people and more areas in our
drive to develop a more inclusive financial system that supports inclusive growth.  With the KRN,
people who need information need not travel to the BSP to access our data. In the process, they
save time and resources by using your KRN-partner libraries. In other words, you and the cities
you  represent  are  key  in  building  networks  of  knowledge  and  communication  for  your
constituents – whether they are MSMEs, government agencies, students or reseachers. 
Indeed,  this  is  an  exciting  time  to  be  informed  and  empowered  participants  of  our  country’s
economic  growth.  For  your  information,  the  Philippine  economy  grew  by  6.8  percent  in  2016,
making us one of the fastest growing economies in Asia.
This is not the first time that you have partnered with us in our financial inclusion efforts.  Most
LGUs  here  have  also  joined  the  BSP-initiated  Credit  Surety  Fund  or  CSF  which  enables
cooperatives without sufficient collateral to access bank loans.
We have made great strides in this area. We now have 45 CSFs in 30 provinces and 15 cities
nationwide. As of 31 December 2016, cumulative approved loans for 16,310 beneficiaries have
reached  Php  3.25  billion.  Progress  in  the  program’s  implementation  could  not  have  been
possible without your help.  Salamat sa inyo!
Moving forward, the Philippines is expected to sustain its growth momentum based on our strong
economic fundamentals and domestic drivers of growth. We hope that similar to CSFs, the KRN
will enhance our economic prospects as more financially knowledgeable citizens participate in
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
the benefits development brings.
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  English  philosopher  Francis  Bacon  famously  said  “Knowledge  is
Power.” And  to  this, American  computer  chip  inventor  Robert  Noyce  added  that  “knowledge
shared is power multiplied.” 
 The launch of the Knowledge Resource Network here in Metro Manila is the beginning. We look
forward to the future with confidence that our partnerships under the KRN will generate multiple
benefits for our people.
 Maraming salamat at Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
