Peter Praet: Calibrating unconventional monetary policy
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at The
ECB and Its Watchers XVIII Conference, organised by the Center for Financial Studies and the
Institute  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability  at  Goethe  University  Frankfurt,  panel  on  the
"Assessment of the expanded asset purchase programme" (with John Taylor and Jan Hatzius),
Frankfurt am Main, 6 April 2017.
 I would like to thank Federic Holm-Hadulla for his contribution to this speech.
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  stance  is  currently  driven  by  three  main  mutually  reinforcing
instruments: a negative deposit facility rate; an expanded asset purchase programme covering a
broad range of private and public securities (APP); and an integrated system of forward guidance
that  governs  the  future  path  of  asset  purchases  and  short-term  interest  rates,  as  well  as  the
sequencing  of  these  different  policy  tools.  Moreover,  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing
operations, the last of which was conducted in March, will continue to incentivise bank lending
over the next four years.
These measures have supported financial conditions, which – due to their prominent role in the
transmission  of  policy  impulses  –  act  as  a  crucial  intermediate  variable  in  the  pursuit  of  a
stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  However,  while  the  role  of  financial  conditions  in  the
transmission process has remained as relevant as ever, the task of steering them in line with
domestic  macroeconomic  policy  objectives  has  become  more  challenging  in  view  of  the
manifold dislocations in financial markets that have arisen since the crisis and the proximity of
standard  policy  instruments  to  their  lower  bound.  The  ECB’s  unconventional  measures  have
confronted these challenges and ensured an appropriate degree of accommodation by fostering
very favourable financing conditions.
Our monetary policy is working, and we see that, supported by our mutually reinforcing monetary
policy measures, the euro area economic recovery is steadily firming. The cyclical recovery is
gaining momentum and the expansion is broadening across sectors and countries, showing the
effectiveness of the transmission of our measures throughout the entire euro area economy. Yet,
the  risks  to  the  growth  outlook  remain  tilted  to  the  downside,  even  though  their  balance  is
improving. And,  importantly,  inflation  dynamics  continue  to  be  conditional  on  the  present,  very
substantial degree of monetary accommodation.
In calibrating the set of monetary policy instruments, we faced – and we still face – two issues.
The  first,  which  I  will  refer  to  as  the measurement  issue,  consists  in  quantifying  the  overall
amount of monetary policy support that we are providing and parsing that support down to the
individual  instruments.  In  unconventional  monetary  policy  times,  measuring  the  contribution  of
each  instrument  to  the  stance  is  crucial  to  ensuring  an  appropriate  composition  of  the  policy
toolkit  –  a  challenge  that  is  much  less  pronounced  in  conventional  times  when  the  decision
space focuses on policy-controlled short-term interest rates as the one, dominant, tool to steer
the stance. Measuring the marginal contributions of each instrument is very hard however.
The  second  issue,  which  I  will  refer  to  as  the benchmarking  issue,  consists  in  determining
whether the resultant, overall monetary policy support is appropriate, i.e. commensurate with our
assessment  of  the  state  and  expected  evolution  of  the  economy;  and,  if  any  changes  are
necessary, what specific instrument in our multi-pronged policy strategy needs to be adjusted.
In today’s speech, I will review these different challenges and describe the ECB’s approach to
addressing them.
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Measuring and benchmarking monetary policy
To operationalise the intended policy path, it is crucial to form an assessment of the prevailing
stance.
Here, economists have traditionally resorted to two types of indicators. One consists of policy
rules  that  exploit  the  systematic  relationship  between  a  monetary-policy  controlled  short-term
interest  rate, 
from  some  medium-term  equilibrium  value,  and  a  set  of
macroeconomic variables, typically including inflation and economic slack – as in the eponymous
Taylor rule. Given an assumption for the medium-term equilibrium interest rate norm, these rules
promise to deliver a level of the short-term rate that would be consistent with driving the economy
back to a sustainable non-inflationary path starting from current macroeconomic conditions.
in  deviation 
The  other  type  of  indicator  consists  of  Financial  Conditions  Indexes  (FCIs)  that  synthesise
potentially large numbers of financial variables and weight them based on how well they forecast
future (nominal or real) economic activity or how much of the common variation of the individual
constituent  variables  they  explain  –  a  field  to  which  Jan  Hatzius  has  made  important
1
contributions.
The  simple  benchmarking  flavour  of  the  Taylor  rule  and  the  broad,  encompassing  metric  of
accommodation offered by the FCIs represent a valuable disciplining tool from which one can
start to reflect about the prevailing stance and the way the stance should be adjusted as new
information flows in.
2
FCIs, in particular, can facilitate story-telling. They have also been able to broadly track the most
salient, yet not all, phases of the recent crisis.  Overall, they show a positive trend in financial
conditions since 2009, reflecting the policy response to the crisis. This was preceded however
by  a  tightening  in  financial  conditions  in  2007  and  2008  on  the  back  of  investor  panic  and
contagion  effects  that  spilled  over  across  the  entire  array  of  asset  prices  at  the  height  of  the
crisis. The FCIs also show the subsequent reabsorption that took place in the aftermath of the
forceful response by central banks and other policy actors around the globe (see their evolution
in the span of time marked by the shaded area for the “global financial crisis”). Furthermore, they
document  the  renewed  tightening  in  euro  area  financing  conditions  that  was  heralded  by  the
escalation of the sovereign debt crisis in the spring of 2010. More recently, the FCIs point to a
clear footprint of the non-standard monetary policy measures the ECB adopted since mid-2014,
after the rate cuts over the preceding two years had coincided with broadly unchanged financial
conditions.   Yet  their  improvement  from  end-2011  onward  stands  in  contradiction  with  the
escalation of the sovereign debt crisis, a point I come back to shortly.
3
  2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Both approaches, FCIs and policy-rules, encounter challenges regarding both the inference that
they  suggest  concerning  the  quantum  of  monetary  policy  accommodation  prevailing  at  any
specific point in time (their measurement function) and the prescriptive value that one can extract
for calibrating current and future policies (their benchmarking function). I believe one can say that
their dual informative value is degraded particularly in the wake of major dislocations – in financial
markets and in the functioning of the economy more broadly – of the sort we had to confront in
the recent past.
Financial conditions indexes
Let me make this point specifically with regard to FCIs and, for that purpose, let me comment on
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Chart  1.  I  concentrate  on  the  period  prior  to  July  2012,  when  Mario  Draghi  gave  in  London  a
speech which is widely credited for stemming the panic that had been raging for a whole year in
the euro area financial markets. The panic – by any measure – had already impaired firms’ and
households’  access  to  credit  in  broad  regions  of  the  currency  union  to  an  extent  that  was
damaging  macroeconomic  stability  in  systemic  proportions. And  it  had  induced  a  pronounced
impairment  in  monetary  policy  transmission.  This  was  visible  for  instance  from  bank  lending
rates  which,  despite  a  series  of  cuts  in  monetary-policy  controlled  short-term  interest  rates,
remained  stubbornly  high  and  only  started  entering  a  pronounced  and  durable  downward
convergence path around the time in which the ECB adopted its credit easing measures in mid-
2014 (see Chart 2).
But, while this sequence of events and causative influences is well-documented empirically, the
picture that emerges from the FCIs is somewhat different. According to the indicators shown in
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Chart 1, conditions seem to have been loosening – not tightening – in the 6 months prior to the
time of the speech. While conditions eased further, more or less in correspondence of the event
in July 2012, that further shift in the range of financial condition indices is marginal if contrasted
with its upward trend that had occurred before.
How  can  this  be  explained?  The  explanation  mainly  resides  in  the  large  weight  that  these
indicators tend to assign to the exchange rate for averaging across financial market variables.
The  dramatic  bout  of  risk  aversion  and  pessimism  about  the  sustainability  of  the  euro  area,
which pre-dated the speech, had encouraged a massive reallocation of international portfolios
away  from  euro  area  assets,  and  this  capital  flight  had  led  to  a  material  depreciation  of  our
currency. Was this depreciation a net source of accommodation in the months preceding the
July  speech?  Or  wasn’t  it  rather  the  reflection  of  an  underlying  and  pervasive  re-appraisal  of
break-up risk which would restrain consumption and business investment for years to come and
remain a lingering factor weighing down on the recovery to this day? I tend to conclude in favour
of the latter interpretation, which also shows that careful judgement needs to be exercised when
interpreting FCIs, particularly at times of dramatic financial disruption.
We can generalise this message beyond episodes of heightened financial stress. By weighting
different variables – such as the exchange rate, equities and interest rates – by their estimated
impact  on  important  macroeconomic  aggregates,  FCIs  promise  to  offer  a  way  to  identify  an
“equivalence scale”, on the basis of which one can weigh the importance of one financial variable
against the importance of another in maintaining a certain degree of looseness/tightness. But we
should be wary of over-stretching this notion to mechanical prescriptive implications, because
this can inspire unwise policy conclusions. A given level of the FCI can be delivered by many
different combinations of drivers and underlying forces, which make the mapping between that
particular level and the broad stance of policy an elusive task.
Let  me  make  another  example  that  is  valid  in  abnormal  and  more  tranquil  times  alike.  An
increase  in  long  term  rates  can  be  a  purely  exogenous  rate  shock,  if  they  merely  reflect  the
tendency of domestic yields to fluctuate in synch with international yields; or it can reflect more
optimistic expectations concerning the state of the domestic economy. The stance implications
of these two scenarios are vastly different.
An  interesting  case  study  emerges  from  the  global  shifts  in  financial  market  sentiment  since
autumn  2016.  An  attempt  to  disentangle  different  drivers  of  key  financial  market  variables
exploiting  cross-asset  correlations  (see  Chart  3)  shows  that  global  factors  may  have  been
exerting  strong  influence  on  euro  area  financing  conditions,  with  tightening  pressures  on  real
interest rates (see left panel). At the same time, part of the increase in real rates over this period
would  be  reflecting  the  ongoing  improvement  in  euro  area  macroeconomic  conditions,  which
also supported equities (see right panel). And the upward impacts on real interest rates would
have  been  offset  by  domestic  monetary  policy,  thus  partly  insulating  euro  area  financing
conditions  from  the  tightening  pressures  originating  from  abroad.  The  relevance  of  different
drivers entails an important caveat against a mechanical interpretation of changes in FCIs.
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is not the only caveat however. Of course, timeliness is a practical advantage of these types
of FCIs, which are based on high-frequency financial market information that can be tracked on a
daily  basis.  In  the  euro  area,  however,  this  timeliness  may  conflict  with  the  relevance  of
measuring  broader  financing  conditions  that  account  for  the  availability  and  pricing  of  bank
lending. Given the bank-based financing structure of the euro area, such indicators are essential
to assessing the transmission of monetary policy. But they are only available at a significantly
lower frequency and – even in normal conditions – the transmission of policy impulses to bank
lending  conditions  is  more  sluggish  than  to  the  financial  market  variables  typically  included  in
FCIs,  such  as  equity  indexes  or  exchange  rates.  This  is  why  FCIs  can  only  provide  a  partial
picture of prevailing financing conditions that needs to be complemented with further sources,
including inter alia an in-depth analysis of monetary and credit developments as embedded in the
second pillar of the ECB monetary policy strategy.
Another caveat derives from the considerable uncertainty surrounding the appropriate weighting
of individual constituent variables. Conceptually, it appears attractive to base such weighting on
the impact that exogenous variation in each of these variables would exert on relevant economic
aggregates, such as growth or inflation. Practically, however, such impact estimates are wrought
with a host of complex identification issues.
Finally, when using FCIs to track the evolution of financing conditions as an intermediate target,
policy-makers have to be mindful of differences in the controllability of its individual components.
In normal conditions, when monetary policy uses short-term interest rates as its dominant policy
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
tool and builds on a broadly predictable connection between these rates and broader financing
conditions, it is relatively straightforward to steer and assess its intermediate target. However, in
crisis times – when the link between short-term interest rates and broader financing conditions is
weakened  and  monetary  policy  increasingly  relies  on  more  direct  means  to  affect  a  broader
range of financial variables – it becomes significantly more complex to assess the impacts of the
various monetary policy measures.
More  granular  model-based  evidence  suggests  that  the  ECB’s  non-standard  monetary  policy
measures  have  left  a  clear  footprint  in  euro  area  financing  conditions.  In  particular,  they  have
induced a broad-based easing that spread across a variety of asset classes, including to bank
lending  rates  (Chart  4). As  a  consequence,  notwithstanding  the  pronounced  influences  from
abroad,  the  ECB  has  been  successful  in  managing  domestic  financing  conditions  through  its
monetary policy measures.
Moreover,  the  impact  of  these  more  recent  measures  has  been  further  supported  by  the
effectiveness of our forward guidance. One potential metric for this effectiveness is the sensitivity
of forward rates to macroeconomic news: in the presence of clear guidance on the policy rate
path, market expectations should be less reactive to the ongoing macroeconomic news flow and
instead  be  anchored  by  central  bank  communication.  Observing  this  metric  over  time,  it
becomes clear that the introduction of our measures – including the forward guidance on policy
rates  –  has  been  followed  by  a  pronounced  decline  in  the  sensitivity  of  forward  rates  at  the
shorter  end  of  the  term  structure,  which  is  most  prominently  driven  by  monetary  policy
expectations, while remaining anchored around their historical average at the longer end (Chart
5).
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
My  overall  conclusion  is  that  FCIs  offer  an  information  basis  for  measuring  the  quantum  of
financial stimulus that is too fragile at times, and – more often than not – they do not provide a
robust benchmark for policy. To appreciate this last point, think of the example I just made. If the
dominant factor explaining the increase in long-term yields is foreign forces, the change would be
akin  to  a  tightening  and  should  counsel  some  offsetting  monetary  policy  response.  If  the
dominant factor is the improvement in domestic macroeconomic conditions, policy forbearance
would be appropriate.
Finally,  the  connection  between  monetary  policy  and  FCIs  is  a  two-way  road  where,  again,
financial  conditions  incorporate  the  whole  set  of  monetary  policy  instruments  put  in  place,
including  forward  guidance. Analysts  thus  have  to  account  for  the  contribution  of  the  existing
instrument constellation to changes in FCIs so as to avoid circularity between the signals of the
indicator and the conclusions on future policy conduct.
Monetary policy rules
Monetary policy rules, unlike FCIs, are designed to describe the systematic component of the
central bank’s behaviour through time, and distil – from that behaviour – a broad paradigm for
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
prudent  monetary  policy  conduct  that  is  usable  for  calibrating  policy  going  forward.  Their
measurement scope is narrower than for the FCIs, as they concentrate on the very short-term
interest rate that is the main operating target of a central bank in normal times. But their explicit
normative focus and the link they establish between the policy instrument and the state of the
macro-economy is potentially of great value for assessing monetary policy.
But, again, while they can certainly help lay down a shared conceptual ground for economists to
start engaging in a disciplined conversation about the multiple trade-offs policy makers face and
the policy choices they should make to resolve them, they are less helpful as a ready-to-use
blueprint for policy design.
Why?  Many  central  bankers,  in  past  and  more  recent  interventions,  have  emphasised
the measurement issues that impede a mechanical use of policy rules in the tradition of John
Taylor’s famous benchmark. Prominent among these is the need to scale that rule to a level of
the short-term interest rate that is compatible with sustainable growth and price stability in the
medium term. That scaling factor, which has been referred to as the natural or the equilibrium
interest  rate,  is  extremely  influential  in  steering  the  policy  implications  that  these  rules  can
deliver.  While hard to estimate, the literature gives clear indications that the natural rate may
vary  over  time  and  is  likely  to  have  fallen  in  recent  years,  due  to  declining  productivity  and
demographic factors, which in turn would lower the end-point to which monetary policy would
converge,  once  the  economy  is  back  to  full  capacity.  I  will  not  dwell  on  measurement  issues
today,  but  rather  concentrate  on  one  aspect  of  simple  monetary  policy  rules  that  has  been
debated less intensely and concerns their usability as policy benchmarks in the day-to-day re-
assessment of the policy stance.
4
As part of their strategies and tactics to fight risks of deflation and an environment of too low
inflation,  in  the  past  many  central  banks  have  reduced  their  traditional  short  interest  rate
operating targets to levels close to their lower bound and have complemented the easing impulse
offered by these rate reductions with a host of other measures. The ECB has deployed a set of
mutually  reinforcing  instruments,  including  long-term  conditional  funding  operations  for  banks,
negative short-term interest rates and direct outright interventions across the yield curve. Verbal
indications about the expected horizon of our purchases, and about the level and direction of our
policy interest rates looking into the future are also critical component of that strategy.
The non-standard ECB instruments can, to some extent, act as substitutes. For instance, APP
and the TLTROs both foster a rebalancing in banks’ balance sheets toward loans – even though
the  channels  differ:  APP  promotes  bank  lending  by  lowering  the  return  on  banks’  securities
portfolios, while the TLTROs produce the same outcome by increasing the risk-adjusted return
on loans.
When instruments are substitutes, one can indeed conceive of exercises in which the degree
and intensity with which each of them is applied is adjusted along an “equivalence frontier” of
sort, altering the mix of the policy package without necessarily changing the overall quantum of
stimulus  that  the  entire  policy  package  delivers.  A  Taylor  rule  could,  in  this  case,  assist  in
benchmarking the level of the very short-term interest rate that is the traditional target of policy.
The remaining components of the policy package could thus be treated as a residual, after the
setting of the short-term interest rate is determined, and be calibrated such that they attain the
overall degree of accommodation indicated by the policy prescriptions originating from the Taylor
rule.
But,  for  the  most  part,  our  policy  instruments  act  as  strong  complements.  For  instance,  the
downward pressure that APP exerts on term premia is strengthened by the negative interest rate
policy and the rate forward guidance that offers an expected horizon for continuing that policy in
the  near  term.  Negative  remuneration  on  banks’  excess  reserves  induces  lenders  and  other
investors  holding  cash  reserves  to  diversify  away  from  liquidity  into  longer-dated  assets.  By
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
demonstrating that short-term interest rates can be driven to levels below zero, the central bank
can signal absence of non-negativity restrictions constraining the path of future short term rates
looking forward. This bends the whole predictive distribution of future short-term interest rates
down, which is another way of saying that the expectations channel of monetary policy and the
forward  guidance  on  policy  rates  are  reinforced.  Conversely,  APP  empowers  the  forward
guidance on policy rates, as the credibility of indications about the setting of the policy rates in the
future are almost certainly enhanced by provision of asset purchases today. These purchases
are  a  concrete  demonstration  of  a  desire  to  provide  additional  stimulus.  Clearly,  forward
guidance on policy rates and APP are connected by a solid two-way interaction. That is: asset
purchases strengthen the signalling effect of rate forward guidance, while rate forward guidance
and the negative deposit facility rate reinforce the impact of purchases.
These  strong  complementarities  among  instruments  mean  two  things.  First,  each  instrument
within the policy parcel has a net value that would be diminished if used independently of – and in
isolation from – any of the other instruments. Second, the determination of the intentional horizon
for applying each of them can only be the result of an integrated decision process whereby these
intimate interactions are duly internalised.
I  will  now  expand  on  the  first  aspect  and  try  to  bridge  it  to  the  problem  that,  in  my  view,
undermines the policy benchmarking function of simple policy rules in unconventional monetary
policy times like the present. At the end of my remarks, I will come back to the second aspect
and link it to the current debate on timing and sequencing of monetary policy normalisation.
5
At  present,  the  intimate  complementarity  between  asset  purchases  and  the  rate  forward
guidance makes monetary policy highly history dependent.  The macroeconomic outcomes that
we observe today are as much the results of actions that we are taking at present, as the on-
going  lagged  impact  of  the  expectations  that  our  past  actions  and  communication  have
generated.  This  is  valid  always  and  everywhere,  because  the  signalling  content  of  monetary
policy decisions is a predominant attribute of transmission. But it becomes a particularly crucial
aspect of policy in the wake of the major disruptions of the past years, which have set in motion
forces that still restrain the economy and will probably take more time to dissipate. The severity
and persistence of the shocks that have tended to destabilise the economy in the past few years
have  forced  a  particularly  bold,  persistent  and  steady-handed  approach  to  monetary  policy. A
large part of what we do today is a follow-through on a course of action that was carefully charted
and communicated in the past. Likewise, a great deal of the macroeconomic outcomes that we
observe today is due to those plans, and the subsequent actions that have been enacted to carry
them out.
In this light, it becomes easier to appreciate how simple policy rules of the type John Taylor has
studied, if used outside a general equilibrium framework, can lead policy astray. The reason is
that,  by  design,  they  ignore  the  complementarities  among  instruments  and  they  offer
prescriptions on one instrument as if it could be moved in isolation. And, if employed outside an
articulated “optimal control” framework, they are “memory-less”, i.e. they forget about past states
of  the  world  which  may  still  be  relevant  for  determining  present-day  conditions  and  monetary
policy actions.
To be more concrete, if used outside a model, these rules tend to prescribe a firming of policy as
soon  as  the  economy  starts  improving.  But,  in  the  presence  of  non-standard  measures,  this
improvement arises precisely because of the set of policy initiatives that the central bank has put
in place in the past, including its rate forward guidance. A typical Taylor rule does not keep track
of the accumulated deviations of the target variables that arise from the limitations encountered
by  standard  monetary  policy  at  the  lower  bound.  A  deviation  from  the  path  of  policy  that  is
consistent with our past communication is not only costly in terms of policy credibility in general.
It would also scale back an important source of stimulus that is behind the performance of the
economy that we observe today.
6
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
How can we retain the most attractive attributes of a Taylor rule – the fact that it encapsulates a
paradigm  of  robust  and  stability-inducing  monetary  policy  conduct  –  and,  at  the  same  time,
address its limitations?
Many  of  the  problems  that  plague  Taylor  rules  can  find  solutions  within  a  general  equilibrium
framework  where  all  the  feed-forward  and  feed-back  channels  of  interactions  among  policy
instruments,  financial  prices  and  the  economy  can  be  internalised  in  a  consistent  manner.  In
fact, virtually all structural models – whether of a stochastic general equilibrium structure with a
strong forward-looking set-up, or of a more hybrid nature with a focus on time-series coherence
– are “closed” with a Taylor rule of one or another specification. Within those models in which a
Taylor  rule  “represents”  monetary  policy,  the  typical  exercise  that  can  answer  the  normative
issue  is  the  following:  how  would  inflation  over  the  medium  term  horizon  react  if  we  were  to
adjust  our  policy  instruments,  one  at  a  time  or  all  of  them  contemporaneously?  This  is  the
philosophy behind our third criterion for declaring a “sustained adjustment in the path of inflation”,
which  is  a  pre-condition  for  starting  to  normalise  our  purchases  and,  indirectly,  for  starting  to
normalise our policy rates – through the sequencing we expect to follow toward a more normal
configuration of policy.
Conducting  this  type  of  exercise  today,  we  see  that  the  combination  of  instruments  that  are
currently in place, including forward indications about the horizon over which these instruments
will still be used, is sufficiently supportive to put inflation on a rising path that will bring it to levels
close to 2% over a time frame that is compatible with our definition of medium term. But, and this
is  our  third  criterion  for  a  sustained  adjustment,  if  we  were  to  firm  policy  by  scaling  back  the
stimulus provided, that inflation path would likely stall and relapse. The projected path of inflation
remains conditional on very easy financing conditions, for which monetary policy plays a key role.
Conclusions
In  conclusion,  let  me  return  to  the  sequencing  issue.  Communication  about  the  intentional
horizon of net asset purchases and expected future path of the policy rates is a key component
of the policy strategy that started in 2014. The reason is simple and, once more, has to do with
instrument  complementarity. Above  and  beyond  any  signalling  content  they  may  have  on  the
intention of the central bank to provide accommodation, asset purchases add stimulus principally
by squeezing the term premia priced into longer-dated securities. However, absent reassurance
that  policy  rates  will  remain  anchored  around  their  lower  bound  for  the  entire  life  of  the  net
purchases, the impact of asset purchases may be partly neutralised. The downward impact of
purchases  on  long-term  interest  rates  via  compression  of  term  premia  will  be  offset  by  the
upward pressure that will stem from the steeper path of the expected short term interest rates.
Moreover,  absent  reassurance  on  the  rate  path,  the  term  premium  itself  may  increase  if  the
future  course  of  the  policy  rates  becomes  more  uncertain,  despite  the  contrary  effect  of  the
purchases.  If  investors  start  perceiving  that  the  path  of  the  policy  rate  is  subject  to  upward
uncertainty,  the  compensation  for  interest  rate  risk  –  i.e.  the  term  premium  –  will  have  to
increase. Again, long-term interest rates will be pushed higher and asset purchases will become
less effective.
These strong complementarities between instruments are behind the way the expected plans for
the evolution of APP and the policy rates have been lined up in time in the Governing Council’s
intentions. In our expectation, the policy interest rate will remain at present or lower levels for an
extended  period  of  time  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases.  This  forward
guidance implies a sequencing between the interest rate policy and the quantitative policy that
can most efficiently internalise and exploit the intimate complementarities between these two key
components of our current stance.
1
For a detailed discussion of FCIs in the US context, see also Dudley W. C. (2017). The Importance of Financial
Conditions in the Conduct of Monetary Policy. Remarks at the University of South Florida Sarasota-Manatee,
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sarasota, Florida.
2
3
4
5
6
The FCIs presented in Chart 1 include two indexes constructed by the ECB, one constructed by Bloomberg and
one by Goldman Sachs. For further information on the latter two indexes, see Hatzius, J., P. Hooper, F. S.
Mishkin, K. L. Schoenholtz and M. W. Watson (2010), “Financial Conditions Indexes: A Fresh Look after the
Financial Crisis”, NBER Working Papers 16150.
The measures presented here consist of “narrow” FCIs, which focus on a limited but important set of financial
variables that are available at (intra-)day frequency. Some alternative, broader, measures also account for bank
lending or credit conditions, including for instance bank lending rates.
For similar arguments on the relevance of changes in the natural rate for Taylor rule prescriptions, see Yellen J.
(2017),  “The  Economic  Outlook  and  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy”;  speech  at  the  Stanford  Institute  for
Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
On history-dependence, see Woodford M. (2003). “Interest and Prices – Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy”. Princeton University Press; or Eggertsson G. B. and M. Woodford (2003). “The Zero Bound on Interest
Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Economic Studies Program, The
Brookings Institution, vol. 34(1), pages 139–235.
See, for instance, Reifschneider, D. and J. C. Williams (2000). “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low
Inflation Era.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32(4), pp. 936–66; and Woodford, M. (2013). “Forward
Guidance by Inflation-Targeting Central Banks.” Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 3, pp. 81–120.
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
