S S Mundra: Bankers & SME borrowers - the emerging mantras
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 3rd
Bankers Borrowers Business Summit, organized by the Associated Chambers of Commerce
and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi, 16 June 2017.
 Dignitaries  on  the  dais;  distinguished  colleagues  from  the  banking  fraternity;  members  of
ASSOCHAM; representatives from the print and electronic media; ladies and gentlemen! At the
outset,  I  would  like  to  compliment ASSOCHAM  for  the  effort  in  bringing  the  bankers  and  the
borrowers together on a common platform to enable discussions on various issues of relevance
to the MSME sector. With changing times new trends are emerging in every sphere and at this
juncture the theme of “10 Emerging Mantras” for the MSMEs is extremely topical.
2.  The  role  of  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises  (MSMEs)  in  the  economic  and  social
development  of  the  country  can  hardly  be  over-emphasized. About  one-third  of  the  country’s
GDP is contributed by more than 50 million MSMEs in the country. It is expected that by 2020,
India  will  have  the  largest  job-ready  youth  population  in  the  world.  However,  before  I  get  into
specifics on the theme of the Summit, let me first present the big picture on why MSME sector
needs our support.
3. First and foremost reason is that with big manufacturing companies increasingly automating
their operations and process flow, the number of jobs in these industries is going to decline. A
recent research based on World Bank data has predicted that the proportion of jobs threatened
in India by automation could be around 69 per cent! That is a huge number. Since MSMEs are
capable  of  generating  plenty  of  jobs  in  segments  like  hospitality,  apparel  manufacturing,  food
processing and so on, it is time for the policy makers as well lenders to focus on them. In this
context, there would also be a need for change in our perception about jobs. Work created in the
formal sector alone does not constitute job. Even if entrepreneurship is promoted that also is
equivalent to creation of a job. Hence, the public policy should focus on how much more work is
created rather than how many jobs in the formal sector.
4.  The  motivation  for  the  bankers  to  lend  to  the  MSME  segment  would  probably  come  from
relatively poor return on their advances to the large corporates. Still another push emanates from
recent regulatory guidelines restricting banks’ exposures to single borrowers or borrowers in the
same  corporate  group  and  forcing  the  large  borrowers  to  meet  their  fund  requirements  from
market  borrowings  rather  than  from  banks.  Under  the  circumstances,  it  would  make  sound
commercial sense for the banks to look at MSME sector as a potential growth area.
5. Therefore, with favourable ecosystem in the manufacturing/services sector, MSMEs can pave
the  way  for  fulfilling  entrepreneurial  ambitions  and  in  the  process  would  be  able  to  generate
significant levels of employment. Yet providing adequate and timely finance at reasonable rate of
interest to these 50 million units at the bottom of the pyramid has remained an elusive goal. It
must  be  appreciated  that  to  realize  the  country’s  aspirations  for  a  double-digital  growth,  it  is
crucial that the potential of MSME sector is optimally tapped.
6.  Before  coming  to  the  theme  of  the  Summit  proper,  let  me  briefly  touch  upon  few  major
reasons for the sector’s limited access to institutional credit. These include – small ticket size
loan  which  renders  these  accounts  operationally  less  profitable,  lack  of  information  about  the
operations of these enterprises and financial illiteracy among the small enterprise owners. Due to
unavailability of timely as well as flexible institutional credit, a number of MSMEs fail to tide over
temporary  setbacks  and  eventually  have  to  shut  shop.  With  the  above  background,  in  my
address today I intend to outline some mantras for the bankers and the borrowers that need to be
pursued for ensuring vibrancy of the MSME sector in emerging environment. I will also dwell upon
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
few recent policy measures that RBI and Government of India have taken for the sector and also
some measures in the pipeline.
Mantras for bankers
7. In my opinion developing empathy for micro, small and medium borrowers and understanding
their financial and other related needs is the first and foremost mantra for the bankers. This can
obviously be achieved if the Top Management is convinced about the potential of the sector and
treats MSME lending as a priority for sound commercial reasons. Developing business sensitivity
towards  such  entrepreneurs  would  require 
training
interventions.
a) Appreciating the Life cycle needs of the MSMEs
focused  capacity  building 
through 
Micro and small units are more prone to financial difficulties than large enterprises / corporates.
Often  absence  of  timely  support  at  crucial  junctures  during  the  operating  lifecycle  of  MSMEs
leads to their sickness. The banks need to be sensitive in providing continuous support to viable
MSEs during phases of transient financial difficulties. Towards this end, Reserve Bank of India
has  already  advised  banks  to  review  their  lending  policies  to  the  MSE  sector  and  incorporate
provisions for sanctioning of Standby Credit Facility, Additional Working Capital Limits, Mid Term
Review of Regular Working Capital Limits and to set timelines for credit decisions. However, a
crucial piece for the success of the endeavour would be execution. Banks need to put in place a
strong oversight mechanism over the field level functionaries for ensuring compliance with the
policies. I believe this is crucial for vibrancy of the MSMEs.
b) Supporting faltering MSMEs
Let  us  recognize  that  failure  is  integral  to  entrepreneurship.  Unfortunately,  however,  failure  of
enterprises  in  our  system  is  still  not  accepted  graciously  without  attaching  any  stigma.  While
providing support to the MSME firms over their life-cycle is important, it is also crucial that the
banks support the firms in distress. An enabling mechanism has already been created by the
GOI  and  RBI  has  issued  necessary  guideline  outlining  a  Framework  on  Revival  and
Rehabilitation of MSMEs under temporary duress. Under the Framework, problem resolution is
scaled up to a committee with a time bound schedule. I am told that all public sector, private
sector and 4 major foreign banks have put in place an internal policy. Until December 31, 2016,
1770 committees have been formed and 41417 cases have been referred to these committees
during the period between July-December 2016. In my opinion, these numbers need to go up
substantially and resolution reached. Supporting MSME firms in temporary distress is extremely
important and hence, I would request my banker colleagues to support this initiative earnestly.
c) Focusing on industrial clusters
By providing shared access to amenities like testing centers, utilities, roads, security, training to
workers,  and  marketing  assistance,  SME  clusters  provide  substantial  benefits  in  terms  of
technology  absorption,  efficiency  enhancement  and  growth.  Firms  in  the  MSME  sector  which
earlier  faced  difficulties  in  achieving  economies  of  scale,  specialization  and  innovation  due  to
their small size are now increasingly benefitting from the advent of industrial clusters. Several
regional organizations have taken up cluster-based projects to promote smaller firms and this is
where  lies  an  opportunity  for  the  banks.  RBI  has  already  advised  banks  to  open  more  MSE
focused branch offices at MSE clusters which can also act as counseling centers for MSEs.
Collaborating with SME association in these clusters can prove mutually beneficial for the banks
as well as for the smaller firms.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Mantras for borrowers
8. a) Bridging information asymmetry
One  thing  that  seriously  ails  the  MSME  entrepreneurs  is  large-scale  ignorance  about  banking
products & practices as also a lack of awareness about the unfolding economic environment.
Under the circumstances, the first mantra for the borrowers is to develop awareness about the
changing economic dynamics and its impact on their businesses. The borrowers must make
efforts to be updated with the latest regulatory guidelines, schemes offered by the banks and also
by  the  Government.  In  this  context,  I  am  not  sure  how  many  MSMEs  are  aware  about  the
existence  of  BCSBI  Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises.  We  often
observe  many  small  entrepreneurs  using  innovative  and  ingenious  techniques  of  production
within their enterprise but I am not sure how many of them have heard of intellectual property
rights (IPRs), let alone making a filing for their unique technique. It is also ironical that in a country
where  creating  jobs  is  of  utmost  priority,  vocational  training  still  continues  to  be  relatively
neglected area owing to social perception. I firmly believe that entrepreneurial skill development
by imparting vocational training can solve the problem of unemployment to a large extent and the
industry bodies like ASSOCHAM would have a significant role to play in handholding and capacity
building of the new entrepreneurs in all the above areas.
b) Reaping digital dividend
Fintech revolution is sweeping the globe and creating immense opportunities for various sectors.
It has also opened new opportunities for the banks in the MSME space. Banks can support SMEs
as  they  embrace  e-invoicing  or  mobile  payment  solutions  to  allow  their  customers  to  make
purchases on the go. With the aid of technology there can be a paradigm shift in the approach in
lending to MSMEs. The banks can collaborate with Fintech players for either lending directly or
through  these  fintech  companies.  On  the  other  hand,  the  MSMEs  can  adopt  technology  for
scaling up their businesses, achieving operational efficiencies and thereby cutting costs. Data
analytics can help the bigger MSMEs to better appreciate customer behaviour and fine-tune their
products, processes and services accordingly. I foresee a role for the Industry associations here
as they can help create an infrastructure which can be shared by the resource-starved MSMEs
thereby helping them prune down their costs.
E-commerce has disrupted the way businesses have traditionally been conducted. E-commerce
technologies have the potential to significantly increase productivity gains at firm level as they
allow  automation  of  common  processes  such  as  distribution,  sales,  after-sales  service  and
inventory management. E-Commerce has also virtually opened the entire globe for the entities to
market their wares. So, instead of competing against large multinational companies, the MSMEs
can  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities  afforded  by  e-commerce  to  access  new  and  distant
markets or global value-chains.
c) Utilizing alternate sources of finance
The MSMEs have always lamented lack of institutional finance as an impediment to their growth.
However,  lately  few  alternate  sources  of  finance  have  become  available  in  the  market  as  a
supplement  to  bank  credit.  The  common  forms  of  alternative  finance  include  crowd-funding,
Invoice trading, Peer-to-peer or marketplace lending, Angel investors etc. Similarly, NSE has a
SME platform for entities whose post issue paid up capital is less than or equal to Rs.25 crores.
The  platform  allows  new,  early  stage  ventures  and  small  companies  to  raise  much  needed
growth capital as they grow and mature. Alternative finance tend to be more transparent about
fees and eligibility as well as flexible in terms of payment. Alternative finance allows businesses
to use different assets for security. This is particularly very handy for service industries that can
secure  loans  against  the  value  of  their  unpaid  invoices,  rather  than  tangible  assets  such  as
property  or  stock.  Spreading  awareness  about  the  availability  of  these  alternate  sources  of
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
finance however, remains a challenge which must be addressed by the Industry Associations.
d) Seeking credit rating
A credit rating can make a MSME unit’s access to financial services more efficient as it provides
transparency, helps overcome perceived uncertainty in lending decisions and thereby reduces
time  and  transaction  costs.  MSMEs  can  use  ratings  to  enhance  their  credibility  with  other
counterparties  too,  such  as  technology  providers,  suppliers,  and  customers.  In  this  context,
having proper documentation would be extremely critical. A related aspect that the lenders need
to be mindful of is that MSME is a vast universe comprising of several million micro enterprises
without  elaborate  system  of  account-keeping.  Hence,  standard  ratio  analysis  would  be  an
ineffective mode while apprising their credit proposals. In such cases, the banks would need to
look to assess their credit worthiness under a credit scoring model using unconventional matrix
comprising of utility bill payments, remittance history etc. I would like to add here that adoption of
Ind-AS will play a key role in enhancing the quality of ratings as better disclosures will increase
information availability on rated companies.
Recent policy measures/Work-in progress
9.  The  regulators  and  policy  makers  have  an  equal  responsibility  for  supporting  the  cause  of
MSME sector. It is pertinent however to mention that the regulators/policy makers are better as
enablers  rather  than  doers.  Whether  it  is  creating  avenues  for  flow  of  finance  to  the  sector,
creating easy climate for doing business or assisting the firms in distress- both Government of
India and RBI have been extremely conscious to the needs of the MSME sector.
a) Smoothening the flow of finance
(i) Trade Receivables and Discounting System (TReDS)
RBI’s  initiative  on  creating  a  TReDS  platform  to  serve  as  an  exchange  for  electronically
accepting and settling bills to enable the MSMEs to encash their receivables, has borne fruition.
The system seeks to facilitate financing of trade receivables of MSMEs from corporate and other
buyers,  including  government  departments  and  public  sector  undertakings  (PSUs)  through
multiple financiers. Out of the three licensed entities, two have already commenced operations. It
would  be  important  that  the  use  of  TReDS  is  made  mandatory  for,  to  begin  with
corporate  and  PSUs  and  later  for  the  Government  departments.  I  would  urge
ASSOCHAM and the MSME Ministry to proactively examine this aspect as success of
TReDS initiative can be a game changer for the sector.
(ii) New institutions/New processes
Besides the two new universal banks, RBI has issued banking licenses to all ten Small Finance
Banks  that  had  received  in-principle  approval  from  RBI.  Seven  of  them  have  commenced
operations while the remaining three should become operational in next couple of months. The
licensing  condition  of  these  banks  entails  focusing  on  lending  to  un-served  and  under-served
sections including small business units, small and marginal farmers, micro and small industries
and unorganized sector entities. The SFBs will be required to extend 75 per cent of their loans to
the sectors eligible for classification as priority sector by the Reserve Bank with at least 50 per
cent of the loan portfolio constituting advances up to Rs. 25 lakh. We believe that on account of
their prior experience as MFIs/NBFCs, these new banks would be able to serve the MSME sector
with aplomb.
Along with measures to improve accessibility, there is also a need to concentrate on new modes
of delivery. Reaching out to the MSMEs in the remote corners has always been a complex issue
in view of lack of brick and mortar branches across the country. One possible solution for this
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
problem  is  convergence  of  efforts  between  banks  on  one  hand  and  the  NBFCs,  MFIs  on  the
other who are more familiar with local conditions, business viability, better information about the
credit  worthiness  of  individuals,  their  repayment  capabilities  etc.  Currently,  within  RBI,  we  are
deliberating on a framework for co-origination of loans by banks and the NBFCs/MFIs with
risk participation which would leverage upon unique strength of both entities, while benefitting
the entrepreneurs in form of lower credit costs.
b) Improving ease of doing business climate
(i) An Udyami Mitra Portal has been set up by SIDBI, leveraging the IT architecture of their Stand-
Up  Mitra  portal,  which  aims  at  instilling  ease  of  access  to  MSMEs’  financial  and  non-financial
service needs. The Portal, as a virtual market place endeavours to provide ‘End to End’ solutions
not only for credit delivery but also for the host of credit-plus services by way of hand holding
support,  application  tracking  and  multiple  interface  with  stakeholders  (i.e.  banks,  service
providers, applicants). I understand that the portal is far from attaining the level of patronisation
than expected. Hence, I urge the banks as well industry associations to help create awareness
about this facility amongst the borrowers.
(ii) Movable assets registry
Movable assets, as opposed to fixed assets such as land or buildings, often account for most of
the capital stock of private firms and comprise an especially large share for micro, small and
medium-size enterprises. Hence, movable assets are the main type of securities that firms can
pledge to obtain bank financing. CERSAI, in active co-ordination with Government of India and
Reserve Bank has already established the movable asset registry, which when mature would
have a multiplier effect in lending to the sector. I would again request all stakeholders to make
optimal use of this platform.
(iii) Credit counsellors
Most  MSMEs  are  typically  enterprises  with  weak  credit  histories  and  also  with  inadequate
expertise  in  preparing  financial  statements.  To  overcome  this  handicap,  RBI  took  initiatives  to
implement a scheme wherein services of a set of certified credit counsellor would be available to
the MSME entrepreneurs. These counsellors will act as facilitators and enablers to micro and
small entrepreneurs, so that they can access the formal financial system channel with greater
ease and flexibility. SIDBI’s help has been taken for the purpose and I am pleased to inform that
the operational guidelines in this regard have been finalised and the scheme is set to be rolled
out in the coming days.
(iv) Capacity building
As I mentioned earlier, capacity building with banks is extremely important as it endows them
with requisite skill-sets as well as sensitivity to the needs of customers. Realizing the gaps in this
area,  RBI  launched  a  National  Mission  for  Capacity  Building  of  Bankers  for  financing  MSME
Sector (NAMCABS) in collaboration with College of Agricultural Banking, Pune in August 2015.
The  mission  involved  structured  training  initiatives  for  in-charges  of  MSME  Divisions  in
commercial  banks,  training  of  the  trainers  at  training  establishments  of  commercial  bank  and
training of in-Charges of specialized branches for MSMEs. I am pleased to inform that until end
March 2017, about 5605  bankers  have  been  trained  under  the  programme.  Presently,  we  are
undertaking  an  exercise  to  assess  the  impact  of  NAMCABS  initiative  on  operational  and
behavioral aspect of bankers.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
c) Resolving stress in MSME sector
Bankruptcy law
As I mentioned earlier, based on a framework approved by the GoI, RBI has issued guidelines on
‘Revival and Rehabilitation of MSMEs’ in March 2016. Government of India has further approved
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 with an objective of expediting resolution of stressed
assets and streamlining the process of liquidating a business. The Code also provides for a fast
track  insolvency  resolution  process  which  will  be  an  enabler  for  start-ups  and  MSMEs  to
complete the resolution process in 90 days (extendable to 45 days in deserving cases).
Conclusion
10. I would like to conclude with following messages for the MSMEs and the banks:
MSMEs must not fall into the lure of unrelated diversification or quick expansion. They should
rather look to conserve capital and strengthen their balance sheet.
The  firms  need  to  be  open  with  their  bankers  about  the  problems  that  their  enterprise  is
facing at the earliest opportunity. On their part the banks would need to be pragmatic and
sympathetic to the problems that the firms is facing and be willing to provide all possible
help.  Remember,  bankers  and  borrowers  have  a  symbiotic  relationship  and  one  cannot
prosper in isolation.
Most of the MSMEs are individual-driven enterprises with no succession planning. In order to
sustain an enterprise entity, it is essential even for small to mid-size firms to plan for future
by identifying a successor.
11. To sum up, the strategic importance of MSME sector as a prime mover of employment and
economic growth in the country can hardly be overemphasized. Technology and innovation will
continue  to  play  a  pivotal  role  in  creating  a  business  friendly  atmosphere  for  the  MSMEs. All
stakeholders-  whether  banks,  MSME  firms  or  the  policy  makers-  must  make  efforts  in  their
respective domains to seize the opportunity that the MSME sector provides. For a healthy and
mutually beneficial relationship between the banks and borrowers, it would be essential for both
parties  to  understand  and  appreciate  each  other’s  point  of  view.  The  bottom  line  is  that  the
information  asymmetry  that  exists  between  the  two  parties  needs  to  be  bridged  and  industry
associations  like  ASSOCHAM  would  have  to  strive  to  make  that  possible.  I  once  thank
ASSOCHAM for inviting me here to share my thoughts and wish the summit all success!
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
