Yannis  Stournaras:  The  Greek  economy 
prospects
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at an event organized by the
British Hellenic Chamber of Commerce, Athens, 28 September 2017.
-  challenges  and
 I am very pleased to be with you tonight. Let me share some thoughts about the developments,
the risks, the challenges and the prospects of the Greek economy.
1. Greece and the United Kingdom are historically linked by close bonds of friendship
and cooperation
Greece  and  the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  are  historically  linked  by  close  bonds  of  friendship  and
cooperation. These bonds are reflected in trade and in the increased weight of tourist flows from
the UK in travel receipts. By way of illustration, in 2016 tourism receipts from the UK amounted to
about €2 billion, while the respective tourist arrivals reached 2.9 million. The UK has a share of
15%  in  total  receipts  and  12%  in  total  arrivals.  Our  trade  balance  versus  the  UK  remains  in
deficit,  but  has  improved  significantly  since  2009.  This  is  due  both  to  a  rise  in  exports  and  a
decline in imports. Specifically, exports of goods to the UK increased in nominal terms by about
47% during the 2010–2016 period, accounting for approximately 4% of total Greek exports. On
the other hand, imports decreased in nominal terms by 31% over the same period, accounting
for roughly 3% of total Greek imports.
The long-standing ties with the UK are also reflected in the strong presence of Greek students
and academics at UK universities and in general of Greeks working in UK firms, as well as in the
notable  presence  of  the  Greek  shipping  community  in  London  and,  respectively,  the  large
number of British nationals who live here, often having purchased holiday homes in our country.
Among other Greeks, both my wife Lina and I completed our post-graduate studies in the UK and
embarked on our professional and academic careers there.
Against the background of the historical and multi-faceted links between our countries, we hope
that Brexit negotiations with the European Union will lead to an agreement acceptable to both
sides.  Our  wish  is  that  the  future  relationship  of  the  UK  with  the  EU  remains  close.  This  will
safeguard the interests of both EU citizens in the UK and British citizens in the EU, while at the
same time the mutually beneficial trade ties which promote economic growth and prosperity in
both economic areas will continue. The recent speech by Prime Minister May in Florence gave
hope for an acceptable agreement, but it is only a first step.
2. The Greek economy on a growth track
The  Greek  economy  is  currently  on  a  growth  track.  This  was  made  possible  thanks  to  the
completion of the second review and its positive effect mainly on confidence and liquidity. The
fact that the economy’s growth dynamics has gained traction is primarily reflected in the positive
path of GDP as well as in the improvement of short-term indicators:
Real GDP grew y-o-y by 0.4% in the first quarter and by 0.8% in the second quarter of 2017.
Overall, in the first half of 2017 real GDP increased by 0.6%, year-on-year. Real GDP growth
in the second quarter was mainly driven by an increase of 9.5% y-o-y in exports of goods
and services, as well as by a rise in public (3.3%) and private consumption (0.7%), whereas
gross  fixed  capital  formation  had  a  negative  contribution,  largely  on  account  of  delays  in
Public Investment Programme disbursements.
Industrial production increased y-o-y by 1.7% in July 2017 for the tenth consecutive month.
Overall, between January and July 2017 industrial production increased by 5.3% relative to
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the corresponding period of 2016.
The volume of retail sales in the first half of 2017 rose by 2.4%, year-on-year.
The positive momentum of the economy is also mirrored in the labour market, which has
been  showing  signs  of  improvement  since  mid-2014,  on  the  back  of  structural  reforms
which  allowed  for  a  shift  towards  more  flexible  forms  of  employment.  In  more  detail,
employment rose y-o-y by 2.4% in the second quarter of the year, while the unemployment
rate stood at 21.2% in June 2017, down from 23.5% one year earlier.
The improved economic outlook and the completion of the second review contributed to a decline
in Greek government bond yields to their end-2009 levels, thereby facilitating Greece’s return to
international markets on 25 July. At the same time, the yields of corporate bonds issued by the
non-financial sector declined considerably as well. Furthermore, Fitch upgraded Greece’s credit
rating, citing sustained recovery and reduced political risk.
Other  key  developments  that  should  be  pointed  out  are:  the  successive  reductions  in  the
emergency  liquidity  assistance  (ELA)  ceiling  for  Greek  banks,  the  increase  in  deposits,  the
attainment of the operational targets set so far for banks to reduce the stock of their NPEs, and
the rise in a number of leading indicators of economic activity and confidence.
On  20  September  the  ELA  ceiling  for  Greek  banks  stood  at  €33.6  billion,  compared  with
€50.7 billion at end-2016 and €90 billion in June 2015.
Deposits  by  the  non-financial  private  sector  increased  by  €1.4  billion  to  €119.4  billion  in
August 2017. In particular, from end-May 2016, when the first review of the programme was
completed,  until  August  2017,  deposits  by  non-financial  corporations  and  households
increased by 5.3% or €7.3 billion, while total deposits gained about €11 billion.
The economic sentiment indicator rose to 100.6 in September, from 99.0 in August, also
amid strong consumer confidence, which recorded a two-year peak.
The manufacturing PMI suggests expansion for the third month in a row, and came to 52.2 in
August, from 50.5 in July, reaching its highest level since August 2008.
In  the  same  vein,  since  the  beginning  of  this  year  there  has  been  progress  with  the  issue  of
banks’  problem  loans.  More  specifically,  on  the  basis  of  June  2017  data,  the  stock  of  non-
performing exposures (NPEs), including off-balance sheet items, decreased by 3.2%, compared
with  end-December  2016,  coming  to  €102.9  billion  or  44.9%  of  total  exposures.  The  NPE
reduction  was  mainly  driven  by  extensive  loan  write-offs  and  to  a  much  lesser  extent  by
collections, liquidations and sales of loans. Loan write-offs amounted to €3.3 billion in the first half
of 2017.
Lastly, significant headway has also been achieved in the area of reforms despite several delays.
According to a recent report by the Lisbon Council (EuroPlus Monitor, September 2017 Update),
Greece  continues  to  rank  first  in  the  EU-28  in  terms  of  the  Adjustment  Progress  Indicator.
Greece’s high score in this area is mainly attributable to its adjustment efforts in 2010–2013, but
also to the fact that since mid-2015 there has been a reversal in the negative course that had
started  in  late  2014  and  peaked  in  summer  2015  amid  heightened  uncertainty  and  strong
confrontation with the institutions, thereby weakening the country’s position.
3. Positive prospects for 2017–2019
In  the  light  of  the  data  I  mentioned  briefly,  it  is  now  safe  to  predict  that  economic  activity  will
continue to pick up at a stronger pace in the near term. In 2017 as a whole, according to Bank of
Greece estimates, GDP will increase by about 1.7%. In 2018 and 2019, growth is projected to
gather  pace  and  quicken  to  2.4%  and  2.7%,  respectively,  driven  by  rising  investment,
consumption and exports of goods and services.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  forecasts  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  reform  and
privatisation programme will be implemented consistently and according to schedule. In order to
capitalise  on  the  progress  achieved  so  far,  strengthen  favourable  prospects  and  enhance
investor confidence in the future of the Greek economy, a strict adherence to the implementation
of the structural reforms that have been agreed upon under the programme is warranted. This is
expected  to  have  strong  positive  effects  on  the  liquidity  of  the  financial  system,  the  easing  of
uncertainty, the improvement of the economic sentiment and expectations, and the reduction of
borrowing  costs  for  the  Greek  State,  thereby  allowing  for  sustainable  access  to  international
markets in August 2018, after the programme’s completion.
4. Risks and challenges
Despite the positive signs and the progress achieved so far, risks to the outlook of the Greek
economy remain.
The most significant and immediate risk relates to a delay in completing the third review of the
programme, as was the case with the first and second reviews. This should be avoided, as it
would  trigger  a  new  cycle  of  uncertainty  leading  to  the  suspension  of  investment  plans,
undermine  the  growth  dynamics  of  the  economy  and  weaken  the  prospects  for  sustainable
access of the Greek sovereign to international capital markets after the end of the programme in
August 2018.
Moreover,  there  are  significant  external  risks  associated  with  a  stronger  euro  and  a  possible
slowdown in the euro area economy. A further rise in the euro exchange rate from its current
levels  could  negatively  affect  goods  exports  as  well  as  tourism  receipts,  dampening  the
economic  growth  outlook  and  slowing  the  pace  of  the  exit  from  the  crisis.  There  are  also
significant geopolitical risks that could increase the risk aversion of international investors. Other
geopolitical risks relate to a possible exacerbation of the refugee crisis.
4.1 Medium- to long-term challenges
In  addition  to  the  above  domestic  and  external  risks  to  the  recovery,  there  are  also  some
medium- to long-term challenges that need to be addressed in order to strengthen the positive
outlook. In particular:
Unemployment remains very high, while the new jobs created largely involve low-pay, part-
time  or  intermittent  employment.  At  the  same  time,  the  tax  burden  on  dependent  and
independent employment has increased and social benefits continue to decline. As a result,
household consumption is likely to weaken or remain subdued for a long time.
Despite the progress made so far, banks continue to be burdened with the management of a
high  stock  of  non-performing  loans,  affecting  their  ability  to  adequately  support  economic
activity with new lending.
Investment remains at a very low level, and this is not only due to delays in financing the
Public  Investment  Programme  or  the  lack  of  bank  lending,  but  also  to  the  fact  that  the
investment climate in the country is still perceived as unfriendly to private investment.
Government debt remains very high and its servicing requires the commitment of significant
public resources on a long-term basis. This can be achieved either by curtailing spending
and  downsizing  the  public  sector  or  by  increasing  revenue.  However,  raising  revenue  by
maintaining the existing high tax rates is a drag on growth and ultimately can have a negative
impact  on  public  finances  and  the  manageability  of  public  debt.  This  is  because  high  tax
rates discourage investment insofar as businesses know that part of their profits will, on a
permanent basis, have to be spent for servicing the public debt. Moreover, high tax rates are
a  disincentive  to  work,  while  in  the  case  of  both  businesses  and  households  they  create
incentives to tax evasion and the strengthening of the shadow economy. Also, high taxes
and social security contributions provide an incentive for businesses to relocate to European
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries with a more favourable tax regime and, accordingly, contribute to brain drain. The
lack  of  investment  and  the  loss  of  human  capital  hamper  total  factor  productivity  and
potential output growth.
5. Strengthening the growth potential
5.1 Boosting investment
Economic  adjustment  and  structural  changes  over  the  last  seven  years  have  made  Greece
more  business-friendly  and  have  created  significant  investment  opportunities.  However,
domestic  savings  are  insufficient  to  meet  the  investment  needs  of  the  Greek  economy.
Consequently, the great challenge today is to stimulate investment. And the only way to close the
large investment gap is by attracting foreign direct investment, focusing on the most productive
sectors of the economy.
This requires, first, the rigorous implementation of the structural reforms outlined in the European
Stability Mechanism (ESM) programme. At the same time, the Bank of Greece has repeatedly
proposed changing the fiscal policy mix to make it more business- and growth-friendly. This can
be  achieved  with  more  emphasis  on  reducing  non-productive  expenditure.  This  would,  for
example,  entail  an  assessment  of  the  structures  of  general  government  and  the  system  of
incentivisation for its various entities (e.g. local authorities) through a review of the manner in
which  they  are  subsidised  by  central  government,  as  well  as  the  expansion  of  Public-Private
Partnerships (PPPs) in areas that are seen as taboo, such as education, health, social security.
Together  with  a  more  efficient  management  of  public  property,  notably  real  estate,  through
appropriate land-use legislation and by further enhancing the efficiency of the public sector and
the  tax  collection  mechanism  in  particular,  a  further  reduction  of  non-productive  public  sector
expenditure will enable the lowering of high tax rates, thereby supporting the growth process.
In addition to the above, it is also necessary to decisively and definitively address the obstacles
posed  by  various  small  or  large  vested  interests  and  groups,  which  weigh  on  the  business
climate and hamper investment and the implementation of reforms and privatisations, even those
already approved. Unless these barriers which in practice discourage investment are addressed,
then the prospect of dynamic growth of the economy and its shift towards an extrovert growth
model may not materialise, given that one of the key drivers of economic growth over the coming
years is the expected rise in investment and the resulting impetus to the export base.
5.2. Pushing ahead with reforms and privatisations
Despite the progress made so far, there is still a lot to be done in the areas of privatisations,
efficient  use  of  public  property  and  structural  reforms.  For  example,  we  need  even  greater
ownership  of  privatisations;  more  public-private  partnerships,  even  in  areas  that,  as  already
mentioned,  have  so  far  been  considered  as  taboo;  several  other  reforms,  e.g.  in  the  energy
market, the product market, the services market and in certain professions, in order to increase
productivity  and  reduce  the  cost  to  consumers;  measures  to  cut  red  tape  across  public
administration;  measures  for  the  rapid  delivery  of  justice;  full  respect  for  the  independence  of
institutions;  encouraging  and  incentivising  private  sector  cooperation  with  universities  and
research  institutes  in  order  to  promote  innovation  and  the  transition  to  a  knowledge-based
economy.
5.3 Reducing non-performing loans
In  the  banking  sector,  a  priority  is  to  address  the  large  volume  of  non-performing  loans,  in
particular the problem of “strategic defaulters”, which is detrimental not only to the soundness of
the banking system but also to the growth of the Greek economy. It is worth noting that all the
necessary measures have now been legislated and that the regulatory framework has been put
in  place  to  tackle  the  problem  of  NPLs  in  an  efficient  and  fast  manner.  Banks  also  possess
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
adequate  loan  loss  provisions,  collateral  and  capital,  which  more  than  cover  the  outstanding
amount of these loans, while the economy is recovering. Banks’ efforts are therefore expected
to, and must, be stepped up, so as to accelerate the pace of NPL reduction, also taking into
account that the targets for 2018 and 2019 are more ambitious than those for 2017. Particular
emphasis  should  be  placed  on  business  restructuring,  on  providing  liquidity  support  to  viable
businesses but also on the liquidation of non-viable ones. This will unlock resources that can
support new or existing sound investment and business initiatives necessary to consolidate the
growth dynamics. In general, banks have achieved significant improvements in their corporate
governance and liquidity and solvency ratios in recent years and there is absolutely no reason for
concern about their performance.
5.4 Tackling the high public debt
Concrete actions are necessary to ensure the sustainability of public debt, as well as a more
realistic adjustment of medium-term fiscal targets. The Eurogroup of 15 June 2017 reiterated in a
clearer manner the lines along which further debt relief measures could be adopted, if deemed
necessary,  after  the  end  of  the  programme.  The  Bank  of  Greece  has  already  made  specific
proposals for a mild debt restructuring, for example by lengthening the weighted average maturity
of interest payments on EFSF loans by at least 8.5 years. The calculations show that this could
make a significant contribution to debt sustainability, even if primary government surpluses were
to remain at 3.5% of GDP until 2020 only (rather than 2022 as envisaged in the agreement) and
fall to 2.0% afterwards. These two proposals, if adopted, will certainly support both the recovery
of the economy and the country’s creditworthiness.
The growth impact of debt restructuring and the resulting reduction in its servicing costs will be
higher if the fiscal space created by the lowering of fiscal targets, amounting to 1.5% of GDP, is
used  to  reduce  labour  and  capital  taxation  and  is  accompanied  by  appropriate  policies  to
increase potential output and bring about a reversal of the brain drain, i.e. a repatriation of young
graduates and professionals who left the country during the crisis.
This  mild  debt  reprofiling  proposal  is  vital  for  Greece  and  entails  only  a  negligible  cost  for  its
partners.  This  will  pave  the  way  to  the  inclusion  of  Greek  government  bonds  in  the  ECB’s
quantitative easing programme, which in turn will facilitate sustainable market access and further
support  the  economic  recovery.  This  will  set  in  motion  a  new  virtuous  circle  that  will  signal
investor confidence in Greece’s economic prospects while encouraging the return of deposits to
banks, a return to financial markets after the end of the current programme and, eventually, the
full abolition of capital controls.
6. Conclusions
The Greek economy is on a steady upward trajectory. However, despite the encouraging signs
coming  from  the  positive  GDP  growth  figures  for  the  first  half  of  2017,  there  is  no  room  for
complacency or a relaxation of efforts. We still have a way to go before the positive prospects of
the Greek economy for the period 2017–2019 can be confirmed and before Greece can gain the
full confidence of markets after the end of the programme in August 2018. This will be achieved if
the country obtains a credit rating enabling it to refinance its debt at rates that are in line with its
sustainability and if banks have sufficient collateral to be fully funded from the ECB’s refinancing
mechanism and not only from the costlier Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA).
Consequently,  a  sustained  exit  to  markets  requires:  First,  adhering  to  the  objectives  of  the
programme and accelerating the pace of implementation of reforms, both those decided as part
of  the  programme  and  discretionary  reforms  to  strengthen  economic  growth.  The  fast
completion of the third review of the programme is absolutely necessary. Second, sufficient and
timely specification of medium-term debt relief measures in line with Eurogroup decisions. Third,
constructive  cooperation  between  the  Greek  government  and  the  institutions  on  the  type  and
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
conditionality of support to the Greek economy after the end of the programme in August 2018, in
order to ensure its return to financial normality after seven years of significant sacrifices of the
Greek people.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
