Lesetja  Kganyago:  Protecting  the  buying  power  of  South Africa's
currency
Address  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
launch  of  commemorative  coins  to  mark  the  100th  anniversary  of  Oliver  Tambo's  birth, 
Pretoria, 4 October 2017.
 Oliver Reginald Tambo’s life was integrity, trust and accountability personified. The power and
emotion behind his speeches lay in the clarity of his thoughts, not in the delivery and the fiery of
his rhetoric. That is partly why he was able to mobilise the world against apartheid. That is partly
why  he  succeeded  in  keeping  together  people  of  diverse  backgrounds  united  under  the ANC
umbrella. His integrity shone through, defining all his interactions with everyone, young and old,
senior and rank and file members.
The  dictionary  describes  integrity  as  the  quality  of  being  honest  and  having  strong  moral
principles. It lists honourableness, decency, fairness, sincerity, truthfulness and trustworthiness
as some of the synonyms of integrity. Tambo’s conduct was one of integrity and accountability.
Integrity, trust and accountability also matter a great deal for the South African Reserve Bank
(SARB) and, indeed, other central banks elsewhere in the world.
The SARB exists to serve the economic wellbeing of South Africans by protecting the buying
power of the domestic currency – the banknotes and coin. This primary mandate of the SARB,
as well as its independence in carrying out this mandate, are entrenched in sections 224 and 225
of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. Our Constitution which has been tested many
times in recent years bears testimony to the calibre and the foresight of the leadership of the
founders  of  this  nation.  To  borrow  the  words  of  Justice Albie  Sachs,  a  paternity  test  on  our
1
Constitution will find Tambo’s DNA.
The SARB does not bow to any pressure, whether it be political or from the private sector. But
the SARB does account to the people of South Africa through Parliament.
The  other  main  function  of  the  SARB  is  to  ensure  there  is  a  sufficient  supply  of  high  quality
banknotes and coin. This is one function of the SARB that puts it in the pockets, wallets and the
hearts of all South Africans.
The SARB banknotes may not be in the pockets or wallets of all South Africans all of the time,
but  they  can  be  if  all  of  us  work  harder  to  make  our  economy  grow  at  a  rate  fast  enough  to
ensure that there is work, bread, water and salt for all.
It is the responsibility of the SARB to ensure the integrity of banknotes and coin in circulation. The
SARB has to ensure that banknotes and coin remain a secure method of payment and a store of
wealth. A banknote is but a piece of paper, a coin but a piece of metal. Both derive their worth
from the trust that the citizens of a country have in the country’s currency.
The  confidence  that  South  Africans  have  in  banknotes  and  coin  is  based  on  trust  that  the
banknotes  and  coin  are  authentic,  and  trust  in  the  institution  that  issues  them.  Whatever  the
SARB  does,  it  must,  without  fear  or  favour,  ensure  that  the  buying  power  of  the  currency  is
protected. It must also ensure that public trust in banknotes and coin as well as the institution
that issues them is maintained.
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, when some among us demand that we must open the sluicegates of inflation what they are
demanding is that we must erode public trust and confidence in the currency. As the history of
money globally show, when inflation walks through the door, public trust in the currency jumps
out of the window. Then banknotes and coin become nothing but worthless pieces of paper and
metal.
1
Oliver Tambo’s Dream, Justice Albie Sachs, Oliver Tambo Centenary lecture, University of Pretoria.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
