Inaugural Ceremony for the Launching of the Bank of 
Mauritius Museum 
Address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, G.C.S.K., Governor, Bank of Mauritius, 
November 3, 2017 
  Honourable Prime Minister 
Honourable Madam Speaker of the National Assembly 
Honourable Ministers 
Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Members of the National Assembly 
Royal Mint and de La Rue Representatives 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Good afternoon 
 I  welcome  you  all  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  on  this  special  occasion 
marking its 50th Anniversary celebrations.  
I am particularly delighted to welcome you to this newly constructed 
auditorium.  In  the  central  banking  community,  the  first  Governor  of 
any central bank occupies a seat apart in its institutional memory. Mr 
Aunauth  Beejadhur,  a  journalist  and  politician,  exceptionally  known 
for his intellectual and journalistic skills, was the first Governor of the 
Bank.  He  was  entrusted  in  1966  with  the  extremely  delicate  and 
demanding  task  of  starting  and  building  a  central  banking  institution 
for the country before independence in 1968. Assisted by two senior 
officials of the Bank of England, he  set up the operational system of 
the  Bank  on  a  foundation,  the  strength  of  which  is  little  known  to 
 2 
those not familiar with the Bank. Mr Aunauth Beejadhur successfully 
set the Bank afoot. Those of us at the Bank, having had the privilege 
of  working  under  his  stewardship,  reminiscently  recall  Mr  Aunauth 
Beejadhur  as  someone  who  was  gifted  with  an  unusual  clarity  of 
mind.  Although  the  business  of  central  banking  was  then  relatively 
unknown in Mauritius, he had  clearly understood that it was a noble 
struggle  that  requires  more  self-command,  judgment  and  inner 
toughness than one would ordinarily imagine. And the nobility lies in 
the struggle for preservation of what is best for our common life as a 
people. 
On the occasion of the 50th Anniversary Celebrations of the Bank, the 
Board  of  Directors  decided  to  dedicate  this  auditorium  to  late 
Aunauth  Beejadhur  in  recognition  of  his  pivotal  contributions  to  the 
foundation  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  It’s  more  than  fitting  that  after 
so  long,  the  Bank  is  paying  a  long  overdue  tribute  to  its  first 
Governor,  Mr  Aunauth  Beejadhur.  I  am  indeed  very  happy  to 
welcome  members  of  his  family  from  overseas  and  from  here  in 
Mauritius to today’s functions. On behalf of the Board of Directors of 
the  Bank,  myself  included,  I  thank  the  Beejadhur  family  for  having 
acceded  to  our  request  that  this  auditorium  bears  the  name,  Aunauth 
Beejadhur.  Thank you so much. 
It  is  expected  of  me  to  look  back  with  you  all  into  the  50  years  of 
history of central banking in Mauritius on this very special occasion. 
It’s  beyond  the  scope  of  this  address  to  cover  so  many  years  of 
achievements  -  and  failures  –  in  a  few  paragraphs.  I  will  limit  my 
 3 
address to some key institutional aspects of the Bank over its 50-year 
history. But before I do so, let me go back to the first half of the 19th 
century  when  Mauritius  had  entertained  a  regime  of  free  banking, 
meaning  that  anybody  could  start  a  banking  business  with  limited 
capital in an  environment  free of regulation. Each bank  was allowed 
to  issue  its  own  banknote  in  the  same  way  as  private  individuals  are 
liberally  issuing  bitcoins  and  altcoins  today.  Because,  amongst  other 
things, banks used to issue banknotes and coins more than necessary, 
bank  failures  were  a  common  feature.  The  concerns  for  financial 
stability were so pre-occupying that the then Government had decided 
to establish in Mauritius the Board of Commissioners of Currency in 
1849 – the first in the world. A mild version of regulation of banking 
activities was introduced thereafter. By the way, this crisis and crisis 
resolution  story  of  ours  is  similar  to  the  one  that  had  led  to  the 
establishment of the  US Federal Reserve System  in 1913. The rupee 
became  our  national  currency  in  1877.  The  exchange  rate  of  the 
Mauritian rupee was set at Rs2.00 for US$1.00. Soon after the Second 
World War, Mr Fernand Leclézio, one of the richest man in Mauritius 
sold his sugar estate to settle down in Europe. The transfer of the sale 
proceeds  was  so  large  that  it  had  worsened  our  balance  of  payments 
position  and  the  foreign  currency  reserves  of  the  country  suffered  a 
troublesome drain as a result. Expeditiously, the then Government had 
introduced  exchange  control  which,  after  more  than  two  centuries, 
brought  to  an  end  an  era  of  unrestricted  transfers  and  payments  for 
international  trade  transactions  and  free  capital  convertibility.  It  was 
 4 
1951.  The  Treasury  Department  of  the  Government  was  made  in 
charge of the Exchange Control Office. 
In  the  context  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Ordinance  1966,  some  of 
these  functions  were  hived  off  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  On  July  1, 
1967, Governor Aunauth Beejadhur assumed office. The functions of 
the Board of Commissioners of Currency were vested with the Bank, 
a  month  later,  in  August  1967.  Equipped  with  an  exchange  control 
office,  an  office  for  the  day-to-day  basic  banking  operations  and  an 
administration department, the Bank became officially operational on 
September  2,  1967.  Thus  began  central  banking  in  Mauritius,  just 
over six months before independence in March 1968. 
Barely two months through the business of central banking the Bank 
faced  its  first  tough  challenge  –  a  kind  of  challenge  that  any  central 
banker  used  to  feel  extremely  uncomfortable  in  the  days  of  the 
Bretton  Woods  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  Great  Britain,  under  the 
then  Prime  Minister,  Harold  Wilson,  devalued  the  Pound  sterling,  to 
which the rupee was pegged at Rs13.33  by 14 per cent in November 
1967. It was the first significant price shock to the Mauritian economy 
after  the  establishment  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  The  Bank  had 
steered through successfully. Governor Aunauth Beejadhur was tested 
right at the very beginning of his tenure of office. 
In  1971,  major  amendments  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  were 
carried  out.  Pressingly,  a  Research  Department  was  created  the 
purpose  and  objective  of  which  was  to  conduct  research  and 
 5 
economic  analyses  and  policy  recommendations  to  the  management. 
In  1974,  Herstatt  Bank,  a  privately  owned  German  bank,  went 
bankrupt in a famous incident that serves to explain settlement risks to 
students  of  banking  and  finance.  As  a  result,  the  Bank  of  England 
then  decided  to  focus  a  lot  more  on  regulation  and  supervision  of 
financial  institutions.  That  incident  had  paved  the  way  for  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Regulation  and  Supervisory  Practices.  At 
around  that  time,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  one  among  the  very  few 
central banks in sub-Saharan Africa, having observed how the fringe 
crises in the early 1970s and the serious disturbances triggered by the 
collapse  of  Herstatt  Bank,  had  set  up  an  Inspection  Division  that 
eventually evolved into what is currently our Supervision Department. 
In 1979, because of a balance of payments crisis, Mauritius adopted a 
Stabilisation Programme under a Stand-by arrangement with the IMF 
that lasted until August 1986. Financial sector liberalisation, properly 
sequenced  by  the  Bank,  initiated  in  1983  was  underway.  Once  the 
Stand-by  arrangement  with  the  IMF  was  over  an  old  paper  on 
offshore banking (written by  me  in  1980) that had been shelved was 
dusted  off.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  and  the  Banking  Act  were 
recast in 1988 with a view to accommodating the development of the 
first  leg  of  an  offshore  financial  sector.  Offshore  banking,  a  project 
led almost entirely by the Bank, was launched in August 1989 by the 
then  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  at  the  Chancery  House, 
Port Louis. In September 1993, Mauritius adopted Article VIII of the 
Articles of Agreement of the IMF and all restrictions on transfers and 
 6 
payment  of  international  trade  transactions  were  eliminated.  By  July 
1994,  the  Exchange  Control  Act  was  suspended.  Mauritius  thus 
moved to a regime of full capital convertibility. Since nowhere has it 
ever  been  mentioned,  let  me  underline  that  the  Bank  made  vitally 
important  contributions  to  the  setting  up  of  the  Port  Louis  Stock 
Exchange  and  to  the  introduction  of  leasing  activities  in  the  country 
around the mid-1980s. 
In 
the  first  half  of 
the  1990s, 
the  Bank  re-constructed 
its 
organisational  structure  to  include  an  IT  Department.  By  the  end  of 
the  last  century,  the  Bank  decidedly  changed  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework  with  a  view  to  making  our  banking  industry 
sound and robust. Having introduced the Real Time Gross Settlement 
system  and  the  Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau,  the  Bank 
created a new Division, the Payment Systems Division.  
In the light of constantly emerging challenges, the Bank of Mauritius 
Act  and  the  Banking  Act  1988  were  completely  overhauled.  It’s  an 
exercise that took the Bank 8 years of work diligently done. In 2004, a 
thoroughly  updated  version  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  bill  and  a 
banking bill were put forward for enactment. Whereas in the previous 
Act, the Minister of Finance could give directives to the Bank, in the 
new  Act,  this  power  to  issue  directives  to  the  Bank  was  done  away 
with.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  was  given  full  independence.  A  major 
review  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  and  the  Banking  Act  2004, 
aligned  to  the  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  bill  and  the  National 
 7 
Payments  System  bill,  is  practically  over.  The  draft  bills  are  being 
given final touches.  
In the last two years, the organisational structure of the Bank has been 
reconstructed once  again to include a Reserve  Management Division 
led  by  a  group  of  highly  competent  professionals  responsible  for 
managing  about  US$5  billion.  A  lot  more  could  be  mentioned  here 
and a lot more has yet to be accomplished.  
You might be wondering why I have chosen to focus on the evolution 
of 
the  organisational  structure  of 
the  Bank  and 
the  regular 
amendments of the Bank of Mauritius Act and the Banking  Act. The 
foregoing brief survey tells one important story. The organisation and 
re-organisations  of  the  Bank’s  structure  and  the  high  frequency  of 
amendments  to  the  two  Acts  are  reflective  of  the  fact  that  the  Bank 
has  never  stopped  from  re-engineering  and  re-inventing  itself  since 
1967. Having myself gone through the thick and thin of things during 
part of the history of the Bank, I may venture to say that the Bank is 
probably the only institution in Mauritius whose legal framework has 
been  so  frequently  amended  and  that  its  organisational  structure  has 
been  so  often  re-cast,  re-shaped  and  re-oriented  to  meet  constantly 
emerging challenges. The Bank has never been  a dormant institution 
in its first 50 years.  
We  are  here  primarily  for  the  inauguration  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius 
Museum for banknotes and coins. In the online Wild West where the 
sheriffs  are  mostly  absent,  there  has  been  a  wild  rush  of  noise  in 
 8 
respect  of  cryptocurrencies,  a  form  of  virtual  currencies  that  goes 
unregulated.  And,  lately,  a  few  curveballs  have  been  thrown  at  the 
Bank of Mauritius in respect of cryptocurrencies. There is a tendency 
to over-react to illusory attractions and under-react to realities. It’s an 
equal  opportunity  disease.  Following  the  release  of  Panama  Papers 
through  wikileaks,  bitcoins 
evangelists  have  mushroomed. 
Cryptocurrencies  are  found  to  be  attractive  to  those  seeking 
anonymity. It means what it means. This is rightly an occasion for me 
to  clear  the  cloud  surrounding  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  stand  with 
regard  to  cryptocurrencies.  But  before  I  proceed  any  further,  let  me 
stress that the Bank does endorse and has already envisaged to go for 
blockchain  technology  in  some  specific  areas  of  its  operations.  But 
with  regard  to  bitcoins  and  altcoins  in  the  manner  they  are  being 
currently  issued,  there  is  a  very  big  question  mark  in  the  central 
banking community.  
Those of us who are conversant with the evolution of capitalism as an 
economic system and with the monetary history of the world must be 
aware that there always have been anarchists aggressively seeking to 
undermine  the  sovereignty  of  the  state.  Why  governments  should 
impose taxes? Why should we pay taxes? Why governments, through 
central banks, should be the sole issuer of banknotes and coins? And 
why  not  the  private  sector  be  allowed  to  issue  them?  These  are 
examples of questions that  are often asked by  anarchists even today. 
The politics of bitcoin reflects this attitude, to some extent. 
 9 
Much of the economic and political thought on which bitcoin is based 
stems  from  ideas  that  travel  all  the  way  from  the  Chicago  School 
economics  of  Milton  Friedman  to  the  Federal  Reserve  System 
conspiracy  theorists.  Bitcoin  enthusiasts  may  not  be  subscribing  to 
these theories. It just happens that the assumptions and concepts stem 
from the very far right. In bitcoin literature as much as in central bank 
conspiracy  writings,  the  Fed  is  said  to  hide  “its  real  purpose;  that  it 
steals money from some private citizens and put it in the hands of the 
‘elites’  that  control  the  Fed;  that  the  Fed  itself  is  covertly  run  by  a 
shadowy group of elites, often made up of Jews and members of the 
English  banking  families  such  as  the  Rothschilds”.  They  also  put 
forward more subtle arguments ‘that inflation and deflation are caused 
by  monetary  policy  rather  than  by  more  conventional  aspects  of 
economies  like  commodity  and  assets  prices,  productivity  and  other 
aspects of labour and so on.’  
Whilst the argument that cryptocurrencies eliminate fees, charges and 
other cost of intermediation is no doubt valid, the argument that they 
are  a  very  convenient  means  of  laundering  money  is  equally  valid. 
Some  observers  say  bitcoins  and  altcoins  are  not  currencies  but 
commodities  that  are  being  traded  like  any  other  commodity  on  the 
exchanges.  They  are  currently  serving  as  speculative  investment 
instruments playing almost no role as a means of payment. In terms of 
economic significance, they are said to have minor importance. Some 
others say it’s just a scam. It does not physically exist. It is invisible. 
But a golden coin on posters is used for purposes of advertisement. It 
 10 
is also said that the word ‘mining’ in the digital creation of the bitcoin 
and altcoins is used to give the impression that it’s gold that is being 
mined.  Still  some  others  argue  that  it’s  a  convenient  means  to  avoid 
income tax and VAT payments. 
Central  bankers  have  been  seeing  this  game  differently  from  afar 
since  2009.  What  is  money?  What’s  the  definition  of  money?  How 
broad  is  the  definition  of  money?  If  cryptocurrencies  are  money, 
anything  else  can,  of  course,  be  construed  as  money.  Take  for 
example  the  banknotes  and  coins  in  your  wallet.  They  are  an  asset 
owned and held by you. The same banknotes and coins appear on the 
liabilities  side  of  the  balance  sheet  of  the  legally  constituted  issuing 
authority which is the Bank of Mauritius. It necessarily means that the 
Bank  has  an  obligation  of  the  stated  amount  vis-à-vis  you,  and  is 
accountable to you. At any point in time, anyone of you can examine 
the balance sheet of the Bank of Mauritius  to see the quality and  the 
value of assets held against the currency in your wallets. In the case of 
cryptocurrencies, the question of liabilities does not arise at all. They 
are your assets if you acquire them but they are liabilities of nobody 
in 
this  world.  Nobody  has  an  obligation 
to 
the  holders  of 
cryptocurrencies  in  the  manner  a  central  bank  does  have  for  the 
currency  it  has  issued.  I  do  not  wish  to  burden  the  audience  this 
afternoon  with  technicalities  and  arguments  that  might  sound 
academic  to  disbelievers  but  which  are  indeed  of  fundamental 
importance  to  central  bankers  having  financial  stability  as  one  of  its 
mandates. 
 11 
Reportedly, there are  more than 1,300 cryptocurrencies registered on 
different  exchanges  worldwide.  It  necessarily  goes  to  say  that  there 
are  more  cryptocurrencies  than  national  currencies.  How  do  we 
recognize them and who is who in this  vast jungle? And how do we 
effectively  regulate  them?  Since  2011,  there  have  been  at  least  three 
dozen heists of cryptocurrency exchanges. Nearly one million bitcoins 
equivalent  to  over  US$4  billion  at  current  prices  have  been  found 
missing between October, 2011 and April, 2017. Legions of investors 
and  speculators  have  been  left  holding  their  bags  empty;  they  are  at 
the  mercy  of  the  exchanges  for  any  possible  compensation.  Would 
you as a money-lender accept cryptocurrencies as collaterals? Does it 
augur  well  for  financial  stability?  Anyone  of  us  sufficiently 
conversant  with  digital  technology,  must  be  aware  that  clever 
algorithms  churn  through  a  massive  history  of  everyone’s  behaviour 
in the internet to predict your own behaviour. And those who have a 
compulsive  gambling  behaviour  needs 
to  bear 
in  mind 
that 
cryptocurrency exchanges are not manned by professors of ethics and 
morality. 
May I however seize this opportunity to state that in discussions about 
cryptocurrencies  one  crucial  aspect  in  the  digital  evolution  of  the 
means  of  payments  and  settlements  is  often  overlooked:  a  vast 
majority of money in a modern economy is already electronic money. 
In  Mauritius,  nearly  Rs3 
trillion  of 
transactions  are  settled 
electronically  on  an  annual  basis.  This  figure  represents  6  times  the 
GDP  of  Mauritius  implying  that  our  payments  and  settlements  by 
 12 
electronic means are quite intensive and are ever growing. We expect 
the  value  of  transactions  settled  electronically  to  shoot  up  with  the 
introduction our National Payment Switch.  
Honourable Prime Minister, Ladies and gentlemen, I have to reassure 
you  that  the  Bank  is  very  digital  minded.  The  Bank  was  one  of  the 
first,  along  with  South  Africa,  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  to  go  for  real 
time  electronic  payments  and  settlements  in  2000.  The  Mauritius 
Credit  Information  Bureau  established  in  2005,  the  first  electronic 
platform  for  sharing  borrowers’  information  established  in  sub-
Saharan  Africa  has  been  ranked  first  by  the  World  Bank  doing 
business indicator for several years in succession. All returns from our 
regulatees are electronically submitted and automatically processed as 
from this year. The National Payment Switch which will be launched 
next year will become a pillar of the Mauritian digital economy. This 
will  bring  about  a  kind  of  revolutionary  change  in  the  Mauritian 
economy that  many of us still fail to take cognizance of.  It will be a 
giant  leap  forward  for  the  Mauritian  economy.  This  is  a  Bank  that 
performs  noiselessly  and  without  chest-beating  –  in  the  quietness  of 
an insulated and well-guarded building. The Bank does realize that at 
the centre of every significant change taking place in our lives today, 
there is indeed some technology of some sort involved. Every kind of 
thing  that  is  made  is  becoming  something  else.  We  do  realize  that 
nothing  is  done  yet.  Nothing  is  finished  for  good.  And  all  is  flux  – 
constant  flux,  meaning  that  this  never-ending  change  is  the  pivotal 
axis around which the modern world rotates. 
 13 
Central  bankers  in  general  have  thoughtfully  taken  a  few  steps  back 
from 
the  cryptocurrencies  debates 
in 
the  past  several  years. 
Increasingly  more  and  more  researched  and 
in-depth  studies 
conducted  by  responsible  organisations  are  being  published  on  the 
subject. Digital currencies like bitcoins and altcoins are being viewed 
by  central  bankers  as  having  the  potential  to  make  future  financial 
crises  even  more  devastating.  There  is  now  a  slowly  emerging 
acceptance  that  if  digital  currencies  have  to  be  issued,  central  banks 
should  necessarily  be  the  issuer.  But  it’s  also  being  recognized  that 
the risks associated with digital currencies are far from minimal.  In a 
world  characterised  by  a  dense  traffic  of  post-truths  and  fake  news, 
policy  makers  need 
to  consult  research  studies  produced  by 
responsible organisations. Truths are turning out to be underpowered 
antibiotics. Let’s exercise prudence. 
This  brings  me  to  the  Knowledge  Centre  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has 
decided to host in this very premise. It’s an idea that I had romanced 
with  since  my  days  I  was  Director  of  Research  here  at  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius. 
In  the  past,  the  power  of  the  priesthood  was  demolished  by  the 
circulation  of  the  Bible  to  all  those  who  wanted  and  needed  it.  The 
power  of  priesthood  in  Hinduism  was  demolished  by  the  circulation 
of  Hindu  scriptures  to  all  those  who  wanted  and  needed  them.  The 
religion  that  once  belonged  to  the  priesthood  finally  belonged  to  the 
people. Unless we make our professional world a better world, a fairer 
world,  many of our younger ones will continue to fade out silently - 
 14 
saddened  and  embittered.  Opportunities  for  a  fuller  intellectual  and 
professional  life  would  only  become  available  if  our  workplaces  are 
emptied  of  all  the  barriers  that  frustrate  the  roaming  and  capricious 
possibilities of the human spirit.  
Openness  frees  up  organisations.  The  emerging  future  is  very 
demanding  but  very  exciting  as  well.  We  have  no  excuse  for 
ignorance  in  the  age  of  information.  Organisations  that  thrive  in  this 
age of information are those that have successfully evolved into what 
is termed as Learning Organisations. When information is open to all, 
power  is  re-distributed.  When  power  is  re-distributed,  hierarchies  in 
organisations  are  replaced  by  networks.  In  the  process,  it  converts 
employees into free agents. Until today, one often hears stories about 
how  information  is  curtained  off  and  made  available  to  only  the 
licensed  ones  in  many  organisations.  Filing  cabinets  are  sometimes 
said  to  be  more  knowledgeable  that  the  officer  in  control  of  the 
cabinets. Where information is not curtained off, power and authority 
dissolve.  Only  the  bests  are  filtered  in.  The  decision  to  host  a 
Knowledge  Centre,  on 
the  occasion  of 
the  50th  anniversary 
celebrations, in this newly designed building is expected to go a long 
way  towards  making  precious  reading  materials  freely  available  to 
bankers  and  to  the  relevant  faculties  of  the  University  of  Mauritius 
and other similar institutions.  
The Bank subscribes to several  economic journals like the American 
Economic  Review,  American  Economic  Literature,  Cambridge  Law 
Journal  and  many  other  treasured  publications,  not  yet  accessible  to 
 15 
students  and  professionals  outside  the  Bank.  We  are  seeking  to 
electronically connect to US and UK University libraries in such areas 
as economics, banking and finance, law and Information Technology. 
Commercial  banks  have  all  agreed  to  contribute  to  the  financing  of 
the Knowledge centre.  
I  requested  bankers  in  2015  to  re-invent  the  Mauritius  Bankers’ 
Association  (MBA).  I  understand 
its  Chairman  appointed  a 
Consultant to find out how best to re-invent the MBA and raise it to 
the same level as in advanced jurisdictions. Once the MBA is ready, 
the  financial  industry  will  be  authorised  to  make  use  of  this  very 
auditorium,  jointly  with  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  for  purposes  of 
professional  training  to  young  bankers.  We  are  overwhelmingly 
reliant  on  quality  human  capital.  There  is  clearly  a  shortage  of 
professionals in the industry with higher kills. There is no way we can 
move to higher income levels without a good stock of quality human 
capital. The Bank is glad to provide these facilities to the jurisdiction 
on the occasion of its 50th Anniversary Celebrations. 
Finally,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Museum.  Walk  studiously  amidst  the 
displays of banknotes and coins in the museum and you will make out 
that  Mauritius  was  about  three  centuries  ago  a  regional  financial 
centre.  
I  do  not  wish  to  be  overly  presumptuous.  The  museum  is  of  a  class 
apart.  It  is  interactive,  reflecting  that  the  Bank  is,  in  practice, 
digitalising its operations. The Board of Directors of the Bank, myself 
 16 
included, is pleased to gift the museum to the people of Mauritius on 
the occasion of the golden jubilee celebrations of the Bank.  
We  have  in  our  midst  Mr  Paul  Van  Bodegraven,  from  Holland,  a 
numismatic expert who is recognized as an unquestioned authority on 
early  Indian Ocean region currencies. The Bank enlisted his services 
to  assess  the  genuineness  of  each  and  every  coin  and  banknote 
displayed  in  the  museum.  I  was  thrilled  to  learn  from  Mr  Van 
Bodegraven  that  the  Museum  has  in  its  collection  a  Dutch  Jakarta 
Tael  (pronounced TA-EEL)  of  the  early  17th  century.  It  is  a  coin  so 
rare that even coin reference books do not have a real photograph of it 
but  just  a  drawing.  I  have  even  been  given  to  understand  that  just  a 
handful of living persons may have ever laid their eyes on such a coin 
across the last century! It’s a very precious coin owned by the Bank of 
Mauritius. You will also have the privileged to actually see the origin 
of the US dollar sign. 
The museum is only the first leg of the project. It will soon be made 
much  more  interactive.  The  second  leg  of  the  project  will  be  the 
incorporation  of  financial  literacy  in  central  banking.  As  I  speak  to 
you here at this very hour, the Bank of Mauritius  has become a full-
fledged member of the International Federation of Financial Museum 
based in New York. 
About  50  per  cent  of  the  rarities  displayed  in  the  museum  are  the 
property of the MCB Group Ltd. I, in fact all of us, must be thankful 
to the MCB Group Ltd for having so generously agreed to display its 
 17 
collections. I extend to Mr Pierre Guy Noel, CEO of MCB Group Ltd, 
my  warmest  thanks  for having  so  graciously  accepted  to  take  up  my 
request  to  his  Board  of  Directors  for  consent  and  approval  for  the 
display  of  MCB’s  highly  valuable  artefacts.  Mr  Christopher  Murray, 
CEO,  of  HSBC  (Mauritius)  Ltd  also  kindly  agreed  to  offer  precious 
rarities  for  display 
in 
the  museum.  Without 
their 
invaluable 
contributions,  the  museum  would  have  been  far  less  telling  of  our 
history. Thank you, Mr Pierre Guy  Noel. Thank you Mr Christopher 
Murray.  We  have  a  very  long  relationship  with  both  the  Royal  Mint 
and de La Rue. May I extend my warm thanks to Royal Mint and de 
La  Rue  for  having  agreed  to  display  in  the  museum  a  number  of 
highly valuable items. 
We have in our midst Messrs Owen Griffiths, Ms Marina Carter and 
Mr Jean-Marie Huron. In 2015, I met with Mr Owen Griffiths and we 
agreed on the publication of a book that bears the title, “From Piastres 
to Polymer”. It’s a comprehensively researched work on the history of 
banknotes of Mauritius. The book is under print and before this year 
is out, we will have the pleasure of reading it with enthusiasm. 
I thank the Honourable Madam Speaker of the National Assembly for 
having granted the permission to re-print the 1966 Sessional Paper on 
the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  I  also  thank  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  for 
having granted  the  permission  to  use  the  updated  Coates  of  Arms  of 
Mauritius on the cover of the Sessional Paper. 
 18 
I thank the Honourable Prime Minister for having so kindly accepted 
to grace the inaugural ceremony of The Bank of Mauritius Museum. 
On  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank,  myself  included,  I 
wish to thank you all for your presence. 
Thank you. 
