Lim Hng Kiang: Metamorphosis – Singapore as a global capital for
Asian risk transfer
Official  keynote  address  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry  and  Deputy
Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  14th  Singapore  International
Reinsurance Conference, Singapore, 1 November 2017.
Opening
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, a very good morning to all of you.
2      I  am  delighted  to  be  here  with  you  today  at  the  14th  Singapore  International  Reinsurance
Conference.
3      This  year’s  conference  is  significant  because  this  is  the  first  year  the  SIRC  becomes  an
annual event.  It is a milestone worth commending as the SIRC is now finally able to serve as a
platform  for  annual  renewals,  much  like  the  Monte  Carlo  Rendez-Vous  and  Baden-Baden
Meetings of the East.  And this is just the beginning.  In the longer term, I am confident that the
SIRC can be built up into an annual gathering of key global and regional industry practitioners,
meeting to discuss key issues facing the industry, and charting out future growth directions.
4   The SIRC’s journey reflects the transformation of the Singapore reinsurance industry over 20
years  –  from  starting  out  as  a  domestic  market  in  the  early  days,  to  going  through  market
liberalisation in 2000, to being a regional insurance powerhouse in 2010, and now to becoming a
global insurance marketplace going into 2020.  
5   Singapore is now widely recognised as the leading specialty insurance and reinsurance hub
in Asia. 
We are home to:
four of the top five global insurance players;
a vibrant ecosystem comprising a strong brokers’ cluster where nine out of ten of the
top global brokers are based here;
the largest captive community in Asia Pacific;
a growing concentration of more than thirty specialty players; and
the largest grouping of Lloyd’s syndicates outside of London, with 26 syndicates.  
Reflecting  the  increasingly  important  role  of  non-life  insurance  in  driving  overall  industry
growth:
The  share  of  offshore  non-life  insurance  as  a  proportion  of  total  non-life  insurance
premiums has increased steadily, rising from 60% in 2010 to close to 70% in 2016. 
Over one-third of offshore premium flows are attributed to specialist lines of business,
such  as  large  and  complex  property,  marine,  construction  and  engineering,  energy,
financial lines and agriculture.
Insurance  companies  are  gradually  anchoring  more  global  and  regional  positions  in
Singapore,  and  most Asian  risks,  including  large  reinsurance  programmes  and  specialty
risks, can now be fully placed in Singapore.
Singapore’s  share  of  global  Asia-Pacific  originated  reinsurance  premiums  has  also
risen from 3% in 2013, to close to 10% in 2016.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Vision 2025: Global capital for Asian risk transfer
6   So what next after this? 
7   The global reinsurance industry continues to face structural challenges, in a few forms:
Alternative capital, which gives rise to excess capacity and softening rates, is expected to
persist.
Insurance underwriting is not keeping pace with the rate of emergence of new risks, such as
cyber, supply chain, and reputation risks.
Companies  are  increasingly  demanding  comprehensive  risk  management  solutions  that
encompass  both  traditional  and  alternative  risk  transfer  arrangements:  for  example,
overlaying  a  standard  reinsurance  policy  with  a  catastrophe  bond  to  cover  low-frequency
and high-severity risks.
New  technologies  and  digital  innovations  are  threatening  to  disrupt  the  insurance  value
chain, such as the underwriting and claims processes potentially being automated with the
use of artificial intelligence.
8   In addition, as Asia continues to grow in economic importance – fuelled by rapid urbanisation,
infrastructure development and trade growth – insurance penetration continues to be low, and
the growing protection gap in the region remains a challenge.  The low penetration arises from of
a lack of risk awareness and data paucity, making it difficult for risks to be well-modelled and
priced.  As a result, less than 5% of disaster losses in Asia were insured over the past decades. 
In other words, more than 95% of Asia is not receiving the protection it needs.
 9   Asia needs to close that protection gap soon, and Singapore is pursuing three strategies in
parallel to help with that:
First,  to  develop  alternative  risk  transfer  mechanisms  like  insurance-linked  securities  and
government  pools  in  our  repertoire  of  insurance  offerings,  so  that  we  are  in  a  position  to
provide financing quickly and effectively in the aftermath of loss events.
Second,  to  incubate  insurance  solutions  for  new  and  emerging  risks,  such  as  cyber,
reputation and environmental liabilities.
Third, to transform the insurance market through technology and innovation.
10   Today, let me focus on the first strategy of developing Singapore’s alternative risk transfer
market through insurance-linked securities and public-private partnerships.
Insurance-linked securities (ILS)
11   Let me begin with insurance-linked securities, or ILS. 
12   We know that alternative capital has been growing more rapidly than traditional capacity over
the years, a clear demonstration of greater acceptance of ILS instruments by both investors and
issuers.  In particular, issuance of catastrophe bonds have grown strongly and total catastrophe
bonds outstanding reached a new high of almost USD 30 billion as at the third quarter of this
year.  This is despite the persistent reinsurance headwinds of excess capacity and depressed
rates.  
13   Catastrophe bonds present unique benefits to reinsurers:  they provide multi-year capacity
and pricing certainty; they are more secure due to their fully collateralised nature and ability to be
rated; they are a good alternative  to traditional reinsurance for risks that are hard to model; and
they are capital-efficient.
14   To an investor, catastrophe bonds proffer strong benefits too: their low correlation with the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial markets make them an effective asset diversification instrument; they have low volatility
and stable returns; they provide liquidity; and they can be issued via private placements or as
tradable securities.  
15   We are therefore seeing a growing cluster of institutional investors and fund managers like
Quantedge  exploring  allocation  into  catastrophe  bonds,  as  they  venture  into  niche  and
specialised strategies to extract better risk-adjusted returns.
16      On  the  supply  side,  we  too  have  seen  healthy  interest  from Asia-Pacific  issuers  in  the
development of an APAC market for catastrophe bond issuances, due to the proximity to and
better understanding of the underlying risks. 
17      Given  the  above,  the  MAS  has  thus  taken  progressive  strides  towards  developing  the
catastrophe bond market in Singapore.
18   As a first step, we have formed an alternative risk transfer work-group comprising industry
experts in the ILS space.  Chaired by Jon Paradine of Renaissance Re, the work-group advises
the MAS on specific initiatives that will support the development of Singapore as an ILS hub.   
19   Today,  I am happy to announce one such initiative – the newly created ILS grant scheme. 
To catalyse the development of Singapore’s ILS market, the MAS will fund 100% of the upfront
costs incurred in issuing catastrophe bonds out of Singapore.  This grant will run from 1 January
2018  and  will  be  applicable  to  ILS  bonds  covering  all  forms  of  risks  beyond  just  natural
catastrophe risks.
20      It  is  my  hope  that  this  grant  scheme  will  encourage  insurers  and  reinsurers  to  consider
issuing a catastrophe bond here.  In fact, MAS is already working with key industry players such
as IAG Re Singapore with a view to issuing a catastrophe bond in Singapore.  This is but the
first step of a longer journey, as we look forward to working more closely with the industry to
further deepen our ILS ecosystem here.
Public-Private Partnerships
21   Moving on, I would like to touch on public-private partnerships – the other equally important
arm of our alternative risk transfer strategy.
22   Continued industrialisation, expanding cross-border trade, and infrastructure development
are at the heart of Asia’s growth.  These create vast investment opportunities in the region, and
will also drive demand for insurance solutions to mitigate a variety of business risks.  
23   One such initiative is China’s One Belt One Road (OBOR) initiative, the most ambitious
infrastructure project of its kind to-date.  OBOR seeks to connect China and countries across
Asia, the Middle East and Europe through a series of land and sea trade routes.  Vital public
infrastructure, such as roads and railways, gas pipelines, power plants and ports will be built in
over 60 countries, with total estimated infrastructure investment to exceed USD 1 trillion. 
24   However, modern risks lie along these ancient routes.  There are a myriad of geopolitical,
legal, credit and environmental  risks  in  many  countries  along  the  corridor.    Political  instability,
rioting, terrorism and conflict can lead to contractual issues and financial losses.  Unfamiliarity
with legal frameworks and regulations can lead to expensive delays.  Non-payment risks can be
exacerbated  by  emerging  markets’  vulnerability  to  external  shocks,  such  as  currency  and
commodity price volatility.
25   The MAS is thus seeking to co-create new risk solutions with regional governments and the
industry, and utilise these solutions on a pre-emptive basis to help governments and investors
safeguard against key risks like natural catastrophes, construction risks and political risks. 
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
26      To  this  end,  I  am  glad  to  announce  the  formation  of  the  Singapore-based  infrastructure
consortium  for  OBOR  projects,  with  China  Re  Singapore  as  the  administrator.    The  OBOR
insurance  consortium  is  envisaged  to  provide  top-up  capacity  and  specialised  insurance
coverage for OBOR projects in APAC ex-China, by bringing together Singapore-based insurers,
reinsurers,  and  brokers  who  will  contribute  insurance  capacity  and  provide  risk  management
services for OBOR projects.
27   The OBOR consortium will initially focus on key lines of business that play to the specialty
risk strengths of Singapore’s insurance markets, with a view to ultimately be a one-stop solution
for both P&C insurance and other specialty insurance.
28   We will pilot the OBOR consortium with two lines of business: Construction; and Project
Cargo  &  Liability.    This  is  particularly  relevant  for  Asia  as  industrialisation  and  infrastructure
investments in this region will propel demand for insurance solutions to mitigate construction and
project  cargo  risks.    We  have  established  a  group  of  interested  lead  and  follow  markets  in
Singapore  to  offer  coverage  in  these  two  lines.  The  markets  comprise  leading  insurers,
reinsurers  and  Lloyd’s  syndicates  operating  in  Singapore.    We  look  forward  to  the  industry’s
active participation in this bold venture.
Conclusion
29   Ladies and gentlemen, insurance is fundamentally about risk management.  As the region
around us continues to grow, the insurance industry can support this growth and development by
creating  relevant  risk  management  solutions  that  can  pave  the  way  for  a  broader  range  of
corporates and investors to participate in its growth. 
31   The two strategies of ILS and public-private partnerships that I have highlighted earlier mark
the  metamorphosis  of  Singapore’s  reinsurance  industry  as  we  transform  from  a  mainstream
traditional reinsurance hub, to a sophisticated full-fledged global capital for Asian risk transfer.
32   I invite you to be a part of this metamorphosis, as we chart new paths together in this journey
that Singapore is embarking on.
33   Thank you very much. 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
