Vítor  Constâncio:  The  future  of  finance  and  the  outlook  for
regulation
Remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Financial
Regulatory Outlook Conference, organised by the Centre for International Governance Innovation
and Oliver Wyman, Rome, 9 November 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I  am  grateful  to  the  organisers  for  the  opportunity  to  publicly  address  some  important  issues
related to regulation and the future of finance. Ten years since the outbreak of the financial crisis
and  still  ahead  of  fully  concluding  the  subsequent  regulatory  reform,  we  are  already  seeing
attempts to roll back financial regulation.
The reform has been successful in building a safer financial system and priority should be given
to completing the agenda of Basel III. Subsequently, there will be time to assess its effects and
possibly  adjust  it  with  some  amendments  that  may  improve  its  effectiveness.  Right  now,  the
world economy is enjoying a moment of synchronous recovery and, if anything, the concerns
arise from possible excesses of financial market buoyancy, not from a lack of finance to support
the recovery.
It  is  still  premature  to  assess  the  strength  of  the  current  regulatory  pushback  but  not  soon
enough to try to prevent its success. We should not allow the memory of the financial crisis we
went through to be dissipated in the fog of vested interests. Euro area output is now 19% below
the level it would have achieved had the trend growth in the 15 years prior to 2007 continued
thereafter. Were the economy to have grown from now on at that same trend, the accumulated
loss of output until 2030, properly discounted, would represent more than three times the annual
output in 2008. The crisis left behind a permanent economic loss with its correspondent human
costs  that  help  explain  the  populist  backlash  that  is  spreading  at  each  election  in  our
democracies.
The  crisis  represented  a  remarkable  failure  of  macroeconomics  which  has  ignored  that  the
economy  is  not  swiftly  self-correcting  towards  a  good  equilibrium.  Public  policies  are  thus
needed. At the same time, the crisis showed that the financial sector can endogenously generate
imbalances  with  significant  consequences  for  the  real  economy.  Furthermore,  finance  theory,
endorsing the Efficient Market Hypothesis, contributed to the views favourable to light regulation
and supervision. Several past regulatory changes reflect those views: the Glass-Steagall repeal;
the 1995 Basel Accord allowing the use of banks’ internal models for the assessment of market
risk; the 2004 Basel II Accord extending the use of internal models to credit risk; the 2003 U.S.
Securities & Exchange Commission (SEC) decision allowing mortgage Asset Based Securities
(ABS) to be used in repurchase agreements (repos) and the subsequent changes in 2005 to the
U.S. Bankruptcy Law, excluding repos from bankruptcy processes thus rendering them a “safe
haven”.
The crisis and the expansion of finance
As in past cases, the recent financial crisis had its origins in excessive leverage and excessive
credit or debt creation in the financial system as a whole.
These excessive imbalances were not considered a risk by the economic thinking of the time. As
credit  expanded  and  assets  grew,  the  share  of  the  financial  sector  in  total  GDP  increased
exponentially. In Europe, this led to strong growth of some important universal banks. In the euro
area, total bank assets represented 116% of GDP in 1985 but increased to 219% in 2000 and to
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
320% in 2008. Already in 2002, the assets of the 12 biggest banks in Europe represented 64% of
GDP and as Bayoumi states in his recent book, “they were already becoming too big to fail”.  In
the  U.S.,  the  increase  in  finance  was  mostly  due  to  the  expansion  of  the  so-called  “shadow
banking” sector. In 2007, total assets in the shadow banking sector equalled the level of total
bank  assets.  Figures  concerning  non-banks’  involvement  in  credit  intermediation  are  also
remarkable: the size of euro area investment funds more than tripled from 2007 to the present,
from 13% of total banking assets to the present 41%. Profits are a further indicator of the sector’s
expansion: in the U.S. financial sector profits climbed from 8% of the non-financial firms’ profits
at the beginning of the 1980s to a peak of 68% in 2003, hovering around 30% in the past few
2
years.
1
The  expansion  of  the  financial  sector  was  not  enabled  by  savings  invested  in  the  capital  of
financial institutions but mostly by a redefinition of risk capital and its endorsement by regulators.
On the eve of the crisis, a few significant European banks had a leverage ratio (equity over total
assets) of just 1.5% to 2% while capital ratios were well above the regulatory minimum of 8%.
The  “magic”  of  internal  models  to  calculate  risk  weights  in  regulatory  capital  explains  the
difference, although the low leverage ratio meant that a loss of 3% of total assets would wipe out
banks’ capital.
The second development underlying the expansion of finance relates to the rapid growth of the
shadow banking sector, especially in the U.S. To be precise, the appropriate concept of shadow
banking  conflates  entities  and  activities  involved  in  a  vast  array  of  services  related  to
securitisation, repos and securities financing transactions (SFTs), as well as over-the-counter
(OTC)  derivatives.  These  instruments  contributed  to  the  creation  of  a  market-based  credit
system funded by secured short-term market funding.
The motivation for this new credit system relates to the emergence of very sizeable cash pools
that could not find safety in banks’ insured deposits and were in search of safer forms of placing
that  cash  in  the  short-term.   Those  three  main  instruments  were  used  to  create  supposedly
“safer” private short-term assets. The crisis came when crashing housing prices raised doubts
about securitisations and when chains of inside liquidity created by repos with re-hypothecation
and re-use of the same securities,  collapsed with rising haircuts and resulting illiquid markets.
That is why Gary Gorton characterises the 2007/2008 financial crisis as a “run on repo”.
3
4
5
We  live  now  in  a  collaterised  financial  system  where  unsecured  interbank  transactions  have
been continuously declining.   It  is  important  to  understand  these  developments  because  they
represent a structural change in our financial systems and go beyond the simple increased role
of non-bank financial institutions in credit intermediation. The enhanced role of these institutions
is nevertheless relevant as they may contribute to the increase of leverage in the whole financial
system that cannot be measured by simply looking at banks’ balance sheets but has to consider
synthetic leverage built with derivatives.
History  illustrates  that  there  is  a  spontaneous  tendency  for  finance  to  increase  leverage  and
maturity  transformation  without  considering  the  potential  social  costs  of  an  overall  excess  of
credit  and  debt  and  the  crashes  that  may  follow.  This  is  particularly  true  for  banks,  where
incentives  are  distorted  by  the  safety  net  ensured  by  deposit  guarantee  schemes  and  by  the
implicit backstop normally provided by public authorities to avoid the spread of financial crises.
There  is  therefore  a  difference  between  private  and  social  costs  and  benefits  that  provides  a
justification for financial regulation.
Finance and growth
The  usual  arguments  against  financial  regulation  rely  on  the  notion  that  finance  is  good  for
growth, and more finance is always better.  Before the financial crisis, the near-consensus in the
academic  literature  was  that  the  relationship  between  finance  and  growth  was  causal  and
6
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
monotonic. The financial crisis prompted a reassessment of this view. More recent evidence has
illustrated that the relationship between finance and growth is non-linear: when it grows beyond a
threshold level, estimated to be a ratio of private credit to GDP of around 100%, the financial
sector stops supporting, and can even start hurting, economic growth.  A number of theories, as
well  as  evidence  to  support  them,  have  been  put  forth  to  explain  this  fact.  First,  it  has  been
pointed out that financial institutions first exhaust the most productive investment opportunities:
too  much  financial  intermediation  thus  tends  to  imply  excessive  support  of  unproductive
investment  projects.   Others  have  suggested  that  there  is  a  trade-off  between  economic
development  and  macroeconomic  risk  which  is  exacerbated  when  financial  intermediation
intensifies.  The third potential explanation for the non-monotonic relationship between finance
and growth at high levels of development is the brain drain from the real sector into the financial
sector, which led one economist to worry about whether we have too many financiers and too
few engineers.
 A final explanation relates to increased rent extraction from the real economy by
financial firms managing investors’ money.
10
11
7
8
9
Despite a number of regulatory initiatives to tame finance after the crisis, the financial sector at
present is growing faster than GDP. In spite of this, the financial industry argues that finance has
been  overregulated,  especially  in  terms  of  high  capital  requirements.  The  recovery  of  credit
growth however, seems to disprove this.
It is also important to underline that the studies showing the negative effects of too much finance
refer to the growth of credit to the private sector. Indeed, the evidence that most financial crises
in  history  stemmed  from  excessive private  debt,  be  it  corporate  or  household  debt,  is
unequivocal. A recent paper analyses financial crises in advanced economies from 1870 to 2008
and finds that “private credit booms, not public borrowing or the level of public data, tend to be the
main precursors of financial instability in industrial countries”.
 In the context of the European
crisis, I showed in 2013 that the main driver of the financial and economic imbalances was the
fact  that  credit  from  banks  in  core  countries  to  banks  in  the  periphery  quintupled  from  the
inception of monetary union until 2008.
12
13
Even in the absence of crises, high levels of private debt are detrimental to the economy. For
example, empirical research has recently argued that excessive corporate debt is one of the root
causes  of  the  slow  recovery  in  corporate  investment  in  Europe  since  the  financial  crisis  as
investment is pushed down by corporate debt overhang.
 Moreover, recent evidence shows that
high household debt is inevitably associated with a slowdown of GDP growth and an increase in
unemployment rates.
14
15
The outstanding corporate debt in the euro area almost doubled during the decade preceding the
global financial crisis, from EUR 5.3 trillion in 1999 to EUR 9.6 trillion in 2008. Corporate debt
continued to rise throughout the crisis, albeit at a slower pace, and reached just over EUR 11
trillion in 2016. We saw similar developments in household debt over these two decades, with
household  debt  rising  particularly  strongly  in  the  decade  preceding  the  global  financial  crisis,
almost doubling from EUR 3.2 trillion in 1999 to EUR 5.8 trillion in 2008, and rising further since
then – albeit at a slower pace, to reach EUR 6.3 trillion in 2016. Importantly, during these two
decades,  there  is  no  clear  causal  relationship  between  developments  in  either  outstanding
corporate debt or in outstanding household debt and productivity growth.
These facts explain why macroprudential policy, born in the wake of the crisis, tries to smooth
out credit booms and tame finance by acting at the level of the system as a whole.
FinTech and regulation
Another challenge to regulation comes from the spread of FinTech: the use of new technologies
to develop and distribute financial products and services. The evident benefits of FinTech relate
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  the  potential  reduction  of  transaction  costs  and  the  prospect  of  greater  financial  inclusion
around  the  world.  In  the  view  of  its  enthusiasts, FinTech  will  be  radically  disruptive,  breaking
industry boundaries and upending financial intermediation by eliminating traditional banks. There
is a lot of exaggeration in this view. The footprint of new FinTech firms is still rather small. The
new  technologies  –  notably  blockchain,  artificial  intelligence,  machine  learning  and  decision
algorithms – are already being used by incumbent banks and asset managers who are not about
to be swarmed by a host of nimble small FinTech firms.
Nevertheless, some usage can be significantly transformative. The use of artificial intelligence
and machine learning by asset managers is one example that will create new risks and may
contribute to further concentration in the sector. Another example is the change in Real Time
Gross  Settlement  systems  run  by  central  banks.  Private  big  banks  are  already  developing
projects based on blockchain technology to create their own networks to clear and settle all types
of transactions among themselves. Some central banks have been working on similar systems
collaborating with private banks. The Ubin project is continuing in Singapore whereas, last May,
the Bank of Canada concluded that its own Jasper project showed that the technology was not
sufficiently mature. In some countries, the use of cash, notes and coins is declining at fast rates
and we cannot disregard its possible disappearance in the future. In most jurisdictions however,
that possibility is very far away, if it ever occurs. In the euro area, issuance of bank notes has
more than tripled since 2001 and is still growing at about 5% a year.
All the developments I mentioned would not materially change the nature of our financial system,
the  concept  of  money  or  the  effectiveness  of  central  banks’  monetary  policy.  The  so-called
private “crypto-currencies” can never prevail as general money substitutes. Their designation is a
misnomer as they are not a currency but just a commodity used as a speculative asset and as a
restricted medium of exchange in very special circumstances, comprising criminal activities or
failed States with collapsed institutions. Instead, the use of the blockchain by central banks to
create digital currency open to all citizens without limits would be really disruptive. This would be
a radical political choice that could end banking as we know it and is therefore unlikely to happen.
Ignoring  that  possibility  and  regarding  current  banking  activity, FinTech  has  penetrated  mostly
into payment systems. Banks’ payment-related income has decreased but some is retained as
bank accounts are still the ultimate way of settling. Where FinTech can have a big impact is in
cross-border  payments  by  using  the  blockchain  technology  to  eliminate  several  intermediate
steps, speed up global transfers and promote worldwide financial inclusion.
Concerning  credit,  peer-to-peer  (P2P)  or  crowdfunding, FinTech  lending  is  still  very  small  in
general, with the exception of the U.S. where mortgage origination is significant, even if the online
firms do not keep the exposures in their small balance sheets.
16
This  progress  is  naturally  due  to  the  fact  that FinTech  firms  are  much  less  regulated  than
traditional institutions under the presumption that it is good to allow new competition. The hope
of FinTech enthusiasts is that its spread will lead to much lighter financial regulation.
However, new technologies generate new risks and do not eliminate the old ones which provide
the  rationale  for  financial  regulation  in  the  first  place. Asymmetries  of  information  and  default
externalities  do  not  disappear  with  the  introduction  of  new  ways  of  supplying  financial
services. FinTech  does  not  provide  an  excuse  for  less  regulation.  It  is  the  specific  nature  of
finance in our economies that provides the rationale for financial regulation which is different from
the one applied to other sectors, particularly those related to privatised former public utilities. In
this  case,  it  is  insufficient  competition  that  justifies  the  regulatory  bias  in  favour  of  new  firms
entering the sector. This principle is not a major driver of regulation in the financial sector where
competition is in general sufficient, prices do not need to be regulated and no special protection
is warranted for new entrants, especially when they offer only part of the services assured by the
incumbents.
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another principle is that we need a financial system with bank-like institutions to provide deposit
liquidity  services  and  maturity  transformation.  Narrow  banking  or  similar  approaches  do  not
guarantee  the  amount  of  credit  to  finance  investment  and  economic  growth.
  The  solution
proposed by FinTech enthusiasts of substituting banks by a sort of money market funds or even
by investment funds, offering securities’ accounts with provision of liquidity services, confronts
the difficulty that in stressful situations there is no guarantee that funds’ units can be redeemed at
par. For good reasons, mutual or investment funds cannot legally offer cheque accounts.
17
Historically,  bank  regulation  was  created  to  ensure  depositors’  protection  and  to  prevent  bank
runs. The imposition of capital ratios and the creation of deposit guarantee schemes emerged at
the beginning of the last century as the minimum regulatory solutions to attain those objectives.
Similar  concerns  subsequently  led  to  the  supervision  of  individual  banks’  asset  quality  and
liquidity  position,  completing  the  micro-supervisory  instruments  to  ensure  the  robustness  of
individual  institutions.  The  deposit  contract  is  indeed  the  specific  service  that  distinguishes  a
bank from other financial institutions. Several other financial entities can provide credit. However,
only when the credit is funded by regularly collected funds from the public and redemption at the
same  nominal  value  is  guaranteed,  is  a  financial  institution  considered  a  bank,  subject  to  the
respective  regulation.  Regulators  should  not  lose  sight  of  these  basic  concepts  when
allowing FinTech firms to get out of their facile regulatory “sandboxes”.
Overview of the regulatory reform and its limitations
As mentioned at the start, ahead of the conclusion of the post-crisis regulatory reform, there are
already  attempts  to  roll  back  financial  regulation.  The  main  points  under  pressure  are  the
Leverage  Ratio  (LR),  the  limitation  of  the  use  of  internal  models  to  assess  credit  risk  and
corresponding capital requirements, the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) and the Fundamental
Review of the Trading Book.
Regarding capital  requirements,  the  mandatory  LR  applied  to  banks  was  one  of  the  most
important reforms introduced. Basel III fixed the LR at 3% of Tier 1 capital which still corresponds
to total assets about 33 times Tier 1 (against 50 times equity for some EU banks pre-crisis).
There are pressures to exclude repos, sovereign bonds and export credits from the LR. This
weakening of the standard should be avoided as it increases the probability of crises and output
losses.
  estimates  optimal  LR  at  7%  to  8%  for
significant  U.S.  banks,  corresponding  to  12%  to  14%  of  risk-weighted  capital  ratio  (RWCR).
Morris Goldstein (2017)
 shows that the LR is more accurate in predicting bank failures than
RWCRs since the latter have been affected by misuse of internal models by large banks. In fact,
for  U.S.  banks,  Goldstein  shows  that  the  ratio  between  risk-weighted  assets  and  total  assets
came  down  from  70%  in  1993  to  40%  in  2011  with  no  apparent  link  to  the  credit  portfolio
composition.
  In  his  recent  book,  William  Cline  (2017)
18
19
20
21
The binding risk-weighted common equity capital ratio was fixed by Basel III at 7%. Euro area
significant banks now have, on average, common equity tier 1 ratio of 14%. A number of studies
to calibrate an optimal capital ratio against a reasonably low crises probability have been carried
out.  In  preparation  for  Basel  III
,  studies  identified  that  banking  crises  occur  every  20  to  25
years, corresponding to a 4.6% probability per annum. It is shown that a four percentage point
increase in the capital ratio lowers this annual probability to less than 1%, while a one percentage
point reduction in the annual probability of banking crises results in an expected drop in output of
0.6%. The study did not try to estimate an optimal level of capital but a 2015 Bank of England
 while an earlier paper puts this
paper maps this analysis into a desirable range of 16 to19%,
range  at  15  to  20%.
  illustrate  that
RWCR  are  not  good  predictors  of  bank  crises  and  recall  that  in  the  1920s,  the  capital  ratios
above 20% did not prevent the host of bank failures in the Great Depression. The analysis shows
that higher capital reduces the severity of the crises as better capitalised banks tend to provide
  Recently,  Jordá,  Richter,  Schularik  and  Taylor  (2017)
22
23
24
25
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
more credit.
25
Some  authors  argue  that  the  introduction  of  the  concepts  of  Total  Loss-Absorbable  Capacity
(TLAC)  and  Minimum  Requirements  for  Eligible  Liabilities  (MREL)  for  the  purpose  of  bank
resolution  could  implicate  a  lower  capital  ratio  to  start  with.
  However,  a  more  recent  FED
paper,  considering  the  potential  effect  of  TLAC  still  reaches  an  optimal  range  of  capital  ratio
between 13 and 25%.
26
27
Considering  these  studies,  there  is  no  justification  to  weaken  the  LR  standard,  nor  is  there
rationale for not restricting the use of internal models for credit risk, to be finalised before the
year-end.  Without  an  agreement  to  finalise  Basel  III,  we  run  the  risk  of  contributing  to  the
fragmentation of international regulation and helping those who want to destroy the multilateral
approach that has served us well.
But  beyond  solvency  and  high  capital  ratios,  the  crisis  has  illustrated  liquidity  risk,  thus  the
importance  of liquidity management rules introduced for the first time in Basel III standards.
Particularly in Europe, banks relied too much on wholesale funding reaching an average credit-
to-deposit  ratio  of  145%  in  2007,  a  level  that  stands  now  at  120%.  In  this  perspective,  a
mandatory NSFR is quite relevant and should not be weakened or delayed.
Maturity  transformation  by  banks  is  very  much  driven  by  housing  financing  and  long-term
mortgages. This has generated proposals to change the terms of housing financing to further
reduce the risks of funding mortgage credit with short-term deposit liabilities. Many ideas have
been  put  forward  to  change  this   including  tilting  even  more  the  NSFR  to  correct  that  bias;
encouraging more securitisation with low maturity transformation; creating a new type of financial
institutions specialised in mortgages or, introducing a new type of mortgage contract that would
have  more  equity  participation  by  lenders  in  exchange  of  sharing  the  returns  of  appreciating
housing prices, proposed by Mian and Sufi in “House of debt”.
28
29
Housing  credit  has  been  growing  in  importance  for  banks  in  many  jurisdictions  over  the  past
decades.  In  17  developed  countries,  the  weight  of  real  estate  bank  lending  in  total  credit
increased 40% from 1970 to 2007.
 New regulations restricting the role of banks in mortgage
lending would therefore be a significant structural change in our financial systems.
30
In addition to new capital and liquidity requirements, the regulatory reform had some success in
addressing the question of too-big-to-fail (TBTF) institutions. The international agreement in
the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  about  a  set  of  key  attributes  for  bank  resolution  and  the
introduction of TLAC, created conditions for more credible resolution regimes. The Dodd-Frank
Act in the U.S. and the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive in the EU marked a shift away
from the previously prevailing bailout approach to a bail-in regime. In what regards cross-border
resolutions, the new framework still has some issues to clarify, especially if the U.S. abolishes
the  Orderly  Liquidation Authority  and  the  respective  Fund.  In  general,  the  new  regime  can  be
entrusted  to  deal  with  one  or  a  few  failing  institutions.  This  is  important  to  ensure  market
discipline and avoid moral hazard.
However,  the  remaining  concern  is  that  the  framework  may  not  be  appropriate  to  deal  with
general financial crises like the one we just had, when the problem is the existence of too-many-
to-fail  banks.  Examining  the  history  of  crises,  it  is  hard  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  such
situations  require  public  intervention  to  backstop  liabilities  and  recapitalise  the  system.
Exceptional interventions that were carried out in the crisis are however no longer legally possible
in several jurisdictions.
 Also, there is no crisis management framework ready should another
episode  of  generalised  banking  crisis  emerge.  In  fact,  public  interventions  may  reduce  overall
income losses for the population stemming from economic distress. The Troubled Asset Relief
Program in the U.S. that was totally repaid by the banks or the public intervention in the Nordic
banking crisis of the 1990s, that penalised shareholders and reduced the costs for the State, are
31
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
examples of how to avoid both losses for the public and moral hazard.
Turning now to non-banks, the role of the shadow banking sector in the crisis greatly related to
the  use  of  securitisation,  repos  and  OTC  derivatives.  The  crisis  revealed  the  important
contribution  of  these  dynamics  in  derivatives  and  SFT  to  systemic  stress.
  For  SFTs,
particularly repos, a key concern relates to excessive reliance on short-term wholesale funding
via  these  transactions.  Indeed,  SFTs  were  identified  as  a  major  source  of  leverage  in  the
financial system and as an important determinant of banks’ vulnerability to funding and liquidity
shocks.
32
33
34
The creation of inside liquidity by repos was important for the funding of the housing bubble .
The 2003 decision by the SEC to allow mortgage ABS to be used for repos and the 2005 legal
amendment excluding repos from bankruptcy processes led to the increase of the repo market.
Similar changes took place at the same time in Europe.
 As stated in Perotti (2010) “These
privileges were granted to overnight secured credit and derivatives, and essentially allowed these
lenders to ‘front run’ all other investors in case of default. This made such lending safer for the
lenders, and thus cheap for the borrowers. The result was fantastic growth of unstable funding to
the  detriment  of  stability”.  We  know  what  happened  in  the  crisis,  once  again  proving  the
statement by Douglas Diamond: “Financial crises are everywhere and always about short-term
debt”.
35
36
The crisis itself made securitisations and repos shrink significantly. In the U.S., broker-dealers
changed  into  banks,  making  the  shadow  banking  sector  smaller.  Post-reform,  securitisations
became  less  attractive  being  now  subject  to  higher  capital  charges,  securities  vehicles  were
consolidated with bank sponsors and repos and OTC derivatives have become subject to central
clearing.  The  overall  progress  in  reducing  risk  in  STFs  and  derivative  markets  has  been
significant, but might not be sufficient. Very little has been done to prevent the expansion and
misuse of those instruments in any future euphoric episode. The recent recommendations by the
FSB  are  in  my  view  not  sufficiently  far-reaching  regarding  the  re-hypothecation  and  re-use  of
securities in repos.
 Regarding the use of margins and haircuts, the FSB recommendations to
introduce  minimum  initial  levels  are  also  quite  narrow:  they  exclude  sovereign  paper  and
transactions  between  regulated  institutions  and  apply  only  to  non-centrally  cleared  operations.
Going forward, more may have to be done.
37
In regulatory circles, the potential for setting margins and haircuts as a policy tool to address
systemic  risks  in  derivatives  and  SFT  markets  was  already  identified  shortly  after  the  global
financial crisis. Indeed, the BIS Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) concluded,
already in 2009, that margining practices in OTC derivatives and haircut-setting in SFTs are a
source  of  procyclicality  in  the  financial  system,  and  recommended  enhancements  to  these
practices in order to dampen the build-up of leverage in good times and soften the system-wide
effects  in  bad  times.
  Furthermore,  the  CGFS  encouraged  macroprudential  authorities  to
consider measures that involve countercyclical variations in margins and haircuts.
38
In  the  ECB’s  response  to  the  European  Commission’s  consultation  on  the  review  of  the
European  Market 
Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR),  we suggested “that  macroprudential
intervention  tools  be  included  in  Level  1  of  EMIR”  and  noted  “two  policy  instruments  that
potentially could reduce or limit leverage through derivatives and SFTs and the pro-cyclicality of
margins  and  haircuts:  (a)  permanent  minimum  requirements,  and  (b)  time-varying  minimum
requirements or buffers”.
39
Setting minimum margins and haircut floors would limit the build-up of leverage and reduce the
procyclicality of current margin and haircut setting practices.
40
On the other hand, I welcome the release of policy recommendations by the FSB to address
structural vulnerabilities arising from asset management activities. They cover liquidity mismatch
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
between fund investments and redemption terms, operational risk, securities lending activities
and  leverage  reporting  by  investment  funds,  including  synthetic  leverage  built  up  usually  with
OTC  derivatives.  Leverage  requirements  for  investment  funds,  already  partially  introduced  in
Europe, represent an important point. The final aim should be to extend LR requirements to a
broader set of financial institutions and to account for the risks posed by synthetic leverage from
the use of derivatives as recently proposed by Dirk Schoenmaker.
The last point I want to address concerns macroprudential policy. It is well known that this new
policy emerged as one of the lessons of the crisis, namely the realisation that while individual
institutions could be seen as robust, the system as a whole could be generating imbalances and
vulnerabilities. Externalities stemming from excessive leverage, liquidity mismatch and network
interconnectedness were indeed building up before the onset of the crisis. Since then, debate
about regulatory reform adopted this overall angle of analysis which then shaped the instrument
calibrations.  Two  objectives  are  normally  assigned  to  macroprudential  policy:  to  increase  the
resilience of the system and to smooth the amplitude of the financial cycle.
 I want to underline
the second goal as a complement to monetary policy to manage the financial and the business
cycle, respectively.
41
42
43
By  using  instruments  like  the counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  and  borrower-based debt-to-
income and loan-to-value tools in housing credit, macroprudential policy can use a targeted way
of containing credit expansion, especially if associated with real estate. In turn, monetary policy,
precisely  because  “it  gets  in  all  of  the  cracks”
,  is  too  blind  an  instrument  to  try  to  contain
particular  credit  booms.  If  used  to  address  systemic  risks,  it  may  unnecessarily  lead  to
recessions that inflation conditions would not justify. This is even more the case in a monetary
union  where  vulnerabilities  identified  in  each  country  can  be  addressed  with  macroprudential
policy,  allowing  for  the  appropriate  heterogeneity,  while  countries  remain  subject  to  a  single
monetary policy. Another aspect of the problem is that when asset returns are going up sharply,
for instance in housing, the increase in interest rates would have to be quite sizeable to have any
effect in curbing an asset price boom. In general, a monetary policy of “leaning against the wind”
for financial stability reasons could induce significant output losses.
 Macroprudential policy and
monetary policy rely on separate tools and aim to achieve different objectives. Yet, they need to
be co-ordinated, which is a non-trivial task given that financial and business cycles can be de-
synchronised.  It  is  my  contention  that  without  an  effective  macroprudential  policy,  advanced
economies will not be able to safeguard financial stability. It is therefore an important endeavour
to  keep  fighting  for  the  appropriate  tools  and  policies  to  smooth  the  financial  cycle  and  to
sufficiently tame finance in order to avoid crises that may threaten the future of our economies.
44
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Bayoumi, T. (2017) “Unfinished Business: The unexplored causes of the Financial Crisis and the lessons yet to
be learned”, Yale University Press.
Source: US NIPA series of Domestic Financials Profits (excluding the Federal Reserve) over Non-Financial
Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment.
See  Pozsar,  Z.  (2011),  “Institutional  Cash  Pools  and  the  Triffin  Dilemma  of  the  U.S.  Banking  System”,  IMF
Working Paper 11/190; Claessens, S. and L. Ratnovski (2014), “What Is Shadow Banking?”, IMF Working Paper
14 /25; Singh M. (2012), “Puts” in the shadow”, IMF Working Paper 12/229; Perotti E. (2013), “The roots of
shadow banking”, CEPR Policy Insight 69; Pozsar, Z. (2014), “ Shadow Banking: The Money View”, Office of
Financial Research WP 14–04.
See Singh, M. and P. Stella (2012), “Money and Collateral”, IMF Working Paper WP/12/95.
See Gorton, G. and P.He (2016), “Optimal monetary policy in a collateralized economy”, NBER Working Paper
No. 22599.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
See  Levine,  R.  (2005),  “Finance  and  growth:  Theory  and  evidence”,  Handbook  of  economic  growth,  1,  in:
Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (ed.), Handbook of Economic Growth, Edition 1, Vol 1, Chapter 12, pp. 865–
934 Elsevier.
See Arcand, J., E. Berkes and U. Panizza (2015a), “Too much finance?”, Journal of Economic Growth, 20(2), 105
—148. A previous version was published as a IMF Working Paper in 2012 (WP\12\161); Arcand, J., E. Berkes
and  U.  Panizza  (2015b),  ”Too  much  finance  or  statistical  illusion:  a  comment”, Graduate  Institute  Geneva
Working  Paper  12–2015;  Beck,  R.,  G.  Georgiadis  and  R.  Straub  (2014),  “The  finance  and  growth  nexus
revisited”, Economics  Letters,  124(3),  382—385;  Cecchetti,  S.  and  E.  Kharroubi  (2012),  “Reassessing  the
impact  of  finance  on  growth”, BIS  Working  Paper  No  381;  Manganelli,  S.  and A.  Popov  (2013),  “Financial
dependence, global growth opportunities, and growth revisited”, Economics Letters, 120(1), 123—125; Zingales,
L. (2015), “Presidential address: Does finance benefit society?”, Journal of Finance, 70(4), 1327—1363.
See Beck, T., B. Büyükkarabacak, F. Rioja and N. Valev (2012), “Who gets the credit? And does it matter?
Household vs. firm lending across countries”, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 12(1), 1—46; Cecchetti, S.
and E. Kharroubi (2015), “Why does financial sector growth crowd out real economy economic growth”, BIS
Working Paper No. 490.
See Rancière, R., A. Tornell and F. Westermann (2008), “Systemic crises and growth”,  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics 123, 359—406; Popov, A. (2014), “Credit constraints, equity market liberalization, and growth rate
asymmetry”, Journal of Development Economics, 107(C), 202—214.
See  Philippon,  T.  (2010),  “Financiers  vs.  engineers:  Should 
the 
subsidized?”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(3), 158—182.
financial  sector  be 
taxed  or
See Woolley, P. (2010), “Why are financial markets so inefficient and exploitive- and a suggested remedy”,
Chapter 3 in Turner et al (2010) “The future of finance: the LSE Report”.
See  Jordá,  O.,  M.  Schularick,  and  A.  Taylor  (2016),  “Sovereigns  versus  banks:  credit,  crises  and
consequences”, Journal of the European Economics, 14 (1):45–79; Schularick, M. and A. Taylor (2012), “Credit
booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage cycles, and financial crises, 1870—2008”, American  Economic
Review, 102(2), 1029—1061.
Constâncio,  V.  (2014),  “The  European  Crisis  and  the  Role  of  the  Financial  System”,  in Journal  of
Macroeconomics, 39(1).
See  Kalemli-Ozcan,  S.,  L.  Laeven  and  D.  Moreno  (2015),  “Debt  overhang,  rollover  risk,  and  investment  in
Europe”, University of Maryland mimeo.
See Mian, A., A. Sufi and E. Verner (2017), “Household debt and business cycles worldwide”,  Quarterly Journal
of Economics, forthcoming.
See  Buchak,  G.,  G.  Matvos,  T.  Piskorski  and A.  Seru  (2017), Fintech,  Regulatory Arbitrage,  and  the  Rise  of
Shadow Banks.
See  Constâncio,  V.  (2016), Challenges  for  the  European  banking  industry,  lecture  at  the  Conference  on
“European Banking Industry: what’s next?”, organised by the University of Navarra, Madrid, 7 July 2016.
Cline, W. (2017), “The economic cost of weakening capital requirements for large banks”, Peterson International
Institute of Economics, September 2017. Cline calculates that for US GSIBs the LR would come down from the
present 7.1% to 5.6% or 5% with induced effects. This would increase the probability of crises and, in different
scenarios, this could produce a GDP loss between 0.5 to 1.4%.
Cline, W. (2017), “The right balance for banks: theory and evidence on optimal capital”, Peterson International
Institute of Economics.
Goldstein,  M.  (2017),  “Banking’s  final  exam:  stress  testing  and  bank  capital  reform”, Peterson  International
Institute of Economics.
BCBS (2010) “An assessment of the long-term economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity requirements”.
Brooke, M., O. Bush, R. Edwards, J. Ellis, B. Francis, R. Harimohan, K. Neiss and C. Siegert (2015), “Measuring
the macroeconomic costs and benefits of higher UK bank capital requirements”, Bank of England Financial
Stability Paper No. 35.
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Miles, D., J. Yang and G. Marcheggiano (2011), “Optimal bank capital”, Bank of England, External MPC Unit,
Discussion Paper No. 32.
Jordá,  O.,  B.  Richter,  M.  Schularik,  M.  and  A.  Taylor  (2017)  “Bank  capital  redux:  solvency,  liquidity  and
crises“, NBER Working Paper No. 23287.
This  is  also  confirmed  in  Gambacorta,  L.  and  H.  Shin  (2016),  “Why  bank  capital  matters  for  monetary
policy”, Journal of Financial Intermediation.
See Brooke et al (2015) ibid.
Firestone, S., A. Lorenc and B. Ranish (2017), “An empirical economic assessment of the costs and benefits of
bank capital in the US”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.,
No. 2017–034.
See Goodhart, C. and E. Perotti (2017), “Containing maturity mismatch”, VoxEU.
Mian, K. and A. Sufi (2014), “House of debt”, University of Chicago Press.
Jordá, O., M. Schularik and A. Taylor (2014), “The great mortgaging: housing finance, crises and business
cycles”, NBER Working Paper No. 20501.
For the U.S. see Geithner, T. (2016), “Are we safer? The case for strengthening the Bagehot arsenal”, Per
Jacobson Lecture at the 2016 Annual Meetings of the IMF and WB.
Brunnermeier, M.K. and , L.H. Pedersen (2008), “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity”, Review of Financial
Studies  22(6), 2201-2238.  Biais,  B.,  F.  Heider  and  M.  Hoerova,  “Optimal  Margins  and  Equilibrium  Prices”,
forthcoming. Brunnermeier, M.K. (2009), “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–2008”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23(1), 77–100. Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2010), “Liquidity and Leverage”, Journal  of
Financial Intermediation 19, 418–437. Geanakoplos, J. (2010), “The Leverage Cycle”, NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2009 24, 1-65. Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2014), “Procyclical Leverage and Value-at-Risk”,  Review  of
Financial Studies 27(2), 373–403. Gorton, G. and G. Ordoñez (2014), “Collateral Crises”, American Economic
Review 104(2), 343–378. Brumm, J., M. Grill, F. Kubler and K. Schmedders (2015), “Margin Regulation and
Volatility”, Journal of Monetary Economics 75, 54–68.
Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2010), “Liquidity and Leverage”, Journal of Financial Intermediation 19, 418–437.
See Bayoumi, T. (2017) ibid , page 73.
Quoting from Perotti, E. (2010), “Systemic liquidity risk and two bankruptcy exceptions”, CEPR Policy Insight No.
52: “In the US the creation of these privileges required an amendment to the Bankruptcy Code in 2005. In the
EU, it required a series of EU Directives to ensure uniformity across bankruptcy codes of all member countries.
The  complete  list  is  as  follows:  (EU  Financial  Collateral  Directive  of  6  June  2002  (OJ  L  168/43),  the  EU
Settlement Finality Directive in 19 May 1998 on settlement finality in payment and securities settlement systems
(OJ  L  166/45),  Directive  2009/44/EC  of  6  May  2009  amending  Directive  98/26/EC  on  settlement  finality  in
payment and securities settlement systems, and Directive 2002/47/ EC on financial collateral arrangements as
regards linked systems and credit claims.”
Douglas Diamond in a Panel Discussion on Financial Regulation at the Becker Friedman Institute, University of
Chicago, 6 Nov 2010 (video at eight minutes mark) quoted in Ricks, Morgan (2016) “The  money  problem:
rethinking financial regulation” The University of Chicago Press.
See Financial Stability Board (2017), “Non-cash collateral re-use: Measure and metrics”, Policy Report and
Financial  Stability  Board  Policy  Report  (2017),  “Re-hypothecation  and  collateral  re-use:  Potential  financial
stability issues, market evolution and regulatory approaches”.
CGFS (2009), “The Role of Valuation and Leverage in Procyclicality”, CGFS Papers No. 34. CGFS (2010), “The
Role of Margin Requirements and Haircuts in Procyclicality”, CGFS Papers No. 36.
See  ECB  response  to  the  European  Commission’s  consultation  on  the  review  of  the  European  Market
Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR), September 2015.
See Constâncio, V. (2016), Margins and haircuts as a macroprudential tool, remarks at the ESRB international
conference  on  the  macroprudential  use  of  margins  and  haircuts,  6  June  2016;  see  also  Constâncio,  V.
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
(2017), Macroprudential policy in a changing financial system, remarks at the second ECB Macroprudential
Policy and Research Conference, 11 May 2017.
41
42
43
44
A convincing argument for a wide application of leverage ratios can be found in Schoenmaker, D. and P. Wierts
(2016), “Regulating the Financial Cycle: An Integrated Approach with a Leverage Ratio”, Duisenberg School of
Finance – Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper, TI 15- 057 / IV / DSF 93. The risks from synthetic leverage have
been outlined in ECB Financial Stability Review (2015) “Synthetic leverage in the investment fund sector” Box 7,
May. See also V. Acharya (2014), “A Transparency Standard for Derivatives,” in  Risk Topography: Systemic Risk
and Macro Modeling, M. Brunnermeier and A. Krishnamurthy (eds), Chapter 6.
See  Constâncio,  V.  (2016) Principles  of  macroprudential  policy,  remarks  at  the  ECB-IMF  Conference  on
Macroprudential Policy, Frankfurt am Main, 26 April 2016.
See Stein, J. (2013), “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses”, remarks at
Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter,
Research Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 7 February 2013.
See Svensson, L.E.O. (2016b), Monetary Policy and Macroprudential Policy: Different and Separate; Svensson,
L.E.O. (2017a), “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning Against the Wind: Are Costs Larger Also with Less Effective
Macroprudential  Policy?” , CEPR  Discussion  Paper  DP11739,  revision  of IMF  Working  Paper  WP/16/03;
Svensson, L.E.O. (2017b), “How Robust Is the Result That the Cost of ‘Leaning Against the Wind’ Exceeds the
Benefit? Response to Adrian and Liang”, CEPR Discussion Paper DP11744; Ajello, A., T. Laubach, D. Lopez-
Salido and T. Nakata (2016), “Financial stability and optimal interest rate policy”, Federal Reserve Paper 067.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
