Vítor Constâncio: Ricardo Reis' contribution to macroeconomics
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ceremony
marking the award of the 2016 Germán Bernácer Prize for Promoting Economic Research in
Europe to Ricardo Reis, Madrid, 24 November 2017.
 I am very happy to be here to celebrate with you the awarding of the Bernácer Prize to Professor
Ricardo Reis from the London School of Economics. As you know, the Prize is awarded to an
outstanding,  young  European  economist  who  works  in  the  fields  of  macroeconomics  and
finance.  Without  a  doubt,  Ricardo  is  one  of  the  leading  macroeconomists  of  his  generation.
Today,  we  recognise  in  particular  Ricardo’s  influential  research  on  expectation  formation  and
sticky information as well as on the role of fiscal policy in business cycles.
1
Ricardo’s  most  cited  paper  –  and  he  has  written  many  frequently  cited  papers  –  is
“Disagreement  about  inflation  expectations”,  co-authored  with  Gregory  Mankiw  and  Justin
Wolfers.   This  early  paper  showcases  what  have  been  the  consistent  characteristics  of
Ricardo’s  work:  his  research  is  data-driven,  innovative  and  deals  with  topics  important  for
economic policy – in this case monetary policy, given the interest of central banks in inflation
expectations.  While  there  had  been  work  on  inflation  expectations  prior  to  Mankiw,  Reis  and
Wolfers, their paper – together with other work done around the same time by Ricardo, some of
it with Gregory Mankiw, and independently by Woodford and Sims – opened a new chapter in
research on expectation formation.  Since then, numerous economists have been motivated to
develop models of data on expectations, and to study the implications of such models for the
transmission of shocks and for policy.
2
Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers documented substantial disagreement among both consumers and
professional economists about expected future inflation. The extent of disagreement in the data
evolves  over  time,  together  with  the  state  of  the  economy.  A  high  dispersion  of  inflation
expectations  is  positively  correlated  with  a  high  level  of  inflation,  and  with  a  high  variance  in
recent  inflation.  Ricardo  and  his  co-authors  also  studied  the  average  forecast  across  agents,
finding weak sensitivity of the average forecast to news and serially correlated forecast errors.
Subsequent research, which builds on the work of Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers, has confirmed and
refined  these  findings.  It  has  established  that  expectations  deviate  systematically  from  full-
information  rational  expectations.  The  average  forecast  across  agents  of  a  macroeconomic
variable responds slowly to news. If a shock raises inflation for some time, the average forecast
of inflation increases by less than inflation itself. Moreover, the average forecast error in a cross-
section of agents is likely to be of the same sign as the ex ante revision in the average forecast. If
inflation is rising and forecasts tend to be revised up, the average forecast error is likely to be
positive – people are likely to under-predict inflation. This is, of course, in contrast to the theory of
full-information rational expectations, where forecast errors are unpredictable. The same pattern
is present in the data for survey-based and market-based measures of inflation expectations, for
expectations  of  macroeconomic  variables  other  than  inflation,  among  consumers  and
3
professional economists, and in different countries.
4
Ricardo, together with Gregory Mankiw, developed a theory that accounts for the salient features
of  the  data  on  expectations.   In  the  sticky  information  model  of  Mankiw  and  Reis,  economic
agents  update  their  information  only  sporadically.  When  agents  fail  to  update,  they  make
decisions based on information that is to some extent out of date. The updating is staggered
across the population, so that at any one time some people are paying attention to news, while
others remain inattentive. As a result, information diffuses gradually in the economy. The average
forecast responds slowly to news, as in the data. Each individual makes the best forecast given
their information. At the same time, however, the average forecast error across agents can be
predicted by the ex ante revision in the average forecast, as in the data. Finally, again in line with
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the data, agents in the model disagree, because their information sets differ. In sum, the sticky
information model suggests how expectations are actually formed in the real world.
5
A number of interesting policy implications arise from this more real-world account of expectation
formation.  As  Ricardo  showed  in  a  paper  with  Lawrence  Ball  and  Gregory  Mankiw,  optimal
monetary policy – given productivity and demand shocks – is price level targeting, as opposed to
inflation targeting.  This is a controversial proposition with practical inconveniences that render it
unpopular among central bankers. There have thus been no attempts to implement it. A broader
lesson for monetary policy resulting from the analysis is that long-term inflation expectations are
likely  to  be  more  stable  in  a  sticky-information  world.  Central  bankers  will  probably  find  this
message reassuring. On the other hand, the sticky information model suggests that, once long-
term  inflation  expectations  become  de-anchored,  their  return  to  a  level  consistent  with  price
stability may take time and effort on the part of the central bank.
6
Ricardo and Gregory Mankiw constructed and estimated a complete dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium model with sticky information.  Their DSGE model features what the authors refer to
as “pervasive stickiness”: the idea that information sets are updated sporadically, which originally
applied to price-setting firms, is extended here to include consumers and workers. The resulting
theory  predicts  gradual  responses  of  consumption,  output  and  wages  to  macroeconomic
shocks, in addition to the sluggish response of prices. Remarkably, sticky information is the only
source of slow adjustment in the model. By contrast, the New Keynesian DSGE model requires
multiple frictions, such as habit formation in consumption and investment adjustment costs, on
top  of  price  and  wage  stickiness,  in  order  to  capture  the  persistence  in  the  macro  data.  The
sticky information approach suggests that the origin of the pervasive slow adjustment in the data
may be different from the sources highlighted in the New Keynesian literature.
7
In  an  influential  pair  of  papers,  “Inattentive  Producers”  and  “Inattentive  Consumers”,  Ricardo
studied  the  decisions  of  agents  who  face  the  costs  of  acquiring,  absorbing  and  processing
information.  Such agents rationally choose to be inattentive to news, only sporadically updating
their information. The optimal frequency of updates, or the length of inattentiveness, depends on
features  of  the  economy  such  as  the  variance  of  shocks.  Upon  aggregation,  the  economy
behaves like the sticky information model of Mankiw and Reis.
Let me turn to Ricardo’s work on the role of fiscal policy in business cycles. While a large body of
literature  in  this  area  exists,  much  of  it  assumes  a  representative  agent  and  focuses  on
government purchases or taxes. Ricardo, in a joint paper with Hyunseung Oh, documented that
during the Great Recession much of the increase in government expenditures across the OECD
countries was in government transfers.  To study the effects of transfers, Ricardo and his co-
author  proposed  a  model  without  a  representative  agent  or  Ricardian  equivalence,  in  which
transfers  affect  the  economy  because  of  imperfect  credit  markets,  uncertainty  and  sticky
information.
8
9
Building  on  this  work,  Ricardo  and Alisdair  McKay  constructed  a  model  to  assess  the  role  of
automatic stabilisers in business cycles.  Their Econometrica paper will be a benchmark in the
literature  on  fiscal  policy,  and  they  now  have  a  follow-up  paper  that  adds  the  normative
perspective.
  Their  analysis  –  novel  and  more  generally  applicable  –  combines  the  New
Keynesian  DSGE  framework  with  the  incomplete-markets,  heterogeneous-agent  model  of
consumption  and  inequality.  The  resulting  theory  includes  a  realistic  array  of  automatic
stabilisers, such as unemployment benefits and progressive income taxes. The authors are able
to quantify a number of mechanisms by which automatic stabilisers may work.
10
One  lesson  is  that  unemployment  benefits  are  especially  effective  in  supporting  aggregate
demand in a recession. People who become unemployed reduce their consumption sharply, in
particular if their period of unemployment is likely to be prolonged. Moreover, those who remain
employed increase their precautionary savings in a downturn as the probability of losing their job
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
rises.  In  this  environment,  more  generous  unemployment  benefits  have  strong  effects  on
aggregate  spending.  Another  takeaway  is  that  –  in  the  US  data  from  the  so-called  Great
Moderation period – automatic stabilisers appear to have played little role in smoothing out the
business  cycles,  with  monetary  policy  being  much  more  important.  That  said,  Ricardo  and
Alisdair show that automatic stabilisers can have more sizeable effects when the central bank is
constrained by the effective lower bound on its policy rates. . In any case, the conclusion about
automatic stabilizers having subdued effects opens up the debate about how to make them more
effective and about the need in some situations to use discretionary fiscal stabilisation policy.
Recently, Ricardo has worked on models in which the central bank’s balance sheet is explicitly
present. Such models are in demand in the wake of the global financial crisis, given the need to
understand the effects of the expansion of the balance sheets of many central banks. Ricardo
has developed, together with Robert Hall, a framework to analyse central banks’ solvency under
“new-style central banking” and studied a model in which the interest rate on bank reserves is the
main policy tool of the central bank.
 As you know, besides his research activities, Ricardo has
also been an active participant in policy debates, notably concerning safe bonds for the euro area
and economic developments in his native Portugal.
 Ricardo’s work is macroeconomics at its
best:  in  contact  with  data,  innovative  and  with  lessons  for  policymakers.  Please  join  me  in
congratulating  Ricardo  on  being  awarded  this  year’s  Bernácer  Prize.  Ricardo,  I  wish  you
continued success in the future.
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Mankiw,  N.  G.,  Reis,  R.  and  J.  Wolfers,  (2004),  “Disagreement  About  Inflation  Expectations”,  NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, 18, 209–248. See scholar.google.com for the citations.
Woodford,  M.,  (2002),  “Imperfect  Common  Knowledge  and  the  Effects  of  Monetary  Policy”,  in  “Knowledge,
Information and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honour of Edmund S. Phelps”, eds. P. Aghion et
al.,  Princeton,  New  Jersey:  Princeton  University  Press,  and  Sims,  C.  A.,  (2003),  “Implications  of  rational
inattention”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 665–690.
See,  for  example,  Gorodnichenko,  Y.  and  O.  Coibion,  (2015),  “Information  Rigidity  and  the  Expectations
Formation Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts”, American Economic Review, 105, 2644–2678.
Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis, (2002), “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to Replace the New
Keynesian Phillips Curve”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1295–1328.
Ball, L., Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis, (2005), “Monetary Policy for Inattentive Economies”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 52, 703–725.
Mankiw,  N.  G.  and  R.  Reis,  (2007),  “Sticky  Information  in  General  Equilibrium”,  Journal  of  the  European
Economic Association, 5, 603–613, and Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis, (2006), “Pervasive Stickiness”, American
Economic Review, 96, 164–169.
Reis,  R.,  (2006),  “Inattentive  Producers”,  Review  of  Economic  Studies,  73,  793–821,  and  Reis,  R.,  (2006),
“Inattentive Consumers”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 1761–1800.
Oh, H. and R. Reis, (2012), “Targeted Transfers and the Fiscal Response to the Great Recession”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 59, S50-S64.
McKay, A. and R. Reis, (2016), “The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Business Cycle”, Econometrica, 84,
141–194.
McKay, A. and R. Reis, (2016), “Optimal Automatic Stabilizers”, NBER Working Paper 22359, CEPR discussion
paper 11578.
Hall, R. E. and R. Reis, (2015), “Maintaining Central-Bank Solvency under New-Style Central Banking”, NBER
Working Paper 21173, CEPR Discussion Paper 10741, and Hall, R. E. and R. Reis, (2016), “Achieving Price
Stability  by  Manipulating  the  Central  Bank’s  Payment  on  Reserves”,  NBER  Working  Paper  22761,  CEPR
Discussion Paper 11578.
See,  for  example,  Brunnermeier,  M.  K.,  Langfield,  S.,  Pagano,  M.,  Reis,  R.,  van  Nieuwerburgh,  S.  and  D.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Vayanos, (2016), “ESBies: Safety in the tranches”, European Systemic Risk Board Working Paper 21, Reis, R.,
(2013), “The Portuguese Slump and Crash and the Euro Crisis”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 44,
143–210, and Reis, R., (2015), “Looking for a Success in the Euro Crisis Adjustment Programs: The Case of
Portugal”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 46, 433–458.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
