OFFICIAL OPENING OF FIRST NATIONAL BANK OF 
BOTSWANA LIMITED - MOCHUDI BRANCH 
 Keynote Speech 
 
by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor, Bank of Botswana 
 September 19, 2017 
 It is with great pleasure that I join you for the official opening of 
the Mochudi branch of First National Bank of Botswana (FNB).  
My team and I are particularly delighted because this is the first 
branch  of  the  bank  in  the  Kgatleng  District.    This  is  indeed  a 
positive  response  to  what  the  Bank  of  Botswana  has  been 
urging all banks to do, specifically to have a physical presence 
in  all  major  villages  of  Botswana  including  Mochudi.  I  am 
assured that the branch is well equipped, to the same standard 
as  is  the  case  with  other  FNB  branches,  with  modern  service 
facilities,  most  notably  platforms  that  harness  the  beneficial 
features  of  new  information  and  communication  technologies.  
Through 
the  branch 
facility  and  electronic  platforms 
for 
conducting  banking  business,  FNB,  and  other  banks,  offer 
choice  and  added  convenience  to  customers;  this,  again  is  a 
welcome  development.  The  widening,  deepening  and 
modernisation  of  financial  services,  and  the  related  facilities 
fulfil  the  nation’s  Financial  Sector  Development  Strategy  and 
contribute  to  both  financial  inclusion  and  inclusive  economic 
growth.  
Distinguished Guests, First National Bank of Botswana Limited 
is a subsidiary and member of the FirstRand Group, which is a 
South  African 
financial  services  Group 
listed  on 
the 
Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange,  offering  banking,  asset 
management  and  insurance  services.    The  FirstRand  Group 
has  a  presence  in  8  countries  in  Africa,  namely,  Botswana, 
Lesotho,  Mozambique,  Namibia,  Nigeria,  South  Africa, 
Swaziland  and  Tanzania.    As  at  June  30,  2017,  the  FirstRand 
Group  had  assets  amounting  to  R1.15  trillion,  with  market 
capitalisation  of  R251.5  billion.    The  Group  is,  therefore,  well-
endowed to support the domestic and regional resource needs, 
with  respect  to  a  broad  range  of  financial  services.    These 
include  participation  in  mobilisation  of  large-scale  finance  and 
funding 
of 
businesses, 
industrial 
developments 
and 
infrastructure  projects. 
It 
is  also  well  placed 
to  support 
sustained  operation,  expansion  and  further  investment  in  the 
local subsidiary, to the benefit of the domestic economy.   
 In  Botswana,  the  Group  offers  a  variety  of  financial  services 
through  its  three  brands,  namely,  FNB,  the  retail  bank, 
Wesbank,  for  financing  of  moveable  assets,  notably  motor 
vehicles  and  finance  leases  for  equipment;  and  RMB  in 
supporting  corporates  to  access  investment  banking  products 
and services including working capital and trade finance, private 
equity  and  global  market  services.    Since  commencement  of 
operations  in  Botswana  in  1991,  FNB  has  grown  substantially, 
2 
initially through the acquisition of Bank of Credit and Commerce 
Botswana  Limited  in  1992,  Financial  Services  Company  of 
Botswana  Limited  in  1993  and  Zimbank  Botswana  Limited  in 
1994.  
 More recently, in the past five years, FNB has grown organically 
to  be  the  largest  bank  in  the  country.    The  bank’s  total  assets 
increased from P13.9 billion in December 2011 to P23.6 billion 
in  June  2017.    In  the  same  period,  loans  and  advances  rose 
from  P8.3  billion  to  P15.6  billion,  while  deposits  grew  from 
P11.8 billion to P18.7 billion.  The bank employs a total of 1 269 
staff members, most of whom are Batswana; it has a network of 
23 branches, 150 cash dispensing Automated Teller Machines, 
51  Automated  Teller  Machines 
that  have  deposit 
taking 
capabilities,  25 Slimline  Automated  Teller  Machines  and  5  600 
point of sales machines in retail outlets all over the country.  
 Overall,  in  the  26  years  of  existence  and  operations  in  the 
country, FNB has grown in both size and range of products and 
services  offered.    With  particular  reference  to  this  Mochudi 
branch, located here at the Pilane Crossing Mall, the bank adds 
to  the  opportunities  for  enhancing  access  to  financial  services, 
notably  saving  channels,  providing  financial  resources  to  its 
customers,  ease  of  transacting,  convenient  payment  and 
related  advisory  services.  The  branch  potentially  extends  the 
support  to  economic  activity  in  the  local  community  and 
3 
neighbouring  areas,  and  should  serve  the  needs  of  local 
industry,  businesses,  agricultural  pursuits  and  households, 
including the informal sector.  
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  FNB  Botswana  has 
embarked  on  a  number  of  beneficial  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility  (CSR)  initiatives  through  the  FNB  Foundation 
and  its  Staff  Volunteer  Programme.    The  focus  of  these 
initiatives  is  on  education;  healthcare;  skills  development; 
vocational training; support for disadvantaged and handicapped 
people;  arts  and  culture  development;  and  sports  and 
recreation.    Many  of  the  community  projects  that  the  Staff 
Volunteer Programme supports involve infrastructure upgrades, 
such  as  the  renovation  of  nursery  schools,  classrooms  and 
primary healthcare clinics.  
 I  am  reliably  informed  that,  here  in  the  Kgatleng  District,  the 
FNB  Foundation  has  changed  many  lives  through  partnering 
with  Community  Development  Organisations,  such  as  the 
Motswedi  Rehabilitation  Centre,  Bakgatla  Bolokang  Matshelo, 
Mochudi  Resource  Centre  for  the  Blind,  Stepping  Stones,  and 
Pudologong  Rehabilitation  Centre.    Through  the  Foundation, 
more than 10 000 pairs of school shoes have been donated to 
deserving pupils.  
 4 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  turn  to  some 
general,  but  topical  financial  sector  development  issues.    I 
recently  made  reference 
to  a  worrisome 
trend  of  non-
performing bank loans; a point that, for emphasis, I would like to 
reiterate here.  Non-performing loans, or NPLs, as a proportion 
of total loans and advances have been on an upward trajectory 
since  2014;  the  industry’s  NPLs  rose  from  3.6  percent  in 
December  2014  to  3.9  percent  in  2015  and  4.9  percent  in 
December 2016.  As at July 31, 2017, the NPLs had increased 
further to 5.9 percent of total bank loans.  The trend is a cause 
for  concern.    This  is  despite  the  fact  that  these  levels  of  NPLs 
are  relatively  low,  by  international  norms,  especially  in  the 
context  of  prudent  and  sound  accounting  practices  as  well  as 
the quality and level of capital in the banking system.  
 Nonetheless,  I  should  emphasise  that  the  concern  is  not  with 
respect to the level or growth of credit in the economy.  In fact, 
the current Private Sector Credit to GDP, of about 30 percent, is 
low  by  international  standards,  suggesting  that  there  is  greater 
scope  for  the  banking  sector  to  perform  better  in  mobilising 
resources to support economic activity through credit provision. 
Broadly,  growth  in  credit  that  is  commensurate  with  rate  of 
increase 
in  economic  activity  and 
incomes  should  be 
sustainable. Indeed, affordable credit, when put to good use, is 
beneficial  for  economic  activity,  investment,  wealth  creation 
and,  ultimately,  increase  in  living  standards.    The  challenge 
5 
arises  when  there  is  high  leverage,  or  over-indebtedness, 
relative 
to 
incomes,  and  where 
there 
is  weak 
financial 
management.  A  combination  of  these  factors,  as  well  as 
subdued  economic  growth,  can  undermine  the  ability  to  repay 
bank 
loans. 
If 
left  unchecked,  unsustainable  personal 
indebtedness  not  only  leads  to  financial  ruin  but  threatens  the 
safety  and  soundness  of  banks  and,  by  extension,  depositors’ 
funds.    It  is,  therefore,  critically  important  to  expand  financial 
education and literacy.   
 Distinguished  Guests,  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Bank  of 
Botswana  and  the  commercial  banks  continue  to  engage  in 
public education on financial matters through various platforms.  
Furthermore, the Bank of Botswana will continue to emphasise 
the  role  of  banks  and  other  lenders  in  the  country  of  instilling 
financial discipline, as well as promote ‘truth-in-lending” through 
greater  transparency  of  credit  terms  and  the  true  cost  of 
borrowing over the life of a loan facility.  Furthermore, concerted 
efforts  are  required  to  educate  the  public,  in  particular, 
consumers  of  financial  services  with  respect  to  borrowing  and 
debt  management. 
I, 
therefore,  call  upon  other  key 
stakeholders, including schools, NGOs, trade and credit unions, 
social  clubs,  consumer  watch  dogs  and  professional 
counsellors to intensify public education on financial matters.  
 6 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  on  a  related  matter, 
please allow me to implore you to be on guard and vigilant with 
respect to the mushrooming of illegal deposit taking activities in 
the form of pyramid schemes.  I thought it would be appropriate, 
to  use  this  forum  to  appeal  to  Batswana  and  to  you  all, 
Distinguished  Guests,  that  you  should  neither  participate  nor 
peddle any of these “get rich quick” schemes.  These can only 
lead to financial ruin, resulting from loss of hard-earned money 
and sources of livelihood. I urge you to be suspicious and stay 
away  from  anybody  offering  exceptional  returns.    The  general 
guide  is  that,  in  any  country,  returns  or  rate  of  profit  on  any 
investment should be around the general level of interest rates, 
the  growth  rate  of  the  economy  or  the  average  return  of  the 
companies listed on the stock exchange.  Anything substantially 
higher is either too risky to be worthwhile or fraud.  As they say, 
‘if something sounds too good to be true, it probably is too good 
to  be  true’.    Unfortunately,  even  the  educated,  professionals 
and  people  who  should  be  financially  literate  and,  I  may  add, 
some  in  the  financial  sector,  are  gullible  and  do  fall  prey  to 
these illegal and unfair trading schemes.  While it is difficult for 
the Bank of Botswana to recommend where to look for advice if 
confronted  by  a  tricky  financial  investment  situation,  and  you 
are unsure; you may wish to consider the general guide I have 
just highlighted.  
 7 
Director of Ceremonies, Distinguished Guests, a formal, sound 
and well-regulated financial sector is the foundation of effective 
intermediation,  productive  use  of  financial  resources  and,  in 
turn,  reasonable  returns  for  savers  and  investors.    In  this 
respect, successful and sustainable banks are essential for the 
development  of  well-functioning  money  and  capital  markets.  
This is particularly so in Botswana where the banking sector is 
a  substantial  component  of  the  financial  system.    Moreover, 
banks  also  benefit  as  deeper  and  more  efficient  markets 
provide alternatives for sources and placement of funds as well 
as  more  effective  liquidity  management.    This  includes  the 
interbank  market,  through  which  banks  lend  to  one  another, 
typically on a short-term basis.  In turn, this improves the overall 
allocation  of  financial  resources,  including  real  returns  to 
depositors  and  investors,  and  the  channelling  of  funds  to 
productive use in diverse areas of economic activity.  
 Director  of  Ceremonies,  in  this  context,  it  is  a  matter  of  public 
policy concern that money and capital markets in Botswana are 
in  a  rudimentary  state  of  development.    As  a  result,  there  is  a 
limited  range  of  instruments  and  relatively  low  turnover  and 
activity 
in 
the  various  markets,  more  so 
in  relation 
to 
instruments  for  risk-sharing,  distribution  and  mitigation.    This 
tends to result in volatility of both prices and volumes, and limits 
the  choice  of  instruments  necessary  for  efficient  financial  and 
business  management.    For  the  banks,  in  particular,  a  diverse 
8 
source of funds that includes a large number of retail depositors 
and  structured  long-term  funds  represents  stable  funding.  This 
facilitates  maturity  transformation  and  support  for  the  range  of 
financial 
resource 
requirements  of  businesses, 
including 
infrastructure and utilities projects, as well as households.  
 Regarding  the  short-term  interbank  market,  it  is  important  that 
banks, although competitors, operate in a collaborative spirit to 
address any structural impediments to this lack of development 
and low efficiency, with a view to improving the flow of liquidity 
and  its  management  in  the  banking  system.    The  central  bank 
should  only  be  required  to  provide  or  absorb  liquidity  in  the 
market  after  mutually  beneficial  trading  opportunities  among 
banks are exhausted.  The Bank of Botswana already facilitates 
such  collaboration  through  industry-wide  fora  that  address 
issues  of  mutual  concern  related  to  market  development  in 
order 
to 
foster  enhanced  and  effective  support 
for  real 
economic activity.  It is, therefore, important that banks strive for 
constructive engagement, in this regard, in order to achieve the 
best  outcomes  in  terms  of  effective  policy  transmission  and 
enhanced  contribution  by  the  financial  system  to  economic 
performance. 
 Distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  I  conclude,  let 
me  thank  the  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Mr  Bogatsu,  the  Board, 
Management and staff of FNBB, for inviting me to be part of this 
9 
occasion.  I wish the bank well and look forward to many more 
invitations  for  the  opening  of  FNBB  delivery  channels  or  yet 
another  “brick  and  mortar”  branch,  especially  in  major  villages, 
such as Mochudi and, of course, the rural areas.  To Bakgatla, 
Dikgosi  tsame,  Member  of  Parliament  for  Mochudi  West, 
District  Commissioner,  Council  Chairman  and  Council 
Secretary, Honourable Councillors, the entire district leadership 
and  all  Distinguished  Guests,  in  addition  to  the  other  banks, 
there is now a branch of FNB Botswana near you; patronize it; 
and  do  not  give  Mr  Bogatsu  and  his  team  an  excuse  to  close 
the  branch,  shortly  after  its  opening,  on  account  that  it  is  not 
profitable.   
 Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, with those  few remarks, it 
is  now  my  singular  honour  and  privilege  to  declare  the  First 
National Bank of Botswana Mochudi branch, officially open. 
 I thank you for your kind attention.  
10 
