François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Monitoring 
institutions
Welcome  address  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and
Chairman of the Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de resolution (ACPR), at the ACPR Academic
Conference, Paris, 11 December 2017.
large  and  complex
Good morning,
 I am very pleased to welcome you to this high level academic conference jointly organised by the
Financial Stability Department of the Banque de France and the French Prudential Supervision
and Resolution Authority (ACPR). This year, the conference will focus on the challenges posed
by the monitoring of large and complex banking institutions.
It is true that large global banks might look complex. The 2008 Great Financial Crisis showed
how highly interconnected financial institutions that were exposed to overly complex derivative
products could spread and amplify domestic shocks. Since then, the “too-big-to-fail” issue has
been put high on the agenda of the Financial Stability Board and significant progress has been
made in this regard. However, there is evidence that some global banks are growing bigger and
perhaps becoming even more complex than before.
Complexity is not in itself a drawback. After all, the globalisation of trade might require a certain
dose of complexity either due to the nature of the financial products required to hedge against
traditional or newly emerging risks, or due to the organisational structures that result from cross-
border activities. Similarly, one should not preclude the diversification benefits associated with
large  global  financial  institutions  exposed  to  partially  correlated  domestic  markets.  The  true
question is how to strike the right balance between the diversification benefits that arise from
multiple  businesses  financing  the  real  economy  and  the  potential  weaknesses  in  risk
management caused by this increased complexity.
This morning, I will start by quickly reminding you of some key features of the complexity of the
global banking system before the financial crisis. Then, I will give a short overview of the strong
regulatory and supervisory actions undertaken to reduce inefficient levels of complexity. Lastly, I
will  mention  two  important  challenges  we  face  today  in  shaping  the  global  European  banking
system.
A – Some stylised facts from the pre-financial crisis period: organisational complexities
and complex activities
Before the Great Financial Crisis, we observed a steady increase in the number of foreign banks,
from 784 in 1995 to 1,301 in 2007, according to Claessens and Van Horen (2014).  At the same
time,  the  number  of  domestic  banks  decreased  and,  as  a  result,  the  relative  importance  of
foreign banks increased substantially, from a share of 19% in 1995 to 32% in 2007. This rise
might be attributable to structural factors such as technological advancements, capital market
liberalisations  and  economic  integration.   It  was  accompanied  by  the  growing  importance  of
wholesale  funding  markets  in  financing  banking  activities  and  it  resulted  in  a  high  degree  of
interconnectedness between financial institutions.
1
2
Beyond the potential complexity of global banking’s organisational structures, the financial crisis
was  also  preceded  by  increasing  complexity  in  banking  activities  and  financial  products.  For
example, the gross market value of the OTC derivative markets increased from USD 2 trillion in
1998 to USD 35 trillion at the end of 2008. The intensive use of complex and off-balance sheet
products distanced the final borrower from the final investor. As underlined by a recent IMF study,
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
most of the pre-crisis financial globalisation had taken place through cross-border activities with
little involvement from global banks in local retail activity. It ultimately led to a reduction in efforts
from banks to monitor the creditworthiness of their borrowers and mitigate the associated default
risks.
These two levels of complexities were exacerbated during the European sovereign debt crisis as
European  banks  were  put  under  funding  pressures  by  market  participants  concerned  by  the
opaqueness  of  their  portfolio  composition  and  the  lack  of  credibility  of  the  previous  resolution
mechanism.
B  –  A  comprehensive  and  strong  policy  response:  both  on  the  regulatory  and  the
supervisory sides
However, I just want to convince you of how strong the regulatory and supervisory responses
have been since then, in curbing the detrimental impacts that overly complex organisations or
overly complex activities might produce.
First,  the  new  regulatory  framework  treats  global  and  complex  banks  differently.  Global
Systemically Important Banks (aka GSIBs) are subject to higher capital requirements explicitly
determined  by  the  importance  of  their  cross-jurisdictional  claims  and  liabilities,  their  OTC
derivatives, and their Level 3 assets exposure. They will range from 1% and possibly up to 3.5%
of the CET1 ratio after the phase-in period (e.g. 2019).
We have seen in the past that complex financial institutions relied too much on wholesale funding
that  could  quickly  evaporate  in  times  of  stress;  the  new  liquidity  ratios  (LCR,  NSFR)  help  to
promote the short-term resilience of the liquidity risk profile of banks and a sustainable maturity
structure  for  assets  and  liabilities.  The  recently  agreed  finalisation  of  Basel  III  reinforces  the
monitoring of internal models and capital requirements on more complex activities, including the
FRTB, the CVA  and the CTP  on market activities.
3
4
Before 2008, we lacked the tools to implement an orderly restructuring of a bank that was failing
or likely to fail. The Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive now requires banks in Europe to
establish  resolution  plans  (also  called  “living  wills”  by  the  US  regulators)  to  anticipate  the
restructuration needed in case of trouble. By defining ex ante the seniority of every creditor and
by making it possible to bail-in some of these creditors (including some senior unsecured debt)
in case of crises, we should have potentially limited the need for public funds to resolve private
bank failures.
Second, not only banking regulation but also the enforcement of its supervision have positively
reduced  the  detrimental  effects  of  bank  complexity.  The  new  supervisory  framework  is  more
consistent  and  harmonised.  In  the  SSM  area,  large  global  banks  are  now  subject  to  a  single
supervisor, associating the ECB with national supervisors in JSTs, as is also the case for their
local foreign subsidiaries.
The  euro  area  banks  have  been  subjected  to  wide-ranging  and  harmonised  supervisory
exercises.  Stress  testing  exercises  that  apply  a  common  methodology  and  common  quality
assurance  have  been  performed  every  two  years  since  2011  under  the  aegis  of  the  EBA. A
transparency exercise is run every year by the EBA, generating lots of data on European banks.
Publicly disclosed asset quality reviews and comprehensive assessments have been performed
each time a bank is put under the direct supervision of the SSM since 2014. A large review of the
internal models used by the European banks (Targeted Review of Internal Models, or TRIM) is
currently performed by the ECB and aims at greater reliability and comparability of risk models
and capital.
In sum, we have set up a regulatory framework in Europe that penalises unnecessarily complex
banking  activities  by  imposing  higher  capital  requirements,  allowing  for  more  intrusive  and
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
comprehensive supervision and fostering greater transparency. The new resolution mechanism
aims  at  extinguishing  the  implicit  government  guarantees,  which  provide  an  incentive  for
excessive risk taking and levels of complexity in order to gain “too-big-to-fail” status.
C  –  Some  challenges  lie  ahead:  better  coordination  of  the  parties  involved  in  the
resolution process and the necessity for cross-border consolidations in Europe
But we still face important challenges ahead. I want to stress two of them. The Single Resolution
Mechanism, the second pillar of the Banking Union, has just successfully passed its first real test
this  summer  with  the  orderly  resolution  of  Banco  Popular.  However,  there  is  still  room  for
improvement in the coordination between the numerous institutions and authorities involved in
these procedures. It means that every participant must know and very clearly understand its role
in the process to ensure an efficient resolution.
Second, Europe still suffers from overcapacity and cross-border consolidation is needed. In the
United States, the top five banks have a market share of more than 40% while this figure is barely
20%  in  Europe.  Given  the  new  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  I  described  earlier,  we
believe that the Banking Union should be considered – according to the criteria set up by the
BCSB – as a single geographic area. Furthermore, we are reaching the point in Europe where
facilitating  healthy  and  well-designed  cross-border  mergers  could  actually  improve  financial
stability. It would make banks better able to diversify their risks, achieve economies of scale and
become more efficient. And as we have strengthened the single supervision and resolution of
significant institutions, we should not fear the “too-big-to-fail” issue. Cross border consolidation
would foster a more efficient allocation of savings towards productive investments in Europe and
it would place European banks in a better position in terms of international competition.
To  conclude,  interactions  between  policy  makers,  researchers  and  practitioners  are  very
valuable and I am certain that this conference will contribute to fuelling these interactions. We
strongly believe in the positive spillovers from the research function being closely intertwined with
the supervisory and financial stability divisions. In particular, empirical evaluations and theoretical
works  on  policy  design  –  and  we  will  see  some  of  them  presented  today  –  are  absolutely
necessary in order to fine tune and reinforce the regulatory reforms that have been implemented
not only in Europe but worldwide.
I wish you a very fruitful conference and I will give the floor right away to Henri Fraisse, who will
chair the first session. Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
Claessens,  Stijn  and  van  Horen,  Neeltje  (2014),  “The  Impact  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  on  Banking
Globalization”, IMF working paper 14/197. Their data set covers 138 host countries for the period 1995–2013.
Focarelli, Dario and Pozzolo, Alberto (2005), “Where Do Banks Expand Abroad? An Empirical Analysis”,  The
2435–2464,
Journal 
EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:ucp:jnlbus:v:78:y:2005:i:6:p:2435–2464.
Business, 
Issue 
pp. 
78, 
6, 
of 
Credit Value Adjustment.
Correlation Trading Portfolio.
3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
