 7TH ANNUAL NATIONAL ASSET LIABILITY MANAGEMENT AFRICA 
CONFERENCE 
 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL  
MARKETS 
 Keynote Address  
 by  
 Moses D Pelaelo  
Governor, Bank of Botswana 
 November 2, 2017 
 Introduction 
It is indeed an honour and pleasure to have the opportunity to 
speak to this gathering this morning.  I wish to start by thanking 
the organisers and, in particular, the Chairman, former Deputy 
Governor at the Bank of Botswana, Mr Oduetse Motshidisi, for 
the  invitation  to  this  Conference  held  in  this  beautiful  city  of 
Cape Town.   
 As many of you would be aware, while it is true that the primary 
mandate of any central bank is price stability, Governors have a 
myriad  of  responsibilities  on  a  daily  basis.    Beyond  the  pre-
occupation  with  the  core  mandate  of  monetary  and  financial 
stability,  many  central  banks,  including  my  own,  the  Bank  of 
Botswana,  have  responsibility  for  the  regulation  and  supervi-
sion  of  the  banking  sector;  promotion  of  an  efficient  payments 
system;  currency  management;  and,  also,  the  management  of 
foreign exchange reserves, as well as the closely related roles 
  of  economic  and  financial  adviser  to  Government.  Equally  im-
portant are considerations such as broader financial sector de-
velopment  issues  including  financial  inclusion,  consumer  pro-
tection  and  financial  literacy.  My  comments  today  will  reflect 
these mixed perspectives. 
 This Conference is being held in the shadow of the tenth anni-
versary  of  the  onset  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  and  subse-
quent  "Great  Recession".    Unsurprisingly,  the  causes  and  les-
sons of the Crisis have been a major topic of discussion in re-
cent months. This meeting is, therefore, taking place at possibly 
the most opportune time in the history of global finance.  In the 
aftermath  of  this  difficult  episode,  the  world  should  come  out 
the wiser.   
 At its recent meeting in Berlin, Germany, the Financial Stability 
Board Plenary observed that the international post-crisis policy 
reform  agenda  was  nearly  complete  and  that,  going  forward, 
the  priority  will  be  placed  on  monitoring  and  publicly  reporting 
on its 24 member jurisdictions’ implementation of the agreed re-
forms. Similarly, the recently-concluded annual Meetings of the 
IMF and World Bank Group noted signs of sustained global re-
covery,  albeit  not  yet  complete,  with  below-target  inflation  and 
weak wage growth in several advanced countries, while output 
growth remains below potential in many cases.   
 2 
 At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  not  to  lose  sight  of  some 
megatrends,  in  demography  and  technology,  for  example,  that 
also  have  a  profound  impact  on  economic  developments  and, 
more specifically, global and domestic financial markets.  In this 
regard, I note that 2017 is also the tenth anniversary of the iPh-
one, and we all know the profound impact of that development.  
What  I  wish  to  emphasise  here  is  not  only  the  importance  of 
technological  progress,  but  also  the  inherent  unpredictability 
associated  with  such  developments.  I  am  informed  that  when 
the iPhone was introduced it was envisaged as little more than 
a combination of the mobile phone and the iPod, with a camera 
added.  As a reflection of the random path of technological de-
velopments,  the  world  of  apps  on  which  we  increasingly  de-
pend  was  not  central  to  the  original  concept.  Also,  among  to-
day’s  generation  of  "new  ideas",  it  seems  to  be  the  potential 
impact  of  blockchain  or  Distributed  Ledger  Technology  that  is 
attracting most attention.  However, as the example of the iPh-
one demonstrates, the future path of its development is far from 
clear.   
 The coincidence of these two tenth anniversaries is of particular 
relevance  for  global  financial  markets.  The  vulnerabilities  ex-
posed by the Crisis, and the responses they engendered, must 
be  viewed  in  the  context  of  dynamic  developments  in  infor-
mation technology. This is in terms of both emerging opportuni-
ties and accompanying threats. Here, Distributed Ledger Tech-
3 
 nology is a prominent example, not least because the technol-
ogy  has  become  intertwined  with  the  controversial  issue  of 
cryptocurrencies.  This is unfortunate, given that central banks 
and regulators, rightly in my view, are increasingly circumspect 
about  digital  currencies.    It  would  be  regrettable,  however,  if 
this stifled development of the underlying technology. Distribut-
ed Ledger Technology has already demonstrated sufficient po-
tential,  albeit still lacking in maturity, as the  basis for more se-
cure  and  efficient  payments  systems  to  attract  the  interest  of 
several central banks.  
 Another matter of serious concern in today’s financial world and 
markets is cybercrime.  Cybercrime is not the focus for this dis-
cussion;  it  is,  however,  a  major  challenge  of  the  modern  age 
and should never be far from our thoughts.  I would like to take 
this opportunity to appeal for concerted cooperative and collec-
tive  action  in  meeting  this  challenge.    In  this  respect,  it  is  wel-
come  that  more  than  70  percent  of  members  of  the  Financial 
Stability Board intend to introduce new initiatives to boost cyber 
security in the coming year.  It is to be hoped that others will fol-
low their example.  
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentleman,  I  now  wish  to  focus  my 
remarks on three broad areas.  First, a brief look at the domes-
tic  economy  of  Botswana,  including  the  capacity  to  generate 
external  foreign  exchange  reserves.  This  will  highlight  the 
4 
 growth  of  the  domestic  financial  sector  and  the  impact  of  the 
global financial crisis on the economy. 
 Second,  from  the  global  perspective,  I  will  consider  recent  de-
velopments in financial markets and the associated policy chal-
lenges; in particular, the extended period of low yields together 
with  heightened  risks,  including  geopolitical  risks.    Again,  this 
has major implications for effective asset/liability management. 
 Before concluding, I will give some consideration to the emerg-
ing challenges, where the increasingly optimistic outlook for the 
global economy has encouraged talk of policy "normalisation".   
 The Botswana Economy 
In  the  five  decades  since  Independence,  in  1966,  Botswana’s 
economy  has  grown  rapidly,  from  one  of  the  poorest  in  the 
world  to  an  upper-middle-income  country  with  a  per  capita  in-
come of approximately seven thousand US dollars.  Central to 
this  growth  has  been  relatively  strong  institutions  and  govern-
ance,  healthy  fiscal  position  and  external  balance  sheet,  low 
public  debt  burden  and  the  prudent  management  of  mineral 
revenues.    From  the  mid-eighties,  persistent  twin  fiscal  and 
balance  of  payments  surpluses  led  to  rapid  growth  of  foreign 
exchange  reserves  that,  at  their  peak,  were  equivalent  to  al-
most three years of import cover.  In turn, this allowed the au-
thorities to move relatively quickly to open the economy, includ-
5 
 ing  the  abolition  of  foreign  exchange  controls  by  1999.  Since 
2001, both S&P Global Ratings and Moody’s Investors Service 
have  consistently  assigned  Botswana  the  highest,  investment 
grade, sovereign ratings in Africa.  On October 27, 2017, S&P 
Global  Ratings  affirmed  the  country’s  ratings  of    A-/A-2  for 
short-  and  long-term  foreign  and  domestic-currency  denomi-
nated  debt,  while  revising  the  outlook  from  negative  to  stable.  
The revision of the outlook is significant as it reflects expected 
stable economic growth at a time when many Sub-Saharan Af-
rican countries face relatively weak growth and shrinking fiscal 
space. 
 This  has  been  a  remarkably  resilient  development  model,  in 
combination  with  the  Government’s  consistently  prudent  ap-
proach to fiscal management and sustainable budgeting.  How-
ever, beginning in the 2000s and, in particular, since the global 
financial  crisis,  the  twin  surpluses  have  not  been  so  reliable, 
with recurring fiscal and external deficits. This has implications 
for the management of the Government’s net asset position, in-
cluding balancing options for  taking on  more public  debt vis-à-
vis drawing on the accumulated national savings.  
 The  structural  transformation  of  the  economy  is  also  an  im-
portant  consideration.    In  the  past,  the  model  whereby  foreign 
exchange  reserves  were  held  pending  opportunities  for  their 
productive  deployment  in  funding  public  infrastructure  was 
6 
 clearly appropriate.  But now, with relatively low returns on such 
investments, the holding of financial reserves as  a sustainable 
source of income for both current and future generations is in-
creasingly important. 
 The  financial  sector,  too,  has  expanded  rapidly,  both  in  size 
and the range of services.  In 2016, the financial and business 
services  sector  accounted  for  13.6  percent  of  GDP,  dwarfing 
most  other  non-mining  private  sector  activity;  for  example, 
manufacturing  accounted  for  only  5.2  percent.    Over  the  past 
ten  years,  cumulative  growth  of  the  financial  sector,  in  real 
terms,  has  been  almost  exactly  100  percent,  compared  to  52 
percent  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.    A  major  driving  force  in 
this  development  has  been  the  rapid  growth  of  the  domestic 
pension fund industry.  In the early 2000s, the Government took 
a  decision  to  effectively  privatise  a  large  portion  of  the  foreign 
exchange reserves through the establishment of a defined con-
tribution pension fund scheme for the public service. 
 Despite its openness, the impact of the global financial crisis on 
the Botswana economy was relatively mild.  The main negative 
shock was to the mining sector, but the transmission to the rest 
of the economy was muted, helped by government drawing on 
its financial savings to maintain public spending.  For the finan-
cial sector, the predominantly "plain vanilla" characteristics and 
limited  international  linkages  provided  a  shield  against  the 
7 
 worst  effects,  buttressed  further  by  effective  regulation  and 
prudential supervision.  
 There  is  no  room  for  complacency,  however,  as  the  intercon-
nectedness of Africa with global financial markets continues to 
develop, encouraged by the search for yield and ample market 
liquidity resulting from an extended period of ultra-loose mone-
tary  policy.  More  generally,  for  the  "Africa  Rising"  narrative  to 
regain the much-needed momentum requires sustained recov-
ery  in  global  commodities  markets.  At  the  same  time,  increas-
ingly  stringent  global  regulatory  requirements,  especially  on 
market  conduct  and  financial  crimes,  notably  the  anti-money 
laundering  and  combatting  of  the  financing  of  terrorism  re-
gimes,  have  created  challenges.    In  this  regard,  a  number  of 
countries  in  the  region  have  been  subjected  to  enhanced  due 
diligence  by  correspondent  banks  and,  in  general,  negative 
perceptions among counterparties towards doing business with 
African banks.  In response to the latter, it is clearly necessary 
for countries to do everything in their power to ensure that  the 
Know  Your  Customer,  and  the  Anti-Money  Laundering  and 
Combatting of the Financing of Terrorism regulations in their ju-
risdictions are of the highest possible standards. Adoption and 
effective implementation of such standards is also supportive of 
development of the regional markets. 
 8 
 Developments in Global Markets and Economic Policy Un-
certainty 
The  extended  low  interest  rate  environment,  resulting  in  mea-
gre  returns  on  international  investments,  was  in  large  part  the 
consequence of central banks’ use of "unconventional" policies, 
such as quantitative easing and  negative interest rates.  But a 
long-term trend decline in the "neutral" rate of interest that bal-
ances economic activity also appears to have contributed.  
 The  resulting  "search  for  yield"  has  driven  important  develop-
ments  in  the  asset  management  industry.    Traditionally  con-
servative  funds  (including  those  under  the  custody  of  central 
banks) have had to face  up to the need to balance a cautious 
approach to taking on more risk with moving away from comfort 
zones based on high-quality fixed income debt instruments and 
listed equities in liquid major markets.  In such circumstances, 
the traditional guiding mantra of "safety, liquidity, return" needs 
recalibration in order to retain its operational relevance.  
 It appears that the greatest challenge has been to balance the 
increasingly  positive  signs  of  global  economic  recovery,  with 
uncertainty  driven  by  geopolitical  event  risks.  It  is  perhaps 
tempting to suggest that this has receded somewhat after a se-
ries  of  elections  across  Europe  where  the  rise  of  populist  par-
ties  appeared  to  have  been  halted,  if  not  fully  rebuffed.    This 
may be too optimistic, however, as indicated by the recent Aus-
9 
 trian  elections  or,  perhaps,  the  unfolding  consequences  of 
events in Spain; the direction of Brexit or the Trump administra-
tion are also still very much unknown.  The cumulative chances 
of  a  highly-unpleasant  surprise  from  further  “Black  Swan” 
events are surely not negligible.  The question would be how do 
investors position themselves against these risks?  
 Looking  more  closely  at  equities  markets,  in  particular  in  the 
United States, there could be a legitimate concern that the cur-
rent optimism is bordering on irrational exuberance shutting out 
evident political risk.  It is of course not difficult to cite plausible 
reasons  why  equities  markets  should  be  buoyant:  earnings 
growth,  good exposure to emerging markets, low bond market 
yields and the prospects of tax reform, among others. However, 
on their own, these factors do not seem to justify market valua-
tions  where  cyclically  adjusted  price-to-earnings  ratios  are  at 
levels that fall short only of the peaks before the dotcom bubble 
burst in 2000 and the Great Crash in 1929.  
 Interest  in  the  next  market  crash  has  been  heightened  by  an-
other recent anniversary: Black Monday, on October 19, 1987. 
Technological  developments  over  the  intervening  years  are, 
once  again,  a  key  factor  and  a  cause  for  both  concern  and 
comfort.  For  example,  there  is  uncertainty  about  how  markets 
increasingly driven by passive funds would respond in times of 
stress. When  investors  are  increasingly  hard-wired  into  follow-
10 
 ing the herd, the risk of herd-mentality sweeping the markets is 
likely to be amplified.  On the other hand, it can be reasonably 
argued  that  improved  information  flows,  increased  diversity  of 
investors  and  interconnectedness  of  global  markets  will  help 
prevent  market  drift  and  misalignment  leading  to  a  crash.  
Overall, we simply do not know the likely balance of risks. 
 In terms of major developments in recent years that impact on 
financial markets, I cannot fail to note the relentless rise of Chi-
na, now surely a major global player, and with the power of the 
current  leadership  amply  demonstrated  at  the  just-ended  con-
gress of the ruling Communist Party.  Beyond the raw strength 
of  the  world’s  second  largest  economy,  with  its  growth  still 
close to 7 percent per annum, China is the technological leader 
in  key  emerging  fields  such  as  cashless  payments.    On  the 
other hand, risks remain pronounced, reflecting issues of trans-
parency,  the  challenging  transition  to  a  consumption-led  econ-
omy based on inclusive growth and its financial system.  
 Its  emerging  status  as  both  a  source  of  and  destination  for  in-
vestment  is  also  well  known.  But  China  remains  something  of 
an  enigma  to  investors,  who  must  aim  to  chart  a prudent  path 
between  the  opportunities  and  challenges.    Moreover,  with  its 
currency  now  included  in  the  Special  Drawing  Rights  of  the 
IMF,  and  as  Renminbi  assets  increasingly  gain  acceptance  as 
11 
 part of mainstream benchmark indices, this is a challenge that 
is increasingly difficult to avoid. 
 The Emerging Challenges of "Policy" Normalisation 
As I mentioned earlier, the recent IMF and World Bank Annual 
Meetings  noted  improved  global  growth,  spread  broadly  over 
both  developed  and  emerging  economies,  as  well  as  reduced 
market  turbulence.  Importantly,  growth  in  world  trade  has  also 
resumed  after  a period  of  stagnation.    Moreover,  it  was  pleas-
ing that this optimism was tempered by realism, including warn-
ings of continuing underlying risk from several quarters.  Equal-
ly  important  was  the  call  to  use  this  window  of  opportunity,  of 
the  relatively  benign  prevailing  conditions,  to  "fix  the  roof",  in-
cluding  undertaking  the  much-needed  structural  reforms.    In 
particular, in many countries debt remains at worrying high lev-
els, with potentially negative consequences for continued finan-
cial  stability.  Nonetheless,  this  "recovery"  phase  poses  a  new 
range  of  challenges  to  policymakers,  with  significant  implica-
tions  for  developments  in  the  global  financial  markets.    Here  I 
shall briefly mention a few. 
 First, what will constitute the new normal for monetary policy is 
far  from  obvious.  Recent  pronouncements  by  leading  central 
bankers have hardly provided much light in this respect, reflect-
ing, in part, the fear that clarity will result in further market "tan-
trums".  More fundamentally, although I would stop short at la-
12 
 belling this, like the Financial Times, a "crisis of confidence" for 
central banks, there is a need for a frank discussion on the ro-
bustness  of  the  models  used  to  guide  monetary  policy  deci-
sions.    In  particular,  whether  the  long-standing  reliance  on  the 
Philips Curve paradigm is still justified; but also the need to ef-
fectively  integrate  financial  indicators  into  the  modeling  pro-
cess. 
 Second,  the role of fiscal  policy requires careful consideration.  
At least with hindsight, it does seem that there is a strong case 
that  the  retreat  to  unswerving  fiscal  austerity  added  to  the 
negative impact of the 2007-08 global crisis.  However, the un-
derlying reasons for fiscal caution still resonate.  This dilemma 
was well summarised in the recent communique from the IMF, 
which  noted  that  "Fiscal  policy  should  be  used  flexibly  and  be 
growth-friendly,  while  enhancing  resilience,  avoiding  pro-
cyclicality,  and  ensuring  that  public  debt  as  a  share  of  Gross 
Domestic  Product  is  on  a  sustainable  path".  This  is  a  tricky 
combination of requirements to meet simultaneously. 
 In terms of major policy issues, the need for financial sector re-
forms and smart regulation is also significant.  At the epicentre 
of  the  global  financial  crisis  were  deregulation,  weaknesses  in 
banking system governance structures and erosion of fiduciary 
responsibility  and  trust.    The  lesson  to  be  learned,  in  this  re-
gard, is that strong micro-foundations of a financial system, es-
13 
 pecially  banks,  are  of  crucial  importance  at  both  national  and 
international  levels.  That  is  why,  for  example,  the  Financial 
Stability Board was established; banking supervisory and regu-
latory  regimes  strengthened  in  many  jurisdictions;  and  capital 
adequacy and liquidity requirements extensively reviewed.  But, 
as  I  indicated  earlier,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  recognises 
that,  while  the  policy  design  is  nearly  complete  and  the  new 
rule books are in place, this is not sufficient.  Hence, it is nec-
essary  to  now  turn  towards  effective  implementation.    In  the 
context  of  an  integrated  and  globalised  financial  system,  this 
requires  effective  coordination,  collaboration  and  communica-
tion, not only among the 24 member jurisdictions of the Finan-
cial Stability Board, but also by including more effectively coun-
tries such as ours in Sub-Saharan Africa. For example, the un-
intended  consequences  of  the  global  reform  agenda,  such  as 
the  global  de-risking  and  withdrawal  of  correspondent  banking 
relationships, requires urgent attention. I should mention that, in 
my capacity as Co-Chairperson of the Financial Stability Board 
Regional Consultative Group for Sub-Saharan Africa, I hope to 
have greater focus on these issues. 
 Conclusion 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  concluding,  I  remind 
you that the saying "may you live in interesting times" is reput-
edly an old Chinese curse.  To the extent that the past decade 
has certainly been "interesting", the continued challenge to pol-
14 
 icymakers is to make life at least a little bit boring, while not re-
peating the mistakes of the past. 
 On  a  more  positive  note,  despite  the  recent  pushback  by  the 
supporters  of  economic  nationalism,  the  fundamental  driving 
forces of globalisation are not reversible.  Nor is it desirable that 
they should be, given the extent to which they have contributed 
to  global  poverty  reduction.  However,  the  globalised  economy 
is a source of not just tremendous opportunities, even for con-
servative investors, but additional risks and associated costs of 
mitigation. These include the potential for various levels of con-
tagion, as indicated by both the experience of the global finan-
cial  crisis  and  the  rise  of  cybercrime  which,  as  I  indicated  my 
remarks,  is  an  increasingly  global  phenomenon.    No  central 
bank Governor, wealth or fund manager can afford to act as  if 
they are immune from such risks.  
 Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your kind 
attention. 
15 
