Muhammad bin Ibrahim: The future of finance
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia),  at  a  "Teh  Tarik  Session",  at  the  Harvard  PETRONAS Alumni  event  "The  future  of
finance", Kuala Lumpur, 8 September 2017.
 Thank you for inviting me here today to share my thoughts on the future of finance. The future is
always a topic weighing heavily on the psyche of our nation, as we reflect on our transformation
over the last 60 years, and what the future will be 50 years from now.
I would like to share my thoughts today in three parts:
a.  A brief reflection on finance and five themes that may affect its future;
b.  A look at four possible future scenarios that may develop based on these themes; and 
c.  Finally, implications of these future scenarios on the Bank and policy development.
Let me place a qualifier here, it is not an exhaustive survey of the future landscape. My remarks
today are meant to stimulate our thinking and discussion. These are my personal reflections and
insights.
Finance across the years and five themes for the future
At its most basic level, finance is an intermediary service that matches the funding, saving and
investing needs of agents in an economy. It lubricates the economy to function smoothly and
allocate  scarce  resources  efficiently.    But  over  the  years  finance  has  evolved.    It  is  useful  to
understand the ideas behind why and how finance has changed in the past.
First,  developments  in  finance  have  primarily  been  driven  by  the  needs  of  society  and  the
economy. The creation of banks, the stock market and finance as we know it today, reflect this.
Secondly, as with other sectors of the economy, finance has synthesised considerably during
periods of significant technological innovation. For instance, the pervasive use of smartphones in
societal mainstream has enabled finance to reach a wider segment of society today than was
ever conceivable in the past, making it possible for previously underserved segments of society
to gain access to finance.
As we ponder on the future of finance, and to start off the conversation, I would like to share five
observations  or  themes  that  might  possibly  shape  the  development  of  finance  in  the  future.
Indeed, some are already beginning to take form in our market today.
The  first,  finance  will  be  democratised  as  we  move  forward.  Technology  is  the  catalyst.  The
great equaliser. This will open up a vast spectrum of possibilities for new entrants. Conventional
wisdom holds that banking business is intricately tied to economies of scale. Size, scale and
barriers  to  entry  are  thus  traditional  key  determinants  of  competitiveness.  This  conventional
wisdom or axiom is very much dated. In the future, competitive advantage will come from those
who are able to harness the power of technology and be bold enough to venture into uncharted
territories. The rules of the game have been reset, and more players are getting into the game.
Regulators around the globe are very mindful of this trend and are willing to take calculated risks
on innovative ventures, going beyond the banking system for solutions. There is thus, a more
level-playing  field  and  more  business  opportunities  for  non-  traditional  companies  that  are
responsive and effective in meeting the financial services needs of consumers.
For example, new robo-advisory businesses are now providing high quality investment advice at
low  cost,  while  payment  technology  companies  are  making  cross-border  payments  cheaper,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
quicker and more efficient. TransferWise, a cross-border payment company is now moving to
offer ‘borderless’ bank accounts for businesses that operate across border. This is a challenge
for many incumbents.
The second observation is that data could be the ‘king-maker’ of finance. Companies that are
able to control and leverage on data to deliver superior customer experience will possess the
greatest advantage. Successful startups over the past decade such as AirBnb, Grab, Snapchat
and  Uber  have  all  utilised  technology  and  data  to  improve  business  models  and  customer
interactions.  For  the  financial  sector,  this  could  potentially  mark  a  highly  interesting  shift  of
mantra in the future from “cash is king” to “data is king”. The arms race of the 21st century is
really big data. Firms on Wall Street and the City of London are now employing data scientists en
masse. They are the new breed of ‘bankers’. The bankers of the future.
The  use  of  data  with  superior  software  will  enable  financial  services  to  be  unbundled  and
increasingly  custom-made  for  individual  consumers.  Data  will  enable  increased  transparency
and  better  assessment  of  credit  worthiness  as  well  as  reduction  of  risks,  thus  extending
financing to previously underserved segments of society.
The third observation is that finance may display ‘winner takes all’ characteristics over the long
term. This characteristic is apparent in Silicon Valley and the digital economy in general. Market
leaders  such  as  Google  and  Facebook  control  over  two-thirds  of  the  market.  This  is  due  to
‘network effects’, where a service becomes more valuable when it has more users.
What is also worrying is the value that the market attach to these network effects. We have seen
staggering valuations of tech-startups, the so called “unicorn companies”, that sometimes have
not even realised any meaningful profits. However, their large user base and ability to scale up
quickly have resulted in frenzied valuations. It is as if the world has forgotten the dot-com bubble
crash of the early 2000s.
For  financial  regulators,  a  winner  takes  all  outcome  is  not  ideal.  It  is  associated  with
concentration risks and “too-big-to-fail” issues.  Concentration of risks and dependence on too
few service providers never ends well. The only consolation I can think of is that “network effects”
in the digital economy are not as durable as those found in traditional sectors such as railway
networks and power grids. Google and Facebook may be at the top of their industry now, but
remember  there  were  Yahoo,  MySpace  and  Friendster.  I  am  very  sure  somewhere  in  some
garage, killer apps are being developed to rival current industry leaders.
The fourth observation is that shifts in consumer needs and expectations will play a key part in
the finance revolution. 91% of Malaysians today have a smartphone and 83% will look on the
internet to research new products and services. Finance and business models will need to be
redeveloped  around  changes  in  consumers’  lifestyles  and  expectations.  For  example  mobile
banking in its traditional sense does not work anymore in this country as smartphone penetration
is quite high and the public is generally receptive to new ideas and innovations.
The transformation of finance and technology will also usher in an era of increasingly educated,
empowered and activist consumers, who will scout for the best prices and services. Globally,
around  a  third  of  consumers  would  consider  banking  with  a  technology  giant  (e.g.  Google,
Amazon  or  Facebook),  potentially  due  to  perceived  personalisation  and  better  customer
experience.
The fifth observation is that technology could be the catalyst to propel finance as a great social
equaliser of the future. Advancement in technology will enhance financial inclusion by addressing
information  asymmetry  and  reducing  the  cost  of  extending  finance  to  previously  underserved
groups. This could grant access to around 2 billion people globally who remain unbanked today,
enabling them to save, invest and uplift their livelihood.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, the evolution of finance must also be managed appropriately to avoid displacement and
exclusion. This would include underserved groups and segments that are currently deemed too
‘risky’ by traditional risk metrics.
Advancements  of  any  sort  always  come  with  trade-offs.  For  one,  with  the  rapid  progress  of
genetic  sciences,  it  is  only  a  matter  of  time  before  chronic  diseases  such  as  cancer  and
diabetes can be predicted even before birth, thereby potentially denying affected individuals of
insurance coverage. Automation and artificial intelligence may also result in the displacement of
certain  segments  of  the  workforce  or  some  segments  of  society  being  denied  medical
protection.
Finance, when used properly is an enabling tool. But if abused, it can be a destructive tool with
devastating  consequences.  Finance  without  ethical  considerations  will  magnify  the  negative
aspects  and  lead  to  lasting  consequences  as  the  global  financial  crisis  demonstrated.
Technological  progress  would  mean  excesses  can  be  magnified  even  further,  spreading  the
risks  to  a  wider  segment  of  the  society.  Regulators,  therefore,  stand  at  the  nexus  between
magnifying the benefits of access to finance and managing the excesses of finance. There are
moral and ethical considerations that regulators and policymakers will have to confront as we go
forward.
Four possible future scenarios
Let us conceptualise these themes into four scenarios, an approach that could provide a peek
into what is in store, as we visualise the future.
The first scenario is “Tech-Savvy Incumbents”
a.  The pace of technology adoption by incumbent banks is high, while level of fragmentation
among finance providers is low. This is a more ambitious, albeit possible, scenario where
banks  successfully  adopt  the  best  strategies  and  emerge  as  the  dominant  winner  in  all
finance segments;
b.  Here  we  see  banks  as  incumbent  institutions  responding  quickly  to  technology  shifts,
realigning their business processes and delivery channels to meet customer expectations.
They  succeed  in  nurturing  both  tech-literate  management  personnel  and  digitally-savvy
talent;
c.  Emerging  tech  firms  remain  important  sources  of  innovation  but  are  acquired  by  the
incumbents.  As  a  result,  these  institutions  can  successfully  retain  and  expand  their
customer base; and
d.  In  this  scenario,  although  we  will  not  see  a  dramatic  change  in  terms  of  players  in  our
financial  system,  the  functions  and  ways  in  which  they  conduct  businesses  will  be
dramatically different.
The second scenario is “Plugged-in Finance”
a.  Both technology adoption by incumbent banks and fragmentation among finance providers
are high. Finance is marked by an ecosystem of “co-dependence” between banks and tech
start-ups that target specific, profitable segments of the market rather than the whole suite of
financial services;
b.  The resulting partnership is one that is both rich and dynamic. Fintech startups leverage on
banks for regulatory compliance and access to customer base, while banks allow them to
‘plug-into’ their business as a swift means of acquiring technology;
c.  This collaborative model is made possible by the application of new technologies such as
distributed ledger and open API across a wide range of financial services;
d.  Consumers  and  businesses  will  have  access  to  highly  competitive  and  efficient  financial
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
services, driven by both scale and adoption of technological innovations; and
e.  In  this  scenario,  greater  financial  education  and  literacy  is  important  to  ensure  that  the
benefits of technology and innovation in the financial sector are fully realised.
The third scenario is “New Kids on the Block”
a.  In  this  scenario,  both  technology  adoption  by  incumbent  banks  and  fragmentation  among
finance providers are relatively low;
b.  Consumers continue to accord a premium to regulated institutions and the existing idea of
financial services being offered by a bank;
c.  Factors  such  as  security,  privacy  and  reliability  remain  at  the  forefront  of  the  value
proposition of traditional banks. However, not all incumbent banks are able to fully bridge the
technology gap, particularly for newer services;
d.  This results in migration towards digitally-focused challenger banks such as Atom, Fidor and
Monzo that will provide similar services of traditional banks, but utilise technology to deliver
faster and cheaper services that better meet the needs of customers; and
e.  The implication of this is that the landscape of finance will remain largely filed by banks, but a
new breed of purely digital banks will gain in significance. The names that we immediately
think of for financial services will change from the current banks that we are so familiar with.
The fourth scenario is what I call ‘the Tech take-over’
a.  Like scenario one, this is a more extreme and less probable scenario, but still one that is
worth a thought. In this scenario, technology adoption by incumbent banks is low, with a high
level of fragmentation among finance providers;
b.  However, in contrast to scenario three, technology firms enter as the new preferred provider,
successfully capturing the loyalty of consumers due to superior ability in using data to deliver
customer-centric solutions;
c.  Financial services will thus be offered via a wide range of providers such as social networks
(e.g. Facebook, Wechat) and e-commerce platforms (e.g. Amazon, Alibaba); and
d.  Growing comfort with the ability of technology to ensure secured transactions also gives rise
to the popularity of peer-to-peer financial services.
Implications to BNM as a regulator
These  scenarios  I  have  painted  are  drawn  to  show  the  distinct  characteristics  of  a  financial
sector across four possible scenarios. It could be one of them, a combination or none of the
above.  Regardless  of  which  scenario  might  eventually  emerge,  perhaps  the  most  important
realisation for stakeholders today is to be aware, ready and prepared for all the scenarios.
In reality, what is even more likely though, is that the dynamic interplay between these scenarios
will end up shaping the future of finance in ways that we cannot even fathom today. Interestingly,
we are already seeing some elements of all four scenarios in our financial system today. To my
mind,  scenarios  one  and  four  are  remotely  possible,  while  scenarios  two  and  three  are
considerably probable.
For  regulators,  as  the  four  scenarios  highlighted,  it  is  not  beyond  the  realm  of  possibility  that
banks, in its current form, might no longer exist. This phenomenon not only negates the main
intermediation channel of central banks’ monetary policy, it will also challenge central banks in
terms of rethinking the means to regulate, supervise and safeguard overall financial stability and
the manner in which scarce economic resources are allocated and intermediated.
As data becomes the driving force of financial services, the central bank must keep abreast with
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the latest thinking to harness the power of big data. The challenge for central banks however, is
to filter out noises from the mass of data and extract meaningful information that will assist in
better  policy-making.  The  Bank  has  embarked  on  a  journey  to  adopt  big  data  and  analytics
across all functions of the organisation. This includes establishing a dedicated statistics team to
drive this agenda, enhancing the capabilities of staff and exploring new areas and methods of
data collection.
We continuously strategise to ‘future-proof’ the financial system through our policies, frameworks
and initiatives. Three principles are worth mentioning;
a.  Firstly, we will continue to strongly advocate for the adoption of technology to enhance the
efficiency,  effectiveness  and  resiliency  of  the  financial  sector.  Our  FinTech  sandbox  and
Financial Technology Enabler Group is an example of this. This also reflects our philosophy
that innovations work best through collaboration between the industry and policymakers;
b.  Secondly,  as  a  regulator  and  trustee  of  the  financial  sector,  we  will  remain  focused  on
ensuring  that  the  financial  sector  is  inclusive  for  all  segments  of  society  and  contributes
effectively and positively to the economic growth and development of the nation; and
c.  Thirdly, we will continue to ensure that financial stability and consumer trust and confidence
are preserved at all times.
Conclusion
These  are  the  cornerstones  of  the  central  bank’s  role  and  functions  and  the  adoption  of  any
policies, past or future, will continue to have an unbreakable link to these objectives.
Finance has come a long way- from serving the basic societal needs to save and borrow at its
infancy to its role today as the backbone of the global economy. In ancient days, kings and rulers
look to astronomers, magicians and soothsayers to tell them about the future. The Greeks for
example, consulted the Oracle at Delphi before embarking on major decisions. The world today
is much wiser I hope, and we no longer believe that the future can be predicted with absolute
certainty.
What finance and technology can bring for the future of human kind is so exciting that it can go
beyond  containment.  Yet  if  left  on  its  own,  the  outcome  can  be  perilous.  Resisting  them,
however, is not an option. While we embrace them as they synthesise and evolve, we also need
to shape and control them such that they would not lead us to face extreme financial market
fragilities  and  devastation.  In  the  words  of  Nassim  Taleb,  we  need  to  make  ourselves  “anti-
fragile”  –  not  only  able  to  withstand  shocks,  disruptions  and  volatility  but  able  to  position
ourselves to take advantage of it.
But I always like the quote by Peter Drucker, “The best way to predict the future, is to create it.”
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
