Digital transformation of the retail payments ecosystem 
Welcome address by Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy 
at the ECB and Banca d’Italia joint conference, Rome 
30 November 2017 
I am pleased  to welcome all the speakers  and participants to this conference on the 
ongoing  digital  transformations  in  the  retail  payments  ecosystem.  The  programme  is 
remarkable: many key issues for central banks and the private sector will be discussed in 
these two days. Let  me take this opportunity to thank the organizers at both the  Bank of 
Italy and the European Central Bank for putting together such a broad and relevant array of 
topics. 
The  fast  evolution  of  digital  technologies  promises  to  deliver  benefits  but  it  also 
creates new challenges for the payment system and its stakeholders. Today’s conference is 
an opportunity to take stock of recent advances, to evaluate possible future landscapes in 
retail payments and to discuss the challenges and opportunities they pose to central banks 
and the population at large. I am sure that maintaining a continuous dialogue among central 
bankers, private sector representatives and academics on the subjects that will be discussed 
in this conference will contribute to the efficiency and safety of our payment systems. 
The diffusion of digital technologies is having pervasive effects on our society. Today, 
around eighty per cent of the European population has a smartphone, personal computer or 
tablet to navigate the internet. We use the internet to perform many fundamental activities 
that  influence  our  behaviour  and  productivity,  such  as  communicating  and  searching  for 
information.  The  rise  of  e-commerce  is  also  having  substantial,  and  at  times  disruptive, 
effects in many industries. Digital innovations, such as big data and artificial intelligence, 
are used for medical diagnoses, in the transportation sector and to select the news that is 
reported on social media. The explosive growth of electronic devices controlled through the 
internet suggests that the “internet-of-things” will play an important role in our daily lives. 
As  the  youngest,  tech-savvy  generations  approach  adulthood,  the  effects  of  these 
phenomena are bound to become even more significant than they are today. 
The  digital  transformation  of  our  society  has  also  changed  the  type  of  payment 
instruments we use. Indeed, the more we use digital distribution channels in our consumer 
expenditures, the more we need digital forms of money to pay for these transactions. But 
there is also a cultural change behind this process. Credit and debit cards are increasingly 
used  in  brick-and-mortar  stores,  and  in  some  countries  banknotes  are  no  longer  the  most 
common means of payment. 
The  highly  dynamic  landscape  of  payment  systems  is  ever  evolving.  While  new 
technologies, such as those used for instant payments, are rapidly approaching, newer ones 
are right behind. Last year we held a conference here at the Bank of Italy on the applications 
of  blockchain  technology  in  the  financial  markets.  What  last  year  still  seemed  to  be  a 
technology  in  its  infancy  is  now  increasingly  put  to  work  in  use  cases.  As  with  all  new 
technologies, it is expected to deliver efficiency gains: according to its proponents, some of 
these gains will come from easier diffusion of information and have the potential of altering 
the payment systems landscape. However, the extent of its impact is still uncertain, as many 
aspects of its practical implementation are yet unknown.  
Nevertheless,  blockchain  technology  is  getting  a  great  deal  of  attention  from 
practitioners and the financial markets. Not long ago the stock price of a British company 
more  than  tripled  after  newspapers  reported  the  company’s  plan  to  add  the  word 
“blockchain” to its name! So large was the gain that the company felt compelled to publicly 
clarify that its development of blockchain products was still at an early stage of research and 
development. 
Thus,  the  digital  revolution  is  posing  new  challenges  to  central  banks,  both  as 
regulators  of  payment  systems  and  as  providers  of  money  and  payment  infrastructures. 
Many of them are already being tackled, but many still lie ahead. 
Through significant investments in technology in the payments industry, both central 
banks and market operators increased the supply of efficient payment services and ensured 
their  security  and  reliability  to  foster  public  confidence  in  (new)  electronic  means  of 
 payment.  In  Europe,  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA)  was  a 
milestone achievement in this context. With widespread access to the internet, consumers 
are now continuously connected and have come to expect commercial and financial services 
to  be  available  at  their  fingertips  in  real  time.  All  over  the  world  we  are  seeing  a  rapid 
increase  in  the  level  of  interest  in  payment  solutions  that  allow  money  to  be  sent  from 
person to person through instant payment applications.  
On  21  November,  the  pan-European instant  credit transfer  scheme established  by 
the European Payments Council (EPC) went live thanks to the efforts undertaken by the 
payment  service  providers  (PSP)  and  automated  clearing  houses  (ACH).  Now,  nearly 
600  payment  service  providers  from  eight  European  countries  (including  Italy)  may 
choose  to  offer  instant  payment  solutions  based  on  the  new  scheme  whose  scope  will 
progressively  span  to  include  thirty-four  European  countries.  To  further  facilitate  the 
integration  of  the  euro  area  and  to  complement  the  services  of  ACHs,  last  June  the 
Eurosystem  decided  to  develop  an  instant  payments  settlement  system  in  central  bank 
money,  the  Target  Instant  Payment  Settlement  (TIPS).  Bank  of  Italy  will  be  deeply 
involved in its development. 
in 
Dramatic 
technological  advances 
the  financial  system  are  creating  new 
opportunities  for  payment  users.  However,  they  also  pose  new  challenges  for  traditional 
intermediaries who are now exposed to heightened competition from digital platforms that 
also offer payment services. Banks no longer compete (only) with each other but also with 
non-banks and must deal with the challenges that stem from the developments in financial 
technology (Fintech).  
In the European context, technology driven transformations in the payment system are 
also  supported  by  regulatory  interventions  that  increase  competition  and  innovation.  In 
2007, the Payment Service Directive (PSD) introduced a new category of payment service 
providers, the “Payment Institution”. The new directive (PSD2), which will take effect in 
January 2018, paves a stable path towards further innovation by regulating the activity of 
“third parties providers” (TPP).  These are Fintech firms that offer payment initiation  and 
account  information  services  by  exploiting  the  new  business  opportunities  provided  by 
technological  innovation,  positioning  themselves  between  payment  service  providers  and 
final customers.  
The PSD2, while requiring banks to share customer information with TPPs, provides 
that  the  activity  of  the  latter  be  authorized  and  monitored  by  the  supervisory  authorities. 
Thus, by fostering innovation and competition, the directive aims at ensuring a level playing 
field in the payment services sector and protecting consumers. Moreover, it focuses on the 
security of payment services, with the objective of achieving a high level of harmonization 
through  a  common  regulatory  approach  within  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA): 
under the  PSD2,  the EBA has been tasked with developing standards and guidelines that 
enhance cooperation among all national competent authorities. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  actively  participated  in  the  adoption  of  the  new  directive, 
supporting the Government since the start of the Italian EU presidency in the second half 
of 2014 when the text of the PSD2 took shape. We are now fully cooperating at European 
level,  where  we  also  chair  the  European  Banking  Authority’s  Standing  Committee  on 
Payment  Services,  and  will  continue  to  share  our  experience,  both  as  regulator  and 
supervisor,  to  help  ensure  an  appropriate  balance  between  the  public  interest,  security, 
innovation and competition. 
The ongoing digital transformation in the payment ecosystem and the new regulatory 
approach are posing new challenges. Oversight of the new payments systems will have to be 
carried out while new technologies and business models are introduced. The risks associated 
with these innovations will have to be faced, such as those stemming from vulnerabilities in 
the assessment, processing and storage of information, as well as those that threaten cyber 
security, which may impair the public’s confidence in the payment system.  
It  is  possible  that  all  these  challenges  will  push  us  towards  a  new  paradigm  in 
implementing policy and supervising the payment system in the new technological era. In 
this  context,  a  continuous  dialogue  between  regulators  and  the  industry  facilitates  the 
introduction  of  innovations  that  have  the  potential  of  generating  broad-based  benefits.  At 
the same time, risks and unintended consequences will have to be carefully evaluated and 
countered.  Most  of  the  issues  we  are  facing  today  are  covered  by  the  topics  that  will  be 
 discussed during this two-day conference. I am confident that it will not only provide food 
for  thought  but  also  new  insights  on  how  to  reap  the  benefits  and  counter  the  risks 
associated with the digital transformation of payment systems. 
 Let  me conclude with some open  questions, the answers  of which could outline the 
future  landscape  of  the  retail  payments  ecosystem.  In  the  economy,  digital  means  of 
payments  are  increasingly  common.  Today  we  do  not  know  whether  they  will  ever 
completely replace physical means of payment or when this might be. It will depend on the 
preferences of consumers and firms. As providers of currency, central banks need to make 
sure  that  they  are  at  the  technological  frontier  in  their  production  and,  as  regulators,  that 
people will continue to trust the system, be it physical or digital in nature. So, how should 
central banks promote trust in the payments system in this age of digitalization? What new 
legal  and  regulatory  issues  will  be  raised  by  the  introduction  of  the  new  payment 
instruments? How will the necessary  coordination of the different actors in the  payments 
system be achieved in a deeply evolving set-up? And how will the necessary stability of the 
financial system be maintained? I am looking forward to learning some of the answers and 
to listening to the presentations, the panel discussions and the keynote speeches that promise 
to make this conference particularly interesting. 
To close my welcome remarks I would like to mention that thirty years ago, under the 
strong  encouragement  of  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  a  major  project  was  finalized  in  the 
Bank of Italy with the drafting of our White Paper on the Payment System. In a companion 
article  (published  in  Moneta  e  Credito  in  1988),  my  late  friend  and  colleague  Curzio 
Giannini, who was one of the main contributors to that project, observed that the payments 
system  is  a  “complex  apparatus  [of  rules,  intermediaries  and  instruments]  that  serves  a 
simple  purpose:  allowing  the  execution  of  payments  in  money  associated  with  the 
circulation of goods and services”.  As regulators and providers of means of payment, we 
have  to  ensure  that  the  digital  transformation  of  retail  payments  will  encourage  the 
exchange  of  goods  and  services  among  households  and  firms,  helping  them  to  reap  the 
benefits of the new technologies and to share them widely. 
 