Erkki  Liikanen:  Independent  institutions  and  rule  of  law  are
essential for successful convergence
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 7th ECB conference on
central,  eastern  and  south-eastern  Europen  (CESEE)  countries  "Institutional  quality  and
sustainable economic convergence", Frankfurt am Main, 5 October 2017.
*   *   *
First a comment from the history of enlargements.
The  first  post-  cold  war  –  enlargement  negotiations  started  in  March  1993.  These  were
concluded in spring of 1994. Austria, Finland and Sweden joined in January 1995. I was one of
the negotiators then.
In the middle of these negotiations, in June 1993, the Danish presidency hosted Copenhagen
European Council. The Council wanted to show the path to 10 Central and Eastern European
countries who desired to become a member of the EU.
The Summit defined three key pillars, preconditions for the membership:
The membership requires:
1.  the  candidate  country  has achieved stability of institutions guaranteeing the rule of
law, human rights and respect for and protection of minorities
2.  the  existence  of  a  functioning  market  economy  as  well  as  the  capacity  to  cope  with
competitive pressure and market forces within the Union
3.  the ability to take on the obligations of membership, including adherence to the aims
of political, economic and monetary union.
In the summit in Essen in 1994 the Pre-Accession strategy was confirmed and it turned
out to be very successful.
Four years later, in July 1997 the European Commission assessed the candidate countries in
her opinion. This opinion was a pre-condition for membership negotiations. I was a member of
that European Commission.
The  first  chapter  of  the  Commission  opinion  analysed  the  political  criteria  with  the  Title
Democracy and the Rule of Law. The Judiciary, its structure and its functioning got a particular
attention.
It is no surprise to anyone that these issues remain a corner stone in the European Union. When
joining  the  EU,  the  countries  took  the  commitment  to  respect  these  principle.  It  is  also  very
important that European Commission monitors the developments closely and takes also actions,
when needed.
The enlargement negotiations were launched in March 1998 in Brussels.
W e can  all  agree  that  economic  convergence  in  the  CESEE  countries  has  been  a
success.  With  the  help  of  foreign  investment  and  especially  market  access  to  the  European
Union, countries in the region have been able to lift their incomes significantly.
For example, during the past 25 years real per capita gross domestic product in Hungary and
the Czech Republic increased by approximately 80% – very rapid increase in welfare. Some
countries did even better: In Poland  and Estonia corresponding increase in economic welfare
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
was approximately 170%. Research from the EBRD shows that the countries that joined the EU
have also been better in ensuring that growth is inclusive.
Rapid economic growth in the region, integration with the older EU countries and convergence
towards  them  has  been  an  economic  success  story  for  the  whole  continent, showcase
example of economic reforms yielding benefits that can be and are shared widely. Many
EU member countries that joined in 2004 are now integral parts of EU-wide production networks.
I  was  happy  to  witness  the  arrival  of  the  new  member  states  and  also  new  members  to  the
European Commission 1.5.2004 before moved to the Bank of Finland and to the ECB Governing
Council in July of the same year.
As we celebrate these achievements, we need to remember their prerequisites. Global economy
is full of sad examples of countries failing to catch up, failing to improve welfare of their citizens.
If institutions are not stable and credible, and if the rule of law is not respected, then it is
not  possible  to  attract  investments  and  not  possible  to  ensure  sustainable  economic
convergence in the longer term. 
In  this  regard  performance  of  the  countries  in  the  region  was  helped  by  the  European  Union,
which  was  the  anchor.  It  offered  both  economic  assistance  and  also  a  model  of  democracy,
which respected rule of law and separation of powers.
While this model of independent institutions and rule of law has been successful, many
see it now challenged in various parts of the world, and the issue is not unknown here,
either.
Every  country  and  every  nation  has  her  right  to  choose  their  political  leaders  and  political
tendencies. But membership in the European Union, which is based on common values
and respect of the rule of law, brings also its obligations. The question is: How to preserve
the rule of law, how to preserve independence of public institutions, including central banks and
financial supervisors, from undue political influence?
Economic  literature  and  history  tell  how  important  the  role  of  institutions  is  for  sustainable
economic  growth.  Countries  that  are  able  to  share  increasing  prosperity  and,  for  example,
ensure education opportunities are better placed to uphold functioning institutions in the long-run.
However, countries with good economic performance are not immune to temptations of
various degrees of populism. One type of populism is that establishment and the forces
in power is challenged. This is a challenge everyone in power must accept and can be a
healthy warning. But if it takes a form where pluralist democracies and independence of
institutions and rule of law are questioned, the situation can become very serious. 
Then  resilience  of  the  rule  of  law  and  independent  institutions  can  be  tested.  In  the
long-run such tensions within societies, especially if they persist, can be detrimental to
economic  development.  Moreover,  damage  to  the  cohesiveness  of  a  society  may  be
hard to repair after such periods.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
