Simon  Potter:  Gradual  and  predictable  -  reducing  the  size  of  the
Federal Reserve's balance sheet
Remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  SUERF  -  The  European  Money  and  Finance  Forum
Conference  "Globalisation  Dynamics  -  EU  and  US  perspectives",  New  York  City,  11  October
2017.
 1
Thank you very much.     I  appreciate  the  invitation  to  speak  to  you  as  part  of  today’s  SUERF
conference on “Globalization Dynamics: EU and US Perspectives.”  With events like these, the
SUERF  aims  to  foster  an  active  network  between  professional  economists,  financial
practitioners,  central  bankers  and  supervisors.     Ongoing  dialogue  between  these  groups  is
important to the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy, and I am glad to have
the opportunity to make a small contribution to that dialogue.
2
Just a few weeks ago, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) announced that it would
begin  to  passively  reduce  the  size  of  its  securities  portfolio.    This  announcement  marks  the
beginning  of  a  multiyear  effort  to  bring  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  to  its  longer-run
size.    In  my  remarks  today,  I’d  like  to  offer  my  views  on  this  policy  from  a  financial  markets
perspective.
The  message  I’d  like  to  leave  you  with  today  is  one  of  confidence.    I  am  confident  that  the
FOMC’s  plan  will  reduce  the  size  of  the  portfolio  in  a  gradual  and  predictable,  “no  surprises”
manner.    I  am  confident  that  the  FOMC’s  plan  will  promote  good  market  functioning  in  the
Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities markets as the portfolio declines, and that it
will not prove disruptive to the U.S. mortgage market or the U.S. Treasury’s debt management
program. And I am also confident that the plan’s design, and the FOMC’s clear communication
prior to the plan’s implementation, will mitigate the risk of sharp or outsized asset price reactions
to the decline in the portfolio’s size over time. 
I want to expand on this last point.  We cannot and should not prevent Treasury and MBS prices
from reacting to relevant economic and financial developments, or indeed from gradually moving
over time in response to the progressive decline in the size of the Federal Reserve’s holdings
and  consequent  increase  in  the  amount  of  securities  held  by  the  private  sector.    In  fact,  we
actively want asset prices to respond appropriately and fully to economic and financial news. 
Over the coming years, such news could span a wide variety of topics, such as central bank
policy  in  this  country  and  abroad,  the  ongoing  debate  over  fiscal  policy,  and  the  evolution  of
expectations for the longer-run neutral rate of interest.  That said, we do seek to mitigate the risk
that  our  operational  actions  contribute  to  unnecessary  surprise,  disruption,  or  volatility.    I  am
confident that the FOMC’s plan appropriately manages this risk.
Now, confidence doesn’t mean certainty: there is always a risk that events could unfold differently
from expectations.  In particular, central banks have had little directly relevant past experience
with  the  impact  of  such  a  reduction  in  holdings  of  domestic  securities  and  in  reserves.    One
relevant experience, of course,  was  the  2013  “taper  tantrum,”  which  shows  that  markets  can
have outsized reactions to changes in balance sheet policy even before they happen.  Moreover,
experience  with  asset  purchase  programs,  both  here  and  abroad,  clearly  demonstrates  that
market volatility can ensue from balance sheet policy changes that market participants perceive
as surprising, unclear, or rapid.  All of this indicates to me that, at policy turning points like these,
central  banks  should  carefully  and  clearly  communicate  their  intentions,  provide  as  much
transparency  as  possible,  and  make  transitions  in  policy  implementation  as  slowly  as  overall
macroeconomic policy objectives permit.
 1 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Policymakers have made it clear that balance sheet normalization is intended to operate in the
background, and that the bar is high to making changes to the FOMC’s normalization plan.  That
said,  the  future  is  uncertain,  and  as  a  result  the  Desk  will  maintain  an  appropriate  set  of
capacities  should  the  FOMC  deem  something  different  be  required  to  promote  the  Federal
Reserve’s  objectives.    We  will  also  continue  to  gather  market  intelligence,  including  through
surveys of primary dealers and market participants and through a robust set of statistical data
collections,  to  further  policymakers’  understanding  of  market  participants’  expectations  for  the
balance sheet and to monitor market functioning.
The  rest  of  my  speech  will  go  as  follows.    First,  I’ll  provide  an  in-a-nutshell  summary  of  the
structure of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  Then, I will discuss why it is important that the
decline  in  the  balance  sheet  be  gradual  and  predictable,  and  explain  how  the  FOMC’s  plan
provides this gradualism and predictability.  I will then talk briefly about how the Federal Reserve
is ensuring it is operationally prepared for unexpected developments.  And then I’ll conclude on a
slightly different note:  I’ll offer my thoughts on why financial markets seem to have reacted much
more  calmly  to  balance  sheet  news  this  year  than  they  did  during  the  2013  “taper  tantrum”
period.
As always, these views are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the New York Fed
or the Federal Reserve System. 
The Fed’s balance sheet, in a nutshell
Let’s begin by reviewing, at a high level, where the Fed’s balance sheet is today, and where it is
likely to go in the coming years.  Although many things about monetary policy are very complex,
the basic structure of the balance sheet is actually fairly simple, as is the program of balance
sheet normalization.
Panel 1 shows a summary of the Fed’s assets and liabilities, as they are today.  Substantially all
of the $4.5 trillion of assets consist of Treasuries and agency MBS.  On the other side of the
balance sheet, the Federal Reserve has three main categories of liabilities: $2.6 trillion of bank
reserves  and  other  deposits,  $1.5  trillion  of  paper  currency,  and  about  $400  billion  of  reverse
repos.
3
Before the crisis, the balance sheet was much smaller.  It reached its present size as a result of
the  FOMC’s  large-scale  asset  purchase  programs,  which  were  undertaken  to  support  the
economic  recovery  by  easing  financial  conditions  to  a  greater  extent  than  could  be  achieved
solely through reducing the federal funds rate, as the FOMC’s ability to provide further monetary
accommodation through this instrument was limited by the zero lower bound on interest rates. 
 2 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
These asset purchases had two effects on the balance sheet: they increased the size of the
asset portfolio, and they  equally  increased  the  size  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  liabilities,  largely
4
through growing the stock of bank reserves.
In  addition  to  being  larger  than  it  was  before,  the  balance  sheet  has  a  significantly  different
composition than before the crisis.  On the asset side, the most important change has been the
addition of agency MBS.
5
For  many  years,  the  FOMC  has  made  it  clear  that  it  did  not  intend  for  the  balance  sheet  to
remain  at  this  size  forever.     Instead,  through  its  statements  and  its  Policy  Normalization
Principles and Plans, it has indicated its intention that the Federal Reserve will, in the longer run,
hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively,
and that in the longer run it will hold primarily Treasury securities.  Starting in its December 2015
statement, the FOMC also indicated that it anticipated continuing reinvestment until normalization
of the level of the federal funds rate was well under way.  The FOMC also indicated, starting in its
September 2014 Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, that it intended to reduce the Federal
Reserve's  securities  holdings  in  a  gradual  and  predictable  manner  primarily  by  ceasing  to
reinvest repayments of principal on its securities holdings.
The FOMC’s strategy of waiting to begin normalizing the balance sheet until normalization of the
federal funds rate was well under way had several advantages.  Most importantly, it reduced the
likelihood  that  an  unexpected  adverse  shock  to  the  economy  not  long  after  the  start  of  policy
tightening would have necessitated a return to the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate and
potentially a reversal in balance sheet normalization.  Instead, the FOMC’s approach promotes
the use of the federal funds rate as the active monetary policy instrument, an instrument with
which  the  FOMC  has  much  greater  experience.    In  addition,  delaying  balance  sheet
normalization allowed the FOMC to meaningfully assess the efficacy of its tools to control short-
term interest rates with a large balance sheet, and thereby judge how patient it could afford to be
6
in reducing the balance sheet to its longer-run level.
From an accounting perspective, the decline in the balance sheet will, at a high level, resemble a
mirror image of its earlier increase.  We should of course expect to see the amount of assets
decline, and this will be matched by a decline in the overall stock of liabilities.  Most of this decline
in liabilities will likely take place as a decline in bank reserves.  The size of the balance sheet will
be “normalized,” in Federal Reserve parlance, when the FOMC judges that the Federal Reserve
is  holding  no  more  securities  than  necessary  to  implement  monetary  policy  efficiently  and
effectively.
At that point, the size of the balance sheet might well be “normalized,” but its composition will
probably not be. Panel 2 shows a stylized summary presentation of how the Federal Reserve’s
assets and liabilities might look when the size of the balance sheet is normalized, drawn from the
“median  scenario”  included  in  the  July  2017  update  to  our  annual  report,  “Open  Market
Operations  During  2016.”    This  presentation  is  largely  based  on  the  median  of  market
participants’ surveyed expectations collected in June, along with some staff modeling to fill in the
details, and as such is not an FOMC projection or forecast.  That said, it provides a useful way to
illustrate my point. 
 3 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the asset side, in this median scenario, the portfolio would still contain a substantial allocation
to  agency  MBS  at  the  time  of  normalization,  even  though  the  FOMC  has,  as  I  noted  earlier,
indicated  a  preference  to  hold  primarily  Treasury  securities  in  the  longer  run.    The  maturity
composition of the Treasury portfolio, not shown in the figure, would be different from what it was
before  the  financial  crisis.    On  the  liability  side,  at  normalization,  non-reserve  liabilities  in  the
median scenario would be considerably larger than they were pre-crisis.  Some of the growth in
the reverse repo programs we have observed since the crisis might be a second-round effect
stemming from the growth in reserves, and therefore some decline in this category is possible
as  the  overall  balance  sheet  size  declines.    However,  my  overall  read  is  that  much  of  the
increased  demand  for  non-reserve  liabilities,  particularly  currency  in  circulation,  is  likely  to  be
7
persistent past normalization, and indeed demand for reserves is also likely to be higher.
But  what  is  the  longer-run  appropriate  size  for  the  balance  sheet?    Other  than  the  qualitative
guidance  I  mentioned  earlier,  and  an  expectation  that  the  level  of  reserve  balances  will  be
appreciably below that seen in recent years but larger than before the financial crisis, the FOMC
has  not  specified  how  large  the  balance  sheet  should  be.     My  colleague  Lorie  Logan  spoke
recently  on  the  many  technical  drivers  of  this  level,  which  include  the  mode  of  policy
implementation that the FOMC chooses in the longer run, possible increases in recent years in
the financial system’s demand for reserves and Federal Reserve reverse repo liabilities owing to
new  financial  regulations  and  other  factors,  and  the  long-term  evolution  of  demand  for  paper
9
currency.  
Considerations in reducing the balance sheet size
8
10
In theory, reducing the size of the balance sheet is quite simple.  There are two ways to go about
it.
 One approach is to simply let securities holdings mature.  Principal matures on the Fed’s
securities holdings all the time:  Treasury bonds mature at specified dates, and agency MBS
principal  is  repaid  over  time  as  home  loans  are  paid  back.
  For  the  past  several  years,  the
securities  portfolio  has  been  maintained  at  a  steady  level  by  reinvesting  these  principal
repayments.
  This activity can be reduced or stopped.  A second approach is to simply sell
securities  on  the  open  market,  using  a  similar  procedure  to  the  way  the  securities  were
purchased to begin with.
11
12
Either way, the securities end up back in private hands.  This is obvious in the case of sales. 
When we don’t reinvest principal repayments on Treasuries, the securities the Federal Reserve
would  otherwise  have  bought  end  up  in  private  hands  instead.   And  when  we  don’t  reinvest
agency MBS principal repayments, this means that any new mortgage that was taken out to fund
those repayments ends up being sold to private investors.  While the mechanism varies, the end
result, in theory, is largely the same.
 4 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
So how should the Fed implement a reduction in the balance sheet size?  The approach should
underscore that the balance sheet will be reduced in a way that is gradual and predictable, so as
to credibly assure market participants that the balance sheet will decline in a way that avoids
surprise, disruption, or volatility.  As part of this, it should be simple, and easy to communicate to
the public.
The FOMC’s plan for normalizing the balance sheet does exactly this.
 It decreases principal
reinvestment, an approach which provides for an appropriate pace of reduction in the balance
sheet and is quite straightforward to communicate.  It accomplishes this by reinvesting principal
maturities only to the extent that they exceed gradually increasing caps.
  For Treasuries, the
cap  will  be  $6  billion  per  month  initially  and  will  increase  in  steps  of  $6  billion  at  three-month
intervals over 12 months until it reaches $30 billion per month.  Agencies follow a similar pattern,
starting at $4 billion and rising in three-month steps to $20 billion.  The FOMC also indicated that
it anticipates that these caps will remain in place once they reach their respective maximums.
14
13
Let me spend a few minutes discussing the importance of gradualism and predictability, and how
the FOMC’s plan achieves these things.
Gradualism
To  examine  the  importance  of  gradualism,  we  will  need  to  open,  once  again,  the  theoretical
debate about “stock” and “flow” effects of central bank asset purchases and sales.
  Under the
“stock view,” transitions in the pace of central banks’ asset flows should have little direct effect
on asset prices.  Instead, what matters to asset prices is the present and expected future stock
of assets the central bank holds, or is anticipated to hold.  The “flow view” suggests instead that
the effect on asset prices relates to the pace at which assets are being added or removed from
the balance sheet at that time. 
15
Many speeches have been given, and journal articles published, about the relative importance of
these effects with respect to their impact on financial conditions and the broader economy, a
topic that I do not intend to wade into today.
  Instead, I think it’s important to make a few points
on  “flow  effects”  relevant  to  policy  implementation,  and  in  particular  related  to  possible  “flow
effects” associated with an overly rapid pace. 
16
Overly  fast  flows  of  securities  into  private  hands  can  be  disruptive  to  market  functioning.    In
particular,  there  is  evidence  that  the  agency  MBS  market,  due  to  the  nature  of  its  trading
conventions, is prone to dislocation when market participants expect large transitions in central
bank  agency  MBS  flows.
  Such  concerns  can  be  self-fulfilling:  if  market  participants  are
concerned that an abrupt shift in flow might be disruptive, they might, for example, withdraw from
liquidity provision.  An overly fast redemption flow of Treasuries could also create challenges in
the  government’s  management  of  public  debt  auctions  and  result  in  communications
challenges.
17
18
A sustained portfolio runoff at an overly fast pace could also shrink the balance sheet so quickly
that it impacts other aspects of monetary policy implementation.  Rapid portfolio declines could
have unforeseen impacts on overnight money markets, for example by creating significant shifts
in dealers’ demand for overnight repo financing.  We have seen such impacts in the past. During
the Maturity Extension Program, the Federal Reserve sold substantial amounts of shorter-dated
Treasuries.    Some  of  these  securities  accumulated  in  dealers’  inventories,  and  secured
financing rates rose a bit as dealers sought to finance these holdings.  This sort of volatility did
not,  and  would  not  now,  pose  a  major  problem  to  markets  or  policy  implementation,  but  it  is
something worth avoiding if possible.  Rapid portfolio runoff could also make it more likely that
bank reserves become scarce unexpectedly or more quickly than policymakers had anticipated.
Finally,  overly  fast  portfolio  runoff  could  introduce  undesired  noise  into  financial  conditions. 
 5 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Policymakers have indicated that they want the portfolio’s size to decline “in the background,”
and  that  the  federal  funds  rate  be  the  primary  instrument  of  monetary  policy.    Rapid  portfolio
runoff  could  lead  market  participants  to  overestimate  the  total  decline  that  will  occur  in  the
Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, and thereby accelerate the rise in term or mortgage risk
premia  associated  with  balance  sheet  normalization.    This  could  complicate  policymakers’
economic  forecasting  and  make  it  more  challenging  to  determine  and  communicate  the
appropriate monetary policy stance. 
The FOMC’s plan addresses these concerns about gradualism in two ways.  First, it begins at a
low  rate  of  redemption,  increases  this  slowly  and  in  small  amounts,  and  then  continues  at  a
specified maximal rate of runoff. These amounts should result in transitions that are within the
market’s  capability 
the  plan  explicitly  and  numerically
communicated the FOMC’s plans, it should promote stability in market estimates for the future
size of the balance sheet, and confidence that the FOMC will not unintentionally create market
stress. 
Predictability
  Second,  because 
to  absorb. 
The second goal is to provide the public with a degree of certainty that, as the Federal Reserve
reduces  reinvestment,  the  market  will  not  be  asked  to  absorb  securities  at  a  speed  that
unexpectedly changes in a significant way.  I’ve already discussed why it is important that the
flow of securities back into the market be gradual.  Predictability is about ensuring that the flow is
gradual across economic scenarios, including scenarios that are quite different from our central
forecast.  Achieving this predictability is complicated by uncertainty about agency MBS principal
repayments, an issue I’ll summarize briefly.
To an extent, mortgage payoffs are driven by the white noise of life, such as homeowners selling
their homes as they find new jobs in different areas of the country, have children, or retire, and in
the  process  pay  off  the  mortgage  on  their  old  house.    There  is  some  uncertainty  about  how
social and demographic factors like these will impact the housing market over the long term, and
this therefore creates uncertainty in long-term MBS prepayment forecasts.  Over the short term,
however, by far the greatest source of aggregate uncertainty in mortgage principal repayments
relates  to  refinancing,  the  process  by  which  homeowners  get  a  new  mortgage  with  a  better
interest rate, and pay off their old one in the process.  Refinancing results in existing agency
MBS,  containing  the  old  higher-rate  loans,  being  paid  off  more  quickly,  along  with  greater
issuance of newly-minted agency MBS containing the new, lower-rate loans.
Homeowners are incentivized to refinance when mortgage rates decline below the rate on their
current loan.  In contrast, most market participants expect longer-term interest rates, including
primary  mortgage  rates,  to  rise  over  policy  normalization,  and  that  therefore  mortgage
refinancing activity will be modest.  As a result, most expect mortgage principal repayments to
run below the level of the redemption cap set by the FOMC.  Projections for these repayments,
drawn from the July 2017 update to our annual report that I discussed earlier, are shown in left-
hand side of Panel 3.
 6 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
The benefit of the cap, even though it is unlikely to bind, is that it limits the amount of variation in
the pace at which securities, and particularly mortgages, will flow back into private hands.  Recall
that the left-hand figure in Panel 3 is based on rising interest rates over an ongoing economic
expansion.  For comparison, the right-hand figure in Panel 3 shows the projected MBS principal
repayments for a scenario in which interest rates come in two percentage points below market
participants’ expectations.  In this scenario, the cap operates to constrain the flow of securities
into  the  market.    While  such  a  lower-rate  outcome  is  not  a  central  expectation,  it  is  certainly
possible.
By providing market participants some certainty that the pace of balance sheet decline will be
gradual across economic scenarios, this plan should help mitigate the risk of unexpectedly sharp
shifts in asset prices, liquidity, or market functioning should markets begin to put greater weight
on lower interest rate scenarios.  Indeed, by promoting greater confidence in the stability and
liquidity of the Treasury and agency MBS markets across economic outcomes, the FOMC’s plan
should result in lower risk and liquidity premia on these assets relative to normalization plans that
do not promote such confidence.
The importance of predictability is underscored when one considers that in recent years, adverse
economic shocks have generally been associated with sharp falls in longer-term interest rates. 
Such  declines  would  tend  to  bring  about  faster  MBS  repayments  and,  if  the  outflow  from  the
Federal Reserve’s portfolio were not constrained by a cap, an unforeseen tightening effect on
financial conditions, amplifying the adverse shock.
Prepared for the unexpected
While  I  am  confident  that  the  FOMC’s  plan  will  work  well,  there’s  always  the  risk  that  events
unfold differently than expected.  In my view, we best prepare for the unexpected in two ways: we
need  to  be  operationally  ready  to  change  course  when  needed,  and  we  need  to  remain
analytically focused so we know when to recommend to policymakers that they do so.
So  long  as  the  plan  I’ve  described  to  you  proceeds  uninterrupted  and  as  expected  toward
normalization, it is likely that policymakers’ operational demands on the Desk will be considerably
lighter  than  they  have  been  over  the  last  decade.    However,  it  is  possible  that  unexpected
developments  in  the  economy  may  require  a  change  of  plans.    For  example,  the  FOMC  has
made  it  clear  in  its  addendum  to  the  Policy  Normalization  Principles  and  Plans  that  it  stands
ready to resume reinvestment if a material deterioration in the economic outlook were to warrant
a sizable reduction in the federal funds rate.  The FOMC also indicated that it would be prepared
to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and composition of its balance sheet, if
future economic conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary policy than can be
achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate.  You may recall that Chair Yellen reiterated
 7 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
these points in her press conference following last month’s FOMC meeting.  Likewise, while the
principles and plans do not indicate an expected role for asset sales in portfolio normalization,
except in that limited sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual
holdings of agency MBS, the operational capability remains, even though we do not expect it will
be needed. 
Unexpected  operational  demands  could  also  emerge  from  technical  developments  within  the
Treasury and agency MBS markets.  Even though it is shrinking, the Federal Reserve’s portfolio
is and will remain large, and market participants will look to the Federal Reserve to lend out on a
collateralized basis some of its holdings from time to time in order to facilitate settlement, as is
done by most other large fixed-income investors.  The Desk does this in the Treasury market via
its decades-old securities lending program, and performs an analogous role in the agency MBS
market  by  conducting  so-called  “dollar  roll”  and  coupon  swap  transactions  as  necessary  to
facilitate  settlement  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  agency  MBS  transactions.    The  Desk  always
welcomes  discussion  with  market  participants  on  ways  in  which  it  can  support  market
functioning.
Preventing tantrums
19
I noted earlier that my confidence that the FOMC’s plan for balance sheet normalization was in
part  due  to  its  clear  communication:  the  gradual  and  predictable  nature  of  the  balance  sheet
decline should help ensure that market participants’ expectations remain well aligned with what
eventually transpires.  In my view, a “trust, but verify” approach is called for to ensure that this
confidence is appropriate.   While I trust that the program design will keep expectations for the
portfolio realistic, I believe that a robust analytical mechanism to verify this, underpinned through
continuous market monitoring, broad-based surveys of primary dealers and market participants,
and a diverse suite of statistical data collections, will help ensure that policymakers can detect
early and respond promptly to situations where market participants expect the portfolio to evolve
significantly differently from policymakers’ expectations.
The idea is simple: keeping these two sets of expectations aligned should help prevent the risk
that they get very far apart, an adjustment has to take place, and there is large move in asset
prices.  But the experience of the 2013 “taper tantrum,” when asset prices moved sharply and
unexpectedly following former Chairman Bernanke’s announcement of an eventual cessation in
asset purchases, poses some questions about doing this in practice.  What might have caused
the taper tantrum, and why have financial markets been so much more stable in comparison this
time around?
First, there are limitations to what one can learn from market intelligence, whether it is done with
a  survey,  through  analytical  modeling,  or  market  monitoring.    The  Federal  Reserve’s  market
intelligence-gathering is among the best there is when it comes to breadth, detail, and rigor.  For
example, we are the only central bank that conducts market surveys directly on balance sheet
policy.    That  said,  the  2013  taper  tantrum  would  not  have  been  anticipated  based  on  market
surveys conducted at the time, as the median surveyed market participants’ projection for the
end  of  asset  purchases  was  similar  to  the  plan  Chairman  Bernanke  outlined  in  his
announcement.
 In his book “The Courage to Act: A Memoir of the Crisis and Its Aftermath,”
Bernanke attributed the failure of surveys to anticipate the taper tantrum to the fact that, at the
time, they reached only primary dealer economists, a homogenous and insular group that he felt
was unrepresentative of investors generally.
20
21
I think there is truth to this, but I wonder if there is more to the story.  We now survey a broad
community of investors in addition to the primary dealers in a bid to gather a more diverse and
inclusive perspective, partly in response to this concern.  While this makes our surveys more
robust, since we started doing this we haven’t observed large differences in median responses
between the dealers and the buy-side community.  As an example, Panel 4 shows a time series
 8 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
of the expected level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2017 for dealers and for buy-side
firms; these two track each other closely.
  On the other hand, both the dealers and buy-side
community responses exhibit substantial dispersion around these medians. One explanation for
the  adverse  reactions  to  Federal  Reserve  communications  in  the  spring  of  2013  is  that  the
marginal investor is not the same as the median respondent to our surveys.
22
Looking past the survey, I think there are a few key factors that differ between now and 2013 that
might explain why the market reaction has been so much calmer this time.  The macroeconomic
environment  is  markedly  better.    Market  participants  have  a  better  sense  for  the  FOMC’s
approach to increasing the federal funds rate, and there is much greater clarity on the respective
roles of the balance sheet and the overnight policy rate.  The normalization plan is more clearly
gradual and predictable.  And the balance sheet news this time around may just not have been all
that surprising.  I’ll talk briefly about each of these.
One important difference between now and 2013 is that the labor market is very healthy, with
unemployment  close  to  levels  most  associate  with  full  employment.    Recall  that  FOMC
statements  around  the  time  of  the  taper  tantrum  stated  that  asset  purchases  would  continue
“until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in the context of price stability,”
and it is possible that many market participants took the signal from an impending taper that the
FOMC was less committed to the goal of a substantial improvement in the labor market than
they had thought.  Not only could this have affected some investors’ expectations for the balance
sheet going forward, but it could have also affected views on the FOMC’s other policy tool: the
overnight interest rate.
23
A  related  possibility  is  that  in  the  current  situation  expectations  for  a  very  gradual  program  of
increases in the federal funds rate are relatively well entrenched, with liftoff more than a year and
a  half  behind  us.    In  2013  market  participants  were  focused  on  policies  that  would  add  more
 9 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
accommodation.  Under the “recruitment effect” proposed by former Governor Jeremy Stein and
Sam  Hanson  of  Harvard  Business  School,  yield-oriented  investors  react  to  lower  short-term
rates by “reaching for yield” into longer-dated maturities, and reverse this effect when short-term
rates rise.  These effects can be even larger when balance sheet policies are in active use.
  As
a  result,  a  shock  to  expectations  of  the  central  bank’s  reaction  function  can  lead  to  outsized
movements  in  longer-term  rates.    The  FOMC’s  current  approach  entails  a  much  clearer
delineation  of  the  roles  of  the  federal  funds  rate  and  the  balance  sheet,  breaking  the  link  that
appeared in the spring of 2013: the association between a reduction in the balance sheet and a
shock  to  expectations  for  the  federal  funds  rate.   As  shown  on  Panel  5,  even  with  the  active
discussion of balance sheet normalization in the March and May 2017 FOMC meeting minutes,
market participants attributed very little of the movement in longer-term rates to communication
from the FOMC regarding potential changes in their reinvestment policy.
24
It’s also possible that it is especially important for the FOMC to act in a gradual and predictable
way at times when investor response to Federal Reserve announcements might not be expected
to  follow  predictions  that  come  from  economic  models  that  assume  rationality,  perfect
information,  expectations  for  continuously  optimal  policymaking,  and  so  on.    George  Soros’s
theory of reflexivity might be instructive here.  Soros’s framework is based on two propositions:
fallibility,  which  means  that  market  participants’  views  of  the  world  can  never  perfectly
correspond to the actual state of affairs; and reflexivity, which means that these imperfect views
can influence the situation through the actions of those who hold those views.
  In other words,
perception might not correspond to reality, but perception can influence reality.  Taking this to the
monetary policy context, expectations for disruption or volatility from an substantial change in the
Federal Reserve’s operational posture, even if totally unfounded, could bring about disruption, as
the holders of those expectations act to protect themselves or profit from what they believe is
likely to come.  The solution is to try to avoid generating such expectations for disruption to begin
with, by acting gradually and predictably. 
25
 10 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another potential explanation for the relative stability of longer-term rates this time around is that
balance  sheet  news  this  year,  taken  together,  just  hasn’t  been  all  that  surprising  to  market
participants.  Panel 6 shows market participants’ expectation for the level of the federal funds
rate that would prevail when the reinvestment policy first changes, as well as expectations for the
date of that change.  As can be seen, balance sheet normalization started slightly earlier than
expected, both in rate terms – it began with the federal funds rate at 1.16 percent – and, more
notably, in terms of the absolute date.  But at the same time, earlier in the year, many market
participants  had  seen  decent  odds  that  the  Federal  Reserve  would  reduce  its  balance  sheet
more quickly with a full-stop end to reinvestment.  Panel 7 shows the decline in expectations for
both no change in Treasury reinvestments and a hard-stop in them.  It seems likely that these
shifts  in  expectations  came  as  the  FOMC’s  communications  became  increasingly  granular,
particularly  after  the  June  meeting  at  which  the  FOMC  provided  detail  on  its  balance  sheet
normalization plan. 
On net, it seems likely that expectations for the Federal Reserve’s overall stock of asset holdings
were  fairly  stable  over  this  time,  despite  variation  in  expectations  for  the  timing  and  pace  of
eventual declines.  Under the “stock view,” this stability in expected future asset holdings should
result  in  limited  changes  in  asset  prices,  as  has  been  observed.    Of  course,  as  the  balance
sheet shrinks, some upward pressure on rates should be realized.  Market participants’ estimate
of this effect over two years is shown in Panel 8.
 11 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
One last possible explanation for the stability of longer-term interest rates amid the movement
toward  balance  sheet  normalization  has  been  the  FOMC’s  clear  message  that  it  would  be
prepared to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and composition of its balance
sheet,  if  future  economic  conditions  were  to  warrant  a  more  accommodative  monetary  policy
than can be achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate.  Panel 9 shows the average of
survey respondents’ probability distributions for the balance sheet; the left side shows this for the
scenario where overnight rates remain away from zero, and the right side shows the adverse
scenario in which they do return to zero.  The right side shows a significant expansion in the
balance sheet.  As shown in Panel 10, market participants assign about one chance in four to
such a scenario unfolding, so communications about how the FOMC might respond to such an
outcome in the future might have the effect of bolstering confidence even today.
 12 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Returning to Panel 9, it is notable how much uncertainty there is about the size of the balance
sheet, even in the no-zero-lower-bound scenario shown on the left.  This likely reflects a few
factors:  MBS  repayments  remain  uncertain  up  to  the  cap;  future  demand  for  currency,  bank
reserves, and non-reserve liabilities is hard to know precisely; and the FOMC has not yet decided
on a longer-run framework for the implementation of policy.  As a result, it seems appropriate to
me that there should be an appreciable amount of uncertainty, which should decline over time as
these matters become clearer so long as normalization continues uninterrupted. 
Conclusion
Let me conclude now by reiterating the message of confidence with which I began my remarks.  I
am confident that the FOMC’s gradual and predictable plan to normalize the balance sheet will
reduce  the  balance  sheet’s  size  at  an  appropriate  pace,  that  it  will  promote  good  market
functioning,  that  it  will  not  disrupt  the  mortgage  market  or  Treasury  debt  issuance,  and,
importantly,  that  it  will  mitigate  the  risk  of  sharp  or  outsized  asset  price  reactions.    I  am  also
confident that the Federal Reserve is well prepared, both operationally and analytically, to identify,
understand,  and  address  unforeseen  circumstances  over  normalization  as  directed  by  the
FOMC.    Finally,  by  accomplishing  all  these  things,  I  am  confident  that  the  FOMC’s  policy
normalization plan should help promote the ongoing economic expansion.
Clearly, the 2013 taper tantrum should leave any observer cautious in assessing a central bank’s
ability to normalize its balance sheet smoothly.  Those of us who work at the Federal Reserve
certainly  were.    I  believe  the  FOMC’s  plan  carefully  takes  into  account  the  range  of  potential
explanations  for  the  taper  tantrum,  in  particular  through  its  emphasis  on  gradualism  and
predictability. 
Early signs on this front are encouraging, with financial market volatility around recent balance
sheet  announcements  quite  modest  relative  to  what  we  saw  in  2013.    It’s  much  too  early  to
declare success.  However, should this stability continue, I believe the FOMC’s approach may
offer useful lessons to other central banks which anticipate reaching a time of transition in their
policy stance.  In particular, the FOMC has aimed to provide as much transparency as it can in
an effort to underscore its intent to achieve an uneventful normalization of the balance sheet.  I
believe that this level of transparency has been of great importance.
1
2
3
I would like to thank James Egelhof for his assistance in the preparation of these remarks, Adam Biesenbach
and  Romen  Mookerjee  for  their  assistance  with  data,  and  colleagues  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  for
numerous insightful comments and suggestions.
Additional information about SUERF is available on its website, www.suerf.org/.
The amortization of premiums on portfolio securities holdings results in downward pressure on the size of the
 13 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  over  time,  even  absent  a  reduction  in  reinvestments  associated  with
increasing redemption caps. Specifically, the balance sheet includes securities holdings at face value and
records unamortized premiums (discounts) as a separate asset (negative asset). As the premium (discount)
security amortizes to its par value—with an associated offsetting reduction (increase) in remittances to the U.S.
Treasury—the size of the balance sheet declines (increases).
The maturity structure of the balance sheet was only loosely incorporated into the purchase plan. Purchases of
Treasury securities were targeted at maturity sectors; within each sector, specific issues were selected for
purchase using a relative-value approach based on a spline fitted to market prices. Sack, Implementing the
Federal  Reserve’s  Asset  Purchase  Program,  February  9,  2011.  Treasury  securities  acquired  through
reinvestment  are  allocated  in  proportion  to  issuance.  Agency  MBS  purchases  are  distributed  across
instruments  roughly  in  proportion  to  anticipated  gross  issuance  of  those  securities  at  the  time.  Potter, The
Implementation of Current Asset Purchases, March 27, 2013.
Early FOMC discussions of balance sheet normalization, then referred to as “exit strategy,” were predicated on
an  intention  to  return  to,  as  put  in  the January 28, 2009 meeting transcript,  “a  more  normal  framework  for
conducting monetary policy,” which meant a return to an asset and liability structure closely resembling that
which prevailed before the financial crisis. Normalization-related matters were discussed in the minutes to most
of the FOMC’s 2009 meetings. In a January 2009 speech, The Crisis and the Policy Response,  Chairman
Bernanke provided extensive detail on the eventual normalization strategy, including his expectation that the
balance sheet would be reduced “to the extent necessary at the appropriate time.”
See Potter, Money Markets at a Crossroads: Policy Implementation at a Time of Structural Change, April 5, 2017,
for an assessment of the efficacy of these tools.
Currency in circulation has risen steadily for decades. A simple assumption is that currency outstanding will
grow  in  line  with  nominal  U.S.  gross  domestic  product.  However,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  shocks  that  could
materially  affect  currency  growth,  either  positively  or  negatively.  For  example,  with  heavy  usage  of  large-
denomination U.S. paper currency overseas, demand for dollars appears sensitive to changes in global growth
and financial and geopolitical stability. In addition, it is hard to know what implications new financial technology,
generational shifts in preferences about payment modalities, and other longer-term factors will have on currency
demand.
“The Committee currently anticipates reducing the quantity of reserve balances, over time, to a level appreciably
below that seen in recent years but larger than before the financial crisis; the level will reflect the banking
system’s demand for reserve balances and the Committee’s decisions about how to implement monetary
policy most efficiently and effectively in the future. The Committee expects to learn more about the underlying
demand  for  reserves  during  the  process  of  balance  sheet  normalization.”  See  the Addendum  to  the  Policy
Normalization Principles and Plans, June 13, 2017. Minutes to the FOMC’s November 2016 meeting summarize
the FOMC’s discussion of its long-run framework and its implications for the long-run balance sheet size.
Logan, Implementing Monetary Policy: Perspective from the Open Market Trading Desk, May 18, 2017.
See Leonard, Martin and Potter, How the Fed Changes the Size of Its Balance Sheet, July 10, 2017, for detail on
how these transactions work in practice.
Interest is not reinvested. Instead, the Federal Reserve’s net income is remitted to the Treasury.
This is done by placing noncompetitive add on bids at Treasury auctions and by buying agency MBS on the open
market.
The Policy Normalization Principles and Plans indicates that all FOMC participants but one agreed that they did
not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities as part of the normalization process, although limited
sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings, and that the timing and
pace of any sales would be communicated to the public in advance. Portfolio projections released in July 2017
do not include sales of any type over the forecast horizon.
Statement Regarding Reinvestment in Treasury Securities and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities, September
20, 2017.
See,  for  example,  Sack, The SOMA Portfolio at $2.654 Trillion,  July  20,  2011,  and  Bernanke, The  Economic
Outlook and Monetary Policy, August 27, 2010.
 14 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
See Bonis, Ihrig and Wei, Projected Evolution of the SOMA Portfolio and the 10-year Treasury Term Premium
Effect, September 27, 2017.
Kandrac, The Costs of Quantitative Easing: Liquidity and Market Functioning Effects of Federal Reserve MBS
Purchases (2014).
The Treasury Borrowing Advisory Council considered this topic in its third-quarter 2017 meeting, including the
potential impact of changes in central bank policy abroad. See the August 1, 2017, presentation by TBAC to the
U.S. Treasury.
In addition to these topics, we are following closely the potential for the decline in the balance sheet to affect
other aspects of the structure of financial markets or the banking industry. As one example, we are paying
attention to the possibility that a decline in the size of the balance sheet puts downward pressure on bank
deposits. As discussed earlier, in general, balance sheet normalization removes an asset from the private
sector that can be held only by banks (reserves) and replaces it with an asset that can be held by anyone
(securities). It is possible that, on net in equilibrium relative to a counterfactual in which the balance sheet does
not decline, (a) banks will hold fewer reserves; (b) banks will offset some of this decline by holding securities
instead, and some by taking in fewer deposits; and (c) non-banks will replace those deposits with securities.
The extent (if any) of any such decline in deposit activity on deposit and loan pricing will likely depend on a variety
of factors, including the extent to which the decline comes from wholesale institutional deposit activity motivated
by interest rate arbitrage. See Ihrig, Mize, and Weinbach, How does the Fed adjust its Securities Holdings and
Who is Affected?, September 22, 2017.
In fact, following the June 2013 FOMC meeting, the dealer survey revealed a shift in expectations toward a more
accommodative balance sheet stance over time. Prior to that meeting, most survey respondents had seen
significant odds that the FOMC would eventually use sales of agency MBS as part of its normalization strategy.
During the post-meeting press conference, Chairman Bernanke stated “While participants continue to think that,
in the long run, the Federal Reserve’s portfolio should consist predominantly of Treasury securities, a strong
majority now expects that the Committee will not sell agency mortgage-backed securities during the process of
normalizing monetary policy, although in the longer run, limited sales could be used to reduce or eliminate
residual MBS holdings.” Surveys conducted after this meeting revealed no expectation for agency MBS sales,
and for the portfolio to be larger over time as a result.
“What explained markets’ strong reaction – and why did it surprise us? In retrospect, I think our view of market
expectations was too dependent on our survey of securities dealers. Futures markets gave us a reliable read of
where  markets  thought  the  federal  funds  rate  was  going  –  but  not  for  our  securities  purchases.  For  that,
economists at the New York Fed asked their counterparts at the securities firms, who paid careful attention to
every  nuance  of  Fed  policymakers’  public  statements.  In  effect,  our  Ph.D.  economists  surveyed  their  Ph.D.
economists. It was a little like looking in a mirror. It didn’t tell us what the rank-and-file traders were thinking.
Many traders, apparently, didn’t pay much attention to their economists…”
These figures include results from the Desk’s September Surveys of Primary Dealers and Market Participants.
The results from these surveys will be released tomorrow on the New York Fed’s website.
In his book, Bernanke describes it as follows: after the June FOMC meeting, investors’ “conclusion, despite the
plain meaning of what I had said at the press conference, was that we were signaling an earlier increase in our
federal funds rate target. They sold their Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities, driving up longer-
term interest rates.”
Stein, Yield-Oriented Investors and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism, September 26, 2013.
This description is drawn from Soros, Fallibility, Reflexivity, and the Human Uncertainty Principle, Journal  of
Economic Methodology, January 2014.
 15 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
