François Villeroy de Galhau: Insurance and pensions – institutional
innovation, economic innovation, technological innovation
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the7th  annual
EIOPA Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 22 November 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  in  Frankfurt  today  for  this  7th Annual  EIOPA  Conference  and  I  wish  to
warmly thank EIOPA’s Chairman Gabriel Bernardino for his kind invitation. I must say that
I feel at home, since we are not far away from the ECB building where I take part in the meetings
of  the  Governing  Council  at  least  every  two  weeks.  But  today  I  will  speak  in  my  capacity  as
President  of  the  French  supervisory  authority,  the Autorité  de  Contrôle  Prudentiel  et  de
Résolution (ACPR), which belongs to the board of supervisors of EIOPA, and which is in charge
of  the  supervision  of  both  insurance  companies  and  banks  in  France.  This  is  an  important
responsibility as the French insurance market is the second largest in the European Union, just
behind the United Kingdom, with an aggregated balance sheet of approximately EUR 2,600 bn.
Given that I am speaking before the panel dedicated to innovation, I will take this opportunity to
focus  on  three  kinds  of  innovation,  which  in  my  view  can  lead  us  to  rethink  insurance  and
pensions: institutional innovation, economic innovation and technological innovation.
1. Institutional innovation
Let me start with institutional innovation. On this issue, I would like first of all to pay tribute to
EIOPA which has done remarkable work to promote sound and consistent European regulation
and  harmonised  supervisory  practices  within  the  European  Union,  since  it  was  established  in
January 2011. The creation of EIOPA, following the Larosière report, reflected the need to move
towards  more  integrated  European  supervision  following  the  2007–08  financial  crisis,  and  I
believe that it has been a success. In a context of increasing financial market integration, EIOPA
has  contributed  to  ensuring  a  true  level  playing  field  for  all  actors  in  the  insurance  and
occupational  pensions  sector  at  the  EU  level,  in  coordination  with  national  authorities  and  the
other European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs). This well-balanced supervisory framework helps
us deal with the “institutional” innovation – this is my first point – that we are starting to see as a
consequence of the Brexit vote. Some British entities are indeed considering the possibility of
simply setting up empty shell corporations in the European Union, mere company nameplates,
while keeping their resources in the United Kingdom. I fully agree with EIOPA that vigilance is
called for in this respect. Moreover, Brexit brings with it certain risks, and consequently the need
for  contingency  plans.  I  am  thinking  in  particular  of  the  European  policyholders  who  took  out
insurance directly with British undertakings and who should continue to benefit from the same
protection.  EIOPA,  in  liaison  with  the  British  authority,  has  rightly  made  British  insurance
undertakings aware of the necessity to draw up plans to deal with Brexit, irrespective of the fact
that negotiations are still underway. This is particularly important to ensure that Brexit takes place
as smoothly as possible, with limited effects for policyholders.  
For the future however, it is worth considering the need to adjust the European institutional
framework, so that it remains as efficient as possible. The review of the ESAs should prompt us
to strengthen EIOPA missions. There are two areas in particular where enhanced convergence
is needed, so that all European consumers are protected wherever the insurer is located in the
European  Union:  construction  and  medical  liability  insurance.  EIOPA  has  already  launched
cooperation platforms in order to facilitate information exchanges regarding construction liability
insurance.  We  are  strongly  in  favour  of  pursuing  these  initiatives  and  adopting  measures  to
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
harmonise supervisory practices in this regard. At the same time we should maintain a clear
distinction  between  the  day-to-day  supervision  entrusted  to  National  Competent  Authorities
(NCA) and the regulatory harmonisation role that has to be played by EIOPA. In line with this
principle,  the  validation  of  internal  models,  for  instance,  should  preferably  remain  the
responsibility of the NCA in order to reflect the close link between this decision and the on-going
dialogue that takes place between the insurer and its national supervisor; EIOPA for its part could
concentrate  more  efficiently  on  the  essential  task  of  enhancing  the  harmonisation  between
national practices.
In  addition  to  these  desirable  adjustments  of  the  European  institutional  framework,  there  is  a
need  to  make  concrete  progress  towards a European resolution mechanism,  which  would
provide  more  adequate  tools  to  limit  the  impact  of  an  insurer  failure  and  increase  trust  and
confidence. France has been working along these lines at national level and such a mechanism
will  be  in  place  in  our  country  before  December.   The  French  resolution  insurance  regime
requires insurers of a certain size to set up preventive recovery plans, which will form the basis
for preventive resolution plans. Moreover, the ACPR is entrusted with several powers to be used
in  a  resolution  context,  such  as  the  possibility  of  appointing  a  resolution  administrator  in  the
insurance  undertaking,  limiting  the  distribution  of  dividends,  or  organising  portfolio  transfers  to
another insurer.
2. Economic innovation
1
Let me now turn to my second point: economic innovation. As Europe’s economy is close to the
“technological frontier”, businesses need to innovate more. As such, they need to be able to take
more risks, which requires more equity financing, over the long term, rather than debt financing.
In this regard, the euro area is seriously lagging behind: equity capital amounted to only 68% of
GDP at end-2016, compared with 128% in the United States. And yet, resources are abundant:
the excess of savings relative to investment is around EUR 350 billion per year, which is more
than 3% of GDP. It is therefore crucial for the euro area’s economy to better steer these savings
towards productive investment across borders, notably by shoring up equity which is the key to
an innovation economy. Start ups are well aware of this, but our European scale-ups, midcaps
and SMEs also need greater access to equity leverage. The insurance sector has a key role to
play  since  it  is  the  largest  institutional  investor  in  the  euro  area,  with  total  assets  of  close  to
EUR 7,800 billion in the second quarter of 2017.
In practice, what is the way forward? A large part of the solution lies at the European level. The
efforts so far are going in the right direction, but work should now be accelerated with what I call
a  “Financing  Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation”.  This  Financing  Union  is  the
microeconomic  accelerator  that  we  need  to  make  concrete  progress  towards  a  genuine
Economic Union in the euro area. The building blocks for such a Financing Union for Investment
and  Innovation  already  exist:  the  Capital  Markets  Union,  which  promotes  the  diversification  of
private financing; (ii) the Juncker Investment Plan, which channels a mix of public and private
investment towards the real economy; and (iii) the Banking Union, which addresses persistent
financial  fragmentation.  These  initiatives,  however,  lack  the  unified  governance  of  a  Financing
Union, which would help circumvent bureaucratic barriers and foster synergies. In addition, for
this  Financing  Union  to  be  effective,  progress  is  still  needed  in  four  key  areas:  first,  providing
incentives  for  cross-border  investments,  mainly  in  equity,  through  accounting,  taxes  and
insolvency laws; second, developing pan-European long-term saving products and investment
vehicles like European venture capital funds – I will focus on this area of progress which is of
particular  interest  to  the  insurance  sector;    third,  completing  the  Banking  Union;  and  fourth,
controlling  financial  activities  and  risks  that  are  of  vital  importance  for  the  euro  area,  such  as
supersystemic CCPs.
In this context, insurers have an essential role to play by taking the lead on new forms of life
insurance that are compatible with the low interest rate environment, with the euro area’s need
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
for equity financing and with the expectations of euro area households – old age provision is now
the second most important motive for saving. This means insurers should pursue reflections to
develop new long-term pan-European savings products. These products should offer, over time,
the higher returns provided by equity, and they can be less liquid, while also featuring a form of
capital protection. However it remains crucial that product innovation continues to be carried out
carefully, without undermining the protection of policyholders. In this respect, specific attention
should be paid to the pan-European personal pension product (PEPP). The PEPP is an avenue
to develop pan-European products and responds to the need for insurers to break away from the
dual  capital-liquidity  guarantee.  Yet  it  also  raises  several  concerns:  information  on  the  risks
incurred  under  the  different  types  of  guarantee  may  not  be  clear  enough  to  consumers;  in
addition,  the  guarantee  may  ultimately  depend  on  the  financial  company  that  is  offering  the
PEPP, as there is a difference for instance between insurance companies abiding by Solvency II
and asset managers, which have lower capital requirements.
This brings me to the issue of regulation. Here too, insurers have to play their part, by actively
contributing to the review of the Solvency II Directive’s new regulatory framework. In many
respects, Solvency II represents a very significant step forward for the insurance sector. But this
does not mean that it’s perfect: we must analyse its impacts closely, particularly its effects on
investment behaviour and the financing of the economy, in order to propose the adjustments that
prove necessary. Progress has already been made on the financing of infrastructure projects
and businesses, thanks to two amendments that came into effect in April 2016 and September
2017, respectively, which adapted the calibration of capital requirements. More generally though,
the  reviews  of  the  standard  formula  and  long-term  guarantee  package  measures  planned  for
2018 and 2020 respectively, are important opportunities to make essential improvements. The
work is already underway and I welcome the proposal published by EIOPA early in November to
reduce the capital requirement for unrated debts and unlisted equities under certain conditions.
The Commission specifically requested that it look at those unlisted or unrated investments. But
we  may  want  to  look  more  widely  and  encompass  other  types  of  long-term  investments  with
innovative proposals for amending Solvency II, with the aim of striking the right balance between
effective supervision and the financing of the real economy. It is now up to the industry to seize
this opportunity to share its views and experience: tomorrow’s regulation should benefit from your
ideas.  Looking  at  the  overall  picture  of  solvency  calculation,  the  correlation  between  assets
classes,  for  example,  to  fully  recognise  the  benefits  of  the  diversification  of  long-term
investments, could be an innovative way forward.
3. Technological innovation
Let me now elaborate on my third and last point: technological innovation. The digital revolution is
creating many opportunities for both financial players and consumers, including an increasing
number  of  more  accessible  financial  services,  and  more  complete  customer  satisfaction.  In
France, the ACPR is mobilised to support innovation, as demonstrated by the creation of the
Fintech Innovation Unit and the Fintech Forum with the French financial markets authority. Within
this Fintech Forum, we work closely with other public authorities to promote the development of
Fintechs  and  Insurtechs  in  France.  A  year  ago,  the  ACPR  authorised  the  first  fully  digital
insurance company in the health sector, the Insurtech “Alan”.  
In  the  case  of  insurers,  the  digital  revolution  starts  with  a  complete  overhaul  of  customer
relationships and user habits. But it goes further than that. In the digital revolution, the insurance
sector  can  bring  stability  and  protection  –  it  is  this  that  has  always  been  the  raison  d’être  of
insurance. I’d like to underline two topics that I think are essential: cyber-insurance and big data.
Coverage against cyber-risk,  first,  is  a  very  real  concern  that  affects  all  companies  –  both
small  and  large  –  as  cyber-attacks  are  becoming  increasingly  frequent  and  costly:  in  2016,
cyber-attacks were estimated to cost businesses about USD 450 billion a year at the global level,
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
according to a report by Lloyd’s and Cyence. Despite these threats, the cyber-insurance market
is still underdeveloped. Insurers can and should take inspiration from their own experiences in
tackling cyber-risk, and use it to develop a more mature European cyber-insurance offering.
The second subject I’d like to focus on is personal data and big data. Naturally, the spread of
connected  objects  that  is  triggering  an  exponential  rise  in  the  amount  of  data  available  on
insurance policyholders represents an opportunity for the business of insurance, which consists
precisely in collecting and exploiting data in order to quantify and put a price on risk. Nonetheless,
insurers  should  take  a  responsible  approach:  we  need  to  strike  the  right  balance  between
segmentation and the sharing of risk between policyholders. The basic principles of solidarity and
risk-pooling  that  are  intrinsic  to  insurance  are  at  stake.  And  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  our
collective values regarding individuals’ right to privacy.
To conclude, I wish to stress that all these innovations require some creativity, on the part of both
supervisors  and  insurers.  John  Maynard  Keynes,  who  profoundly  renewed  economic  thinking,
was well aware of this need to think “out of the box”. He wrote in the preface of The General
Theory: “The difficulty lies, not in the new ideas, but in escaping from the old ones, which ramify,
for those brought up as most of us have been, into every corner of our minds.”  Let’s have the
courage to think differently. In this respect, as insurers, it’s up to you to shape the insurance of
the future and, as I said, a lot has to be done. As supervisors, we  also  have  to  demonstrate
enough  flexibility  so  as  to  foster  your  innovations,  while  ensuring  that  the  key  principles  that  I
mentioned earlier are respected. I am very happy that this very issue will be developed in the next
panel discussion this afternoon. I wish you a fruitful reflection. Thank you for your attention.
2
1
2
“Loi Sapin”, 9 December 2016; definitive framework adopted before December 2017 via “ordonnances”
J.M. Keynes (1935), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
