Jens Weidmann: Monetary union – ever a work in progress? The
euro area torn between the Maastricht framework and fiscal union
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 21st RWI (Leibniz-Institut für
Wirtschaftsforschung) Economic Discussion, Essen, 29 November 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Many a joker in his time has answered the question “How do I get to the philharmonic hall?” with
the punch line “Practice, practice, practice."
As my musical talent would certainly never have got me onto this stage, I am all the more grateful
to you, Mr Schmidt, for the opportunity to talk here today about current monetary policy and the
architecture of monetary union.
I  will  be  discussing  what  needs  to  be  done  to  make  monetary  union  stable,  and  what  role
monetary policy plays in this endeavour.
2. Congratulations to Wim Kösters
But  first  of  all,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  Professor  Wim  Kösters,  who  is  retiring
today. It is a special honour to pay tribute to his long and successful career as an academic, an
academic manager and a supporter of young talent.
Mr  Kösters,  you  have  been  a  member  of  the  RWI’s  Board  of  Directors  since  2003  in  your
function  as  an  academic  manager.  It  is  partly  down  to  you,  then,  that  the  RWI  ranks  among
Germany’s  foremost  economic  research  and  policy  consulting  institutions.  The  Leibniz
Association shared this view in its 2012 evaluation, hailing the work of five out of the RWI’s six
research areas ratings as “good” to “excellent".
First-rate  research  and  problem-driven  policy  consulting  calls  for  well-trained  and  motivated
employees who are the brains and soul of any institution. But as we all know, that kind of talent
doesn’t  just  spring  up  like  mushrooms.  Hence  the  particular  importance  of  nurturing  up-and-
coming talent – at the RWI, at the Bundesbank and at the many other enterprises and institutions
across Germany.
Bearing that in mind, Mr Kösters, it is greatly to your credit that you have done so much for so
many years to foster gifted students and doctorate candidates. You have been a member of the
board of the Cusanuswerk scholarship body’s gifted education foundation since 2008, as well as
its  chairman  since  2011.  Incidentally,  there  used  to  be  long-standing  ties  between  the
Cusanuswerk and the Bundesbank – you took over as chairman back then from Hans Tietmeyer,
the  former  president  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank.  I’ve  had  the  numbers  checked:  since  you
became a member of the foundation’s board, more than 3,000 students have been sponsored.
And  at  the  RWI,  too,  you  helped  to  create  an  environment  in  which  the  next  generation  of
academics can reach their full potential. The great many RWI employees who submit their PhD
thesis each year attest to your achievements.
And let’s not forget the many academics trained personally by you, Mr Kösters, in your chair,
among them Professor Ansgar Belke, who will be taking part in the subsequent panel discussion.
That  panel  discussion  will  be  discussing  a  topic  to  which  you  have  devoted  yourself  as  an
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
academic since the 1990s, and one which is close to my own heart: the prerequisites for making
monetary union a union of stability.
3. European integration
Ladies and gentlemen, even though today’s event is essentially a gathering of economists, there
is one point which must not be forgotten when discussing monetary union: namely that the euro
was also a political project from the outset. As early as 1949, the French economist Jacques
Rueff  declared  that  money  would  pave  the  way  to  European  integration.  In  his  own  words:
“Europe will either be built on money or it won’t be built at all."
The unification of Europe after the Second World War was a political vision intended to bring
lasting  peace  and  stability  to  the  continent.  To  put  it  in  the  words  of  Jean  Monnet,  the  great
European and winner of the Charlemagne Prize, and whose name your chair, Mr Köster, also
bears: “By creating Europe, the Europeans are building a true foundation for peace."
Yet  it  was  the  integration  of  Europe’s  economies  that  was  a  major  catalyst  for  European
unification. And this in itself has produced remarkable results. Economic integration – in other
words, the elimination of trade barriers and the harmonisation of regulations – boosts prosperity.
Free trade enables each of us to specialise in what we’re best at. Economies of scale can be
harnessed  more  readily.  Plus  a  bigger  market  results  in  greater  competition. And  this  in  turn
fosters innovative power and productivity.
It is, of course, impossible to say exactly how the economy would have fared in the absence of
European  unification.  The  impact  of  the  single  market  on  the  prosperity  of  European  states,
however, has been considerable. It is estimated that European economic integration has boosted
annual economic output by between 5 and 25 per cent.      That’s a handsome 1,450 to 7,250
euro per capita.
1 2 3
There is no question that economic and monetary union was the boldest step towards deeper
economic  integration. And  at  the  same  time,  it  was  a  twin  promise:  of  price  stability,  and  of
stronger long-term economic growth.
There is a broad consensus that EMU has so far succeeded in delivering on the first of those
promises. I dare say that significantly fewer people would claim that it has done likewise on the
second.
For one thing, mounting economic competition across borders has been driving change, just like
technological  progress  has,  and  many  people  are  afraid  of  this.  If  the  benefits  not  just  of
economic integration but of innovation as well are to be felt by the greatest number of people, the
framework conditions also need to be right. Flexible economic structures and a good education
system,  say,  are  prerequisites  for  sustainable  growth  and  for  ensuring  that  many  people  can
share in the opportunities offered by technological progress and international trade, for example.
For another thing, though, the financial and sovereign debt crisis shook the euro area to its core.
Taxpayers were forced to step in for billions upon billions of euro in bank losses. Joblessness in
some member states rocketed to levels hitherto unseen in the post-war era. To all intents and
purposes,  European  and  global  institutions  became  the  ancillary  government  in  individual
countries. And many saw the rescue packages as the first step on the road towards a transfer
union – something which had been categorically ruled out prior to the launch of monetary union.
Many  perceived  the  problems  instigated  by  the  crisis  to  be  huge.  Some  even  thought  them
irresolvable. Indeed, a number of commentators, particularly on the other side of the Atlantic, but
elsewhere, too, predicted that the euro would come crashing down.
That didn’t happen – and it would have been a disaster if it had. At the same time, let’s be honest
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
– the future might also hold regional or sectoral crises in store which put the euro area to the
test. The upbeat economic situation right now shouldn’t blind us to the fact that it is one outcome
of a very accommodative monetary policy.
The low-interest-rate environment, then, is contributing to an air of deceptive calm which might
tempt economic and fiscal policy decision-makers to sit back and do nothing. But if a crisis does
materialise, the European house we live in today will need to be sufficiently strong to withstand
these headwinds. There is still much to do, if we are to make that a reality.
4. Ensuring the long-term stability of monetary union
One defining characteristic of European monetary union is that, while it has a common monetary
policy, it also encompasses 19 largely independent national fiscal and economic policies. This,
incidentally, is what makes European monetary union unlike other federal currency areas, such
as the United States or Switzerland.
This  particular  composition  does  not  only  make  European  monetary  union  unique,  it  also
potentially makes it vulnerable. As the crisis made clear, the euro area as a whole ultimately had
no option but to cushion unsound developments in individual member states in order to prevent
the stability of the entire monetary union from being jeopardised.
The  underlying  context  is  that,  if  you  are  not  careful,  membership  in  a  monetary  union
undermines  the  incentive  to  exercise  fiscal  prudence.  This  is  because  the  consequences  of
excessive debt in one member state can, to an extent, be passed on to the rest of the group.
Mr  Kösters,  you  were  not  alone  in  flagging  this  incentive  to  run  up  debt  inherent  to  monetary
union early on.  When a country in a monetary union takes on debt, the interest rate does not
rise quite as sharply as it would have if that country had its own currency. Instead, however, the
interest rates in all of the other member states rise slightly.
4
Economic theory calls this phenomenon the “common pool problem", and overfishing is often
used as an example to explain it. A single fisherman who catches too many fish leaves fewer
behind  for  others  and  ultimately  jeopardises  the  long-term  sustainability  of  fish  stocks.
Overfishing, then, is detrimental to the fishing community. But, for an individual fisherman, it is
highly desirable to net as many fish as possible and not consider the interests of other or future
generations of fishermen.
This is arguably one reason why historian and winner of the 2017 Charlemagne Prize Timothy
Garton Ash described the story of monetary union so far as a “crisis foretold".
Yet  that  remark  is  not  really  entirely  fair  to  the  founding  fathers  of  monetary  union,  who  most
certainly  did  have  their  eye  on  the  particular  incentive  to  run  up  debt.  Their  idea  was  that  a
combination of market discipline and fiscal rules would keep budgetary policymaking on a sound
basis. 
As you know, the Maastricht Treaty contains a no-bailout clause prohibiting member states from
assuming each other’s debts. The treaty also bans monetary financing of government debt by
the Eurosystem. Together, these safeguards aim to ensure that investors themselves – and not
other parties such as the taxpayer – bear the risks of investing in government bonds.
In addition, the Stability and Growth Pact includes rules to restrict government debt and budget
deficits. These aimed not only to ensure that public finances remain on a sustainable path, but
also to create the buffers needed to allow budgets to fluctuate over the economic cycle and to
enable member states to take countermeasures during economic crises without being forced to
call for external aid to fend off looming overindebtedness.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
These  rules  form  the  principle  of  national  fiscal  responsibility.  This  is  the  foundation  of  the
Maastricht framework.
Walter  Eucken,  a  founder  of  the  Freiburg  school  and  pioneer  of  the  social  market  economy,
summed up this liability principle as follows: “Whoever reaps the benefits must also bear the
liability."
And  what  goes  for  the  economy  goes  for  countries  as  well:  decisions  will  only  ever  be  taken
responsibly if those who decide also bear responsibility for the consequences of their actions.
Thus, the Maastricht Treaty largely assigned the power to act and liability in matters of economic
and fiscal policy to the member states.
And yet, government debt in some euro area countries has risen significantly. One reason for
this is the repeated breaches of the budgetary rules – even by Germany, incidentally, at the very
beginning of monetary union. Capital markets, contrary to initial expectations, also did not punish
these  infractions  by  imposing  higher  risk  premiums.  The  no-bailout  clause,  it  seemed,  lacked
credibility.
But  another  reason  for  the  ballooning  debt  levels  was  undoubtedly  the  financial  crisis,  which
forced  euro  area  countries  to  shore  up  their  banking  systems.  This  was  another  reason  why
doubts  emerged  over  the  sustainability  of  some  member  states’  debt  in  the  subsequent
sovereign  debt  crisis.  Rescue  measures  were  swiftly  rolled  out  to  prevent  the  crisis  from
escalating.
This episode showed that it might be wise for the euro area, too, to have a lender of last resort to
support countries facing exceptional circumstances in order to limit the negative fallout for the
currency area as a whole.
Hence  the  establishment  of  a  permanent  safety  net  in  the  form  of  the  European  Stability
Mechanism  (ESM).  Its  financial  assistance  allows  distressed  sovereigns  to  bridge  temporary
liquidity  bottlenecks  and  put  government  finances  back  on  a  sustainable  footing.  This  is  why
countries are required to commit to reforms so that they can put their finances back in order as
soon as possible.
However,  not  even  the  financial  assistance  programmes  have  made  monetary  union  crisis-
resistant  for  good.  For  all  their  benefits,  they  added  further  elements  of  mutual  liability  and
softened the principle of independent accountability. At the same time, economic and fiscal policy
remained a national matter. The balance between actions and liability for their consequences,
then, had got out of kilter.
The euro area will only ever be made crisis-proof once and for all if the balance between action
and liability is restored. There are two ways in which this can be achieved. Either through deeper
integration,  ie  a  situation  in  which  every  member  state  surrenders  decision-making  powers  in
fiscal  and  economic  policy  matters  to  the  European  level,  or  by  returning  to  an  overhauled
Maastricht  framework.  In  the  latter  case,  euro  area  countries  would  once  again  bear  greater
liability for their own decisions.
The first solution is the road to fiscal union with centralised decision-making powers. Admittedly,
fiscal union would not guarantee fiscal prudence, and permanent guide rails would need to be
added as a matter of stability policy, though it could curb the aforementioned propensity to run
deficits.
This is why it was obvious to many economists, even before monetary union was launched, that,
in  the  long  term,  monetary  union  must  go  hand  in  hand  with  political  union.  One  of  those
economists was you, Mr Kösters. In 1994, you wrote: “It should first of all be clear that in the long
 4 / 9
5
BIS central bankers' speeches
run the EMU can only exist if accompanied by a European Political Union."  German Chancellor
Helmut Kohl held a similar view. Addressing the Bundestag in November 1991, he remarked that
“the  idea  of  sustaining  economic  and  monetary  union  over  time  without  political  union  is  a
fallacy".
5
True political union proved unfeasible back then, however. It seems to me that not much has
changed  in  this  regard,  not  least  because  the  necessary  transfer  of  sovereign  rights  would
require comprehensive changes to the EU Treaty and national constitutions.
That would suggest that option number two currently stands a more realistic chance of restoring
the  balance  between  actions  and  liability.  It  essentially  means  bolstering  the  principle  of
independent national responsibility. Only when public finances are put on a sound footing and
countries  stop  drifting  apart  economically  will  the  Eurosystem  ultimately  be  relieved  of  the
pressure to constantly intervene as a firefighter. And only then will the financial markets do their
job of taking adequate account of risks in their lending activities.
But what would have to change for monetary union’s regulatory framework to function better than
it has done in the past?
To paraphrase Johann Wolfgang von Goethe: “Easier said than done.” Goethe was not just a
poet, but also finance minister for the Duchy of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach. Whether or not this bon
mot summed up his experiences in fiscal policy is unclear, however.
In any case, his remark holds true for the fiscal rules in the euro area: established with the best
intentions, but rarely adhered to consistently. The European Union’s budgetary and debt rules
have been reformed over and over again. But that did not make them any stricter, to put it mildly. I
have already mentioned that not even Germany set a shining example in the early days.
The latest reform of the Stability and Growth Pact originally set out to strengthen the binding force
of  the  rules  on  debt. As  it  turned  out,  that  reform  created  considerable  discretionary  scope,
mainly  for  the  European  Commission.  We  also  drew  attention  to  this  in  our  June  Monthly
Report.  The Commission has already exploited this leeway on several occasions and invariably
interpreted the rules very liberally in doing so.
6
The Commission’s dual role as the guardian of the EU Treaty on the one hand and as a political
institution on the other is undoubtedly a factor in the repeated compromises made at the expense
of budgetary discipline. After all, as a political institution, the Commission must always strive to
strike a balance between the various political interests of the member states. The outcome is
that individual euro area  countries  have  breached  the  budgetary  rules  ever  since  the  financial
crisis erupted.
Austrian  comic  Werner  Schneyder  once  accurately  characterised  the  situation  as  follows:
Europe, he quipped, is made up of countries that do not want to be told to do what they have
decided to do themselves.
4.1 Reinforce the binding effect of fiscal rules
What  is  needed  to  reinforce  the  binding  effect  of  the  fiscal  rules  is  a  straightforward  and
transparent  design  and  implementation  of  the  rules.  An  independent  institution  taking  over
responsibility for fiscal surveillance from the Commission would be a key step towards a less
political  approach.  That  would  be  a  clear  marker  where  unbiased  analysis  ends  and  political
concessions begin. That is why one of the Bundesbank’s suggestions is to strengthen the role of
the ESM in matters of fiscal surveillance.
One  thing  does  seem  obvious  to  me,  however.  If  member  states  retain  fiscal  autonomy,  the
sustainability of public finances cannot be safeguarded by rules alone.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is why it is not just the binding force of the rules that we need to strengthen; we also need
the disciplining effect of the market, just as the founding fathers had envisaged of the monetary
union. In other words, interest rate levels have to be aligned more strongly again with the risks in
government budgets.
That can only be achieved, however, if the credibility of the no-bail-out clause in the Maastricht
Treaty is restored. Investors need to be under no illusion that they risk losing their money if they
buy bonds from governments that have unsound public finances.
This  is  another  reason  why  I  take  a  critical  stance  of  the  Eurosystem’s  government  bond
purchases, because they weaken the market mechanism which prices sovereign solvency risk.
This ends up blurring the boundaries between monetary policy and fiscal policy. And yet a clear
division  of  responsibilities  is  vital  for  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  if
Eurosystem central banks are not to wind up dancing to the tune of fiscal policymakers. This is
why I called for a quick end to government bond purchases at the end of October.
4.2 Automatic ESM maturity extension
And this is also why one of the proposals put forward by the Bundesbank envisages changing the
contractual terms for government bonds in the euro area. In future, the maturities of a country’s
bonds  ought  to  be  automatically  extended  as  soon  as  the  country  applies  for  financial
assistance.
Under the existing procedure, remember, a large part of the assistance loans go towards paying
off  legacy  creditors.  This  lets  those  legacy  creditors,  such  as  banks,  off  the  hook  –  at  the
expense of taxpayers. Extending maturities, on the other hand, would leave them on the hook,
and they could be still held liable if debt is restructured down the line. In an emergency, it can be
very  difficult  to  tell  for  certain  whether  a  debtor  is  temporarily  illiquid  or  actually  insolvent. An
automatic extension of maturities, however, would grant the ESM far more time to give careful
consideration to the question of debt sustainability – and without releasing legacy creditors from
liability during this period.
A  maturity  extension  would  have  the  added  advantage  of  substantially  reducing  the  need  for
financial aid under an ESM programme. This would also broaden the reach of the existing rescue
mechanism. Had we already been able to automatically extend maturities by three years back in
2011, say, Portugal would have only needed around €43 billion by 2014 instead of the total of €76
billion it received in financial assistance.
I am also convinced that when it comes to resolving future crises in the euro area, the IMF will
arguably play a far less prominent role and could, at most, be involved in an advisory capacity.
So this increased clout would certainly be helpful.
Incidentally, the ESM stands for a substantial form of fiscal solidarity. ESM chief Klaus Regling
has said that an ESM loan costs two-thirds less than an IMF loan because the ESM – unlike the
IMF – does not charge a risk mark-up for its loans. In the case of Greece, for instance, the saving
comes to 5.6% p.a. of its GDP.
This  is  an  major  transfer  to  governments  in  need  of  assistance.  But  they  are  not  permanent
transfers and they are tied to strict conditionality in order to eliminate as much moral hazard as
possible. Permanent direct transfers are not necessary in a functioning currency area, as the
United States demonstrates. Quite the opposite, in fact: dividing agents into transfer providers
and  transfer  recipients  risks  undermining  public  acceptance  of  monetary  union  in  individual
member countries.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  proposed  automatic  extension  of  maturities  will  only  boost  the
disciplinary role of capital markets if restructuring sovereign debt really is a realistic option. But
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
that will only ever be the case if the financial system really can absorb a haircut, because if a
haircut brought the financial system to its knees, the community of states would still have an
incentive to bail out private creditors.
Politicians and supervisory authorities in the euro area have, on more than one occasion, faced
the following paradoxical situation: a haircut for overindebted countries drags down the banking
system  with  it.  But  if  banks  carrying  government  bonds  at  risk  of  default  on  their  books  are
resolved, the necessary rescue measures will plunge the country into financial distress once and
for all.
This  reminds  me  a  little  of  the  novel  Catch-22  by  Joseph  Heller,  in  which  a  “catch-22”  is  an
intolerable  situation  where  every  apparent  alternative  only  draws  the  protagonists  ever  closer
towards their fate. In Heller’s novel, it’s the contradictory rules that put the American soldiers into
an absurd situation.
In the euro area, it was primarily the lack of rules regarding this dilemma that was pivotal: there
was no rule which stated that, if the worst comes to the worst, it was mainly up to the investors
and creditors to shoulder banks’ losses, and not taxpayers.
This is also precisely what makes the new European regime for bank resolution, and its rigorous
application, so very important. Because these are the rules which stipulate that if a bank needs to
be wound up, investors and creditors will be first in line to bear the ensuing losses. Only after that
does a resolution fund financed by banks step in.
Add  to  that  the  close-knit  sovereign-bank  nexus  in  the  euro  area,  as  evidenced  by  the  huge
stocks  of  government  bonds  which  banks  hold  on  their  balance  sheets.  This  is  why  it  is  not
enough to just focus on bank resolution.
4.3 Abolish preferential treatment of sovereign bonds
It would be enough to curb banks’ appetite for government bonds to force them to treat sovereign
exposures on their books in exactly the same way as private ones.
Because,  unlike  in  the  case  of  corporate  bonds,  banks  are  not  required  to  back  government
bonds  denominated  in  domestic  currency  with  capital,  nor  do  they  have  to  comply  with  any
ceilings or caps. This is the case irrespective of the issuing sovereign’s credit rating quality – and
even  though  the  euro  area  debt  crisis  made  it  quite  plain  that  government  bonds  are  by  no
means risk-free.
Only when banks hold sufficient capital against government bonds and limits are placed on the
size of individual exposures will banks be able to cushion a restructuring of sovereign debt. And
only then will there probably be the political will needed to take this step.
The Bundesbank has put the topic of abolishing the preferential treatment of government bonds
on the agendas of international committees. But the talks, particularly on the Basel Committee on
Banking  Supervision,  are  not  straightforward.  That’s  why  it’s  now  vital  that  we  give  the  issue
greater prominence on the European committees and make headway there.
Ladies and gentlemen, toughening the fiscal rules, abolishing the preferential treatment afforded
to  government  bonds,  and  automatically  extending  the  maturity  of  sovereign  debt  are  three
important reforms. They can play a part in putting monetary union on a sound long-term footing.
These proposals put the shine back on the principle of individual fiscal responsibility – which is
the key feature of the Maastricht framework.
At  the  end  of  the  day,  any  proposals  on  the  future  direction  of  monetary  union  need  to  be
assessed  according  to  how  they  impact  on  the  necessary  alignment  between  actions  and
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
liability.
In a recent speech which garnered a great deal of attention, French President Emmanuel Macron
put  forward  his  vision  for  advancing  the  European  project,  suggesting  that  more  policy  areas
could be communitised – that is, transferred to Brussels and thus funded jointly.
Such proposals are no substitute for strengthening individual national responsibility in the euro
area.  Nor,  by  the  same  token,  do  they  have  to  be  at  odds  with  the  principle  of  individual
responsibility.  Indeed,  it  is  quite  possible  that  issues  like  preventing  climate  change,  securing
external borders and developing common communications, energy and transport networks can
be handled more efficiently at the European rather than national level.
5. Monetary policy
Ladies and gentlemen
One  policy  area  that  we  all  know  has  long  been  dealt  with  collectively  at  a  euro  area  level  is
monetary policy. And, as far as monetary policy is concerned, I can kick off the last part of my
speech with some good news. The euro area is experiencing an ever more robust economic
upturn which has continued unabated over 17 quarters and spread to all euro area countries.
And this trend looks set to continue for a while yet. In September the ECB’s economists raised
their  forecasts  for  2017  economic  growth  to  2.2%. And  they  are  anticipating  growth  rates  of
around 2% for the next two years as well.
An updated forecast will be released in two weeks’ time, as is customary in December, and that
will be based on detailed country projections. At the moment, there is good reason to believe that
the economic outlook will be just as upbeat then, if not even better. At the very least, several
short-term indicators have made for surprisingly positive reading.
And the economic situation in Germany is looking exceptionally good, too. Employment levels are
at their highest since  reunification,  business  and  consumer  sentiment  is  splendid,  and  the  Ifo
business  climate  index  has  even  hit  a  new  record  high.  And,  going  by  the  latest  economic
indicators we have received, the difficulties Germany is experiencing in forming a government
are showing no signs of markedly dampening the mood.
The economic recovery we’re seeing in Germany and in the euro area is benefiting in part from
the  Eurosystem’s  exceptionally  accommodative  monetary  policy.  This  monetary  policy  stance
was the ECB Governing Council’s response to the subdued inflation outlook.
One of the reasons behind the muted rate of price inflation is that some euro area countries are
still in the process of remedying the loss of competitiveness which played a role in triggering the
euro  area  crisis.  But  improving  price  competitiveness  generally  also  means  greater  wage
moderation.
The ECB Governing Council initially responded to the weak price pressures by cutting its policy
rates. Once it had cut its rates to 0%, it then started to roll out a host of non-standard measures
in an effort to loosen up monetary policy still further.
Since March 2015, these measures have included the Eurosystem’s large-scale purchases of
sovereign  and  corporate  assets,  currently  at  a  monthly  pace  of  €60  billion  per  month.  From
January this will fall to €30 billion a month – with purchases continuing until September 2018, if
not longer. As you know, these purchases have been hotly debated, particularly in Germany. And
you are no doubt also aware that I myself view these purchases with scepticism, too.
The Eurosystem has now become the largest creditor of the euro area countries. This means
that governments’ financing conditions hinge much more directly on our actions than in times of
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
normal monetary policy. My concern, therefore, is that the ECB Governing Council could end up
facing political pressure to keep rates low for longer than is justifiable from a strictly monetary
policy perspective.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  my  reading  of  the  ECB’s  projections,  however,  is  that  domestic  price
pressures in the euro area are gradually building and that the projected path is quite consistent
with our definition of price stability.
For if there is one thing that is clear, it’s that even after net purchases have been discontinued,
euro area monetary policy will remain highly accommodative.
October’s monetary policy decisions even mean that our foot is still on the accelerator as far as
monetary policy is concerned, just not quite so hard as before. Given the favourable economic
outlook  and  the  pick-up  in  prices,  a  somewhat  less  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance
would also have been justifiable, in my view.
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
I’ve spoken a lot today about how the euro area is managed – its institutional order – and about
monetary policy. On the subject of order, the physicist Georg Christoph Lichtenberg once said
that  “order  leads  to  all  virtues,  but  what  is  it  that  leads  to  order?”  Today,  I’ve  endeavoured  to
make the answer clear in the context of the euro area, with the help of various reference points.
In essence, the solution lies in ensuring alignment – though since we are in a philharmonic hall,
perhaps  I  should  say  harmony  –  between  actions  and  liability.  In  debates  about  the  future  of
monetary union I will make sure that this fundamental harmony is not forgotten.
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you have a stimulating panel discussion. And to you, Mr Kösters,
may I wish you all the very best for your upcoming retirement.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Badinger,  Harald  (2005),  “Growth  effects  of  economic  integration:  evidence  from  the  EU  member  states",
Review of World Economics 141, pp 50–78.
Campos,  Nauro  F,  Fabrizio  Coricelli  and  Luigi  Moretti  (2014),  “Economic  growth  and  political  integration:
estimating the benefits from membership in the European Union using the synthetic counterfactuals method",
IZA Discussion Paper No 8162.
Boltho,  Andrea  and  Barry  Eichengreen  (2008),  “The  economic  impact  of  European  integration",  CEPR
Discussion Paper No 6820.
W Kösters (1996) Stability culture as a precondition for the sustainability of the European monetary union (EMU).
In Urban S (eds) Europe’s challenges. Gabler Verlag, Wiesbaden.
W Kösters (1994). Comments on “European monetary union: sovereignty and hegemony” by Norbert Kloten. In
S Frowen and F McHugh : Financial decision making and moral responsibility. St. Martin’s Press, 1994.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Design and implementation of the European fiscal rules, Monthly Report, June
2017, pp 29–44.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
