     
Deputy Governor    : Jameel Ahmad 
Title 
Date 
Event 
Venue 
 
 : CFA Society Pakistan: 14th Annual Excellence Awards 2017 
: August 30, 2017 
: 14th Annual Excellence Awards 2017 
: CFA Society Pakistan 
 Speech of DG SBP as Chief Guest 
CFA Society Pakistan: 14th Annual Excellence Awards 2017 
30 August 2017  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Assalam-o-Alaikum and Good evening,  
 I am grateful to the CFA Society, Pakistan for inviting me to the 14th Annual Excellence Awards 
ceremony. It is indeed a matter of great honor for me to address this auspicious gathering of 
financial  analysts  and  industry  professionals.  I  hope  that  today’s  session,  apart  from  being  a 
celebration  of  achievements,  will  provide  the  participants  an  opportunity  to  exchange  views 
and share ideas on issues of professional interest. 
CFA  Society  Pakistan  deserves  appreciation  for  organizing  such  events  to  reward  the  high 
achievers and bring together the stakeholders. The role that CFA Society Pakistan has played, in 
terms  of  providing  a  platform  for  industry  professionals  to  connect  with  each  other  and 
 Page 1 of 5 
exchange  views,  is  laudable.  With  initiatives  like  “Putting  Investors  First”  the  CFA  Society  has 
put in commendable efforts, in collaboration with SECP, to inculcate awareness about investor 
rights and to establish the standards of professional excellence. This is in line with CFA’s focus 
on promoting high ethical standards and fair market practices. I am delighted to know that the 
society’s contribution to our financial markets and industry has been continuously growing.  
The  role  of  CFA  in  capacity  building  of  organizations  is  globally  acknowledged.  Despite, 
primarily, focusing on investment decisions, CFA is highly useful for other market participants 
including  the  regulators  (such  as  SBP)  for  deep  financial  analysis,  proactive  monitoring  and 
effective  policy  formulation.  These  wide-spread  benefits  are  due  to  CFA’s  broad  coverage 
encompassing important dimensions such as ethical standards and business conduct, portfolio 
management  strategies,  fixed  income  world,  risk  management  tools  (e.g.  hedging  strategies) 
and analysis of economic environment, etc.  
SBP in its role of regulator and supervisor of banks, financial institutions and financial markets, 
values qualified human resource. International certifications, such as CFA, provide opportunity 
to harness necessary skills. SBP, therefore, encourages the promotion of CFA culture and it has 
developed strong relations with the CFA institute. SBP has signed MoU with the CFA institute, 
through which, a specific number of SBP employees can enroll in CFA program at a discount. As 
a result of these incentives, SBP now holds a decent number of CFA charter holders and expects 
the numbers to grow as more and more SBP officers pursue CFA certification.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me now shed some light on why it is necessary for all of us to equip 
ourselves with advance knowledge and tools proactively. The Global Financial Crises (GFC) has 
aptly demonstrated the havoc that can be caused when profit taking motive combines with lack 
of  transparency  and  disclosure  standards,  inadequate  awareness  of  sophisticated  financial 
products, optimistic expectations about asset pricing and lax regulatory standards. The Global 
Financial  Crisis  forced  the  regulatory  attention  towards  containing  systemic  risk  and  ensuring 
financial  stability  through  strong  capital  and  liquidity  standards  (such  as  Basel  III),  more 
stringent  regulations,  and  introduction  of  macro  prudential  policy  toolkit.  Financial  stability 
demands timely identification of systemic vulnerabilities along with mitigating measures to limit 
 Page 2 of 5 
the spillovers and keep the public confidence intact. Appreciably, CFA institute has updated its 
curriculum to address the key lessons learnt from the global crisis.  
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
Not surprisingly, ensuring financial stability has now become the number one priority of many 
of the central banks around the world. SBP is also playing a pivotal role in ensuring stability of 
the financial sector in Pakistan. In line with its Vision 2020’s focus on strengthening the financial 
stability regime in Pakistan, SBP has established a separate Financial Stability Department (FSD). 
An  executive  level  Financial  Stability  Executive  Committee  (FSEC)  has  also  been  constituted 
within  SBP  which  is  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of  discussing  and  monitoring  financial 
stability issues. Further, SBP and SECP have formed a Council of Regulators, which will act as a 
forum  for  deliberating  issues  related  to  systemic  risk,  particularly  those  having  cross  market 
stability implications. Work is also underway to form a National Level Financial Stability Council 
(NFSC) involving other stake holders such as Ministry of Finance.  
 It  is  no  secret  that  developed  financial  institutions  act  as  a  catalyst  for  enhancing  financial 
intermediation,  reduce  information  asymmetries  and  allow  central  banks  to  implement  and 
achieve  policy  objectives.  Monetary  policy  is,  generally,  implemented  through  money  and 
foreign exchange markets where financial institutions, particularly the banks, play a pivotal role. 
If financial institutions are fairly mature, markets are efficient and there is low uncertainty, the 
effectiveness of monetary policy increases as the monetary signals are smoothly transmitted to 
the entire spectrum of the yield curve. SBP, through its various policies and initiatives, has been 
endeavoring  to  create  an  enabling  environment  for  the  financial  institutions  as  well  as  the 
markets.    
Besides  well  functioning  and  stable  financial  system,  SBP  is  striving  to  broaden  the  base  of 
financial  landscape  through  enhanced  financial  outreach.  SBP  has  been  driving  “Financial 
Inclusion” as a strategic goal through a dynamic regulatory framework, development of market 
information and infrastructure, and capacity building of service providers and clients.  The SBP 
 Page 3 of 5 
strategy is particularly focusing on promoting Agriculture, Micro and SME Financing, and Islamic 
Banking.  I  am  quite  confident  that  these  measures  will  lead  to  product  diversification,  while 
enhancing efficiency through competition. 
Though our regulatory framework is well structured and able to contain the systemic risk so far, 
the  financial  sector  of  Pakistan  requires  further  improvement  in  few  areas.  For  example,  (a) 
debt  market  activities  are  still  limited,  (b)  financial  penetration  is  quite  low  and  corporate 
sector  is  not  adequately  tapping  the  capital  market,  (c)  equity  market,  perhaps,  needs  more 
diversification  and  depth,  (d)  investor  awareness  needs  to  be  further  enhanced.  Moreover, 
savings to GDP ratio – which act as a catalyst to spur investment growth - is considerably low in 
Pakistan if compared to its peer countries. To address all these issues, joint efforts are required 
from regulators, industry and government.   
SBP  is  well  aware  of  these  challenges.  Within  its  supervisory  and  regulatory  domain,  it  has 
taken several initiatives to remove market frictions, enlarge financial landscape and bring more 
transparency and efficiency in the financial system of Pakistan. The list may be quite exhaustive 
but  in the  interest  of time  I  would  like  to  mention few  key  developments  related to financial 
markets such as (a) introduction of interest rate corridor and SBP target rate, (b) strengthening 
of  FX  reserves  and  deepening  of  FX  markets,  (d)  broadening  the  scope  of  money  market  to 
include  Islamic  Financial  Institutions,  (e)  diversifying  the  investor  base  for  government 
securities and (f) strengthening of primary dealers. 
Further,  SBP  is  always  trying  to  align  itself  with  international  guidelines  and  best  practices. 
Within the supervisory landscape, regulators around the globe are gradually shifting their focus 
from compliance based supervision to forward looking risk based supervision (RBS). RBS focuses 
on  continuous  identification  and  mitigation  of  key  risks  associated  with  financial  institutions, 
while  helping  the  regulators  to  allocate  their  supervisory  resources  optimally  and  effectively. 
SBP  has  also  initiated  work  on  migrating  to  RBS  in  order  to  advance  its  current  supervisory 
regime  and  improve  its  supervisory  efficiency.  RBS  would  help  SBP  in  prioritizing  supervisory 
resources  and  articulating  responses  to  financial  stress  besides  more  structured  profiling  of 
 Page 4 of 5 
financial institutions. It will also help SBP to identify the problem and institute corrective action 
on proactive basis. 
I would like to stress here that achieving high level goals such as strengthening and deepening 
of financial markets, ensuring financial stability, and bringing more efficiency and transparency 
in the financial sector will be possible only through our collaborative efforts and supportive role 
of the industry. We at the SBP are making continuous efforts to adopt international standards 
and best practices, which are well suited to our domestic financial structure and needs. SBP is 
also closely coordinating with the banking industry and other market players for seeking their 
input  on  new  regulatory  initiatives  and  aligning  the  existing  regulatory  framework  with 
international  standards.  Obviously,  effective  implementation  of  global  standards  and  best 
practices  would  not  be  possible  without  qualified  people,  both,  within  regulatory  bodies  and 
the industry. I am quite hopeful that professional capacity building through globally recognized 
certifications, such as CFA, will enable us to achieve these goals.  
At the end, I would like to offer my heartiest congratulations to the winners of the Excellence 
Awards  today.  I  wish  them  all  the  best  for  their  future  accomplishments.    I  am,  once  again, 
grateful to you for providing me the opportunity to share my thoughts with you. 
Thank you for your attention. 
   Page 5 of 5 
