Mario Draghi: IMFC Statement
Statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  thirty-sixth
meeting  of  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee,  Washington  DC,  13  October
2017.
 The  euro  area’s  economic  expansion,  supported  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  measures,
continues  to  be  firm  and  broad-based  across  countries  and  sectors.  The  economy  has  now
expanded for 17 consecutive quarters, and at a faster than expected pace in the first half of this
year.  Over  this  period,  employment  in  the  euro  area  has  increased  by  almost  seven  million.
Youth unemployment has declined from its peak above 24% in 2013 to just above 19% recently,
but still remains above its pre-crisis level, and especially high in some member countries.
The  ongoing  recovery  is  being  largely  driven  by  domestic  forces,  with  both  consumption  and
investment  contributing  to  growth.  Private  consumption  is  fostered  by  employment  gains  and
increasing  household  wealth.  Investment  continues  to  benefit  from  very  favourable  financing
conditions and improvements in corporate profitability. Also, the broad-based global recovery is
increasingly supporting euro area exports. The latest ECB staff projections foresee annual real
GDP increasing by 2.2% in 2017, 1.8% in 2018 and 1.7% in 2019. Risks to the growth outlook are
broadly  balanced,  with  downside  risks  stemming  predominantly  from  external  sources.  In  this
context,  preserving  openness  underpinned  by  multilateral  cooperation  and  effective  financial
regulation will decisively contribute to fostering a favourable external environment.
While  headline  inflation  has  increased  markedly  over  the  past  year,  this  is  largely  reflecting
energy and food inflation. Measures of underlying inflation however have yet to show convincing
signs of a sustained upward trend, despite an uptick in recent months. Domestic cost pressures
remain  subdued,  with  wage  growth  still  low  by  historical  standards.  At  the  same  time,  the
deflation risk in the euro area has essentially disappeared. Because of anticipated base effects in
energy prices, headline inflation is likely to temporarily decline towards the end of the year. The
latest ECB staff projections point to annual euro area headline inflation of 1.5% in 2017, 1.2% in
2018  and  1.5%  in  2019.  Risks  to  this  inflation  outlook  are  broadly  balanced.  Exchange  rate
volatility  represents  one  source  of  uncertainty  which  requires  monitoring  with  regard  to  its
possible implications for the medium-term outlook for price stability in the euro area.
Looking ahead, underlying inflation is expected to rise gradually over the medium term, supported
by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  expected  continuing  economic  recovery  and  the
corresponding  gradual  absorption  of  slack  in  the  euro  area  economy.  However,  progress
towards a durable and self-sustaining convergence of inflation towards our objective is not yet
sufficiently convincing.
Thus,  a  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  is  still  needed  to  secure  a
sustained return of inflation towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term – in line
with  the  ECB’s  mandate.  As  affirmed  by  the  Governing  Council  at  its  last  monetary  policy
meeting on 7 September, we expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at present levels for an
extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  the  net  asset  purchases.  Our  asset
purchase programme (APP), at the current monthly pace of €60 billion, is intended to run until the
end of December this year, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council
sees  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  its  inflation  aim.  The  net
purchases are made alongside reinvestments of the principal payments from maturing securities
purchased  under  the  APP.  Later  this  year  we  will  decide  on  the  calibration  of  our  policy
instruments beyond the end of 2017, taking into account the expected path of inflation and the
financial conditions needed for a sustained return of inflation rates towards our objective.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The ECB’s monetary policy measures and the favourable effects they are having on borrowing
conditions for firms and households, access to financing and credit flows across the euro area
are supporting domestic demand and are also facilitating the deleveraging process. In order to
reap the full benefits of our monetary policy measures, actions in other economic policy areas
remain necessary to strengthen long-term growth and resilience in the euro area.
Meanwhile,  the  condition  and  resilience  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector  has  continued  to
improve. Euro area banks’ CET1 capital ratios remain at a solid level of about 14%, whereas
profitability  has  stabilised  on  the  back  of  the  strengthening  recovery.  Some  weak  banks  have
been successfully resolved with the impact on the rest of the euro area banking sector being well
contained. Notwithstanding these positive developments, important challenges remain, including
the still subdued profitability, structural challenges in some parts of the euro area banking sector,
such as the presence of excess capacity and cost inefficiencies, as well as – in a few countries
–  the  persistently  high  stock  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs).  On  aggregate,  however,  further
progress has been made with respect to resolving NPLs, and a comprehensive action plan to
deal with legacy asset quality issues was adopted by the Council of the European Union and is
now being followed up by EU and national authorities. The ECB has published guidance to banks
on NPLs and a draft addendum, currently subject to public consultation.
With respect to financial stability, we observe that at the current stage the euro area’s position in
the financial cycle is consistent with the ongoing economic recovery. There are no indications of
widespread asset price misalignments and credit developments remain modest. Nevertheless,
relatively buoyant real estate dynamics and high household debt levels in some countries warrant
careful monitoring. We expect the national macroprudential authorities in the euro area to remain
vigilant and ready to use the macroprudential policy instruments at their disposal to counteract
the  any  emerging  risks  when  necessary.  Within  its  macroprudential  mandate,  the  ECB  will
contribute to this end.
Despite the potential for monetary policy to influence economic growth in the short term, strong,
sustainable and balanced growth requires other policymakers to assume their responsibilities.
From a global perspective, one of the key ingredients for raising potential growth and productivity
is openness. Open trade, investment and sustainable financial flows play a key role in the cross-
border  diffusion  of  new  technologies  that  drive  forward  efficiency  improvements.  Preserving
openness  is  thus  key  to  strengthening  global  growth  potential.  It  should  be  underpinned  by
effective multilateral cooperation, including in the field of financial regulation and supervision.
As regards the euro area, strengthening its long-term growth potential calls for decisive action to
address  the  remaining  structural  issues.  Reform  implementation  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped up, with further actions to improve the business and regulatory environment aimed at
boosting  investment  and  increasing  productivity.  Labour  market  rigidities  need  to  be  reduced
further to enhance job creation and reduce unemployment, especially for young people. To foster
reform  implementation  at  country  level,  a  full  and  consistent  application  of  the  EU’s  policy
framework  is  required,  including  the  European  Semester  and  the  macroeconomic  imbalance
procedure. Likewise, full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact remains
crucial  to  ensure  confidence  in  the  EU’s  fiscal  framework  and  to  safeguard  public  debt
sustainability.  In  the  current  environment,  a  broadly  neutral  euro  area  fiscal  stance  strikes  an
appropriate balance between aggregate stabilisation and sustainability needs. Although such a
euro  area  stance  is  prevailing,  the  contribution  of  individual  Member  States  to  the  aggregate
outcome is suboptimal. Some of them need to take additional measures to ensure compliance
with the fiscal rules, while others have scope to use available fiscal space. In addition, all euro
area  countries  should  strive  for  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  fiscal  policies  by
prioritising public investment and reducing the tax burden on labour.
The  current  political  and  economic  momentum  in  Europe  also  provides  an  opportunity  to
strengthen our Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Further integration needs to be achieved
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
above all by implementing what has been agreed and by completing the common projects we
have started. This includes completing the banking union and building a capital markets union. A
more complete EMU, with further steps towards a deeper financial, fiscal and economic union,
will be the foundation for a stable, flourishing and resilient euro area economy. That is the best
contribution  which  Europe  can  make  to  global  economic  growth  and  financial  stability.  By
delivering on its mandate, the ECB will continue to play its part in this endeavour.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
