Michael Held: The financial crisis - perspectives from a decade on
Remarks  by  Mr  Michael  Held,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Legal  Group  of  the  Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  to  the  Administrative  and  Banking  Law  Committees  of  the
Association of the Bar of the City of New York, New York City, 15 November 2017.
Introduction
 Thank you to the City Bar and the members of its Administrative and Banking Law Committees.
It’s a pleasure to be able to speak with you. The views I express today are my own, and not
necessarily  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  or  the  Federal  Reserve
1
System.
I’d like to take my time here with you today to reflect a bit on the decade since the financial crisis.
A decade later, while the most acute effects of the crisis have dissipated, American families and
businesses—the Main Street economy—continue to feel or remember its longer term effects.
Savings  were  depleted.  Homes  and  businesses  were  lost.  Many  Americans’  careers  were
fundamentally  altered.  Consumer  spending  dropped  more  severely  on  a  year-over-year  basis
2
than it had since the Second World War.
A  decade  later,  recognition  of  the  human  element  of  the  Great  Recession  motivates  both  the
private and public sector to remain vigilant in our efforts to prevent a future crisis. Remembering
the  effect  of  the  crisis  on  American  families,  business  owners,  and  investors  helps  prevent
personal and institutional memories from fading. And the potential for memories to fade is real.
Last month, the Dow Jones Industrial Average reached an all-time high. Recent data suggest
that families’ incomes have increased between 2013 and 2016, although they also suggest that
3
the wealth gap is widening.
People, too, have changed. Even at the New York Fed, now, over 50 percent of staff were not
with us at the time of the crisis. I suspect that the same is true at banks and law firms, where
many professionals have practiced for less than a decade. These junior bankers and lawyers
have not even experienced a turn of the business cycle let alone have a memory of the financial
crisis.
Now, I recognize that the crisis and its aftermath is well trod ground. Indeed, my boss Bill Dudley
delivered a speech on this very topic last week. That said, I think it is worth traveling down this
well-worn  path  again.  In  doing  so,  I  am  mindful  of  a  few  aphorisms.  First,  those  who  fail  to
remember history are doomed to repeat it. Second, generals (and economists and even lawyers)
tend to fight the last war. The third, which I will steal from a mutual fund prospectus, is that past
performance  is  no  guarantee  of  future  results. All  of  this  is  to  say  that  while  it  is  critical  to
remember and draw lessons from what happened in that period of 2007–2009, and the response
to it, it is also equally critical to remember that the next shock to the system is likely to look quite
different in material ways.
Today, I’ll start by talking about the broad range of innovative responses people within the Fed
and  other  public  sector  institutions  devised  to  restore  confidence  in  part  by  providing  liquidity,
capital, and information during the chaos of 2008. Next, I will focus on some of the fundamental
changes that have been implemented in the wake of the crisis. In my opinion, those changes go
a long way toward making financial institutions and the financial system overall more stable and
resilient. We should also recognize that, notwithstanding their increased resiliency, one or more
firms will fail at some point in the future. It is imperative for US law to have an avenue to handle
such a failure, and  without  systemic  consequences.  Finally,  I  will  address  some  more  recent
legislative proposals to amend post-crisis reforms, emphasizing proposals relating to the orderly
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
failure of major financial institutions.
Disorder and the unprecedented steps to right It
I will start with the obvious. The crisis caught the world off guard. Many have argued that the
crisis  should  have,  would  have,  and  could  have  been  predicted  and  averted.  Others  have
claimed  that  bubbles  are  inevitable  and  that  regulators  should  principally  focus  their  time  and
attention on cleanup and mitigation rather than avoidance. I will not engage here in that debate.
From  my  perspective,  prevention  and  cleanup  are  not  mutually  exclusive.  Indeed,  in  exploring
how to survive a crisis, you inevitably think about how to avoid it.
When the crisis materialized and firms began to experience material distress or even fail, US law
did not have a framework for achieving an orderly resolution of a systemically important institution
at  the  corporate  level.  It  had  tools  that  have  proved  highly  effective  in  managing  corporate
restructuring  and  depository  institution  receiverships,  but  none  tailored  for  a  major  financial
group.  Instead,  when  large  financial  groups  began  to  fail,  policymakers  relied  on  ad  hoc
interventions.
Some of the immediate interventions involved use of the Federal Reserve’s “lender of last resort”
functions. It was at this point that “Section 13(3)” entered the lexicon of modern central banking.
For those few who are unaware, Section 13(3) was added to the Federal Reserve Act during the
Great Depression. It gave the Board of Governors broad authority to permit a Reserve Bank to
lend in exigent and unusual circumstances provided that the Reserve Bank was secured to its
satisfaction. Prior to the crisis, Section 13(3) loans had last been made during the Depression, to
such enterprises as a typewriter manufacturer and a vegetable grower.  Fed policy makers and
their advisors pulled Section 13(3) back off the shelf, perhaps brushing some metaphorical dust
off  its  cover.  In  2008,  loans  made  pursuant  to  Section  13(3)  facilitated  JPMorgan  Chase’s
purchase of Bear Stearns. Loans under 13(3) also prevented the potentially catastrophic failure
of American International Group (AIG).
4
Innovations  under  13(3)  also  underpinned  many  of  the  Fed’s  broad-based  facilities  to  provide
market liquidity. The Fed created a variety of facilities under 13(3), giving rise to an alphabet soup
of  new  acronyms.   Those  facilities  provided  liquidity  to  different  segments  of  our  economy,
ranging from primary dealers to issuers of commercial paper. Their broader purpose, however,
was to facilitate the availability of credit to businesses and households through on-lending.
5
Not  all  of  the  Fed’s  responses  involved  lending,  either  under  Section  13(3)  or  at  the  discount
window.  On  the  supervisory  side,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment
Program  (SCAP)  (the  “stress  test”  of  the  19  largest  US  financial  institutions)  addressed
uncertainty about their ability to weather additional losses. The results were disclosed publicly in
a  significant  departure  from  standard  practice  to  keep  supervisory  information  confidential.
Transparency, as well as the availability of a government backstop, encouraged confidence in
US institutions.
Of  course,  the  Fed’s  actions  did  not  happen  in  a  vacuum,  but  rather  in  the  context  of  other
actions  taken  by  other  regulators  and  Congress.  Perhaps  most  notably,  in  October  2008,
Congress passed the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act. That statute allowed, among other
things,  Treasury  to  create  the  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program  to  inject  capital  into  financial
institutions. In addition, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation expanded its guarantees of
bank liabilities under the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program. The Federal Housing Finance
Agency placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship. Non-US authorities responded
to crises in their own jurisdictions. And really this is just a sampling of the diverse and creative
array of public sector responses to the crisis.
Many commentators and policy makers have been deeply critical of the Fed’s actions during the
crisis.  I  am  not  here  to  suggest  that  leaders  during  the  crisis  were  infallible  or  that  decisions
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
made during the crisis were always the right ones. What I believe is difficult to dispute, however,
is  the  importance  of  having  the  ability  to  be  agile  in  times  of  severe  economic  stress.  Policy
makers  were  both  able  and  willing  to  try  new  things,  to  make  adjustments  as  circumstances
evolved,  and  to  attack  the  crisis  from  different  angles.  Many  aspects  of  the  crisis  were
unprecedented. Room to innovate allowed the staffs of public sector institutions to craft targeted
responses.  It  also  allowed  them  to  adjust  those  responses  on  the  fly—through  cooperation
domestically  and  internationally,  knowledge  of  the  financial  sector  and  familiarity  with  its
participants, and the ability to instill confidence through the provision of liquidity.
As a lawyer, I am perhaps a bit of a pessimist. But I’m not a cynic. If there’s one lesson I take
from the crisis, it is the importance of having room to maneuver during a crisis. And, there will be
future shocks to the system. When the next shock comes, regulators need to have both the legal
authority to take risks and the will to act.
From disorder to order (hopefully)
In the years after the crisis, attention has been focused on mitigating the risk of another one.
Legislators  and  other  policymakers  made  substantial  changes  to  the  financial  system  to  hold
firms, and their managers and shareholders, more accountable. A great many of those changes
have put both firms and the public sector in a better place.
Today, regulators and supervisors expect systemically important financial institutions to be more
resilient. They must be prepared for unanticipated losses and shocks to the financial system,
including through rigorous (if not always popular) capital and liquidity standards.
Supervised firms are also required to have a much greater understanding of the governance and
controls supporting their critical operations. This includes, for example, governance frameworks,
management  information  systems,  and  IT  resiliency.  This  last  point  is  particularly  notable
because, as many of you are now painfully aware from the data breaches at Equifax and Yahoo
(and those are just the most recent ones), cybersecurity risk has increased dramatically in the
last several years.
Resilience goes a long way. It prepares firms to be ready to fight not only the last war, but also
the unanticipated stresses of the next one. It prepares them not to rely on past performance as a
guaranty  of  future  performance.  But,  increased  preparedness  should  not  be  cause  for
overconfidence. Supervision and regulation should not and cannot drive all risk from the financial
system, and the probability of a systemically important institution’s failure will never be zero. The
largest  firms  must  be  prepared  for  a  rapid  and  orderly  resolution  under  the  US  Bankruptcy
Code.  Among other things, these firms must now also ensure that critical activities or services
provided  to  the  market  will  not  be  disrupted  in  the  event  they  find  themselves  in  recovery  or
resolution. Moreover, if an institution fails, there must be sufficient tools to manage its failure in a
way  that  reduces  the  chance  that  its  failure  will  cascade  systemically  through  the  financial
system.  In  other  words,  if  one  institution  gets  a  cold—or  worse—it  should  not  become  an
epidemic.
6
The  Fed’s  use  of  Section  13(3)  during  the  crisis  was  not  uncontroversial.  Concerns  were
expressed about moral hazard—that the Fed was somehow “bailing out” troubled institutions and
that this would only lead to excessive risk taking in the future.  As a result of this concern and
others,  Congress  amended  Section  13(3)  to  prevent  the  Fed  from  engaging  in  the  kind  of
institution-specific lending that was directed at Bear Stearns and AIG. Going forward, the Fed
may  only  lend  under  Section  13(3)  as  a  part  of  a  broad-based  program  directed  at  providing
liquidity to the financial system and not to aid an individual failing firm.
7
At the same time Congress constrained one potential source of liquidity in the event of a crisis—
Section 13(3) —it also created a new source of liquidity in Title II of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
8
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act ,  which  established  the  Orderly  Liquidation  Authority
(OLA) and the Orderly Liquidation Fund (OLF).
8
In the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress expressed its preference for the use of “ordinary insolvency”
under the Bankruptcy Code.  However, Congress also recognized the importance of establishing
an alternative resolution mechanism with features tailored for resolving a systemically important
firm, and in a way that minimizes moral hazard.
10
9
OLA includes a public sector resolution authority—the FDIC, an agency well-versed in resolving
depository institutions under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDI Act) and working with other
domestic and international authorities. OLA empowers the FDIC to step into the shoes of the
failing institution to resolve a “financial company” at the corporate group level. The FDIC must
ensure that responsible managers and directors are removed, and the FDIC or Federal Reserve
Board may seek certain industry bans for culpable directors and senior executives.
OLA also includes the OLF. Congress recognized that the ability of the FDIC to borrow funds
from the Treasury Department to provide emergency liquidity to a failing systemically important
institution is crucial to the success of its resolution. The OLF is not prefunded, and the FDIC’s
capacity to borrow to fund the OLF is capped at 90 percent of the fair value of the assets of the
institution that are available for repayment. The provision of OLF liquidity does not fall ultimately
on the American taxpayer. Shareholders may not recover until the OLF is repaid. The FDIC is
authorized to assess financial sector participants if necessary to repay the funds advanced by
the Treasury to fund the OLF.
Reevaluate, but don’t forget the disorder of the crisis
The breadth of changes that have been made to the regulatory landscape since the onset of the
financial crisis is huge. Given the scale of the changes, it is entirely appropriate to take stock of
these  changes  and  reevaluate  their  effectiveness.  It  is  not  surprising  to  think  that  some
recalibration might be necessary. It is also worth considering what additional reforms are needed
to  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient  and  resistant  to  future,  unanticipated  shocks.
Sometimes I get asked the question of whether the financial sector is where it needs to be in
terms of resilience. My answer is usually that things are better, but they can get even better still.
And  I  suspect  that,  in  even  the  best  case  scenario,  that  will  always  be  my  answer.  Because
threats  and  risks  evolve.  Financial  institutions,  and  regulators  for  that  matter,  must  recognize
changing risks and ensure that their approaches evolve in kind. We need to ensure that when the
next economic downturn occurs, the financial system will bend, but not break.
Of  course,  increased  resilience  does  not  come  without  costs.  It  is  important  to  continually
reassess whether those costs are appropriately balanced with the evolving risks. There are a
number of potential areas that may be worth reassessing. One place to start is with regulations
pertaining  to  smaller  banks.  People  of  all  political  stripes  tend  to  agree  that  Congress  and
regulators should reassess the effect that regulations have had on these firms and whether such
regulations are commensurate with their level of risk. For these smaller banks, whose failure will
not  directly  inflict  large  costs  or  stress  on  the  broader  financial  system,  the  regulatory  and
compliance  requirements  should  be  reconsidered.  Indeed,  banking  agencies  have  announced
many proposals for small banks,
 including one that would simplify the capital rules for such
12
banks consistent with their risk.
11
With respect to systemically important firms, I think it would be terribly myopic to forget the crisis.
There have been a number of different types of changes proposed with respect to these firms.
Today, I’d like to focus on the proposals relating to resolution regimes.
Congress  established  OLA  when  memories  of  Lehman  Brothers’  failure  were  fresh.  It  bears
repeating that Congress did so after facing the terrifying realization that the lack of a credible
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
resolution  mechanism  for  dealing  with  failing  systemic  firms  left  only  bad  choices,  such  as
lending into a run, bailout, or the collapse of the financial system. Over the past several years,
there  have  been  efforts  in  Congress  to  repeal  OLA  and  create  a  new,  bespoke  process  for
systemically  important  firms  under  the  Bankruptcy  Code.  That  process  would  largely  mimic
many  of  the  features  of  the  FDIC’s  single  point  of  entry  strategy  intended  for  use  in  an  OLA
proceeding. Those efforts have picked up steam this year with the passing of two different bills in
the House of Representatives.
13
From my perspective, there are attractive aspects to both OLA and the Bankruptcy Code. OLA is
largely an administrative process that has the benefit of agility. It is administered by the FDIC,
which will already have insight into the institution though the living will process. The FDIC also
communicates with foreign regulators regarding systemically important firms.
OLA has particular advantages in the context of a cross-border resolution, which means in this
day and age the resolution of pretty much any systemically important institution. US regulators
have established relationships with their foreign counterparts, and resolution processes similar to
OLA now exist in many globally important financial centers. This familiarity can facilitate cross-
border  cooperation  and  coordination  in  the  event  of  a  failure  of  a  systemically  important
institution,  and  stem  competing  insolvency  proceedings  in  multiple  jurisdictions  and  the  ring-
fencing  of  assets.  This  last  point  shouldn’t  be  discounted.  It’s  worth  remembering  that  after
Lehman  Brothers’  parent  company  initially  filed  for  bankruptcy  in  the  US,  many  foreign
proceedings  were  initiated  for  Lehman  affiliates  around  the  world.  It  took  over  six  months  to
establish  a  cross-border  protocol  among  the  representatives  of  the  more  significant  Lehman
Brothers affiliates. The protocol was meant to improve communication and cooperation among
the representatives as well as minimize costs and maximize recoveries for creditors. In the case
of one of the most significant Lehman Brothers affiliates, Lehman Brothers International Europe
located in the UK, no agreement was ever reached.
OLA also provides for backstop liquidity through the OLF, a feature not available in the ordinary
bankruptcy process. During the financial crisis, lender of last resort liquidity from the Fed was
critical to promoting faith in the financial sector. So, too, will backstop liquidity be important for
restoring faith in a recapitalized institution in resolution under OLA and preventing a run.
The bankruptcy process also offers many positives. The US Bankruptcy Code is admired around
the world and has been the model for similar regimes in other countries. The court-administered
nature  of  bankruptcy  provides  transparency  and  predictability  to  parties  and  provides
stakeholders  with  a  meaningful  opportunity  to  be  heard.  However,  as  many  have  noted,  the
current  bankruptcy  laws  were  not  designed  to  resolve  systemically  important  financial
institutions. Although firms have worked within the existing bankruptcy framework for purposes of
resolution  planning,  revisions  to  bankruptcy  law  could  be  a  means  of  facilitating  the  orderly
bankruptcy  resolution  of  a  major  financial  institution.  However,  the  devil  is,  of  course,  in  the
details. The bills that passed the House earlier this year include many helpful changes regarding
current  bankruptcy  law.  They  may  help  facilitate  the  resolution  strategies  of  most  of  the
systemically important financial institutions. Notably, however, these proposals do not include a
credible source of backstop liquidity. Congress recognized the importance of such a facility in the
OLF. Any bankruptcy regime without one may lack the scale and speed needed to bolster market
confidence and may not be as effective in preventing contagion, particularly with respect to a
systemically important firm.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I believe the legislative and regulatory reforms to the financial system over the last
10  years  have  made  the  system  more  flexible  and  resilient.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  entirely
appropriate to revisit these reforms now and assess their efficacy. In doing so, though, let’s keep
my aphorisms in mind and not risk history repeating itself. I say this because the American public
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
does not deserve to have history repeated.
Improved resilience should permit financial institutions to weather another shock and, if needed,
fail under the Bankruptcy Code as contemplated by the living will process. Under the living will
process  today,  firms  must  approach  their  bankruptcy  using  tools  geared  toward  corporate
restructuring. Any  changes  to  the  regimes  under  which  financial  institutions  can  and  will  fail
should be carefully considered before enactment, particularly to the extent they retain, or not, a
credible source of liquidity going forward. This isn’t abstract financial theory. This concerns the
ability of people on Main Street—employees, retirees, small business owners—to persevere in
times  of  severe  financial  stress.  Returning  to  the  human  element  of  the  crisis,  these  are  the
same people who suffered during the Great Recession and who expect us all to do better during
the next period of stress.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Lisa Kraidin and Ben Snodgrass assisted in the preparation of these remarks.
See Mariacristina De Nardi et al., Consumption and the Great Recession, Economic Perspectives, 1st Quarter
2012, at 1, 1.
See Jesse Bricker et al., Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of
Consumer Finances, Federal Reserve Bulletin, Sept. 2017, at 1, 10.
See  Thomas  C.  Baxter,  Jr.  &  David  Gross, The  Federal  Reserve’s  Response  to  the  Crisis,  i n International
Monetary and Financial Law: The Global Crisis 293, 298–99 (Mario Giovanoli & Diego Devos eds., 2010). Use of
13(3) had been authorized during the 1960s, but no loans were made. See id.
These facilities included, among others, the PDCF (the Primary Dealer Credit Facility), the TALF (the Term
Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility), and the CPFF (the Commercial Paper Funding Facility).
The US Bankruptcy Code refers to Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended.
See, e.g., S. Rep. No. 111–176, at 6 (2010) (“The Federal Reserve’s emergency lending authority, under section
13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, in the past allowed the Federal Reserve to make loans to individual entities
like AIG.  While  such  lending  played  an  important  role  in  ending  the  recent  financial  crisis,  it  also  created
potential moral hazard.”).
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 111–203 (2010).
See 12 U.S.C. §§ 5365 & 5383.
See 12 U.S.C. § 5384; H.R. Rep. No. 111–517, at 865 (2010) (Conf. Rep.) (“When the authority is used, the FDIC
is appointed receiver and must liquidate the company in a manner that mitigates significant risks to financial
stability and minimizes moral hazard.”).
See Joint Report to Congress: Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996, 82 Fed.
Reg. 15900 (March 30, 2017).
See Simplifications to the Capital Rule Pursuant to the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction
Act of 1996, 82 Fed. Reg. 49984 (proposed Oct. 27, 2017).
See H.R. 10, 115th Cong. (as passed by House, June 8, 2017); H.R. 1667, 115th Cong. (as passed by House,
Apr, 5, 2017).
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
