Michael  Debabrata  Patra:  One  year  in  the  life  of  India's  Monetary
Policy Committee
Speech by Dr Michael Debabrata Patra, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the
Jaipur Regional Office of the Reserve Bank of India, Jaipur, 27 October 2017.
 The theme of this lecture was inspired by an interview given by Governor Dr. Urjit R. Patel in the
Mint, October 9, 2017 available at www.livemint.com/Industry/Gr9H0MnqAL5Ko4PdGa7fdL/RBI-
governor-Urjit-Patel-Weve-started-seeing-the-upturn-in.html.
I  am grateful to  Dr.  Viral  V.  Acharya  for  valuable  comments.  Inputs  from  Shri  Sitikantha
Pattanaik, Dr. Praggya Das, Dr. Rajiv Ranjan, Dr. Rajeev Jain and Dr. Jai Chander are also
acknowledged with appreciation.
At  2.30  pm  on  October  4,  2017  the resolution  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  was
released on the website of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and history was made in a small way.
Exactly a year ago, a page was turned on a tradition that went back to the origins of the RBI in
pre-independent India. The monetary policy decision, hitherto made solely by the Governor of the
RBI, was ceded to a six-member committee comprising the Governor as the Chairperson, the
Deputy Governor in charge of monetary policy, one officer of the RBI appointed by its Central
Board, and three external members appointed by the central government. The room filled with
debate  and  argumentation,  challenge  and  counter-challenge,  articulations  of  well-defended
individualistic  assessments,  and  voting  –  India’s  monetary  policy  was  undergoing  a  regime
change. Quietly ushered in, without any grandeur about it or anything like that, it was a big step
towards the modernisation of the conduct of monetary policy in India.
Invested  by  legislative  mandate  –  through  an  amendment  to  the  RBI  Act  –  with  the  goal  of
‘maintaining  price  stability  keeping  in  mind  the  objective  of  growth',  India  joined  a  select  but
growing band of countries that, beginning in 1990, adopted flexible inflation targeting (FIT) as their
framework for monetary policy. Under FIT, price stability is accorded primacy as an objective of
monetary  policy,  while  being  mindful  of  the  state  of  the  economy. Accordingly,  the  target  for
inflation is to be achieved over a medium term horizon rather than at a point in time to mitigate
any output effects that disinflation could entail. Furthermore, the target itself is set within a band
or range in acknowledgement of potential supply shocks that well up outside monetary policy’s
realm. Accountability for failure to ensure the inflation band is generally defined, but after taking
into account the various lags characterising the operation of monetary policy.
In  India,  the  amended  RBI Act  defines  the  metric  for  the  inflation  target  as  the  year-on-year
change in the monthly consumer price index (CPI). The numerical inflation target has been set by
the government at four per cent, with an upper tolerance level of 6 per cent and a lower tolerance
level of 2 per cent, internalising flexibility. The amended RBI Act has also specified accountability
norms for dealing with failure to achieve the inflation target while building in recognition of the lags
inherent in the conduct of monetary policy. It defines failure as average inflation breaching the
tolerance  band  for  three  consecutive  quarters,  not  instantly. Although  concerns  about  inflation
had  dominated  monetary  policy  over  the  past  decades  in  deference  to  a  societal  intolerance
threshold,  such  an  explicit  commitment  to  a  numerical  inflation  target  as  the  centre-piece  of
policy had never been made.
It was veritably a baptism by fire for the MPC, the new kid on the block in a cross-country sense
of the term. The amendment to the RBI Act, the inflation target and tolerance band around it, and
accountability with respect to failure to achieve the target were notified in the Gazette of India
during May-August 2016. They were widely telegraphed and occupied many media bytes. What
was little noticed, however, was that it was only on September 29, 2016 that a press release of
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the Government of India (GoI) informed the world about the appointment of the MPC. Just one
working day later, the MPC plunged into its work and on October 4, it issued its first resolution,
unanimously  backed.  Many  ‘firsts’  surround  that debut. As the statutory semi-annual Monetary
Policy Report (MPR) of October 2016 noted: “For the first time in its history, the RBI has been
provided the explicit legislative mandate to operate the monetary policy framework of the country.
The  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  has  also  been  defined  for  the  first  time.  The
amendments  also  provide  for  the  constitution  of  a  monetary  policy  committee  that  shall
determine  the  policy  rate  required  to  achieve  the  inflation  target,  another  landmark  in  India’s
monetary history.” Each of these milestones warrants a more detailed exposition to catch the
inflexions around the turning points. Indeed, each shall receive its due and enter the pantheon of
legends in my memoirs. In the interest of brevity and time, however, I shall devote the rest of my
lecture to (I) the initial conditions that brought to critical mass the urgency of the regime shift; (II)
the RBI’s efforts to build the institutional architecture ahead of and to prepare the ground for FIT;
(III) the high wire that electrified the six decisions the MPC took in its formative year; and (IV) the
conflicting pulls and trade-offs that shaped the decision of October 4, 2017 – arguably, one of the
most testing.
II. The Initial Conditions
Today, the Indian economy basks in macroeconomic stability with a configuration that could be
the envy of peers: a fiscal deficit steadfastly consolidating towards a Maastricht-like rendezvous
with a strong consensus that its quality matters; inflation below target, shepherded by an MPC
committed to the centre of the band notified by government; a current account deficit below 1 per
cent of GDP and sustainable in terms of a dashboard of external sector indicators – overall, a
sweet spot by any consideration! Yet, just four years ago, an ocean of vulnerability engulfed the
economy. The situation around the “taper tantrum” seemed so dire that even a growth rate of 6.6
per cent and foreign exchange reserves of close to US $ 300 billion seemed like matchsticks
before a tide that swept India into the infamous ‘fragile five’ in that fateful summer of 2013. In a
fundamental way, it was those troubled conditions that provided the impetus for monetary policy
regime change.
India was among the first nations to rebound from the global financial crisis, with tailwinds from a
fiscal stimulus, the RBI’s policy rate cut cumulatively by 425 basis points and access to potential
liquidity  from  the  Reserve  Bank  expanded  to  as  high  as  10  per  cent  of  GDP  with  a  view  to
keeping financial institutions functional as financial markets seized up. In 2009, growth seemed
set to accelerate to the aspirational double digits that Indians dream about. Long embarrassed by
the parlous state of the physical infrastructure, we set out to build world class roads, airports,
power  supply  and  ports.  The  financial  sector  was  expected  to  take  a  lead  role  in  creating
conducive conditions for this big push even, as we have learned painfully, at the risk of much
loss of governance and risk control.
There was, however, a serpent in the garden! Starting out innocuously in the guise of food prices
rising on the back of a monsoon failure, inflation reared its ugly head, hidden behind the heady
upswing  of  growth  that  deceptively  appeared  too  good  to  interrupt.  The  wholesale  price  index
(WPI), the official metric for measuring inflation then, failed to detect it initially – although the WPI
food index rose by close to 15 per cent in 2009, headline inflation measured as the year-on-year
change  in  the  WPI  remained  below  4  per  cent.  It  was  beguilingly  pulled  down  by  the  core
measure of those days – WPI non-food manufactured products inflation was close to zero! By
contrast, inflation in terms of the consumer price index for industrial workers (CPI-IW) was raging
at above 12 per cent. Spreading incipiently, food inflation became generalised by 2010–11. The
WPI  picked  it  up  by  then,  and  spillovers  to  prices  of  non-food  manufactured  products  started
getting manifested. By the time there was a policy reaction in March 2010, it was too late. Over
the period 2009–12, inflation averaged 10.4 per cent measured by the CPI-IW and 7.4 per cent by
the WPI. Thirteen policy rate increases failed to excoriate it. Entrenched now in the system, it
began to mutate like a multi-headed Hydra.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Inflation is not just the rate of increase of the price level. It is also considered an index of the
quality of governance and macroeconomic management by the state which seeks to assure the
well-being of its people who have relinquished to it some control over their lives for the greater
common good. Indian society is well-known for zero tolerance for double digit inflation. Often in
the not too distant past, it has been a pivotal election issue and governments have been voted
out  of  office  over  the  price  of  the  lowly  onion.  In  the  year  2009  itself,  inflation  expectations  of
households a year ahead rose by 400 basis points. By the end of the year, they crossed 12 per
cent and kept climbing, entrenched in those high reaches. People were completely discounting
the possibility of putting the genie back into the bottle. This time around, however, they did not
take recourse to the ballot. They did something more sinister – they bought gold!
As inflation outcomes and expectations climbed, the real rate of return on bank deposits started
to get eroded and even turned negative. Saving in financial assets became a losing proposition.
So people pulled out their money from bank deposits and other financial assets and put it into
gold. For India, buying gold is just another conduit of capital flight; only 2 per cent of India’s gold
demand is mined domestically. Since 2012, India was already the largest consumer of gold. In
the troubled years (2009–12), an annual average of 700–800 tonnes of gold imports surged to
cross 1000 tonnes. With gold constituting 11 per cent of total imports, the current account deficit
began to expand and by the third quarter of 2012–13, it reached 6.8 per cent of GDP – a time
bomb  ticking  away,  waiting  to  explode.  Indeed,  the  RBI  warned  of  the  danger  posed  by  the
burgeoning current account deficit in its monetary policy statements of 2011–12 and 2012–13,
but with the intoxicating surges of capital inflows of that time, these warnings went unheeded.
In hindsight, it was a crisis waiting for ignition. That was provided in May 2013 when the Federal
Reserve (Fed) hinted at the possibility of normalising monetary policy later in the year. Financial
markets were rudely jolted out of the complacency that the Fed’s quantitative easing (QE) had
spread  since  2009.  Foreign  capital  started  frantically  herding  at  exits  out  of  emerging  market
economies (EMEs) to scramble for safe haven. Currencies, yields and equities were roiled as
investors  fled  out  of  EMEs  –  perceived  as  risky  asset  classes  –  and  contagion  claimed  one
economy  after  another.  In  particular,  they  lost  faith  in  five  emerging  economies  –  Brazil,
Indonesia, Turkey, South Africa, and India. The epithet – the “fragile five” – entered the lexicon of
financial markets.
Inflation had perniciously attacked the Indian economy in more ways than one. What started out
as a dose of food inflation had eventually morphed into a balance of payments crisis. Monetary
policy was subjected to its most severe challenge – the evaporation of credibility. The time for
reform had arrived unannounced and was demanding immediate attention.
III. Building the Institutional Framework
The immediate response of the government and the RBI was to arrest the deterioration in the
external  accounts.  Buffering  up  the  reserves,  restricting  gold  imports,  tightening  domestic
liquidity to push up market interest rates – much has been written about the 2013 defence of the
economy, and visceral memories of that turmoil remain. But, it was a time for soul searching –
something rather basic was broke and needed to be fixed. The pledge of good governance and
macroeconomic management to the people had taken a body blow and had to be re-built. Early
on, it was clear that a fundamental change was due, something that would shake up the system
and unsettle the ruling orthodoxy, something that would require an amendment to the RBI Act.
Accordingly,  starting  in  2014,  the  RBI  embarked  upon  building  stone  by  stone  –  though  not
necessarily in chronological order – the institutional plinth for a new monetary policy framework.
In  September  2013,  an  Expert  Committee  to  Revise  and  Strengthen  the  Monetary  Policy
Framework  was  set  up.  The  Expert  Committee’s  recommendations  provided  the  intellectual
edifice on which the new framework would rest. It was an internally consistent model, complete
in  itself,  ranging  from  the  goal(s)  of  monetary  policy;  the  instrument  rule  that  would  guide  the
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy  maker’s  pursuit  of  the  goal;  the  operating  procedure;  the  transmission;  and  the
international dimensions of monetary policy. It drew heavily on work accumulated before it and
broke new ground as well.
1
The consumer price index, the official metric for gauging inflation, struck a chord with households
and consumers by capturing price changes at the retail level, unlike the WPI which is closer to a
producer price index or at least, it reflects wholesale price changes and tells households about
inflation measured before it reaches them. Moreover, the WPI was until January 2012 a weekly
index comprising 676 items. Price relatives were not always available or collected and often they
were just repeated . All this was easier said than done. The public had for long been used to the
RBI articulating inflation concerns in terms of the WPI under a multiple indicator based monetary
policy framework. In January 2015, a new all India consumer price index had been constructed
with 2012 as its base. The problem for the RBI was, however, that it had never reacted to CPI
inflation  before.  Consequently,  the  responsiveness  of  CPI  inflation  to  policy  impulses  was
unknown. There was no way to calibrate policy actions. The anointment of headline CPI inflation
as the official measure of inflation was a brave move in another significant aspect – almost half
of the CPI basket was food! The Indian economy has had a long history of being buffeted by food
shocks  which  exhibit  persistence  and  spillovers.  Supply  shocks  cannot  be  within  the  remit  of
monetary policy. The RBI took the view that although the first incidence of a food shock is outside
the  purview  of  monetary  policy,  second  round  effects  such  as  on  inflation  expectations  and
especially, spillovers impacting the rest of inflation are! It also judged that headline CPI inflation is
more easily communicated than an exclusion measure stripped of its most salient components.
The RBI set out a glide path for bringing down inflation from its peak of 11.5 per cent in November
2013 towards more conscionable levels, abjuring a big bang in order to minimise output losses of
disinflation. Within this path, it set up self-imposed targets – 8 per cent by the end of 2014; 6 per
cent  by  end-2015  and  5  per  cent  by  end-2016.  These  targets  were  achieved  with  a  large
measure  of  good  luck  (the  collapse  of  international  commodity  prices  in  2014;  geometric
averaging in the new CPI) but perhaps fortune favours the brave! This was the backdrop against
which the MPC set about its work. It was destined to confront a growth-inflation balance on the
razor’s edge over the year ahead amidst heightened uncertainty.
IV. The Year Gone By
The first year of the MPC’s functioning would be a tumultuous one in more ways than one. After
several false starts, global demand and trade secured a tenuous foothold in the second half of
2016  and  gained  traction  through  the  first  half  of  2017.  Financial  markets  were  churned  by
political events, though. In November 2016, the US presidential elections stampeded capital flows
out of EMEs and a surge of the US dollar triggered sizeable depreciations in currencies around
the world. Again in January 2017, the ‘Brexit’ roadmap and expectations of fiscal expansionism
by the new US administration propelled the US dollar to a multi-year high. As 2017 progressed,
reflation trade lifted equity markets, hardened bond yields and returned capital flows to emerging
markets.  The  US  dollar’s  bull  run  lost  steam  by  mid-March;  in  fact,  it  weakened  right  through
early  September,  while  EME  currencies  traded  with  an  appreciating  bias.  By  late  September,
however,  there  was  a  complete  reversal.  The  US  dollar  clawed  back  lost  ground  with  the
announcement  of  Fed  balance  sheet  normalisation  and  tensions  around  North  Korea.  Capital
outflows from EME equity markets gathered pace. For India, an improvement in external sector
viability occurred despite these global developments. Generally buoyant capital inflows buffered
up the foreign exchange reserves.
What would challenge the MPC throughout the year was the domestic dilemma – the trade-off
between inflation and growth was set to become sharp and the tension between the two so acute
that  it  would  eventually  impact  the  voting  pattern  of  the  MPC.  Shortly,  I  am  going  to  focus
exclusively  on  the  trials  and  tribulations  facing  the  MPC  in  this  crucial  balancing  act;  for  a
moment, however, let me introspect on the RBI.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the time of the MPC’s first meeting a year ago, the RBI itself was caught up in the throes of
leadership change – the twenty-fourth Governor had just assumed office; the Deputy Governor
responsible  for  monetary  policy  had  not  yet  been  appointed,  and  the  senior-most  Deputy
Governor had to step in to complete the six-member MPC. Also, the RBI had been working with
the  convivial  guidance  of  a  technical  advisory  committee  since  2005.  The  more  formal
processes associated with an MPC had to be literally tailored from the cross-country experience
to adapt to the  country-specifics.  What  emerged  was  quite  a  unique  sequence  of  institutional
procedures informed heavily by internal management information systems.
As the MPC set about its first meeting, the accommodative cycle of monetary policy in India that
commenced  in  January  2015  was  maturing,  with  the  policy  rate  having  been  reduced  by  a
cumulative 150 basis points already. Yet, the ground underneath was moving. Macroeconomic
and liquidity conditions were about to undergo tectonic shifts. The combination of a stronger than
usual seasonal spike in vegetable prices, highly elevated pulses prices and international crude
prices firming up from a recent trough, veered inflation up from its projected path during April-July
2016, even as growth slowed. In the August CPI reading – which was the first print that became
available to the MPC – a glimpse of the forming vortex was revealed. With a suddenness that
overturned the April-July surge, inflation fell off a cliff as the prices of vegetables and pulses sank
into deflation!
In  these  challenging  circumstances,  the  MPC  prognosticated  inflation  developments  as  “…a
downward  shift  in  the  momentum  of  food  inflation  –  which  holds  the  key  to  future  inflation
outcomes….” This assessment would turn out to be prophetic! On the hope that the satisfactory
monsoon and cautious business optimism would quicken growth in the window of opportunity
that the lull in inflation opened up, the MPC voted unanimously for a reduction of 25 basis points
in the policy rate. This took the cumulative rate reduction to 175 basis points in this phase of
easing. In this meeting, the MPC maintained an accommodative policy stance.
Just  a  month  later,  demonetisation  –  which  involved  withdrawal  of  about  87  per  cent  of  the
outstanding  stock  of  currency  from  circulation,  setting  off  a  sudden  liquidity  explosion  in  the
system  –  altered  monetary  conditions  drastically.  Over  the  next  few  months,  the  pangs  of
currency  exchange  preoccupied  the  nation,  but  when  the  definitive  history  of  that  time  is
documented,  the  RBI’s  valiant  defence  of  financial  stability,  right  from  the  morning  after,  will
hopefully receive its due. As the withdrawn currency notes were returned by the public, deposits
flooded  into  banks  and  swamped  them  with  idle  reserves.  A  wall  of  liquidity  started  moving
through financial markets, threatening to take down everything in its path – interest rates; yields;
exchange rates; asset prices. Standing alone between the ocean of liquidity and financial chaos,
the  RBI  mounted  an  extraordinary  liquidity  absorption  strategy.  It  combined  unconventional
instruments with regular operations when the liquidity tsunami was so overwhelming that it could
have completely depleted the RBI’s stock of government securities that are used as collateral in
reverse repo auctions. In order to tide over the delay in obtaining market stabilisation scheme
securities from the government, the incremental cash reserve ratio (ICRR) was deployed and for
the first time in the RBI’s history, an ICRR of the size of 100 per cent of the relevant demand and
time liabilities of banks was applied.
These austere conditions weighed ponderously upon the MPC’s meetings in December 2016,
February  and  April  2017. Ab  initio,  the  MPC  recognised  that  its  assessment  of  underlying
conditions  will  likely  be  clouded  by  demonetisation  effects  that  were  unfolding  in  the  form  of
transient  disruption  of  cash-intensive  segments  of  the  economy,  an  abrupt  compression  of
demand,  restrained  discretionary  spending  and  fire  sales  of  perishables  that  would  reduce
inflation  temporarily.  Accordingly,  it  decided  –  unanimously  again  –  to  look  through  these
‘transitory  but  unclear  effects’  that  were  influencing  the  outlook  disproportionately.  It  kept  the
policy rate unchanged through these meetings, but noting that inflation excluding food and fuel
was setting a floor to headline inflation by exhibiting downward inflexibility. The MPC also worried
that  global  financial  market  spillovers  could  impact  macroeconomic  conditions  in  emerging
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
markets. Accordingly, it changed the policy stance from accommodative to neutral in its February
meeting. Importantly, the MPC renewed its commitment to the inflation target of 4 per cent. In
keeping with this stance, the RBI refined its liquidity management framework in its April meeting,
inter alia narrowing the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) corridor to +/-25 basis points (from +/-50
basis  points  earlier)  to  ensure  a  finer  alignment  of  the  weighted  average  call  money  rate,  the
operating target of monetary policy, with the policy rate.
Three features distinguish these meetings of the MPC. First, it was assailed by the criticism of
large one-sided inflation forecast errors right up to the June inflation print, which turned out to be
a historic low. Demonetisation was readily available to denounce. Yet, the collapse in inflation
occurred  from  August  2016,  well  before  demonetisation,  which  could  have  accentuated  it
transitorily  during  November  2016-January  2017.  The  cumulative  deviation  of  80  basis  points
between actual inflation and forecasts between August 2016 and June 2017 was entirely due to
the twin deflation of vegetable and pulses prices that produced a trend shift, holding a mirror to
serious errors in food management which would later ignite wide-spread farmers’ unrest. In this
context, the MPR of October 2017 stated: “These developments may warrant a reappraisal of the
scope and quality of food management strategies that seem prone to failure in the face of shocks
in either direction. In the past too, supply shocks, of which large one-sided deviations of inflation
from projections are merely a symptom, drove disinflation episodes.” In the rush to pillory the
scapegoat, attention was diverted from the real issues and consequently, from the right fixes.
Second,  there  was  an  overwhelming  preference  to  wait  out  the  transitory  effects  of
demonetisation. Although today, it appears the logical decision to take, markets were taken by
surprise by the neutral stance and sentiment turned bearish. At the cost of a hawkish tone, the
MPC was striving to anchor expectations in a situation when even the near-term was a step in
the dark. Third, the decisions of the MPC in these meetings were taken by unanimity, although
driven  by  individualistic  approaches.  The  MPR  of  April  2017  surveyed  the  recent  country
experience  and  found  many  decisions  taken  by  unanimity.  Where  differences  were  revealed,
they were typically confined to the size of the change in the policy rate rather than contesting the
overarching policy stance.
The June and August meetings of the MPC were different from the three that preceded them,
being literally on the horns of the growth-inflation dilemma. Although inflation had firmed up a bit in
February  and  March,  its  abrupt  and  significant  retreat  in April  caused  the  MPC  to  lower  the
forecast path of inflation for 2017–18 from 4.5 per cent in H1 and 5 per cent in H2 to 2-3.5 per
cent  in  H1  and  3.5-4.5  per  cent  in  H2  in  its  June  meeting.  It  unambiguously  pointed  out  that
“prices of pulses are clearly reeling under the impact of a supply glut caused by record output
and imports. Policy interventions, including access to open trade, may be envisaged to arrest the
slump  in  prices.”  Abundant  supply,  coupled  with  the  renege  on  procurement  by  designated
agencies, resulted in the market price of pulses falling sharply below minimum support prices
fixed by the government. Nonetheless, the MPC did express misgivings about the durability of the
unusually  low  momentum  of  inflation,  the  likelihood  of  petrol  and  diesel  prices  rising,  and  the
possibility that the stickiness of inflation excluding food and fuel would re-assert itself soon. It also
indicated that the transitory effects of demonetisation have ‘lingered on in price formations’ and
warned that ‘premature action at this stage risks disruptive policy reversals later and the loss of
credibility.’ Importantly, the MPC prognosis of economic activity also reflected its concern about a
deeper than initially anticipated loss of momentum. It underscored the urgency around reviving
private investment, restoring banking sector health and removing infrastructural bottlenecks all of
which were outside the purview of monetary policy but would greatly enhance its effectiveness.
For the first time, the MPC voted to keep the policy rate unchanged not by unanimity but by a five-
member majority, as the scars left by falling growth and inflation set up conflicting pulls.
In the August meeting, the MPC saw for the first time the impact of the implementation of the
house rent allowance (HRA) for central government employees for which it had been preparing
the  public  for  some  time,  especially  the  need  to  distinguish  between  ‘statistical’  and  second
round effects. The former would merely push up the index without actual inflation, while the latter
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
would warrant careful monitoring for evidence of generalisation. The MPC observed that some
upside risks to inflation had reduced – inflation excluding the HRA impact would likely be only a
little above 4 per cent by Q4; inflation excluding food and fuel had fallen significantly over the past
three months – but underlying growth impulses in industry and services were weakening, given
corporate deleveraging and the retrenchment of investment demand. In fact, growth projections
for 2016–17 and 2017–18 had been revised down by a cumulative 70 basis points and 10 basis
points, respectively (in its October 2017 meeting, the MPC would revise it down even further, as I
will shortly bring out, and the cumulative downward adjustment would be 70 basis points for each
year).  Seizing  the  space  that  had  opened  up  for  some  accommodation,  the  MPC  decided  to
reduce the policy repo rate by 25 basis points but with a neutral stance. In order to derive the
maximum  effects  of  the  rate  cut,  it  reiterated  the  urgent  need  to  revive  private  investment,
remove infrastructure bottlenecks, resolve stress in corporate balance sheets and recapitalise
public sector banks to help restart credit flows. This time around, the vote was carried by a four-
member majority, and the divergence in voting preference was two-sided – one member voted
for status quo while another voted for a rate cut by 50 bps.
V. The Fourth Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy, 2017–18
The monetary policy statement of October 2017 was framed in quite a dramatic setting. Even as
growth broadened globally, it slowed below 6 per cent for the second quarter in a row in India in
April-June. At this rate, India was still among the fastest growing large economies of the world,
but the blow from the growth print was significant enough to set off a chorus of alarm.
The slowdown was essentially located in manufacturing activity which slumped to a 20-quarter
low. Over the recent few years, industrial output has shown synchronicity across geographies,
with trade being identified as the channel of co-movement. In the early part of 2017–18, however,
Indian industry has been an outlier, decelerating just when industrial production the world over is
on the mend. Transient disruptions associated with the GST rollout are likely operating as a drag.
Nonetheless, it is fair to say that the nation is impatient to see a revival in industry, especially as
capital formation staged a modest recovery.
Sharpening the dilemma for the MPC, retail inflation rose nearly 200 basis points since its last
meeting. The upturn was broad-based, provoking households to expect that the general level of
prices would increase by more than the current rate in the months ahead. Input costs facing both
farms  and  firms  rose,  but  weak  pricing  power  in  conditions  of  subdued  demand  prevented  a
fuller-blown pass-through into retail inflation.
In the MPC’s assessment, inflation will likely rise from current levels in the rest of the year, with
farm  loan  waivers  and  the  implementations  of  pay  and  allowance  revisions  by  states a la  the
centre posing upside risks. The MPC also pensively expressed concern about the spectres of
geopolitical tensions and imminent normalisation of systemic central bank balance sheets that
loomed over the outlook. On food inflation, the MPC’s prognosis was more sanguine though, with
adequate foodstocks and supply management efforts seen as mitigating factors.
On growth, the MPC regarded the first estimates of kharif production – which were lower than
last year’s level and the target for this year – and the GST rollout as early but transitory setbacks.
It  believed  that  agricultural  activity  will  improve  from  here  on.  Furthermore,  it  found  business
optimism  expressed  by  firms  about  prospects  for  the  October-December  quarter  reassuring.
Relative  to  its August  assessment,  the  MPC  lowered  its  growth  forecast  by  60  basis  points
which,  in  a  rough  and  ready  sense,  measures  the  net  lagged  impact  of  shocks  such  as
demonetisation and the GST.
The  MPC  expressed  the  view  that  recent  structural  reforms  would  support  growth  over  the
medium-term. Accordingly,  it  expected  upsides  to  the  growth  forecast  from  the  resolution  of
GST-related  impediments  and  from  the  pay  and  allowance  revision  for  state  government
employees,  while  the  hardening  of  input  costs  and  the  loss  of  consumer  confidence  would
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
balance the risks.
The MPC was particularly candid in drawing out the bottom line: “…it is imperative to reinvigorate
investment  activity.”  For  this,  creation  of  a  conducive  environment  for  investment  is  critical,
involving adequate recapitalisation of stressed banks, closing the infrastructure gap, simplifying
the  GST,  hastening  clearances  and  rationalising  procedures  by  states  relating  to  investment
proposals.
Against this backdrop of its appraisal of the evolution of macroeconomic and financial conditions,
the MPC decided to hold the policy rate unchanged and to maintain a neutral policy stance. In the
reactions that followed, there seemed a central tendency that the MPC may have called right.
VI. Concluding Remarks
I hope my thoughts on the recent monetary policy engagement have provided some clarity on the
challenges  confronting  the  MPC  and  the  rationale  underlying  its  decisions.  Monetary  policy  is
ultimately the art or science of the feasible. Ben Bernanke, when he was chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board, was once asked by Liaquat Ahmed, the author of the celebrated book Lords of
Finance, as to how confident he was that the theory of quantitative easing or QE would work. His
reply – “The problem with QE is it works in practice but it doesn’t work in theory” – provoked
laughter, but it is so true of monetary policy more generally. Monetary policy decision making is
always complex and severely testing. It is typically undertaken in an explosion of diverse views,
each differing from the other in expressing intensity and fervour. The endeavour of our MPC has
been to try to share with the public through its resolutions and through individual minutes a set of
balanced assessments so that monetary policy in India becomes transparent and predictable.
Looking ahead, the task of the MPC is cut out and I can do no better than quote Governor Dr.
Patel  from  his  recent  interview:  “we  should  aim  at  achieving  the  inflation  target  without  losing
sight of supporting economic growth.”
1
The WPI has a low weight for food items, which is not in sync with consumption patterns of households. It does
not includes services. Price relatives are drawn from a mix of markets, but primarily from bulk sale markets
where ordinary consumer do not shop.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
