ACRI
Association of Italian Savings Banks
2017 World Savings Day
Address by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Rome, 31 October 2017
      A strengthening economy  
After five years of weak growth, world trade is again expanding at a steady pace and 
 
global  GDP  is  clearly  gaining  strength.  Despite  geopolitical  tensions,  the  outlook  is 
favourable in most economies and financial market conditions are very relaxed, reflecting a 
reduced perception of risk. 
 
Buoyed  above  all  by  expanding  domestic  demand,  GDP  growth  is  picking  up  in  the 
euro  area  as  well;  the  risks  of  deflation  have  disappeared.  Excluding  the  most  volatile 
components, price increases remain low at just over 1 per cent. This reflects rather modest 
wage growth in many economies, including Italy, owing to still high levels of underutilized 
labour.  
 
Last  week,  in  the  ECB  Governing  Council  we  decided  to  continue  making  net 
purchases of government securities and private bonds until the end of September 2018, or 
beyond  if  necessary,  recalibrating  the  monthly  purchases  to  €30  billion  as  of  January 
2019. We stand ready to strengthen the programme if conditions become inconsistent with 
further  progress  on  inflation. We  expect  official  interest  rates  to  remain  at  their  present 
levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. 
The  principal  payments  on  maturing  securities  will  continue  to  be  re-invested  for  some 
time  after  the  end  of  the  purchases,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary.  These 
decisions  will  allow  a  high  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  to  be  maintained  even 
going forward. 
 
The  cyclical  indicators  and  the  data  gathered  from  surveys  indicate  that  growth  is 
continuing to gain strength in Italy too, thanks to reforms, international economic conditions 
and a strongly  expansionary monetary policy. Employment has increased to levels close to 
those recorded before the global financial crisis and continues to rise. 
 The renewed growth in lending and the outlook for the banking sector 
 
Economic expansion in Italy has been accompanied by an uneven recovery in lending, 
which  has  been  concentrated  among  households  and  among  those  firms  that  have 
strengthened their financial position and are now ready to invest and expand their production 
capacity.  Lending  is  once  again  increasing  in  manufacturing  and  services,  while  the 
construction sector continues to reduce its debt from the particularly high pre-crisis levels. 
Our  surveys  on  banks  and  firms  point  to  a  gradual  upturn  in  demand  for  financing, 
 
driven by the recovery in  investment and favourable credit access conditions. Interest rates 
remain very low and, since the second half of 2015, have been basically equal to the euro-area 
average. 
 
Meanwhile, credit quality continues to improve.  In the second quarter of this  year 
the flow of new non-performing loans fell to 2 per cent of total lending, a level consistent 
with  the  average  observed  in  the  years  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  stock  of 
non-performing loans is also decreasing rapidly: net of write-downs, in June it had fallen 
to  €150  billion,  equal  to  8.4  per  cent  of  total  loans,  from  the  peak  of  €200  billion,  or 
around 11 per cent of total loans, reached in 2015. The ratio of bad debts to total loans has 
declined from 4.8 to 3.9 per cent. Over the next few months, disposals and securitizations 
already under way and those recently announced by a number of banks will further drive 
down the stock of NPLs, which, net of existing write-downs, should fall below 8 per cent 
of total loans in the early months of 2018. 
Banks’  balance  sheets  need  to  be  further  bolstered  to  make  them  better  able  to 
 
withstand, now and going forward, the risks still weighing on the economic outlook. Banks 
are responding to this also by referring to the ECB’s ‘Guidance to banks on non-performing 
loans’ issued in March  2017. The measures to reduce the burden of non-performing assets 
announced last July during the European Council are a step in the right direction. This is also 
the aim of the introduction, which should be gradual and properly calibrated, of a calendar 
approach to write-downs for future non-performing loans. 
The  reforms  passed  in  Italy  in  recent  years  have  shortened  the  duration  of  credit 
 
recovery proceedings; there is room for further action. The recent passage of the enabling law 
laying  the  ground  for  a  comprehensive  reform  of  legislation  on  corporate  crises  and 
insolvency proceedings will provide a major contribution to this. The principles and criteria 
set out in the enabling law must be implemented and translated into rules that can truly speed 
 up credit recovery times, preserving as much as possible the value of companies that are still 
in sound condition.  
Banks must make full use of the tools that have recently become available in the domain 
 
of out-of-court settlements with firms for the restructuring of debts and the transfer of assets. 
Moreover,  having  suitable  and  timely  data  on  NPLs  is  indispensable  for  more  effective 
internal management and to facilitate their sale on the market at adequate values. Despite the 
improvement observed following the survey we launched last year, banks still need to make 
progress in this area too. 
 
The  first  six  months  of  2017  saw  an  improvement  in  the  overall  operating 
profitability  of  Italian  credit  institutions.  The  return  on  capital,  net  of  extraordinary 
components and annualized, nevertheless still stands at around 2 per cent, reflecting the 
increase in write-downs caused by the securitization of non-performing loans. The CET1 
ratio has risen from 11.5 per cent to 13.1 per cent, partly as a result of the precautionary 
recapitalization of Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena carried out in July. 
 
I  discussed the steps needed to  regain profitability and meet the  challenges posed by 
regulation, digitalization and competition in my address at the Annual Meeting of the Italian 
Banking Association. Resolute action is required, restructuring where necessary and fostering 
consolidation  where  possible.  Stronger  signs  of  recovery  and  a  favourable  outlook  for  the 
economy are an opportunity that must be acted upon swiftly. 
Italian households’ saving and wealth 
 
The  saving  rate  of  Italian  households,  which  used  to  be  high  by  international 
standards, is now below the average for the main euro-area countries. It has fallen from 19 
per cent in the mid-1990s to 8.6 per cent in 2016. This is a reflection of changes in various 
domains;  among  them,  the  fast-paced  development  of  the  financial  sector,  which  has 
increased  households’  ability  to  obtain  loans  and  redistribute  consumption  over  their 
lifetime,  the  sharp  fall  in  interest  rates,  which  has  made  those  loans  cheaper,  and 
demographic trends.  
 
During the years of the financial crisis, the decrease in the saving rate was partly due to 
low disposable income and households’ attempts to limit the repercussions on consumption. 
Our surveys on household income and wealth show that the decrease was larger in the case of 
young people, who were hardest hit by the impact of the recession on the labour market. An 
 increase  in  the  ability  to  save  therefore  needs  to  be  fostered  by  developing  adequate 
supplementary pension schemes.  
The total net wealth of Italians is almost nine times households’ disposable income. In 
per capita terms, this is comparable to the other main European countries and, like them, the 
predominant  share  (almost  two  thirds)  is  in  housing  and  other  real  assets.  While  the 
propensity to borrow has risen owing to the structural factors I mentioned earlier, it remains 
low by international standards. The total financial liabilities of Italy’s households amount to 
62 per cent of disposable income, compared with a euro-area average of nearly 100 per cent 
and even higher ratios in the English-speaking countries.    
Today, households’ investment in  financial  assets stands at more  than  €4,200  billion. 
These  are  a  popular  form  of  investment  among  the  public  and  an  important  factor  of 
social inclusion and integration. Over 90 per cent of households have at least one post office 
or bank account; in the mid-1960s, when the Bank of Italy instituted its sample surveys of 
household  budgets,  that  share  barely  surpassed  25  per  cent.  Greater  participation  by 
households  in  the  financial market has been accompanied by a gradual increase in portfolio 
diversification and in the share of savings invested in more risky assets.    
Bank  deposits  and  post  office  savings  have  long  been  the  main  form  of  investment 
(Figure  1).  Since  the  1970s,  a  large  proportion  of  savings  has  been  channelled  into 
government bonds; the 1990s saw the first significant investments in private sector securities 
and, above all, in investment funds. Since then, pension funds and individual pension plans 
have been gradually included in households’ portfolios, and at the end of last year individual 
savings plans were introduced, accompanied by tax incentives. 
The  ratio  of  cash  and  deposits  to  total  assets,  which  at  the  start  of  this  century  had 
declined to 20 per cent, has since risen to nearly 30 per cent in response to the fall in market 
rates and to the insecurity sparked by the financial and sovereign debt crises. At about 8 per 
cent, or roughly €340 billion, the share of public and private sector bonds today stands at its 
lowest level since 1950. These securities include €110 billion worth of bank bonds, of which 
about  €20  billion  in  the  form  of  subordinated  debt  (Figure  2).  Some  30  per  cent  of 
households’ bonds will expire within a year, 70 per cent by 2020. 
Since  the  end  of  the  1980s,  the  stock  of  shares  and  equity  interests,  investment  fund 
units,  insurance  reserves,  and  pension  funds  has  increased  significantly  (from  35  to  58  per 
cent of financial assets). Investment fund units have experienced particularly strong growth 
 (from  less  than  3  per  cent  in  1990  to  12  per  cent  today)  as  have  insurance  reserves  and 
pension  funds  (from  8  to  23  per  cent).  The  share  of  savings  invested  in  pension  funds, 
however, remains below that recorded in mainland Europe. 
The diversification of investments in assets bearing higher risks and returns remains a 
characteristic  of  the  wealthiest  households,  although  it  is  gradually  spreading  to  broader 
swathes of the population. In Italy just 6 per cent of households hold investment fund units 
and 9 per cent insurance savings products and pension fund units; in Germany and France the 
percentages are 13 and 9 respectively for investment fund units, and 46 and 38 for insurance 
savings and pension funds.   
The protection of savings 
The  wide  range  of  instruments  available  and  the  numerous  financial  operators  allow 
savers to make the choices best suited to their needs, to plan for the future, and to deal with 
unforeseen  events.  This  is  a  victory  that  must  be  defended  and  extended.  However,  it  can 
make decisions more complex, and increase counterparty, market and liquidity risks, which 
are often interrelated. The main criterion to be followed for proper investment management 
remains  that  of  diversification.  Savers  should  demand  that  this  principle  be  followed,  even 
when they rely on third-party advice. 
Two  broad  categories  of  public  policy  contribute  to  safeguarding  savings:  that 
designed to guarantee the stability of the financial system and that aimed at protecting savers 
as consumers of financial services. This is a much more complex matter than it was in post-
war  Italy,  when  it  was  written  into  our  Constitution;  it  requires  the  contribution  of  many 
different actors, including savers themselves. 
Economic policies that can foster growth are essential for the protection of savings. The 
value of financial assets derives from that of real assets: a company’s share and bond prices 
rise or fall according to its state of health. An economy that does not grow cannot generate the 
resources necessary to recompense the capital invested in companies, to bear the burden of 
public debt or to  enable households to  repay  their debts. Weak  economic  growth has  even 
more serious effects on financial wealth if there is also a surfeit of debt in some sectors. The 
recent financial crisis provides dramatic examples of how serious these risks are. In Italy it is 
 precisely  the  combination  of  structurally  low  growth  and  high  public  debt  that  has 
exacerbated the problems of the banking sector. 
A  crucial  safeguard  for  financial  wealth  is  price  stability.  Several  times  in  Italy’s 
history, long periods of high inflation have led to unfair reallocations of wealth, above all to 
the detriment of small savers who are less able to guard against the erosion of the value of 
money.  The  return  to  monetary  stability,  following  a  loss  of  purchasing  power  of  almost 
90  per  cent  between  1973  and  1995,  dates  back  just  over  twenty  years.  Most  recently, 
the greatest threats have come from the risk of deflation. The fall in prices increases the real 
value  of  debts,  propelling 
eventually 
undermining  financial  stability.  The  monetary  policies  implemented  by  central  banks 
are  a  bulwark against this risk. 
recession 
economy 
towards 
and 
the 
Macroeconomic policies go hand in hand with those designed to ensure the strength of 
the financial system overall and particularly that of the banking system. The crisis has led to 
more pronounced regulatory action at international level, aimed at reducing the riskiness of 
banks.  This  has  resulted  in  an  increase  in  the  quantity  and  quality  of  banks’  capital,  the 
introduction of liquidity requirements and of constraints on maturity transformation, and the 
imposition of financial leverage limits. Corporate governance systems have been reinforced 
and  additional  prudential  requirements  have  been  adopted  for  systemically  important 
institutions.  
The  banking  crisis  management  system  has  also  been  overhauled,  with  the  clear 
intention  of  placing  the  burdens  primarily,  if  not  entirely,  on  the  holders  of  banks’ 
liabilities,  with 
the  exception  of  depositors  covered  by  guarantee  schemes.  The 
consequences of these changes have been particularly important in Italy, where tools such 
as the preventive use of deposit protection funds, which had long been used successfully in 
crisis management, have become unavailable according to the interpretation of the rules on 
State aid established at EU level. 
Despite  the  greater  constraints  imposed  by  the  new  European  regulatory  framework 
during  a  far  more  serious  economic  recession,  considerably  fewer  resources  have  been 
deployed in Italy to resolve banking crises than in almost all the other main countries. The 
events of these difficult years should be assessed according to the conditions existing at the 
time and the information actually available when decisions were made. At the end of 2013, 
the International Monetary Fund, following its periodical assessment of the Italian financial 
system  (Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program,  FSAP),  had  carefully  analysed  the  data  on 
 individual banks and judged that the Italian banking system was particularly resilient and that 
its supervision was strong and effective. 
Banking supervision significantly reduces the chances of banking crises occurring, but 
 
it  cannot  entirely  eliminate  them.  Supervisory  inspections  require  accurate  and  complex 
analyses,  both  on-  and  off-site;  they  cannot  use  the  powers  that  the  law  reserves  for  the 
judicial  authorities  and  the  police  forces.  In  most  of  the  difficult  situations  experienced  by 
individual  banks,  an  analysis  of  the  data  available,  an  examination  of  the  risk  factors,  the 
complaints appraised and the inspections conducted made it possible to maintain sound and 
prudent management and to resolve tense situations in a determined yet restrained way. 
Banks  are  businesses;  under  normal  conditions,  even  difficult  ones,  the  supervisory 
 
authority cannot assume the role of the corporate officers. Transactions executed rapidly in 
order  to  evade  checks  or  to  circumvent  rules  and  restrictions  may  compromise  a  bank’s 
stability. The most serious violations were identified in time and were promptly reported to 
the judicial authorities, even though this is not always enough to avoid a crisis.   
 
Over  the  last  few  years,  resolving  banking  crises  has  proved  a  lengthy  process.  This 
reflects the changes made to the regulatory framework and the multitude of authorities and 
institutions involved. We must take a closer look at the causes of the delays and work towards 
shortening the banking crisis management procedures.  
  
Every type of investment is risky. Some instruments benefit from a guarantee scheme 
put in place in the public interest: this is the case for deposits below €100,000. This type of 
safeguard protects savings in their simplest and most accessible form, thereby contributing to 
financial stability, preventing bank runs, and minimizing the risk of contagion among banks. 
The  protection  of  other  forms  of  savings  relies  on  different  instruments  but  can  never 
completely remove the risk of loss.  
At the end of the 1980s, the Interbank Deposit Protection Fund (Fondo interbancario di 
 
tutela  dei  depositi)  was  established  in  Italy,  flanking  the  mutual  banks’  deposit  guarantee 
scheme. Thanks to these two funds, to the small proportion of non-deposit liabilities and to 
the use of public resources, until the entry into force of the new European regulations, Italian 
banking crises generated losses only for the shareholders of the institutions involved.  
 
Immediately following the outbreak of the global financial crisis, European legislators 
rightly  decided  to  strengthen  and  harmonize  deposit  guarantee  schemes,  making  them 
 obligatory. In 2014 they considerably restricted the protection of financial instruments other 
than  deposits  below  €100,000  so  as  to  prioritize  the  safeguarding  of  taxpayers  over  bank 
creditors.  As  I  have  remarked  on  several  occasions,  the  transition  to  the  new  system  was 
abrupt;  banks  were  not  given  sufficient  time  to  issue  new  debt  instruments  capable  of 
absorbing losses in the event of a crisis, and instruments that had already been issued were not 
exempt from the new rules. 
 
The protection of savings entails taking action to avoid the unintentional assumption of 
risk on the part of savers. The preventive tools employed to pursue this objective are the rules 
and checks on transparency and on the propriety of relations between banks and customers; 
the  contribution  of  financial  education  campaigns  is  essential.  A  third  tool  is  the  ex  post 
settlement of disputes both in court and out of court.  
Customer relations must be underpinned by transparency and proper conduct; this applies 
 
both  to  traditional  banking  services  (such  as  current  accounts),  where  the  Bank  of  Italy’s 
monitoring  ability  has  been  enhanced  since  2010,  and  to  the  offering  of  investment  and 
insurance products and services, which is monitored by Consob and IVASS respectively. The 
Antitrust Authority contributes by countering the adoption of improper commercial practices. 
The  presence  of  distinct  authorities  is  a  result  of  the  specific  features  of,  and  regulations 
applicable to, the various regulated sectors and of the contractual risks and structures involved. 
In the  current regulatory context, a close  working relationship  among the authorities is  even 
more important to minimize overlaps and to avoid loopholes in the safeguard mechanisms.    
 
In  recent  years,  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  strengthened  the  rules  and  controls  relating  to 
bank  services  and  products,  as  well  as  the  management  of  exposures  and  the  support  of 
alternative  dispute  resolution  schemes.  With  regard  to  improper  conduct,  in  addition  to 
sanctions on banks for regulatory violations, we have taken steps to eliminate anomalies and 
called  for  the  restitution  to  clients  of  amounts  unduly  paid:  in  the  three  years  2014-16 
approximately €200 million were reimbursed. 
 
The Banking and Financial Ombudsman (ABF) was established in 2009 to settle rapidly 
disputes  between  customers  and  financial  intermediaries.  The  ABF  works  completely 
independently,  with  support  from  the  Bank  of  Italy  in  terms  of  logistics  and  resources.  In 
2016  four  new  panels  were  set  up  in  addition  to  the  existing  three;  overall,  their  technical 
secretariats  are  staffed  by  over  100  Bank  of  Italy  employees.  Consob’s  Financial  Dispute 
Arbitrator  started  work  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  to  resolve  disputes  involving  financial 
investments. 
  
Further  instruments  will  soon  be  included  in  the  transparency  rules  to  stop  products 
being proposed if they are not suited to customer needs. The new rules on the development, 
introduction and control of financial products placed on the market (product governance) and 
on  the  remuneration  and  bonuses  of  sales  networks  will  help  to  prevent  opportunistic 
behaviour on the part of financial intermediaries.  
 However incisive, legislative obligations and protection measures alone are not enough; 
 
we also need to protect consumers by increasing their capacity to sift through the information 
at their disposal. Financial education is not only a response to the crisis, it is an indispensable 
requirement  in  the  face  of  changes  in  the  investment  instruments  on  offer.  Basic  financial 
skills are essential not only to defend against the risk of misconduct or fraud, but also to make 
the right choices in line with personal needs and financial circumstances.   
 
In some countries the aim of expanding financial education has been explicitly included 
in the mandate of the authorities that protect savings, often in the context of a more general 
national strategy, as is the case in Italy today. The recent establishment of the Committee for 
the  Planning  and  Coordination  of  Financial  Education  Activities  is  indicative  of  the 
importance that the Italian authorities give to the aim of increasing the public’s awareness in 
the fields of finance, insurance and pensions.  
The level of Italians’ financial know-how and skills is one of the lowest for adults in the 
 
OECD countries. In Italy there is little knowledge of basic concepts such as the importance of 
portfolio  diversification  and  how  interest  payments  are  calculated.  The  situation  is  better 
among young people: the latest OECD-PISA assessment, relating to 2015, indicates that the 
financial literacy of Italian 15-year-olds is in line with the European average and has clearly 
improved since the last survey. This is encouraging because it indicates that the work done in 
schools in recent years is starting to bear fruit. The Bank of Italy’ financial education project 
reached more than100,000 students in the 2016-17 school year. 
 The composition of Italian households’ financial wealth has changed greatly over time. 
 
New  risks  call  for  new  forms  of  protection  for  different  forms  of  investment.  It  would  be 
unthinkable  to  try  to  limit  savers’  choices  or  unduly  curtail  the  independence  of  financial 
 operators;  this  would  have  a  high  cost  in  terms  of  the  economic  system’s  efficiency  and 
people’s wellbeing. We need to guarantee correct, transparent information and a regulatory 
framework able to embrace change. We need to step up financial education programmes and 
make people more aware that there is no such thing as a totally safe investment. 
The protection of savings calls for monetary stability and financial stability. Through 
   
their decisions and actions the central bank and the supervisory authority pursue these aims 
vigorously; supervision of the conduct of individual banks is steadfast and intensive. We have 
no hesitation in giving an account of our actions to the Institutions and to the country. 
   Composition of households’ portfolio of financial assets: 1950-2017 (1)
(end-of-period data; per cent)
Figure 1
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2017
Deposits and cash
Shares and equity interests
Insurance products and pension funds
Government securities and bonds 
Investment fund units
Other assets
Source: Bank of Italy.
(1) For 2017, the data refer to June.
 Composition of households’ portfolio of financial assets: June 2017
Figure 2
(per cent)
2.8
31.4
8.0
Government securities
Non-bank private bonds
Ordinary bank bonds
Subordinate bank bonds
22.8
3.2
2.2
2.1
0.5
23.3
Deposits and cash
Government securities 
and bonds
Shares and equity interests
Investment fund units 
Insurance products 
and pension funds
11.7
Other assets
Source: Bank of Italy.
by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
