William C Dudley: Lessons from the financial crisis
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Economic Club of New York, New York City, 6 November 2017.
 James  Bergen,  Caren  Cox,  Gerard  Dages,  Beverly  Hirtle, Anna  Kovner,  Lisa  Kraidin,  Lorie
Logan, Jonathan McCarthy, and Kevin Stiroh assisted in the preparation of these remarks
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity today to speak again at the Economic Club of New York. 
As we mark the tenth anniversary of the onset of the financial crisis, I would  like  to  focus  on
some of the lessons we should draw from that harrowing experience, and the implications of
those lessons for regulatory policy going forward.  As always, what I have to say reflects my own
views  and  opinions  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the
Federal Reserve System.
The first lesson is that financial crises can have grave consequences—for the economy and the
nation—that can linger for many years.  The toll from the financial crisis was severe, with nine
million  jobs  lost  and  eight  million  housing  foreclosures  amid  the  deepest  economic  downturn
since  the  Great  Depression.    Moreover,  the  road  back  has  been  long  and  slow.    Despite
economic  policies  oriented  toward  supporting  recovery,  it  has  taken  eight  years  to  push  the
unemployment rate down to a level consistent with the Federal Reserve’s employment objective. 
Other  residual  impacts  include  the  large  size  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet;
significantly higher public debt; and substantial damage to public trust in the nation’s government
and financial institutions.  
The second lesson follows from the first.  We need to ensure that we have a resilient financial
system.  To that end, we must ensure that the safeguards put in place in response to the crisis
are  fully  appreciated  and  respected.    But,  it  also  means  that  we  need  to  finish  the  job—for
example, by building out a fully workable regime for resolving a complex, global firm if one were
to  become  insolvent.    We  need  to  ensure  that  our  financial  system  can  continue  to  provide
critical services not just during good times, but also during periods of stress. 
These  objectives  are  particularly  relevant  today,  when  reopening  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  and
modifying our regulatory framework are under consideration.  While it is appropriate to evaluate
adjustments that might improve our regulatory regime, it is critical that we do not forget the hard-
learned lessons of the crisis and—in the haste to reverse course—undermine the robustness
and resiliency of the financial system. 
The U.S. housing market boom and bust
At the heart of the crisis was the U.S. housing boom and bust.  Between 1997 and 2006, U.S.
home prices nearly doubled in real terms on a national basis.  Then, when the boom turned to
bust, real home prices reversed course, declining by about 40 percent on a national basis, with
1
larger  price  declines  in  several  states.       The  magnitude  of  the  national  price  declines  was
unprecedented during the postwar period.
The  evolution  of  the  financial  crisis  illustrates  a  number  of  key  issues,  including  the  potential
hazards of financial innovation, the procyclicality of the financial system, and the importance of
confidence in sustaining effective financial intermediation.
The  housing  boom  resulted  from  several  factors.    Innovations  in  subprime  mortgage  lending
enabled moderate-income households to purchase homes with negligible down payments.  This
led to an increase in the demand for housing, which helped push up home prices.  Home price
appreciation masked the potential riskiness of such lending and, in turn, sustained the wisdom of
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the easier underwriting standards.   As  long  as  home  values  were  rising,  subprime  borrowers
could either refinance their loans or sell their homes when the initial teaser rates expired.  Thus,
losses on subprime and other mortgage lending were low, reinforcing the belief that such loans
were “safe.” 
Easier  mortgage  underwriting  practices  were  also  supported  by  the  ability  of  mortgage
originators to pool their mortgages into collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), transforming low-
quality assets into triple-A-rated securities.  Investors, including banks, relied too heavily on credit
ratings  and  didn’t  do  sufficient  due  diligence  on  the  underlying  quality  of  the  assets  and  the
assumptions that underpinned the triple-A ratings.  Implicit in these ratings was the assumption
that a large, national decline in home prices was extraordinarily unlikely. 
The  rise  in  home  prices  led  to  a  surge  in  construction  activity,  which  helped  to  sustain  the
housing  boom  for  a  time.    This  effect  was  particularly  powerful  in  states  such  as  Arizona,
California, Florida, and Nevada.  Rising home prices also bolstered the economy by supporting
consumption, as households monetized these gains by cash-out refinancings and home equity
lines of credit. 
The  housing  boom  was  also  supported  by  an  accompanying  financial  boom.    The  financing
activity  associated  with  the  surge  in  mortgage  originations  and  securitizations  pushed  up  the
earnings of the major banking and securities firms.  These strong earnings created incentives to
ease underwriting standards further. 
But, as housing supply responded to the increase in home prices—housing starts rose from a
1.5  million  annual  rate  in  mid-2000  to  a  2.3  million  annual  rate  in  early  2006—the  positive
feedback loop began to run in reverse.  Home prices began to soften, subprime borrowers found
it more difficult to refinance, and mortgage loan defaults and delinquencies rose.  As the bust got
underway in earnest, residential investment declined and consumer spending was undercut as
home equity levels fell. 
The housing boom and bust underscores several important lessons.  First, the financial sector is
not only a very complex system, but also one that can be inherently unstable—subject to excess,
then  sharp  reversal.    This  is  especially  the  case  when  an  important  innovation  occurs  and
market participants don’t fully appreciate the powerful feedback loops that first sustain a boom
and  then  contribute  to  a  bust  when  the  process  runs  in  reverse.    This  means  that  we  as
regulators  must  continually  evaluate  the  financial  system  and  monitor  the  landscape  for  new
developments and innovations that, if taken too far, could lead to excess and put the system at
risk. 
Second, when there are potential excesses that could threaten financial stability, we should look
to temper them.  For example, in the run-up to the financial crisis, macroprudential tools—such
as requiring larger down payments or more closely evaluating the incomes of borrowers—could
have been implemented to limit the demand for housing.  If such an approach were successful,
home prices would not have risen so dramatically, and the subsequent bust would have been
less  severe.   Another  approach  would  have  required  financial  intermediaries  to  build  stronger
capital and liquidity buffers as protection against a housing bust and an economic downturn. 
Prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  the  conventional  wisdom  was  that  asset  bubbles  could  not  be
identified in real time—rather, they could only be cleaned up after they burst.  While there are
significant challenges to identifying asset bubbles, it is clear that cleaning up only after they burst
does not always work out well in practice. 
Third, we need to carefully monitor the incentives that govern the behavior of borrowers, savers,
and financial intermediaries. 
During the crisis, some examples of bad incentives that sustained the boom included:
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
1.  Compensation  practices  at 
financial 
firms 
that  rewarded  volume  and  short-term
performance over longer-term, sustainable returns;
2.  The conflict of interest inherent in the willingness of the credit rating agencies to designate
tranches of subprime mortgages triple-A in exchange for fees;
3.  The ability of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to use their implicit government support to take
on large amounts of mortgage risk with very little capital backing; and,
4.  The ability of AIG to use its triple-A rating to provide credit protection to banks and securities
firms against complex mortgage obligations with little direct capital support or an adequate
liquidity backstop.
Culmination of the crisis
Once the housing bust got underway, stress on the financial system increased sharply as asset
prices fell and bank earnings plunged.  In the spring of 2008, such pressures led to a forced sale
of Bear Stearns to JPMorgan Chase.  Later in the year, the government placed Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac into conservatorship.  In September, Lehman Brothers failed.  And, a day later, AIG
was rescued in order to protect the rest of the financial system against further losses and even
broader  contagion.    With  confidence  in  financial  markets  and  financial  intermediaries  badly
frayed, the Federal Reserve and the U.S. government intervened and provided a range of liquidity
backstops, debt guarantees, and capital infusions to forestall a complete collapse of the financial
system and the economy. 
The bust exposed many structural flaws in the financial system that exacerbated its instability. 
Without  being  exhaustive,  these  included  the  instability  of  the  tri-party  repo  system,  which
supported the nation’s short-term funding markets; the risks of runs in the money market mutual
fund industry; and the risk of contagion caused by the huge volume of outstanding bilateral (non-
centrally  cleared)  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivative  obligations  between  the  major  financial
intermediaries. 
The tri-party repo system was centered on two of the major U.S. banks.  The system matched
investors and borrowers each day—with the investors lending cash, secured by Treasuries and
other collateral, to the major securities firms.  But, the system was unstable.  In times of stress,
clearing banks could be faced with very large single-firm exposures—of potentially hundreds of
billions  of  dollars.    Not  surprisingly,  when  such  counterparties  became  troubled,  the  clearing
banks were less willing to take on these large intraday exposures.  As a result, repo investors,
who  were  primarily  worried  about  getting  repaid  each  morning,  were  motivated  to  simply
withdraw from the market.  As short-term investors withdrew funding, the liquidity buffer of the
troubled securities firm was quickly exhausted, particularly as other counterparties to that firm
demanded additional collateral to secure their own exposures. 
Structural weaknesses in the money market mutual fund industry—which was a major source of
short-term  wholesale  funding  to  the  securities  industry  and  various  non-bank  financial
corporations—also  exacerbated  the  crisis.    When  Lehman  Brothers  failed,  the  value  of  its
outstanding short-term obligations collapsed.  The Reserve Primary Fund “broke the buck,” and
investors rushed to withdraw their funds from prime institutional money market mutual funds in a
modern  version  of  a  classic  “bank  run.”    The  funds  generally  did  not  have  sufficient  cash
available  to  meet  these  runs  because  they  offered  overnight  liquidity  at  par  value  against  a
portfolio of assets with weighted average maturities that were considerably longer. 
Another important source of instability was the large volume of bilateral OTC derivatives positions
outstanding among the major firms and the right of a firm to immediately close out such positions
if their counterparty became insolvent.  For example, when Lehman Brothers failed in September
2008,  counterparties  to  Lehman  terminated  OTC  derivatives  in  which  the  contract  was  in  the
money (i.e., Lehman owed money to the counterparty) and liquidated the collateral held against
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
those obligations, but kept open obligations in which the exposure went the other way, from them
to Lehman.  Not only did this create an imbalance in the risk exposures of the failed firm, but it
also generated significant market churn and risk as firms scrambled to rebalance their own risk
exposures.  The contagion generated by the complex web of outstanding bilateral OTC derivative
exposures significantly worsened the crisis and was responsible for much of the losses Lehman
2
incurred in its bankruptcy.   
The near-collapse of the U.S. financial system underscores three critical lessons. 
First,  financial  institutions  must  be  robust  to  stress.  In  particular,  they  need  to  have  enough
capital  to  be  considered  solvent  even  after  sustaining  significant  losses,  so  that  they  can
maintain the market access needed to recapitalize. They also need sufficient liquidity buffers so
that they can respond to shocks without having to sell illiquid assets. The forced sale of illiquid
assets  can  push  asset  valuations  far  below  their  fundamental  value,  which  can  increase
insolvency  risk.    And,  it  is  important  that  they  not  be  overly  reliant  on  short-term  wholesale
funding, which can evaporate during times of stress. 
Second, when we identify potential sources of instability that could amplify shocks, we need to
make structural changes to the financial system to reduce or eliminate them. For example, the
financial crisis made it clear that changes were needed in how tri-party repo transactions were
unwound each day, net asset values were calculated for prime money market mutual funds, and
OTC derivative obligations were cleared, settled, and risk-managed. 
Third, there should be a viable and predictable resolution regime. We need to be able to resolve a
large, systemically important bank or securities firm in a way that limits contagion and stress on
the rest of the financial system, while at the same time protecting the taxpayer against loss. 
Meanwhile, central counterparties (CCPs)—through which most standardized OTC derivatives
must  now  be  cleared—need  to  be  open  for  business  for  the  financial  system  to  operate
effectively.  Here, the emphasis should be on ensuring that these financial market utilities can
open for business the day after the failure of one or more of their participants.  Credible resolution
regimes for large banks and securities firms—and credible recovery regimes for CCPs and other
critical financial market utilities—should help support confidence during times of stress. 
These measures would make the financial system less prone to booms and busts.  Financial
intermediaries would be more robust to stress when busts inevitably occur, and contagion to the
broader  system  would  be  reduced  when  a  systemically  important  firm  fails.    Such  changes
should reduce the likelihood of the failure of a large, systemically important firm and the negative
consequences of such a failure on the broader financial system.  These steps should help to
ensure that credit flows can be sustained throughout the business cycle.
Considerable progress
So, where are we relative to what is needed?  As I see it, there has been considerable progress. 
The nation’s largest banks are much safer as a result of substantially higher capital and liquidity
requirements,  as  well  as  robust  stress  tests.    This  enhanced  resiliency  has  been  achieved
without a significant negative impact on the broad availability of credit—recognizing that it is now
more  difficult  for  households  with  low  credit  scores  to  obtain  a  mortgage.    Most  importantly,
improving the capacity of such firms to continue to lend during times of stress should make the
overall economy more stable. 
We  have  also  made  significant  progress  in  addressing  many  of  the  structural  weaknesses
uncovered  by  the  financial  crisis.    Money  market  reform  has  made  the  prime  money  market
mutual fund industry smaller and safer.  The elimination of the net asset value convention for
institutional prime money market mutual funds has made these funds smaller and less prone to
runs during times of crisis.    The tri-party repo system has been made more stable as intraday
3
 4 / 7
4
BIS central bankers' speeches
exposures of the large clearing banks have been dramatically reduced.    This means that they
have less reason to back away from a firm if it were to become troubled.  And, firms are much
less reliant on short-term wholesale funding. 
4
We have also reduced the amount of risk in the system by requiring that most standardized OTC
derivatives be cleared through CCPs, where multilateral netting occurs.    In a centrally cleared
regime, major intermediaries have net exposures to individual CCPs that replace much larger
bilateral exposures to other financial intermediaries.  Of course, this means putting more eggs in
the  CCP  basket.    So,  it  is  particularly  important  now  to  closely  watch  that  basket.   Greater
oversight  of  CCPs  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  they  have  good  governance,  sound  risk
management, robust technological infrastructures, and adequate liquidity support.  In addition, we
have made considerable progress in developing a viable resolution regime for large, systemically
important banks and securities firms. 
More work is still needed
5
6
7
Yet,  we  should  not  be  complacent,  as  there  are  important  areas  where  our  work  is  not
complete.       Relative  to  other  countries,  the  United  States  has  limited  ability  to  implement
effective macroprudential tools.  That is because oversight is shared by several different entities,
and  the  power  to  implement  macroprudential  tools  is  constrained.   Another  challenge  is  the
diverse structure of the U.S. financial system, in which non-banks and capital markets play a
substantial  role  in  credit  intermediation.    Although  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council
(FSOC) could conceivably play a greater role here, whether it will be able to do so effectively
remains uncertain. 
Another  issue  that  needs  attention  is  the  ability  to  resolve  large,  complex  financial  firms  that
operate on a global basis.  The framework of requiring such firms to hold a large buffer of debt
that could be converted into equity at the time of non-viability is an important step forward.  But,
the task of operationalizing this on a global basis in a way that is fully credible to these firms’
customers and counterparties has not been completed.  Achieving clarity about the roles and
responsibilities of home and host country authorities is still a work in progress. 
The Federal Reserve’s lack of authority to lend to a major securities dealer that gets into difficulty
is  another  outstanding  issue.  The  Dodd-Frank Act  narrowed  the  Federal  Reserve’s  authority
under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act.  No longer can the Federal Reserve lend to an
individual  securities  firm  or  non-bank  financial  intermediary.    Such  authority  may  not  be  as
necessary now that the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  has  the  power  to  lend
under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act and firms are required to have sufficient resources to support
their  resolution  plans.    But,  I  would  prefer  having  such  a  tool  available in  extremis given  the
potential need to buy time for coordination and critical decision-making. I think it is important to
ensure that one can “get to the weekend.”  Finally, the work needed to ensure that CCPs can
always recover has not yet been completed. This is an issue of increased importance given that
their role in the financial system has become more prominent.
Where the pendulum may have swung too far
At the same time, there are some areas where the pendulum may have swung too far, where the
costs  of  regulation—including  compliance  costs  and  the  potential  impact  on  the  provision  of
services—are  likely  to  exceed  the  benefits.    In  this  vein,  I  favor  regulatory  relief  for  smaller
banking organizations. First, such firms individually are not systemically important, and therefore
do not pose a significant risk to the viability of the U.S. financial system. Second, the regulatory
burdens  on  smaller  firms  can  be  heavy  because  they  don’t  have  the  scale  over  which
compliance  and  other  regulatory  costs  can  be  spread.  Regulatory  requirements  should  be
appropriately calibrated to avoid inadvertently creating a competitive advantage for larger financial
firms. 
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  also  think  that  the  Volcker  rule  could  be  modified  so  that  its  implementation  would  be  less
burdensome.   As  I  see  it,  regulators  could  review  the  criteria  for  permissible  market-making.
Trading activity should be viewed as market-making when it is customer-facing and inventories
are not excessively large or stale. Market-making serves an important function, and it is important
that  trading  desks  can  intervene  and  buy  during  flash  crashes  or  sell  during  flash
surges. Permitting this could provide greater liquidity and stability to financial markets. I would
also exempt smaller banking institutions from the Volcker rule since they rarely, if ever, engage in
proprietary trading. 
Do no harm
Many  speculate  that  Congress  will  make  changes  to  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.    If  the  scope  is
confined  mainly  to  small  bank  relief  and  adjusting  how  the  Volcker  rule  is  applied,  I  have  no
objection. But, because the Dodd-Frank Act addresses many of the key lessons of the crisis, I
think it appropriate that changes be made carefully—with a paring knife, rather than with a meat
cleaver.    Here,  I  would  underscore  the  importance  of  preserving  higher  capital  and  liquidity
requirements for systemically important banks; Title VII, which mandates the central clearing of
standardized OTC derivatives; and Title VIII, which gives the Federal Reserve an oversight role
for  financial  market  utilities  that  are  systemically  important,  and  which  helps  promote  more
uniform risk management standards. 
While Title II gives the FDIC the authority to resolve a large, complex financial firm by converting
its debt into equity and establishing a new holding company, I do not think this is necessarily the
only way to have a viable resolution regime.  However, if Title II were to be eliminated, then the
Bankruptcy Code would need to be bolstered.  There are two essential requirements: the ability
to initiate an effective resolution strategy over the weekend, and a government entity—be it the
Federal Reserve or the FDIC—that can provide a credible liquidity backstop to the recapitalized
entity when it opens for business on Monday morning.  If resolution cannot be accomplished in
this  timeframe,  confidence  would  suffer  and  there  would  be  contagion.    Without  a  credible
liquidity  backstop,  clients  and  counterparties  would  run,  making  it  much  more  difficult  for  the
recapitalized firm to conduct its business. 
I would also preserve the authority of the FSOC to designate non-banking firms as systemically
important and subject to supervision by the Federal Reserve.  As I see it, the designations of GE
Capital and AIG were successful in two important respects.  First, Federal Reserve supervision
resulted in improved corporate governance and risk management. Second, it created incentives
for the firms to alter their operations to become less systemically important in order to be de-
designated.  We should also retain this designation tool because we cannot predict which firms
and activities may emerge and become systemically important in the future.  After all, I do not
think many were focused on or worried about the activities of AIG’s Financial Products Group
several  years  before  the  financial  crisis,  though  in  retrospect  those  activities  proved  to  be
systemically important.  That part of the firm should have been better supervised and regulated. 
Summing up
In conclusion, as we reflect on potential changes to the U.S. regulatory regime, we should not
lose sight of the horrific damage caused by the financial crisis, including the worst recession of
our lifetimes and millions of people losing their jobs and homes. We had a woefully inadequate
regulatory regime in place, and while it is much better now, there is still work to do. We should
finish  the  job  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  we  should  do  no  harm  as  we  adjust  our  regulatory
regime to make it more efficient. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions.
1
Figures are based on the CoreLogic home price index (including distressed sales) and the PCE price index as
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the deflator.
For more background, see Fleming and Sarkar, The Failure Resolution of Lehman Brothers, December 2014.
For more background, see Chen, Cipriani, La Spada, Mulder and Shah, Money Market Funds and the New SEC
Regulation, March 20, 2017, and Cipriani, La Spada and Mulder, Investors’ Appetite for Money-Like Assets: The
Money Market Fund Industry after the 2014 Regulatory Reform, June 2017.
For more detail, see Tri-party Repo Infrastructure Reform.
For more background, see Over-the-Counter Derivatives.
To paraphrase Andrew Carnegie and Mark Twain.
For related remarks, see William C. Dudley, Principles for Financial Regulatory Reform, April 7, 2017.
2
3
4
5
6
7
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
