  An address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Sixth Bank of America Merrill Lynch  
Annual Summer Macro Investor Conference 
 Johannesburg 
 24 November 2017 
 Macroeconomic policy and financial risks – From 2017 into 2018 
  Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  this  sixth  Bank  of 
America Merrill Lynch Annual Summer Macro Investor Conference.  
 The  end  of  the  year  is  upon  us.  No  later  than  yesterday  did  the  South  African 
Reserve Bank  (SARB) conclude  its last Monetary Policy  Committee  (MPC) meeting 
for the year. It is around this time when many analysts and forecasters publish their 
respective outlooks for the year ahead, complete with  „baseline scenarios‟ and a list 
of  the  major  risks  thereto.  But  to  what  extent  will  these  risks  differ  from  those  that 
most  of  us  flagged  as  the  biggest  threats  12 months  ago?  Does  the  way  in  which 
economic agents and policymakers responded to those threats hold lessons for the 
future? Or do we face as many uncertainties now as we did last year?  As American 
author  David  Levithan  once  said:  “The  mistake  is  thinking  that  there  can  be  an 
antidote to the uncertainty.” We have to strive to achieve the best we can under the 
circumstances. 
 Page 1 of 12 
In  trying  to  tackle  the  questions  I  have  just  posed,  I  will  look  back  at  some  of  the 
global risks which both official and private forecasters highlighted at the turn of 2017, 
to  try  and  gauge  the  extent  to  which  these  risks  materialised,  if  at  all.  I  will  also 
consider  whether  any  new  risks  are  emerging  as  we  approach  start  of  2018,  which 
may  deserve  our  attention  in  the  year  ahead.  I  will  then  zoom  in  on  South  Africa‟s 
situation,  analysing  how  much  the  global  environment  has  influenced  domestic 
developments  over  the  past  year  and,  equally,  how  new  global  uncertainties  may 
combine with local issues to influence monetary policy over the coming year. At the 
end,  I  will  also  briefly  touch  on  yesterday‟s  monetary  policy  decision,  assuming 
however, that most of you would have seen our statement. 
 What investors feared most in early 2017 
 There was a general feeling of economic optimism, albeit a prudent one, at the start 
of  2017.  For  example,  in  its  World  Economic  Outlook  Update  published  in  January, 
the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  wrote  that  „in  [the]  advanced  economies,  a 
modest  and  uneven  recovery  [was]  expected  to  continue,  with  a  gradual  further 
narrowing of output gaps‟. Yet, in the same document, the IMF also warned that risks 
to  the  global  outlook  remained  „tilted  to  the  downside‟  and  related  to  „ongoing 
adjustments  in  the  global  economy‟.  Fears  of  disorderly  adjustment  were  indeed 
numerous,  including  in  the  US1  –  the  major  country  which  had  recovered  relatively 
fast from the global financial crisis even though it had been at its epicentre. 
 Indeed, because the imbalances created by the global crisis had healed earlier than 
in other jurisdictions, the US was also the first advanced economy to raise its interest 
rates  from  the  zero-lower  bound.  This  process  was  initially  very  gradual.  However, 
the US Federal Reserve System (Fed) then signalled a likely acceleration in the pace 
of interest-rate increases (and and that it would embark on the process of reducing in 
its  balance  sheet)  as  it  had  become  increasingly  confident  of  meeting  its  medium-
term  growth  and  inflation  goals.  In  light  of  the  earlier  key  influence  that  low  US 
interest rates had exerted on boosting risk appetite and compressing term premiums 
in  global  financial  markets,  investors  became  concerned  about  a  reversal  of  these 
earlier favourable market developments.  
                                                           
1 United States 
Page 2 of 12 
The  election  of  a  new  US  administration  in  November  2016,  which  pledged  large-
scale tax cuts and an „America first‟ approach to external trade, compounded market 
fears of a disruptive rise in US interest rates and an appreciation of the dollar. 
 In fact, many observers viewed the 2016 presidential election result in the US as one 
of many examples – albeit a key one – depicting a general shift of voters in advanced 
economies towards populist politics and policies, including a rejection of several key 
tenets of the wave of globalisation over the past few decades. The growing hostility 
towards  these  tenets  –  including  free  trade,  free  capital  flows,  and  easier  cross-
border  movement  of  labour  –  was  seen  at  its  strongest  in  continental  Europe. With 
key  elections  scheduled  throughout  2017,  not  least  in  France  and  Germany, 
observers  feared  a  move  towards  populism  that  had  the  potential  to  torpedo  the 
already delayed eurozone economic recovery.  
 At  the  same  time,  at  the  other  end  of  the  Eurasian  continent,  economic  observers 
noted  some  stabilization  in  the  Chinese  economy  and  capital  markets,  yet  doubted 
whether this pattern would be durable in light of the continued growth in imbalances 
that  it  seemed  to  involve,  not  least  of  which  was  the  ongoing  build-up  of  corporate 
debt, especially in state-owned enterprises. In turn, investors feared that China would 
continue to suffer capital outflows, which might force the authorities to again allow the 
kind  of  depreciation  in  the  yuan  exchange  rate  that  had  prompted  a  tightening  in 
global financial conditions in late 2015 and early 2016.  
 Concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  economic  stabilization  in  China  also  raised 
worries  that  the  prices  of  many  commodities  (in  particular  of  metals  and  minerals) 
could experience a renewed sell-off in view of China‟s key role in shaping demand for 
these commodities. Furthermore, the last few months of 2016 saw a jump in crude oil 
prices  as  key  producers,  both  inside  and  outside  of  OPEC2,  somewhat  surprisingly 
agreed  on  freezing  production  levels.  As  the  market  adjusted  to  a  new  supply-
demand equilibrium, the possibility of a further rise in oil prices at a time when other 
commodity prices could be on the back foot posed a risk to the economic recovery of 
both the advanced economies and the oil-importing emerging economies. 
                                                            
2 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
Page 3 of 12 
 The global backdrop that proved benign in 2017 
 However,  as  we  look  back  at  the  developments  over  this  year,  we  can  be  thankful 
that  most  of  the  risks  I  have  listed  above  did  not  materialise.  In  the  US,  policy 
normalization continued largely  like the  Fed had anticipated at  the start of  the year. 
The FOMC3 raised its Federal funds target rate by 25 basis points each at its March 
and  June  meetings,  and  markets  largely  anticipate  a  third  hike  in  December,  which 
would  bring  the  funds  target  rate  to  1.25-1.50%,  in  line  with  the  median  forecast  of 
the  FOMC  participants  at  the  start  of  2017.  Separately,  the  Fed  began  the  gradual 
unwinding of its balance sheet in October. 
 Yet these steps have not triggered the yield-curve steepening or the sell-off in riskier 
assets  that  many  feared.  In  fact,  on  17  November,  the  10-year  US  Treasury  yield 
stood at 2.36, which was 8 basis points lower than at the beginning of the year. The 
yield  curve  has  thus flattened.  At  the  same  time,  US  corporate  credit  spreads,  both 
investment-grade  and  high-yield,  are  lower  than  at  the  start  of  2017,  and  the  S&P 
500 equity index has rallied by 15% over the period. 
 Several factors contributed to this solid market performance. On the macroeconomic 
front, while real economic activity in the US continued to expand at a solid pace, price 
and wage inflation kept undershooting most official and private forecasts. Indications 
that prices may have become structurally less responsive to an erosion of economic 
slack, as well as perceptions that potential US GDP4 may have slowed over time, led 
the FOMC to lower its medium-term projection for the equilibrium Federal funds rate, 
even  as  monetary  accommodation  was  being  withdrawn.5  At  the  same  time, 
expectations for a quick and sizable fiscal stimulus in the US, which could have been 
a  justification  for  a  faster  pace  of  monetary  tightening,  gradually  faded  throughout 
2017.  
 The  economic  recovery  in  the  eurozone  continued  to  display  stronger  momentum 
than had been expected at the start of the year. Consensus forecasts for GDP growth 
                                                           
3 Federal Open Market Committee 
4 gross domestic product 
5 As of the December 2016 FOMC meeting, its median projection for the medium-term Federal funds   
rate was 3.0%; it declined to 2.75% by the September 2017 meeting. 
Page 4 of 12 
in 2017 and 2018, which stood at 1.3% and 1.6% respectively at the beginning of the 
year,  have  since  been  revised  upwards  by  0.9  and  0.2  percentage  points 
respectively.  But  the  so-called  „populist  risk‟  has  not  disappeared.  While  the  anti-
mainstream  candidates  did  not  cause  major  upsets  in  elections  in  France  or  the 
Netherlands,  the  results  still  generally  confirmed  that  a  significant  portion  of  the 
electorate  chose  candidates  who  were  openly  critical  of  globalisation  and  of  the 
policy  consensus  that  has  prevailed  over  the  past  few  decades.  Nonetheless,  this 
political  background  did  not  prevent  a  further  rise  in  business  and  consumer 
confidence in the region. If anything, the current confidence readings in the eurozone 
stand well above the average of the past decade and their increase has been broad-
based across countries. 
 The Chinese economy also performed somewhat better this year than most analysts 
had  anticipated.  While  a  degree  of  policy  tightening,  mostly  through  stricter 
regulation,  did  weigh  on  certain  components  of  domestic  demand,  Chinese  exports 
benefitted  from  an  improved  global  and  regional  trade  environment.  At  the  same 
time, the authorities‟ tighter regulatory stance appears to have succeeded in curbing 
specific  components  of  private-sector  financing  (specifically  the  funding  of  and  by 
shadow-banking  institutions)  while  keeping  bank  loan  growth  relatively  stable  and 
thus  avoiding  a  broad-based  credit  slowdown.  Finally,  pressure  on  China‟s  capital 
account  has  continued  to  moderate,  allowing  official  foreign-exchange  reserves  to 
edge up again after the losses of the previous years. 
 With respect to the oil market, OPEC members appear to have largely complied with 
their late-2016 deal to limit output, although that agreement has not been the  „game 
changer‟ that some observers had feared, in part because of the US shale industry‟s 
ability  to  quickly  ramp  up  production  once  oil  prices  exceed  the  break-even  point. 
Admittedly, oil prices posted significant gains in the latter part of the year, rising from 
a low of US$44 per barrel in mid-June to US$63 per barrel as of 23 November. Yet 
this  move  seemed  to be  more  a  reflection of  stronger  demand  (as  global  economic 
growth  exceeded  expectations)  than  of  a  supply  constraint  that  could  endanger  the 
economic recovery. 
 Overall,  considering  that  many  of  the  risks  feared  in  early  2017  did  not  materialise 
and the fact that the „push and pull‟ factors have remained favourable, the year saw 
Page 5 of 12 
renewed  and  solid net  non-resident  capital  inflows  into  emerging  markets,  including 
South  Africa.  In  an  October  report,  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  (IIF) 
projected  that  such  flows  would  rise  to  US$1.1  trillion  this  year,  or  to  about  4%  of 
emerging-market GDP – meaningfully higher than the lows of 1.5% in 2015 although 
still far off the pre-crisis peak of over 9% in 2007. The bulk of the improvement would 
reflect debt portfolio and banking-related flows. Indeed, the IIF estimates that in the 
first 10 months of 2017, the former totalled US$162 billion versus only US$37 billion 
for the whole of 2016. 
 What should we worry about for 2018? 
 Of  course,  the  fact  that  major  risks  did  not  materialise  in  2017  should  not  breed 
complacency  about  the  coming  year,  even  though  most  official  and  private 
forecasters  broadly  agree  about  a  continuation  of  the  broad-based,  relatively 
inflation-free  economic  expansion  in  most  regions  of  the  world  in  2018.  History 
teaches  us  that  it  is  often  when  most  observers  concur  about  the  low  probability  of 
negative scenarios that these unfold. The trigger of the next downturn may well be an 
event that no forecaster sees as a risk right now. Nevertheless, economic downturns 
– beyond their immediate trigger – always have deeper underlying causes. Let me list 
a  few  of  these  underlying  trends  which  could  be  sources  of  fragility  for  the  world‟s 
economy. 
 First, considerable uncertainty remains about the long-term impacts of the large-scale 
monetary stimulus put in place by the major central banks since the  global financial 
crisis  as  well  as  about  the  (more  short-term)  implications  of  its  gradual  unwinding. 
While the degree of global monetary stimulus has so far had surprisingly little impact 
on  inflation,  the  debate  remains  open  as  to  whether  this  pattern  will  continue  once 
output gaps have fully closed and once legacy issues from the  crisis (for instance in 
the  banking  sector)  have  finally  been  resolved.  Equally,  analysts  debate  whether 
even  a  gradual  unwinding  of  central  banks‟  balance  sheets  can  trigger  a  quick 
decompression  of  term  and  risk  premiums  across  major  financial  assets.  Because 
the size of these balance sheets (relative to world GDP) is unprecedented, guidance 
from economic history is limited. 
 Page 6 of 12 
Second, the recent cyclical improvement in global GDP growth may mask  persistent 
issues  around  low  trend  gains  in  productivity  which,  if  unresolved,  could  result  in 
economic agents and financial market participants being over-optimistic about future 
economic  activity.  In  most  of  the  large  economies,  both  average  labour  productivity 
and total factor productivity have slowed in the past decade or so – a trend which, at 
least in the advanced economies, has predated the global financial crisis. The exact 
causes  of  this  „secular  stagnation‟  are  not  yet  fully  understood,  and  economists 
disagree on how long it may last. As of yet, there are limited signs that this trend is 
reversing. 
 Third, despite efforts at deleveraging in some sectors and in some countries, global 
debt, as a share of GDP, remains higher than before the global financial crisis. Data 
from the Bank for International Settlements show that, as of the first quarter of 2017, 
total  credit  to  the  non-financial  sector  (in  all  reporting  countries)  stood  at  219%  of 
GDP  compared  to  185%  at  the  end  of  2008.6  While  the  credit  to  households  has 
stabilised  relative  to  GDP,  the  financing  extended  to  general  government  and  non-
financial corporations has steadily increased. If unchecked, this rising trend has the 
potential to trigger phases of financial instability in the future, weighing on growth and 
undermining financial assets. 
 In fact, in many cases the market valuations of these assets already appear elevated 
relative  to  long-run  norms,  which  increases  their  vulnerability  to  any  potential 
repricing of risk. And while these valuations may not be inconsistent across different 
categories  –  the  equity  risk  premiums  over  bond  yields,  for  example,  are  relatively 
large – this does not preclude a situation where all asset categories sell off together. 
The catalyst for such a sell-off need not be an economic one. Geopolitical tensions in 
regions  as  diverse  as  the  Middle  East,  the  Korean  Peninsula,  and the  South  China 
Sea indicate that the world is not necessarily a safer place than in previous decades.    
 The global backdrop and the South African economy 
 Let  me  now  turn  to  the  influence  that  this  global  backdrop  has  had,  and  is  likely  to 
have, on the South African economy.  
                                                           
6 These statistics use credit data at market value, converted at PPP-adjusted exchange rates. 
Page 7 of 12 
 As  I  have  mentioned  above:  the  relatively  benign  global  environment,  coupled  with 
the  failure  of  key  risks  to  materialise,  has  supported  a  continued  inflow  of  capital 
towards emerging markets in 2017 – and South Africa was no exception. IIF statistics 
show  that,  in  the  first  10  months  of  the  year,  net  non-resident  purchases  of  South 
African debt instruments totalled US$4.9 billion, up from US$1.9 billion in the whole 
of last year.  
 Such  inflows,  up  to  the  last  couple  of  months,  have  helped  the  country‟s  financial 
assets  to  weather  unfavourable  domestic  growth  developments  as  well  as  political 
and  policy  uncertainty  without  any  major,  or  lasting,  consequences.  For  example, 
from  early  January  to  the  end  of  August 2017,  the  rand‟s  trade-weighted  exchange 
rate  depreciated  by  only  2.5%  and  the  yield  on  the  benchmark  R186  government 
bond declined by 35 basis points. In addition to global factors, downside surprises in 
domestic  inflation  figures  for  most  of  the  first  half  of  the  year  as  well  as  a  reduced 
deficit  on  the  current  account  have  contributed  to  the  resilience  of  domestic  fixed-
income assets. 
 Yet,  South  Africa‟s  domestic  problems  have  prevented  the  country  from  fully 
benefiting 
from 
the  benign  global  backdrop 
that  historical  experience  and 
international  comparisons  would  suggest.  In  fact,  while  the  global  risks  seen  at  the 
start of 2017 did not materialise, several domestic risks became a reality, especially 
later  in  the  year.  This  was  illustrated  by  the  depreciation  of  6.3%  in  the  nominal 
effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  and  a  rise  of  53  basis  points  in  the  benchmark 
R186 government bond yield from the end of August to the end of October 2017. 
 Real  economic  growth  failed  to  display  any  meaningful  acceleration  after  a  poor 
performance  in  2016,  despite  the  rebound  in  agricultural  production  following  the 
previous year‟s drought. At present, the SARB forecasts average growth of only 0.7% 
in  2017,  after  a  mere  0.3% last  year.  Hence,  the  gap  between  South  African  GDP 
growth and world GDP growth, which was minimal up to 2013, continues to widen. 
 Disappointing economic growth, together with the surprisingly low buoyancy of major 
tax  revenues  relative  to  their  bases,  has  compounded  the  fragility  of  South  Africa‟s 
fiscal situation.  
Page 8 of 12 
 For  several  years  already,  projected fiscal  consolidation  and  debt stabilization  have 
had to be postponed because of GDP growth shortfalls relative to budget projections. 
However, the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement of October 2017 not only saw a 
meaningful upward revision to deficit estimates for the current year, but also  did not 
project a  reduction  in  that deficit  in  the  outer  years.  Consequently,  the  debt-to-GDP 
ratio  is  now  projected  to  keep  rising  throughout  the  period,  approaching  60%  by 
2020/21. This mixture of weak growth and rising debt – the two concerns repeatedly 
flagged by ratings agencies  – suggests that South Africa must increasingly be wary 
of possible further downgrades to its sovereign ratings. Following the announcement 
by  Fitch  Ratings  yesterday  that  it  has  affirmed  South  Africa‟s  BB+  rating  (which  in 
their  case  applies  to  both  local  and  foreign  currency  debt),  announcements  will  be 
made  later  today  by  both  S&P  and  Moody‟s  on  the  outcome  of  ratings  reviews 
recently undertaken by them.  
 While exhibiting uncertainty and generating volatility, the recent behaviour of financial 
markets clearly highlights this risk. Admittedly, as I have indicated earlier, the global 
economic and financial backdrop has sheltered South African assets for most of the 
year. Yet they underperformed relative to their emerging-market peers. For example, 
in the first nine months of 2017, the J P Morgan emerging-market foreign-exchange 
index  appreciated  by  5.6% while  the  rand  gained  only  1.3%  against  the  US  dollar. 
Such  an  underperformance  was  already  a  warning  sign  of 
the 
relative 
unattractiveness of South African assets, as generally, in periods of improved global 
risk  appetite,  both  the  rand  and  domestic  bonds  tend  to  outperform  their  peers.  In 
recent  weeks,  and  in  particular  since  the  upward  revision  to  the  deficit  and  debt 
projections in the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement, the sell-off in both the local 
currency and domestic bonds is a much clearer indication of investors‟ nervousness 
about South Africa‟s rising economic and fiscal risks as we draw the curtain on 2017 
and move towards 2018. 
 Recent monetary policy developments 
 The  SARB  cannot  ignore  this  recent  shift  in  the  balance  of  risks  affecting  South 
Africa‟s  economy  or  the  way  it  is  perceived  by  financial  markets.  Obviously,  the 
Page 9 of 12 
central  bank  does  not  target  the  exchange  rate  or  the  level  of  bond  yields,  as  its 
mandate is to keep inflation within the 3-6% target range.  
Nonetheless, market developments are important inputs in policy formulation  – fairly 
directly  for  the  exchange  rate  (which  impacts  on  inflation  with  a  lag)  and  more 
indirectly for the level of bond yields (which reflects investors‟ perceived risks to the 
inflation outlook and how they expect monetary policy to respond as a consequence). 
 In  its  July  meeting,  the  MPC  of the SARB  lowered  the  repurchase  rate by  25  basis 
points,  both  in  reaction  to  a  sequence  of  better-than-expected  inflation  data  and  a 
stronger  likelihood  that  inflation  would  remain  comfortably  within  the  target  range 
over  the forecast  period.  In fact, the  SARB‟s  projections for  both headline  and  core 
inflation in 2018/19 had been revised downwards on several instances in the first half 
of  the  year.  Nonetheless,  the  MPC  guarded  against  expectations  that  this  rate 
reduction would mark the start of an easing cycle and warned that any future moves 
would remain data-dependent. This reflected a high degree of uncertainty about the 
future  inflation  profile;  the  decision  was  also  informed  by  the  MPC‟s  continued 
discomfort with the broad measures of inflation expectations remaining uncomfortably 
close to the upper end of the target range. 
 By  its  September  meeting,  the  MPC  was  of  the  view  that  the  balance  of  risks  to 
inflation had tilted to the upside  and warranted a more cautious approach, and  thus 
decided to leave the policy rate unchanged.  
 At the conclusion of our MPC meeting yesterday, we decided to leave the repurchase 
rate unchanged at 6.75 per annum. Our decision to err on the side of caution at the 
September  meeting  appears  to  have  been  correct,  as  upside  risks  to  the  inflation 
outlook have increased in the last two months.  The Bank‟s inflation forecast shows 
some deterioration, with inflation expected to be 0.2 percentage points higher in both 
2018 and 2019, at levels of 5.2 and 5.5 per cent, respectively. These revisions were 
mainly influenced by a weaker exchange rate path, higher international oil prices, and 
higher  average  wage  growth.  Inflation  is  expected  to  remain  within  the target  range 
over the forecast period. 
 Yet  this  „baseline  scenario‟  only  tells  part  of  the  story.  Although  inflation  is  not 
expected  to  breach  the  upper  end  of  the  target  range  over  the  forecast  horizon,  as 
Page 10 of 12 
indicated, the risks to the outlook are currently assessed to be skewed to the upside, 
at a time when imminent key event risks contribute to an environment of heightened 
uncertainty.  
In  light  of  the  growing fiscal  risks  and  increased domestic financial  market  volatility, 
the  MPC  has  to  be  cognisant  of  the  possibility  that  the  inflation  outlook  could 
deteriorate  further.  The  MPC  also  has  to  weigh  the  risks  I have  outlined  earlier, 
including the possibility that the global environment could turn less favourable, which, 
in the current circumstances, could exacerbate the downward pressure on domestic 
financial assets. 
 At  the  end  of  the  day,  the  MPC  is  well  aware  of  the  current  weakness  in economic 
growth,  with  continued  downside  risks,  and  will,  wherever  possible  within  its 
mandate,  strive  to  support  an  improvement  in  economic  activity  through  an 
appropriate monetary stance. However, in an environment characterised by elevated 
uncertainty,  where  inflation  expectations  could  become  unanchored,  the  best 
approach  for  the  SARB  is  to  minimise  the  number  of  threats  to  price  and  financial 
stability.  Consequently,  the  MPC  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  both  global  and 
domestic developments as well as their implications for the inflation outlook, and will 
act accordingly. 
 Conclusion 
 While acknowledging that five weeks can be a long time in economies and markets, I 
think we can reasonably safely already draw the conclusion that the global backdrop 
in  2017  proved  to  be  more  benign  than  many  had  anticipated.  For  the  first  time  in 
many  years,  the  outlook  is  finally  looking  promising,  with  global  growth  gathering 
momentum,  without  yet  generating  too  much  inflation.  Financial  markets  have 
generally performed well. 
 South  Africa  faced  a  particularly  challenging  domestic  environment,  which  affected 
growth performance, mainly because of low business and consumer confidence. We 
failed  to  fully  take  advantage  of  the  global  cyclical  upswing.  The  inflation  outlook 
improved during the year, and inflation is expected to be inside the target range over 
the forecast horizon. But more recently upside risks to the inflation outlook have been 
intensifying, which will require careful monitoring.   
Page 11 of 12 
 As Niels Bohr said: “Prediction is very difficult, especially if it‟s about the future”. We 
do not know what 2018 has in store for us, and how the global risk profile will unfold.  
  The relatively benign global backdrop in 2017,  should not make us complacent, but 
rather  encourage  us  to  take  advantage  of  the  current  cyclical  economic  upswing  to 
strengthen  our  structural  reforms  and  implement  growth-friendly  policies  that  are 
needed to boost economic growth and create employment.  
 In South Africa, 2018 provides an opportunity to press the “reset button” and, through 
a collaborative approach, to try and break the self-reinforcing negative feedback loop 
of  policy  uncertainties,  low  private-sector  confidence,  subdued  investment  in 
productive capacities, and poor competitive performance.   
  Thank you. 
    Page 12 of 12 
