     
Governor :   Mr. Tariq Bajwa 
Title 
Date 
Event 
Venue 
 
:   Islamic Banking & Finance Awareness Drive - 2017 
:   August 03, 2017   
:   Opening Ceremony at Mega Event Islamic Banking & Finance Awareness Drive - 2017 
:   Movenpick Hotel, Karachi 
Dr. Ishrat Hussain, Chairman IBA Centre of Excellence  in Islamic Finance Education, Dr. Imran Usmani, 
Shariah Scholar, Mr. Irfan Siddiqui, Chairman Steering Committee on Islamic Finance Media Campaign, 
members of the Dunya Media Group, Presidents/CEOs of Banks and Financial Institutions, Distinguished 
Guests, Ladies & Gentlemen; 
Assalam-o-alaikum  
I am pleased to be here today at the opening ceremony of the mega event of Islamic Banking & Finance 
Awareness  Drive-2017  by  Dunya  Media  Group  which  was  aimed  at  creating  awareness  and  removing 
misconceptions  about  Islamic  banking  and  finance  in  the  country.  Dunya  Media  Group  deserves 
appreciation on successful completion of this awareness raising venture. I am hopeful that results of this 
campaign will be long lasting due to effective collaboration among various stakeholders and arranging 
multiple programs for public and targeted groups like students and business communities all across the 
country. 
Ladies & Gentlemen; 
Growth  of  Islamic  banking  industry  particularly  over  the  last  decade  is  reflective  of  increasing 
acceptability of its merits; the total global size of the Islamic financial assets by end 2016 has reached to 
US $ 2.29 trillion and is expected to go beyond US $3 trillion by 20201.  However, practitioners of Islamic 
finance  cannot  be  complacent  with  this  growth  especially  in  the  backdrop  of  changing  global 
infrastructure  for  the  financial  sector.  Today  there  is  more  than  ever  a  compelling  environment  for 
Islamic  finance  industry  to  capitalise  on  its  inherent  strengths  like  asset  backed  nature  of  financial 
                                                           
1 Global Islamic Finance Report 2017 
 Page 1 of 4 
transactions, being devoid of interest and prohibition against gambling, uncertainty and speculation to 
move away from the traditional business models and explore new opportunities.  
Talking  about  domestic  industry,  the  fast  growth  of  Islamic  banking  in  Pakistan  would  not  have  been 
possible without sound regulatory, supervisory and Shariah foundations laid down by the State Bank of 
Pakistan  under  my  illustrious  predecessors.  Promoting  Islamic  finance  has  remained  an  important 
component of strategic goals of the central bank. Overwhelming demand coupled with the support of 
the  regulator  and  other  stakeholders  has  contributed  towards  significant  progress  of  the  industry; 
Islamic banking industry by now constitutes 11.6 percent share in assets while 13.7 percent in deposits 
of    the  total  banking  industry  with  21  banking  institutions  and  more  than  2,300  branches  across  the 
country. 
It  would  also  be  befitting  to  acknowledge  the  commitment  and  determination  of  the  Government  of 
Pakistan  towards  developing  conducive  infrastructure  for  growth  of  Islamic  finance  industry  in  the 
country.  Formation  of  a  high  level  Steering  Committee  for  Promotion  of  Islamic  Banking  in  Pakistan 
followed  by  formation  of  Implementation  Committee  for  implementing  recommendations  of  the 
Steering Committee, issuance of international sukuk after a gap of nine years and allowing tax neutrality 
for Islamic financial institutions and their customers through Finance Act 2017 are few examples in this 
regard. I would also like to take  this opportunity to applaud other stakeholders of the Islamic finance 
industry for their strenuous efforts in achieving stellar growth.  
Ladies & Gentlemen; 
Islamic  financial  institutions  have  the  potential  to  be  major  contributors  towards  growth  and  broad 
based development of a country owing to their closer link with real economic activities. However, in line 
with global trends the  domestic  industry is also concentrated in corporate  clients  and few big sectors 
ignoring others  that  are  either unserved or underserved by conventional industry.  I believe that given 
their risk sharing model and ability of financing ventures on the basis of their feasibility, Islamic financial 
institutions can penetrate into underserved sectors like agriculture, small & medium enterprises (SMEs) 
and housing, particularly low cost housing, which are sectors of paramount importance in terms of their 
contribution to inclusive and sustainable GDP, employment generation and overall development of the 
country. This will also contribute towards improving financial inclusion in the country.  
Recognizing  the  importance  of  these  sectors,  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  is  persuading  the  industry  to 
increase their financing to SMEs and agriculture  sectors. We are assigning annual  indicative  targets to 
banking industry including Islamic banking institutions for SME and agriculture sectors. We at State Bank 
of Pakistan do not compromise on stability of the sector and hence fully acknowledge issues like adverse 
selection  and  moral  hazard  linked  with  participatory  based  modes  of  financing  particularly  to  these 
sectors. However, this challenge demands the industry to diverge from traditional business approaches 
and  develop  adequate  risk  management  framework  through  coordinated  efforts.  This  can  enable 
 Page 2 of 4 
industry to tap these strategically important sectors and create value for their shareholders, depositors 
and country’s economy as a whole. 
While talking about these unserved sectors I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that like 
any Muslim dominant country financial exclusion in Pakistan is voluntary and involuntary. Islamic banks 
can play a key role in minimizing both segments of this incidence. Along with significant faith-sensitive 
voluntary exclusion in the country the prevalence of huge unbanked population in rural and semi urban 
areas signifies an attractive opportunity for Islamic banks. You must be knowing that our survey based 
research  study  on  Islamic  banking  “Knowledge  Attitude  and  Practices  of  Islamic  Banking  in  Pakistan” 
identified the potential greenfield growth for Islamic banking in the country. This implies that the true 
potential  of  Islamic  banking  industry  of  the  country  lies  in  underserved  areas/sectors,  particularly 
Balochistan,  interior  Sindh,  south  Punjab.  However,  Islamic  banking  branches  are  still  concentrated  in 
very few  regions; 80 percent  of Islamic banking branches are concentrated in eighteen big cities only. 
Moreover, at present the share of Islamic microfinance is insignificant, though, the inclination of Islamic 
banking institution towards this sector is encouraging. 
Ladies & Gentlemen; 
There are three challenges to rapid growth for Islamic banking: the first is developing new instruments 
to cover all aspects of banking. 
We as stakeholders of Islamic banking industry should recognize that  we cannot move the industry to 
the  next  level  of  growth  trajectory  unless  innovative  Shariah  based  solutions  for  all  financial  services 
needs  of  the  clients  generally  and  business  community  particularly  are  developed.  This  highlights  the 
need of research and development to be the core ingredient of the strategy of Islamic banking industry. 
The industry needs to establish knowledge sharing and research platforms to evolve strategies on how 
best to meet the surging demand for Shariah compliant products and services in Pakistan. To this end 
industry can capitalise on strengths and expertise of Centres of Excellence in Islamic Finance Education 
that  have  been  established  as  research  incubator  and  for  the  capacity  building  of  the  industry. 
Moreover,  collaboration  between  academia,  Shariah  scholars  and  industry  professionals  can  be 
established  through  these  research  centers  which  will  allow  synergies  along  with  identifying  priority 
research area. 
Ladies & Gentlemen; 
The second challenge is capacity building and awareness. 
The State Bank of Pakistan, as a regulator performs the role of facilitator for Islamic banking industry in 
the  country.  In  this  role,  our  major  focus  is  on  capacity  building  and  awareness  raising  about  Islamic 
banking and finance in the country. To this end we are not only using our training arm, National Institute 
of Banking and Finance (NIBAF) for undertaking multiple capacity building programs but have also been 
 Page 3 of 4 
supportive for such initiatives of industry and academia. While talking about human resource of Islamic 
finance industry, the discussion about role of Ulema in promoting Islamic banking and finance cannot be 
ignored.  Fortunately  we  are  among  those  countries  which  are  regularly  producing  good  number  of 
Shariah scholars with many of those being of international repute. However, with the high growth of the 
industry, there still prevails demand supply gap. State Bank of Pakistan is using multi-pronged strategy 
to  ensure  adequate  supply  of  Shariah  scholars  in  the  country;  Not  only  NIBAF  is  conducting  targeted 
customised programs for Shariah scholars but Centres of Excellence in  Islamic Finance Education have 
also  been  specifically  mandated  to  develop  customised  programs  for  Shariah  scholars.  From  the 
platform of State Bank of Pakistan, efforts are also being made to encourage madaris to play their role 
in growth of Islamic finance industry.  
The  third  challenge,  especially  in  the  context  of  Pakistan,  is  that  Islamic  banking  is  to  find  Shariah 
compliant instruments for investment. As Islamic banks have excess liquidity, we are already witnessing 
this. Unless we are able to develop asset-based Sukuk, growth may become stunted in future. The State 
Bank in its Vision 2020 has set target of 20% of deposit with the Islamic banking by 2020 and this is very 
much a focus of our efforts as a regulator. We will be interacting with all the stakeholders to ensure that 
the  challenges  highlighted  above  to  sustained  and  high  growth  in  Islamic  banking  and  finance  to 
overcome.  
Electronic  and  social  media  platforms  have  become  most  effective  mean  of  opinion  formation  and 
information  dissemination.  One  of  the  major  benefits  of  advancement  in  information  technology  and 
communication  is  empowerment  of  masses  through  access  to  information.  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  is 
supporting the industry's mass media campaign which is aiming at creating awareness among public at 
large in addition to conducting seminars, conferences, targeted programmes and focused discussions for 
business community, academia, bankers and policy makers. We feel that  such initiatives taken by Dunya 
Media  Group  &  its  peers  would  contribute  in  creating  the  much  needed  awareness  regarding  Islamic 
finance and improving perception of public at large.  
Ladies & Gentlemen; 
At the end, I would encourage and persuade all stakeholders to collaborate more effectively to address 
challenges faced by the industry. I assure you full support and cooperation from the central bank side to 
develop a vibrant industry on sound foundations 
I wish again the success to all future endeavours of the Dunya Media Group. 
 Page 4 of 4 
