KGORI CAPITAL BUSINESS CLUB SEMINAR 
 THE IMPORTANCE OF COMMUNICATION IN MACROECONOMIC 
POLICY MANAGEMENT 
 by  
Moses D Pelaelo  
Governor, Bank of Botsw ana  
 October 3, 2017  
 Director of Ceremonies 
 I  am  pleased  and  indeed  it   is  an  honour  to  be  part  of  this 
important   information  sharing  and  empow ering  Seminar, 
organised  by  t he  Kgori  Business  Press  Club.  The  initiative 
for this forum resonates w ith the Bank’ s desire to contribute 
to  the  development   of   informed  financial  and  economic 
journalism  as  a  means  of  improving  transmission  of   market 
information,  as  w ell  as  incisive  commentary  on  policy 
analysis  and  decisions.    For  a  number  of  reasons,  a  central 
bank  needs 
t o  continually 
interact   and  disseminate 
information 
to 
st akeholders.  Such 
int eractions  and 
communication  clarify 
the  Bank’ s  role  and, 
therefore, 
reinforces  t he  effectiveness  w ith  w hich  it  discharges  its 
mandate of ensuring price st ability, sound financial and w ell-
functioning  payments  systems  and,  more  broadly,  financial 
stability. 
Director  of  Ceremonies,  t he  subject   of   my  remarks  this 
morning 
is 
‘The 
Importance  of  Communication 
in 
Macroeconomic  Policy  Management.’  For  this  purpose,  let 
me  distil  macroeconomic  policy  into  three  distinct  elements, 
namely  fiscal  policy,  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate 
policy;  and  for  convenience  add  financial  sect or  policies  in 
order  to  complete  the  interactive  and  inherent   relationships 
involved.  
 Distinguished  guest s, 
ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  w ill 
appreciat e  that   individually  and  together,  these  policies  are 
intended  to  affect   the  behaviour  of  economic  agents,  w hich 
is, their response in terms of the supply and demand factors 
of economic act ivity.  At  a broad level, this ent ails decisions 
to  invest,  save,  consume,  and/or  trade  across  borders.    In 
this  regard,  the  relative  incentives  across  sectors  and 
industries  engendered  by 
t he  various  policies  and 
instruments  w ill  have  an  impact   on  the  rate  of  economic 
grow th,  in  other  w ords,  the  pace  of  increase  in  national 
w ealth  and  living  standards.  Evidence  from  the  2007/08 
global financial and economic crisis indicat es that  if not w ell 
managed  and  coordinated,  macroeconomic  and  financial 
2 
 policies  also  have  the  potent ial  to  undermine  economic 
grow th.  
 At  this  point,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me 
take  a  moment   to  illustrat e  t he  influence  of   the  various 
policies and related instruments on real economic activity: 
Starting  w ith  Fiscal  Policy  -  In  a  sit uation  of   slow   economic 
grow th,  fiscal  policy  might   involve  increase  in  expendit ure 
or reduction in t axes by Government  to stimulat e activity. In 
the  event,  spending  by  government   and 
low er 
taxes 
generate  an  increase  in  demand,  including  consumption, 
providing  an  incentive  for  businesses  to  invest   and  increase 
operations  to meet the higher demand; thus making positive 
contribution to economic grow th.  
 Monetary  Policy  –  With  regard  to  monet ary  policy,  again 
assuming  a  need  to  support   grow th,  a  reduction  of  interest  
rates  by  the  central  bank,  in  t he  right   level  of  doses,  w ill 
low er  the  cost   of  finance,  therefore,  potentially  leading  to 
higher demand by consumers and investment  by businesses, 
ultimately raising the overall rat e of economic grow th.  
 Exchange  Rat e  Policy  –  A  discretionary  devaluation  or 
maintenance  of   an  undervalued  exchange  rat e  could  be 
undertaken  in  order  to  enhance  the  competitiveness  of   the 
3 
 domestic  indust ry  in  external  markets  and  against   imports. 
This  is  relevant   for  supporting  sustainable  industrialisation 
and  diversifying  sources  of  grow th,  and  may  similarly  raise 
overall rate of  economic grow th.  
 Financial  Policies  –  In  this  area,  a  sound,  stable  and 
inclusive  financial  sector  not  only  facilitates  the  conduct   of 
transactions  and  payments,  but  it  is  also  the  conduit  
through  w hich  macroeconomic  policies  are  transmitted  to 
real  economic  activity.  Thus,  t here  is  need  for  continuous 
attention  to  ensure  the  developmental  aspect s,  as  w ell  as 
integrity,  saf ety,  stability  and  a  w ell-functioning  financial 
sector 
to  support   sustainable  and 
inclusive  economic 
grow th.  
 Distinguished  Guest s, 
I  now  
to 
turn 
t o 
the  role  of 
communication  in  ensuring  ultimate  efficacy  of  the  various 
policies  or  actions  and  decisions.  Efficacy  or  potency  in  this 
regard  w ould  mean  policy  action  having  t he  desired  or 
intended outcome.  In the examples given above, this w ould 
mean higher rat es of economic grow th w ith respect  to fiscal 
and  monetary  policies  and  a  f aster  pace  of  industrialisation 
arising from the exchange rate policy. 
 4 
 Going  back  in  history,  there  w as  a  time  w hen  policymaking 
w as  shrouded 
in  secrecy,  w ith  policy 
framew ork  and 
actions  designed  to  surprise  t he  market;  t he  language  of 
policy makers w as coloured by obfuscation and ambiguity in 
order  to  generate  uncertainty.  In  particular,  a  mystique 
surrounded  cent ral  banks.  The  former  Chairman  of   the  US 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  (FED)  Allan  Greenspan  even  said  in 
1987, “ Since I have become a central banker, I have learned 
to  mumble  w ith  great  incoherence.  If  I  seem  unduly  clear  to 
you, you must  have misunderst ood w hat I said” .  
Indeed,  in  a  Speech  in  2014,  the  President   of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  Mario  Draghi,  pointed  out  that   there  w as  a 
time  w hen  the  FED  w ould  not   even  publish  its  interest   rate 
decisions.  At  the  time  the  FED  w ould  let  the  outside  w orld 
derive  the  interest   decisions  from  the  market   reaction;  it 
w as  only  in  1994  that  the  FED  decided  to  make  its  int erest  
rate decisions public in real time.  
 No  doubt   things  have  changed  and  economic  policy  making 
now   involves  phrases  such  as  “ forw ard  guidance”   as  a  real 
policy  tool  designed  to  enable  markets  and  t he  public  to 
anticipat e  the  direction,  magnitude  and  timing  of  policy 
action.  And  in  this  regard,  t he  manner  and  w ording  of 
communication becomes crucial. 
 5 
 Therefore,  I  w ill  argue  t hat  communication  is  an  instrument  
of  macroeconomic  policy,  w ithout   w hich 
the  desired 
outcomes  w ould  not  be  realised  or  w ould  be  realised  only 
sluggishly. There are tw o related dimensions t o this. First is, 
economic  and  policy  aw areness  that  helps  the  public  and 
economic  agent s  to  anticipate  policy  action;  t he  so  called 
expectations.    Second  is  the  direct   relaying  of  information 
on policy action and the intended outcome.  
 In  both 
these  cases, 
three  pillars  support   effective 
communication. On one  side is  the policy instit utions, in the 
middle,  a  vibrant   and  know ledgeable  media,  w hile  an 
economically  aw are,  participat ive  and  responsive  market 
and  economic  agents  are  t he  third  pillar.  That   said,  in  order 
for 
the 
communication 
t ool 
to 
be 
effective 
in 
macroeconomic  policy 
formulation, 
the 
inst itutions  and 
framew orks  for  policy  need  to  have  sufficient   integrity.  In 
turn, 
integrity 
is  derived 
from  clarity  w it h  respect 
to 
governance,  policy  setting,  operational  and  accountability 
framew orks, as w ell as transparency and consistency.  
 Regarding  general  aw areness  and  understanding  of 
economic and financial mat ters, w e need to appreciate that, 
generally,  economies  are  characterised  by  business  cycles 
of  varying  lengt hs  and  int ensity,  driven  by  various  f actors. 
6 
 While,  there  is  no  time  to  go  into  details,  the  message  I  am 
relaying  is  that   the  various  macroeconomic  policies  are 
programmed 
to 
respond 
to  such  cycles.  Therefore, 
economic  aw areness  entails  understanding  the  state  of  the 
economy,  the  current   cycle,  t he  direction  or  momentum, 
and,  theref ore,  anticipat e  policy  direction.  Thus,  in  terms  of 
macroeconomic 
indicators,  an  up-cycle 
is  normally 
characterised by acceleration in economic grow th and credit  
demand, and an increase in inflation. In t his inst ance, a w ell-
informed  market   and  public  w ill  anticipat e  that   t he  next  set 
of  policies  w ould  be  contractionary.  The  converse  is  true, 
w here  sustained 
low   and 
falling 
inflation,  depressed 
economic  grow th  and  credit   demand  should  engender 
expectations  of   expansionary  or  accommodative  monetary 
policies.  
 Therefore, in this environment  of w ell-informed expectations 
and 
trust  
in 
the  stabilising  capacity  and  potency  of 
instruments  arsenal  of  t he  aut horities,  t here  is  less  risk  of 
market  overreaction  t o  t he  path  of   economic  indicators. 
Indeed,  economic  agents  might   take  st abilising  and  policy 
reinforcing  decisions.  Consequently,  once  a  policy-set ting 
institution  has  built   up  integrity  and  reputation,  markets  and 
economic  agent s  generate  belief   and  respond  accordingly 
7 
 because  the  institution  consist ently  does  w hat   it  says  it  w ill 
do in given circumstances. 
 I  w ill  now  
illustrate,  and 
indeed 
reinforce,  how  
communication  is  evolving  w it h  respect   to  t w o  areas  of 
macroeconomic  policy  formulation  in  Botsw ana.  You  w ill 
appreciat e, 
that  
in 
the  areas  of  monetary  policy  and 
exchange  rat e  policy,  there  is  ongoing  improvements  and 
clarity  relating  t o  institutional  setting,  policy  framew ork  and 
parameters,  instruments  and  decision-making  cycles  and 
dissemination  platforms.  In  my  view   such  developments 
have  greatly  improved  underst anding  and  efficacy  of  these 
policies. 
 Regarding  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  of   Botsw ana  has  now  
entrenched  a  price  st ability  objective  of  3  –  6  percent, 
w here  the  inst itutional  set-up  entails  six  pre-announced 
meetings  in  a  year,  of  t he  Monetary  Policy  Committee  that 
assess  developments,  economic  outlook  and  make  a  policy 
decision.  A  media  briefing,  and  a  Statement   announcing  the 
policy  decision  and  related  background  information  follow  
each  meeting.  The  annual  Monetary  Policy  Statement   and 
its  Mid-t erm  Review   serve  as  t he  anchor  for  dissemination 
of the monetary policy framew ork, policy analysis and guide 
for expectations on economic and policy out comes.  
8 
  In 
this 
regard,  aw areness  of 
the  policy 
framew ork, 
institutional 
arrangements 
f or 
decision-making 
and 
consistency, 
promote 
the 
necessary 
integrity 
and 
transparency  that  fost er  efficacy  of  monetary  policy.  In 
essence,  economic  agents  are  able  to  anticipat e,  as  w ell  as 
respond  to  policy  action.  In  addition,  market s  are  more 
aligned  to  the  policy  stance.  We,  therefore,  view   the 
maintenance  of   a  transparent   and  accountable  monetary 
policy  and 
the 
related  communication  strategies,  as 
contributing 
to  sustained  at tainment   of 
t he 
inflation 
objective. 
 The  exchange  rate  policy  is  also  much  more  transparent.  It  
is  now   clear  to  the  market   that   w e  have  a  fixed  exchange 
rate,  albeit  in  a  craw ling  band  arrangement,  pegged  55 
percent   to  the  SDR  and  45  percent   to  the  South  African 
rand. It is also know n that the exchange rate is continuously 
adjusted  using  an  annual  rat e  of  craw l    based  on  the 
difference  in  the  projected  inflation  of  the  trading  partner 
countries  and  Botsw ana’ s  inflat ion  objective;    this  rate  of 
craw l  is  public  know ledge,  t ypically  announced  at   the 
beginning  of  t he  year.  Such  transparency  has  removed 
uncertainty  in  t he  management   of   the  exchange  rate.  Thus, 
economic  agent s  can  use  market   information  and  forecasts 
9 
 w ith  respect   t o  the  freely  traded  currencies  (that   constitute 
the  Pula  basket)  and 
inflation, 
to  anticipate 
the  Pula 
exchange rate. In this regard, certainty about  the policy path 
helps  to  anchor  economic  decisions  in  a  manner  desired  by 
policy  action,  and  that  is  supportive  of  industrialisation  and 
economic grow t h objectives. 
 Distinguished 
Ladies 
and 
gentlemen, 
effective 
communication  also  entails  common  understanding  and 
usage of language.  In this regard, there is need, on the part 
of  policy-setting  institutions,  for  consistency  in  definitions, 
in  the  meanings  of   adjectives  attributed  to  magnitudes  of  
changes  and  movements  in  economic  indicators,  as  w ell  as 
the  w ording/int erpretation  of  policy  action  (or  non-action). 
To  the  extent   t hat  such  common  language  is  accept ed  and 
used  by  the  media,  policy  analysts  and  commentators,  it  
becomes  a  tool  in  policy  formulation  that   has  an  int ended 
impact   on  economic  decision  making.  How ever,  on  the 
other  hand,  misreporting,  either  deliberately  or  due  to  lack 
of  understanding  of   some  key  concepts,  could  cause 
unnecessary  confusion  in  the  market  and,  t herefore,  be 
detrimental  to  t he  implementation  of  these  macroeconomic 
policies.  
Communication  also  entails  proper 
identification  of 
spokespersons  f or  the  policy  setting  institution  and  matters 
10 
 on w hich  they  are responsible.  A proper  arrangement  in this 
regard,  promot es  credibility  and  eff ectiveness  of   policy 
communication.  For  example,  the  Governor  of  the  central 
bank  is  normally  and  appropriately  the  singular  voice  on 
monetary  policy,  w hile  the  Minister  responsible  for  finance 
or treasury, is t he singular voice on fiscal policy. 
 In  concluding,  I  w ant  t o  point   out  that,  dissemination 
platforms  are  also  an 
important   component   of  policy 
effectiveness,  and  determine  t he  reach  and  credibility  of 
macroeconomic  policy.  For  the  Bank,  w e  find  high-level 
gatherings  such  as  the  launch  of   the  Monetary  Policy 
Statement,  Economic  Briefings  follow ing  publication  of  the 
Annual 
report,  as  w ell  as  media  briefings 
follow ing 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  meetings,  to  be  very  important. 
These f acilitate both information dissemination, exchange of 
ideas,  as  w ell  as 
feedback  and  evaluation  of  
their 
performance.    Extensive  use  of   the  w ebsite  also  allow s  for 
w ider  and  cont inuous  access  to  information  and  external 
contributions  and  commentary.  The  Bank  also  finds  t hat 
research  and  publications,  as  w ell  as  participation 
in 
w orkshops  and  seminars,  help  to  project   the  quality  and 
content  of the Bank’ s w ork, w hich also engenders credibility 
and integrity of the sources of policy analysis and decisions. 
 11 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow   me  to  end  here  and  I  w ould  be 
happy  to  continue  the  dialogue  as  you  make  observations, 
comments and ask questions.  
12 
 