Andreas  Dombret:  We  can  work  it  out  –  or  can  we?  Current
challenges in Brexit talks
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at an event of the Atlantik-Brücke at the Travellers Club, London, 8 November 2017.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
It’s a great pleasure to be with you in London, which for me has always been the embodiment of
both British and international spirit.
Just a few miles from this building, 52 years ago, on 20 October 1965, the Beatles recorded their
hit “We Can Work It Out” at EMI Studios, later renamed Abbey Road Studios.
This song is about the difficulties in repairing a damaged relationship. The legend goes that Paul
McCartney delivered the up-beat mood, concentrating on the possibility to work it out – before
John Lennon added the rather sceptical voice. Thus, the attitude of the song swings from positive
to negative. To me, this clash of messages describes the current state of the Brexit talks better
than anything else.
Currently everyone is asking whether the EU and the UK can work it out. Yet, in a way, it’s too
late: the train has already left the station. The UK will leave the EU, and that will include a full-
blown exit from the single market and the customs union.
But on another level, we can still work it out, as we can still find an agreement that achieves the
two big goals: a stable and friendly political alliance as the foundation for close cooperation in
foreign and security matters,  and  economic  cooperation  that  allows  for  an  efficient  division  of
labour and trade.
From  an  economic  point  of  view,  the  question  then  is:  can  we  still  work  out  a  deal  of  close
cooperation  with  little  in  the  way  of  friction?  Or  will  we  break  up  entirely  and  trade  on  quite
prohibitive terms?
I remain optimistic that we can achieve a good deal for both sides, and I remain committed to this
outcome. But what does that mean?
For me it means two things. First, there is no need to panic: even the worst-case scenario is
manageable  from  an  economic  viewpoint.  Yet,  it  will  have  serious  effects  on  our  economic
process.
Thus, and this is the second point, if we want a strong economic partnership that’s based on a
sound political partnership going forward, both politicians will need to work out the best possible
terms for economic cooperation; and businesses have to prepare meticulously.
Today  I  will  talk  about  the  current  challenges  on  the  road  ahead.  I  will  begin  by  outlining  the
consequences of Brexit and explain why a disorderly Brexit may mean substantial losses for the
UK. The disorderly exit, as I will go on to show, is unfortunately not that improbable given the
difficult  current  state  of  negotiations.  That’s  why  firms  and  politicians  must  prepare  for  a
disorderly exit, too. I will focus on the financial sector to highlight what that means. Nevertheless,
I will close with an optimistic outlook on the terms of our future cooperation
2 What if we don’t work it out?
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
But, first let’s take a look at what’s at stake. What are the economic consequences if we don’t
work it out?
Well, economic impact analysis is anything but an exact science, but we can sketch some likely
scenarios. Seeing the writing on the wall, the UK government has apparently begun to realise
that  a  hard  –  that  is,  a  disorderly  –  Brexit  without  a  new  agreement  would  have  serious
repercussions for the UK economy.
This  impact  will  come  via  two  main  channels.  The  first  is  the  trade  and  investment  channel.
Exporters  will  lose  out  as  a  result  of  the  restricted  access  to  the  single  market,  and  supply
chains may suffer substantially.
The second channel is the migration channel. The UK’s access to highly skilled workers from
abroad could take a severe hit. I recognize that migration has played a big role in the Brexit vote –
but,  especially  today  a  failure  to  attract  highly-skilled  workers  via  migration  could  have  a
detrimental impact on future UK growth.
The economic impact on Europe will be limited by comparison. Take Germany for instance. The
UK is an important export market, accounting for 7% of German exports. But that’s only 2% of
value added to the German GDP. Therefore, Brexit will most likely not result in a major setback
for the German economy. Bundesbank simulations confirm that even a hard, disorderly Brexit
would be manageable from Germany’s viewpoint.
To sum up: the costs of Brexit will most likely be much higher for the UK than for the remaining
EU, though a disorderly exit would, without doubt, substantially disrupt economic cooperation on
both sides – just think of the transnational supply chains.
And these consequences were not transparent to those who voted to leave the EU. In contrast,
many voters held the EU responsible for wage stagnation, job loss, precarious job conditions or a
lack of rural development. In the end, they protested by voting to leave the EU.
The frustrating thing is that the UK’s exit from the EU will not help to overcome these issues. In
fact, economic disintegration may even worsen the situation. That’s why national policies on both
the European continent and in the UK as well as EU-27 policies must take those who have lost
out through economic change seriously and find tangible – not emotional – solutions.
3 Can we still work it out?
This will be a challenge that runs in parallel to the Brexit negotiations, and it is likely to be a long-
term challenge. At the moment, it also looks as if the Brexit negotiations are going to be a drawn-
out, very long-term process – progress so far has been quite disappointing.
In  June  this  year,  the  EU  and  the  UK  agreed  to  settle  the  divorce  arrangements  first,  before
entering into talks about the future relationship. These issues are the divorce bill in respect of the
UK’s outstanding liabilities, the future status of EU citizens living in the UK and vice versa, and
the border between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland. Yet, to this day progress on the
three issues has been thin on the ground – they are far from being settled.
The only logical consequence following the EU summit three weeks ago was to conclude that
progress was insufficient to embark on the second phase of negotiations. The EU-27 leaders
were  united  in  their  assessment  that  talks  about  the  future  relationship  –  that  is  a  free-trade
agreement and a transition period – could not yet be started.
In addition, however, they chose a far-sighted communications strategy. They made clear that
the questions surrounding the divorce – while showing disappointing progress – were actually
quite solvable and that talks about the future relationship could be initiated as soon as December,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
at  the  next  EU  summit.  This  is  far-sighted  because  it  strengthens  Prime  Minister  May’s  quite
difficult position at home, where she has to tread a fine line between the extreme camps of the
“leave-now-without-any-deal”  Brexiteers  and  the  “remain-as-close-as-economically-possible”
supporters.
But we have to be careful, as there may be a hint of method in the UK’s political turmoil. As we
know from international negotiation theory, a leader can use domestic dispute as a negotiation
resource, arguing that she cannot move any further because she has no room for manoeuvre at
home. That’s why it was necessary for EU leaders to call for the UK to deliver soon in order to
move on to phase two in December.
In sum, then, the state of negotiations has to be taken seriously – but there is no reason to panic.
Why not?, you may ask, as the outlook seems quite dramatic.
There  are  two  reasons.  First,  the  process  we  are  witnessing  is  not  that  unusual  for  complex
political negotiations – they take time, and in the beginning both sides typically weigh up their
options and their opponents first. Thus, it is often the case in such negotiations that concrete
results only become visible shortly before the deadline.
That  it  takes  time  is  also  quite  sensible,  seeing  as  a  lot  is  at  stake.  The  decisions  taken  will
influence UK-EU relations for decades; moreover, they will have a lasting impact on global supply
chains and geopolitical constellations.
The second reason why we need to keep calm is that the UK government is apparently ready to
compromise. While Prime Minister May’s speech in January was widely perceived as indicating a
hard Brexit – (quote) “No deal is better than a bad deal” (unquote) – her tone and stance have
softened in the meantime. This was clearly signalled in her Florence speech.
We now know that the UK government aims to strike an ambitious free-trade deal and reach a
customs  agreement.  In  exchange,  they  are  prepared  to  offer  permanent  residence  for  EU
citizens and a clear budgetary commitment regarding their liabilities.
Overall,  therefore,  the  chances  of  reaching  a  deal  might  be  better  than  they  appear  at  the
moment.
4 Hope for the best, but prepare for the worst
Given this calm assessment of mine, some may conclude that firms could simply sit back and
wait. Nothing could be farther from the truth. Let me explain why, by focusing on the financial
services sector. What will the impact of Brexit be on financial institutions?
Financial institutions should prepare for the worst case – that is, a “no deal” scenario – with a
disorderly exit of the UK in March 2019.
As daunting as it seems, this “no deal” scenario is – if we take a positive view – luckily, quite
clear; there will be no surprises. WTO rules will apply, as the UK will be a third country. With
regard to banking, the relevant EU regulations and directives will necessitate a licence from an
EU supervisor.
Therefore,  banks  are  well  able  to  prepare  for  this  scenario  and  so  make  the  worst  case
manageable.  The  necessary  preparations  certainly  mean  costs  and  a  heavy  administrative
burden for banks, and they are complex and time-consuming.
Yet, despite these costs, it would be irresponsible to speculate on one particular outcome of the
talks – such as a possible transition period – and adopt a wait-and-see strategy based on that
educated guess.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me be crystal-clear. Preparations should already be well underway; if not, they must start
now! Banks must establish at least basic entities in the EU – and, vice versa, in the UK – before
it’s too late. In many cases, that means applying for new licences and a great deal of paperwork.
While I am concerned about the state of preparations at some banks, I am at least as worried
about the current position at other firms. For them, the pressure to prepare for the worst – and to
do so now – may be even greater.
As I said, the “no-deal” scenario represents an event with clear terms – with no hidden surprises
– but, of course, there will be no surprises only if a company thinks this scenario through and
asks  itself:  how  would  it  affect  us,  our  customer  relations,  our  product  offerings,  our  supply
chains, and in terms of regulatory approval, and so on?
Think of it as a Brexit stress test. If – and only if – you prepare meticulously, you won’t be caught
out by the “no deal” scenario. So, the motto must be: Hope for the best, but prepare for the worst.
The potential repercussions of inaction are huge. Firms have to act now!
5 Friends after the break-up? Terms of future cooperation
Supervisors are playing their part to support preparations. We are taking a strict, yet at the same
time pragmatic approach. What do I mean by that?
Our  aim  is  to  make  the  transition  as  smooth  as  possible.  We  are  providing  a  clear  point  of
contact for banks, explaining our supervisory approach and offering guidance with the licensing.
Here is one example: when EU supervisors examine a bank’s internal model used to calculate
regulatory capital requirements, they could proceed – for the time being – from the findings of the
Prudential Regulatory Authority. Similarly, the PRA could build on the verdict of the EU’s Single
Supervisory Mechanism. For that to be viable, both the PRA and the ECB or the Bundesbank
would need detailed information on each other’s decisions. Close, responsible cooperation would
have to be in place between supervisors.
But no bank should put its money on supervisors’ mercy. We take our mandate seriously – there
will be no blank cheques. We will not accept shell corporations – we will license only if banks
build risk-appropriate risk management functions in the EU.
That’s  why  it  would  be  so  important  to  work  towards  a  meaningful  free-trade  agreement  that
integrates services in a pragmatic manner. There could be an agreement that safeguards a high
regulatory  standard  without  imposing  undue  processes.  But  first,  negotiations  would  have  to
move to the second phase.
6 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, I am optimistic that we still can achieve an orderly Brexit, with a solid
future relationship between the EU and the UK.
However,  the  current  negotiations  must  gain  in  speed  –  if  the  British  government  can  find  a
constructive approach that unites the country and enables progress on the divorce issues, we
might see substantial acceleration.
But  even  then,  it  remains  a  highly  challenging  undertaking  to  reach  an  agreement  in  a  timely
manner. And let us not forget that a disorderly exit will remain an option until the very end.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
