 November 28, 2017 
Bank  of 
Japan 
Asian Financial Markets -- 20 Years since the Asian 
Financial Crisis, and Prospects for the Next 20 Years -- 
Keynote Speech at 2017 Annual General Meeting of Asia 
Securities Forum in Tokyo 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction: The Past 20 Years 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. It is my great pleasure to join you this morning at the 
Annual General Meeting of Asia Securities Forum. 
 The  year  2017  marks  twenty  years  since  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis.  Before  the  crisis,  the 
region was highly praised for its strong economic growth. But at the same time, weaknesses 
had  been  accumulating,  such  as  large  current  account  deficits,  high  external  debt,  and 
massive non-performing loans. When a combination of economic, financial, and corporate 
problems triggered a sharp loss of confidence and capital outflows from the region, the crisis 
erupted and countries faced extreme recessions. 
 Twenty years later, Asia is now the largest contributor to global growth, accounting for 57 
percent of global growth in real terms for 2016.1 Domestic demand, especially consumption, 
has become the engine of growth and major cities in the region have prospered, being often 
characterized by the simple phrase, "lively and vibrant." Here in Tokyo, the surging number 
of Asian tourists to Japan is itself evidence for the strength of growing consumption in Asia. 
 I cannot but think of the significant changes that the economies of Asia, including Japan, have 
experienced  over  the  past  twenty  years.  These  changes  have  been  made  possible  through 
countless  painstaking  efforts,  initiatives,  and  policies  that  countries  in  the  region  have 
introduced, both individually and collectively. I myself have been at the forefront of policy 
making  in  orchestrating  crisis  responses  and  enhancing  regional  cooperation  in  Asia  for 
almost two decades, at Japan's Ministry of Finance, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and 
the  Bank  of  Japan  (BOJ).  Confirmation  of  the  region's  greater  resilience  against  a  major 
economic shock is deeply reassuring. 
 Let me touch upon the responses taken in the region after the crisis two decades ago. First, 
Asian countries improved their current account balances and strengthened foreign exchange 
reserves. The increase in net external assets has enhanced resilience against possible capital 
outflows.  Second,  the  ratio  of  non-performing  loans  has  decreased,  and  regulatory  and 
                                                        
1 The percentage share is based on real GDP (constant 2010 U.S. dollars), taken from the World Bank's 
World Development Indicators. "Asia" in this context includes Asia & Pacific and South Asia. 
 1 
supervisory frameworks have been strengthened. Third, many countries in the region  have 
adopted  more  flexible  exchange  systems.  Last  but  not  least,  financial  markets,  especially 
local currency bond markets, have continued to develop.  
 The development of local currency bond markets was aimed at addressing two issues. One 
was the so-called double mismatches, that is, currency mismatches and maturity mismatches, 
and the other was a bank-centric financial system. Financial institutions in the region were 
borrowing short-term debt in dollars to finance longer-term lending in domestic currencies. 
This  double  mismatch  was  particularly  damaging  as  the  significant  depreciation  of  their 
currencies  inflated  borrowers'  debt  burden.  This  led  foreign  lenders  to  refuse  rolling 
short-term debt, which then triggered massive defaults of banks and firms. Twenty years later, 
the degree of the double mismatches has been reduced. Local currency bond markets have 
grown,  as  can  be  seen  in  Chart  1,  providing  an  alternative  intermediation  channel  to 
bank-financing.  Today,  the  capitalization  of  Asian  local bond  markets  is  equivalent  to  3.7 
trillion  U.S.  dollars,  more  than  100  times  larger  than  before  the  crisis.2 We  have  certainly 
made  progress.  Economies  have  become  more  resilient  to  exogenous  shocks,  and  the 
financial sector has developed significantly. 
 In  addition  to  these  individual  efforts,  various  initiatives  have  been  established  through 
regional cooperation. For example, a regional financial safety net, the Chiang-Mai Initiative 
Multilateralization, has been set up by the ASEAN countries, together with China, Japan, and 
Korea, or ASEAN+3. The Asian Bond Market Initiative (ABMI) was launched in 2002 by 
ASEAN+3,  and  this  has  contributed  to  the  development  of  local  currency  bond  markets. 
Market associations and self-regulatory organizations, such as yourselves, have also played 
an important part in enhancing the efficiency and transparency of the markets. 
                                                         
2 The total is as of June 2017 and covers nine countries and regions, including China, Hong Kong, 
Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia,  the  Philippines,  Singapore, Thailand,  and  Vietnam.  The  scaling  factor 
compares  June  2017  with  June  1997  with  reference  to  comparable  four  countries  and  regions, 
including China, Hong Kong, Korea, and Thailand. Data are taken from Asian Bonds Online. 
 2 
Challenges Remaining 
However, important challenges still remain. Today, I will focus on the importance of further 
developing local currency bond markets, partly because I am surrounded here by people from 
the securities industry. 
 As I have mentioned, local currency bond markets have grown over the last twenty years. At 
the same time, bank financing still dominates as a primary source of funding in the region. 
You can see this from Chart 2. Bank credit, as a source of corporate funding, has outgrown 
both stock market capitalization and corporate bonds outstanding over the years. 
 The strong reliance on bank-financing may be explained by Asian corporate culture, which 
puts high priority on business relationships. Bond financing is often not the first choice for 
domestic firms when financing their business. To make my point clear, I am not proposing 
that Asian corporates should rely on market-financing over bank-financing, as is the case in 
some other countries. I would rather like to stress the importance of diversifying the sources 
of funding to reduce the direct effect on the corporate sector, should the banking sector face 
economic or financial shocks. 
 Along  with  this  cultural  issue,  domestic  firms  are  deterred  by  the  cost  of  bond-financing 
when  compared  with  bank  loans.  One  of  the  factors  that  explain  the  unattractiveness  of 
bond-financing may be the lower levels of market activity and less liquidity in the secondary 
market. With lower liquidity in the secondary market, investors require additional premiums, 
which increase the cost of issuance. In such an environment, domestic firms are more likely 
to rely on banks for financing. 
 In this regard, developing highly efficient and liquid local currency bond markets is essential. 
Past initiatives in the region have enriched the primary markets. We may therefore need to put 
more focus on developing liquid secondary markets. 
 As presented in Chart 3, according to a survey conducted by Asian Bonds Online, there is no 
single  factor  that  inhibits  the  development  of  the  secondary  markets.  Survey  respondents 
were  asked  how  important  each  of  the  eight  structural  issues  was,  with  respect  to  local 
 3 
currency bond market liquidity. The survey results in recent three years show that "Greater 
Diversity  of  Investor  Profile"  was  the  most  important  structural  issue  for  promoting  the 
market  liquidity.  Another  structural  issue,  "Transaction  Funding,"  which  also  marked  a 
relatively high score, may also be worth noting as an important impediment. 
 Let me elaborate these two structural issues. First, the issue of investor base diversification. 
Since banks are the dominant financial institutions in the region, they are often the largest 
investor group as well. The presence of buy-and-trade investors like mutual funds, and active 
investors like hedge funds is relatively low, and this may be one of the causes of low liquidity 
in the secondary market. But it has to be borne in mind that merely increasing the size of the 
domestic  investor  base  does  not  necessarily  improve  market  functioning.  In  the  region, 
demand  for  local  currency  bonds  exceeds  supply.  In  this  situation,  if  a  few  dominant 
buy-and-hold  type  investors  become  even  larger,  they  may  take  bonds  out  of  circulation, 
leaving fewer investable bonds in the market. It is therefore important to increase the variety 
of investor types, attracting those who have different investment objectives and strategies. 
 The second issue is that of transaction financing. Improving it would require the development 
of repo markets. Repo markets are a key instrument for banks to trade cash while controlling 
counterparty  risks.  A  well-functioning  repo  market  is  also  a  precondition  for  feasible 
market-making  by  dealers,  and  would  increase  two-way  trading  in  both  equity  and  bond 
markets. However, repo transactions in many Asian emerging markets are still restricted or 
small in transaction volume, as uncollateralized short-term funding conditions are easy and 
many investors do not have the incentive to use such instruments. 
 I  have  discussed  the  importance  of  developing  local  currency  bond  markets  from  the 
viewpoint of preparing for exogenous shocks and adverse circumstances. I would like to add 
another  perspective  related  to  the  main  theme  of  this  meeting,  "Ways  for  building  a 
sustainable future." 
 It has often been said that, in order to achieve sustainable growth, the region must narrow its 
large infrastructure gaps. The ADB estimates that this will require funding of over 1.7 trillion 
 4 
U.S. dollars a year, through 2030.3 This magnitude of financing is well beyond the current 
funding  capabilities  of  individual  national  governments,  international  organizations,  and 
banks that operate as project finance lenders in the region.  
 In  the  financing  of  infrastructure  assets,  bond  finance  offers  a  number  of  advantages  over 
bank loan finance. Infrastructure assets often generate stable long-term cash flows that make 
infrastructure  debt  an  attractive  investment  opportunity  for  bond  investors.  Insurers  and 
pension  funds  who  have  long-dated  liabilities  are  seeking  to  match  them  with  long-dated 
assets.  Bond  markets  are  able  to  provide  opportunities  to  issue  longer-tenor  debt  at  fixed 
interest rates, thereby reducing the risks associated with refinancing shorter-tenor debt and 
the  necessity  of  having  to  enter  into  long-term  interest  rate  swaps  to  manage  the  risk  of 
interest rate fluctuation. Also, as revenues from most infrastructure projects are denominated 
in  local  currencies,  local  currency  infrastructure  bonds  will  be  able  to  mitigate  the  risk  of 
currency mismatch. 
 Central Banks' Initiatives 
Let  me  now  explain  some  measures  taken  by  central  banks  in  the  region.  Along  with  the 
Ministries  of  Finance,  central  banks  of  ASEAN+3  are  taking  part  in  the  ABMI  that  I 
mentioned earlier, and have contributed especially to the discussion of cross-border payment 
and settlement issues.  
 Furthermore, the Executives' Meeting of East Asia Pacific (EMEAP) central banks, a group 
of 11 central banks and monetary authorities in the East Asia and Pacific region, set up the 
Asian Bond Fund (ABF) initiative in 2003, in order to develop local currency bond markets. 
The  region  has  seen  several  advancements  since  the  launch  of  the  ABF  initiative.  They 
include (1) accelerated tax reforms to exempt nonresident investors from withholding tax, (2) 
enhancement  of  the  regulatory  framework  for  exchange-traded  funds,  (3)  liberalization  of 
foreign exchange administration rules, (4) improvements in regional market infrastructure, 
and  (5)  the  adoption  of  documentation  in  line  with  international  best  practices.  These 
                                                        
3 ADB (2017), Meeting Asia's Infrastructure Needs.  
 5 
advancements could perhaps have been achieved sooner or later without the ABF initiative, 
but the initiative certainly had a positive effect in facilitating these developments.4  
 The EMEAP central banks have also been engaged in promoting analysis of financial market 
developments  in  the  region.  In  2014,  EMEAP  published  a  report  that  assessed  the 
developments and challenges in the repo markets in the region.5 In addition to the benefits of 
efficient  repo  markets  that  have  been  noted,  repos  are  an  essential  instrument  in  the  open 
market operations of central banks, and therefore important to the transmission of monetary 
policy. The deeper these markets are, the more scope they offer central banks in their liquidity 
management operations.  
 Along with intra-regional initiatives, individual central banks have also introduced measures 
aimed at  facilitating  repo transactions.  For  example,  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore 
launched the Securities Repo Facility to promote their market-making activities. The central 
banks in Malaysia, Thailand, and Indonesia, have set up programs to increase awareness of 
repo markets among market participants, including corporate treasuries. Many other central 
banks are also working with investors, issuers, and intermediaries, to assess what can be done 
to facilitate active repo markets. 
 We,  at  the  BOJ,  have  been  participating  in  discussions  at  EMEAP  to  enhance  the  ABF 
initiative, and have been active in conducting market reviews. Assistant Governor Maeda of 
the BOJ currently chairs the Working Group on Financial Markets, leading further work in 
this area. The Bank also contributes to capacity-building with other authorities. 
 Concluding Remarks: Initiatives for the Next 20 Years 
I  have  discussed the  importance  of  developing  local currency  bond  markets,  its remaining 
challenges, and initiatives taken by central banks in the region. Let me now summarize some 
                                                        
4 For example, see Mizen, P., and Tsoukas, S. (2014), "What Promotes Greater Use of the Corporate 
Bond Market? A Study of the Issuance Behaviour of Firms in Asia," Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 66 
(1), pp. 227-253. 
5 EMEAP  Repo  Markets:  State  of  Play  --  A  Report  by  the  EMEAP  Working  Group  on  Financial 
Markets 2014 (available from http://www.emeap.org/index.php/publications/). 
 6 
of the wide range of benefits that can be gained by developing deep and liquid local currency 
bond  markets.  First,  it  makes  possible  for  governments  and  firms  to  borrow  in  local 
currencies  at  longer  maturities.  This  will  reduce  the  risks  associated  with  currency  and 
maturity mismatches. Second, the development of such bond markets will enable borrowers 
to diversify their sources of  funding by complementing bank-financing.  At the same time, 
investors will gain more investment opportunities. With enhanced investment opportunities, 
abundant savings in the region could be recycled within the region. It could also fill part  of 
the  large  infrastructure  funding  gap.  Lastly,  well-functioning  primary  and  secondary  bond 
markets  reinforced  by  an  expanded  investor  base  will  improve  the  overall  efficiency  of 
financial markets, which in turn will aid macro-economic policy implementation. 
 Over the past two decades, there have been many fruitful initiatives and programs to develop 
local currency bond markets. However, this is still work in progress and more needs to be 
done.  As  the  market  is  a  place  of  interaction,  all  stakeholders  must  play  their  roles.  A 
successful implementation strategy must identify critical paths and appropriate sequencing to 
achieve the optimal result. Cooperation among authorities and private market participants is 
the key to further development. 
 The  ASEAN+3  Bond  Market  Forum  (ABMF)  was  set  up  in  September  2010  by  the 
ASEAN+3 countries as a common platform to foster standardization of market practices and 
harmonization  of  regulations  related  to  cross-border  bond  transactions  in  the  region. 
Members comprise experts drawn from both public and private sector organizations, such as 
those present at this forum today. This type of forum is a practical step toward achieving the 
ultimate common goal of Asia's bond market development. 
 The  global  economy  continues  to  recover  and  the  financial  system  has  been  maintaining 
stability. As the IMF's Managing Director expressed in her Global Policy Agenda at the last 
International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee  (IMFC)  meeting,  current  economic  and 
financial  conditions  provide  "a  window  of  opportunity"  to  tackle  key  challenges. 
Stakeholders in the region must maintain the will to further develop and deepen the market. 
Through these concerted efforts, the challenges in fostering bond markets can be overcome. 
  7 
On  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  at  a  BOJ  symposium,  the  then 
Governor Zeti of Bank Negara Malaysia, stated: Asia, especially the ASEAN tigers, is back 
and  poised  to  leap  on  to  the  next  wave  of  economic  advancement  and  prosperity. 6 How 
correct  she  was.  Asia's  economy  has  developed  much  more  vigorously  than  many  had 
anticipated.  Economic  integration  in  the  region  has  further  deepened  through  the 
development of global value chains.  
 Looking ahead to the next twenty years, Asia's economy will continue to be at the core of 
world  economic  growth  and  we  will  experience  further  integration.  Along  with  such 
developments, it is natural to seek more developed and integrated regional financial markets. 
We can anticipate that twenty years from now, Asia's financial markets will have developed 
to become as efficient and liquid as other major financial centers in the world. 
 Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                        
6 "Ten Years after the Asian Currency Crisis: Future Challenges for Asian Economies and Financial 
Markets," a speech at the international symposium hosted by the Center for Monetary Cooperation in 
Asia 
(CeMCoA)  of 
the  BOJ  on 
January  22,  2007 
in  Tokyo 
(available 
from 
https://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2007/index.htm/). 
 8 
Asian Financial Markets 
－ 20 Years since the Asian Financial Crisis,  
and Prospects for the Next 20 Years  － 
November 28, 2017 
 Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Increased Resilience 
Less reliance on foreign-currency-
denominated short-term funding     
 Growth of Asian local currency  
bond markets     
Chart 1       
  Notes : 1. The figures are the ratios of foreign currency-denominated   
                 short-term claims to all claims of foreign banks. 
            2. The latest data are as of end-June 2017. 
Source: BIS. 
Notes: 1. Aggregates of China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea,  
                Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. 
           2. The figures for 2017 are as of end-June 2017. 
Source: Asian Bonds Online. 
   Bank-Dominated Financial Systems 
Corporate financing  
in Emerging Asia     
 Investor base  
in Emerging Asia     
Chart 2       
 Note:  Emerging Asia is the aggregate of China, India, Indonesia,  
           Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. 
Sources:  Asian Bonds Online; The World Bank, World Development Indicators. 
Notes:  1. As of end-2013 except for India’s deposit-money-banks figure which 
                 refers to end-March 2014. 
            2. Figures for Pension funds and Mutual funds for Indonesia and Vietnam, 
                 and Insurance for Hong Kong are not available. 
 
Sources: The IMF, International Financial Statistics; National central banks; 
               The World Bank, Global Financial Development Database. 
 Structural Issues in Local Currency  
Corporate Bond Markets in Emerging East Asia  
Annual Bond Market Liquidity Survey     
 Chart 3       
 Notes:  1. Emerging East Asia comprises China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand,  
                and Vietnam.  
            2. Averages of four scores answered (1: not important,  2: somewhat important,  3: important,  4: very important)  
                in 2015-2017. 
Source: Asian Bonds Online. 
