Vitas  Vasiliauskas:  Statement  on  behalf  of  the  Nordic-Baltic
Constituency at the IMF
Statement by Mr Vitas Vasiliauskas, Governor of the Bank of Lithuania, on behalf of the Nordic-
Baltic Constituency at the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund, Washington DC,
13 October 2017.
 I am honored to make this statement on behalf of the Nordic-Baltic IMF Constituency, consisting
of Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Norway, Sweden, and Lithuania.
In order to maintain strong growth, it is crucial to commit to structural reforms, apply
well-designed macroprudential policies and strengthen multilateral cooperation.
Global  economic  growth  has  gained  momentum;  however,  we  face  challenges  in  reaching  a
sustainably high economic growth. In order to maintain this momentum, we need to address low
productivity  growth,  inequality  in  terms  of  opportunities,  as  well  as  income  and  gender,  rising
indebtedness, and demographic headwinds. Such challenges require policy makers to think in
the 
fiscal  policy,  well-designed
macroprudential policies, and monetary policy.
frame  of  an  appropriate  mix  of  structural  reforms, 
It  is  important  to  stay  focused  and  committed  to  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms;
otherwise structural issues will continue to dampen growth prospects. Technological change and
fast-paced digitalization are altering economic fundamentals. Policy makers will have to foster
the positive implications of this change, while at the same time searching for solutions that help
mitigate  the  negative  effects.  Fiscal  policy,  often  together  with  structural  policies,  will  have  to
accommodate systemic changes, for labor markets in particular. Technological improvements –
despite the many benefits – have the potential to disrupt labor markets and change the sectoral
composition of economies. In order to address such challenges we need to facilitate mobility and
the efficient transfer of labor resources between sectors and regions.
It is widely acknowledged that the prolonged low interest rate environment – partly a legacy of the
global  financial  crisis  –  has  created  risks  to  financial  stability.  Well-designed  macroprudential
policies – when needed also with the collaboration between countries – may prevent the build-up
of financial vulnerabilities and imbalances, while at the same time enhancing the resilience of
economic growth. Therefore, we welcome the Fund’s contribution to the global development of
macroprudential  policies  and  invite  further  research  on  their  effectiveness  and  impact.  In  this
respect we encourage the Fund to continue gathering information on the best practices from the
in-depth analyses and cross-country comparisons.
The low interest rate environment poses additional challenges for the effectiveness of monetary
policy.  The  normalization  of  exceptionally  accommodative  monetary  policy  will  be  an
unprecedented and challenging process with a longer-term perspective. This calls for enhanced
vigilance  among  policy  makers  especially  concerning  the  containment  of  potential  spillover
effects.
Multilateral  cooperation  continues  to  be  crucial,  especially  when  facing  the  risk  of  a  possible
inward  shift  in  policies  and  threat  of  protectionism.  Trade  integration  has  contributed  to  the
improved  living  standards  across  the  globe,  while  lifting  hundreds  of  millions  out  of  poverty.
Geopolitical and national political risks add to the uncertainty of the global economic outlook. In
this context we strongly believe that adherence to a rules-based international trading order is vital
in  order  to  continue  reaping  the  benefits  of  globalization. Adding  to  that,  climate  change  also
requires  worldwide,  multilateral  action,  and  so  does  handling 
its  macro-economic
consequences.  In  order  to  secure  intergenerational  equity  it  is  imperative  that  the  long-term
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic  consequences  of  climate  changes  are  prioritized  over  any  short-term  gains  from
disregarding environmental considerations.
The  Fund  has  a  role  to  play  in  new  macro-critical  areas;  also  it  should  maintain  its
tailored advice on appropriate country-specific policies and remain the key institution in
the Global Financial Safety Net.
We welcome the Fund’s work in new areas such as the digital economy, the FinTech industry,
and in facilitating policies that promote inclusive growth, i.e. ensure equal opportunities for all.
The benefits, brought on by the FinTech industry and increased digitalization, are welcome and
encouraged.  However,  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  changes  they  might  bring  to  the
regulatory framework and established market structures. In this respect the Fund could have a
role to play in monitoring the risks that the evolution of the FinTech industry might entail. The
recently observed changes brought by the FinTech industry and increased digitalization might
also help address the risks regarding correspondent banking relationships (CBRs), which have
recently  come  under  pressure.  We  welcome  the  Fund’s  analytic  work  and  advice  on  policies
aimed towards dealing with the adverse impact of withdrawal from CBRs.
The  Fund  plays  a  central  role  in  fostering  global  economic  growth  and  financial  stability  by
providing country specific policy advice and guidance to policymakers in moving towards not only
strong domestic policies, but also promoting globally optimal solutions. We support the Fund‘s
engagement in policy diagnosis and recommendations while promoting the implementation of the
right mix of structural reforms, fiscal, macroprudential and monetary policies.
We  strongly  support  the  Fund’s  role  as  the  key  institution  in  the  Global  Financial  Safety  Net
(GFSN).  We  welcome  the  Fund’s  continuous  work  on  reforming  its  lending  facilities  and
instruments to address potential gaps in the GFSN. We welcome the discussions on the new
tools and the introduction of the Policy Coordination Instrument, which could encourage countries
to commit to and signal strong national policies. At the same time we believe that further work is
needed in order to ensure an adequate and strong GFSN with the Fund at its center.
th
We stand ready to engage in an open and constructive discussion on the 15  General Review of
Quotas.  The  outcome  of  the  Review  should  be  broadly  acceptable  and  beneficial  for  all
Members.  The  results  should  not  serve  the  interests  of  the  largest  member  countries  at  the
expense of small and medium open economies, as it would threaten the credibility and legitimacy
of the Fund.
To  conclude, we  face  changes  in  the  global  economy  and  live  in  the  environment  which
requires us to think and operate in the frame of an appropriate policy mix of structural reforms,
fiscal, macroprudential, as well as monetary policies. The Fund has a crucial role in advising
countries and ensuring a smooth transition through cyclical as well as systemic changes. The
Fund’s contribution in multilateral cooperation remains significant and especially relevant when
facing possible threats of protectionism. The Fund should stay alert to long-term tendencies in
the global economy. We stand ready to cooperate.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
