       LEVERAGING BETTER OUR CURRENT ECONOMIC SUCCESS 
 ADDRESS BY DR MARIO VELLA 
GOVERNOR, CENTRAL BANK OF MALTA 
DELIVERED DURING THE IFS MALTA ANNUAL DINNER 
01 DECEMBER 2017 
Dear  President  and  Members  of  the  Committee  of  the  Institute  of  Financial  Services  (IFS) 
Malta,  distinguished  guests,  personally  and  on  behalf  of  the  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malta,  I  thank  you  for  this  annual  traditional  opportunity  to  address  this  distinguished 
audience and, through it, all stakeholders.  
Also my personal and institutional welcome to the representatives of overseas professional 
bodies  who  are  with  us  tonight,  the  London  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance,  the  Global 
Association of Risk Professionals, and the European Banking and Financial Services Training 
Association.  You evidently hold IFS Malta in high esteem.  So do we. 
Mr  President,  we  are  pleased  to  hear  about  the  many  initiatives  being  undertaken  in  the 
area of financial services education and commend the Institute for its ongoing commitment 
to  the  professional  development  and  up-skilling  of  financial  services  practitioners.    This  is 
definitely  a  positive  contribution  to  the  sustainability  of  our  dynamic  sector,  and  one  we 
commit  ourselves  to  support  effectively.    The  Central  Bank  of  Malta  is  a  long-standing 
partner of the Institute.  Rest assured that we will continue to offer our support wherever 
possible. 
Tonight’s  event  has  become  an  important  date  in  the  calendar  of  key  stakeholders  in  our 
country’s economy, particularly but not only in the financial services sector.  This dinner, in 
fact,  provides  us  with  an  opportunity  to  meet  together  and  discuss  what  went  well,  and 
Page 1 of 10 
what  went  less  well,  in  our  economy  in  a  less  formal  environment  than  that  usually 
associated with discussions on economic and financial developments. 
Traditionally, the Central Bank avails itself, through its Governor, of the opportunity of this 
occasion to give an extensive panoramic review of Malta’s economic performance, of what 
in  our  view  drove  these  results,  outline  the  challenges  ahead  and  conclude  with  policy 
recommendations.  
This  year  we  will  depart  from  this  tradition.  While  we  will  start  with  an  overview  of  this 
year’s developments and discuss briefly the outlook for 2018, we will use this as a basis for a 
broader, more thematic, discussion.  In recent years, definitely since the European sovereign 
debt  crisis,  we  have  increasingly  come  to  realise  that  whilst  we  are  a  very  open  economy 
dependent on foreign trade and investment, our economy has shown a degree of resilience 
and  adaptability  that  has  defied  expectations,  surprised  foreign  institutions  and,  indeed, 
ourselves too.  
All forecasters including the International Monetary Fund, European Commission, European 
Central  Bank  and  the  credit  rating  agencies,  as  well  as  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  were 
proven to have been conservative.  One could argue that the comment on GDP projections 
is a bit unfair in as much as the December 2015 projections would have been based on the 
information  available  at  that  time.    Since  those  projections  were  made,  historical  data 
would have been revised.  The forecasters would not have known about these subsequent 
revisions.  Nevertheless the results were certainly better than expected.  
Let me give you a couple of examples.  In December 2015 the Central Bank projected real 
GDP growth for 2017 at 3.2%.  Two years after, we believe economic growth has reached 
6%,  or  nearly  double  what  we  had  originally  projected.    Back  in  December  2015  we  had 
anticipated 2017’s unemployment rate as 5.4%.  Now we know it will be closer to 4%, or a 
quarter less. More striking is the divergence in fiscal projections.  Back in December 2015 we 
thought  Government  would  close  2017  with  a  deficit  of  1.1%  of  GDP.    Today  we  believe 
there will be a surplus of 0.9%.  Two years ago we thought our national debt-to-GDP ratio 
would be 64% of GDP in 2017. Now we think it will be nearly ten percentage points less than 
that. 
  Page 2 of 10 
Malta’s current economic performance  
Two  weeks  ago,  in  the  concluding  statement  following  their  annual  official  staff  visit  to 
Malta, the IMF said that “Malta’s economic growth remains one of the strongest in Europe” 
and projected that this robust performance will continue on the back of rising incomes and 
historically-low  unemployment,  complemented  by  buoyant  services  exports.    They  also 
concluded that Malta will remain a surplus economy, both in terms of government finances 
and external transactions. This is, broadly speaking, the same assessment as that made by 
the  European  Commission  in  their  Autumn  2017  forecasts.    In  fact,  the  Commission’s 
experts  are  forecasting  that  this  year  and  over  the  next  two,  Malta  will  have  the  highest 
current  account  surplus  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  of  all  euro  area  countries,  “beating” 
countries such as Germany and the Netherlands.  
Whereas, going forward, growth is expected to moderate somewhat, Malta will continue to 
out-perform significantly the euro area.  The Commission’s Autumn 2017 Forecasts put us at 
the head of the league table both in terms of real GDP growth and employment increases.  
Though there are downside risks stemming from more inward-looking policies abroad and 
an  uncertain  external  environment,  including  the  impact  of  Brexit  on  the  continent’s 
economy, domestic demand in Malta should continue to grow at a fast rate, particularly as 
wage  growth  will  boost  disposable  income  while  investment  is  expected  to  remain 
sustained.  
In  last  year’s  speech  I  described  what  we  believe  are  the  conditions  leading  to  this 
performance.  Part of our success is attributable to cyclical factors, such as the effects of the 
ECB’s  monetary  policy  actions  to  stimulate  the  euro  area  economy.    Accommodative 
monetary  policy  is  boosting  aggregate  demand,  locally  and  in  our  trading  partners,  and 
lowering  the  external  value  of  the  euro,  which  helps  our  exporters.    We  also  noted  how 
strong  government  investment,  partly  financed  by  EU  funds,  is  helping  the  Maltese 
economy.  
However in last year’s speech we emphasised that most of our current economic growth is 
attributable  to  structural  changes,  which  have  contributed  to  more  than  double  our 
potential growth rate since the global financial crisis.  On the one hand, this was due to a 
significant improvement in our labour supply, both in terms of quantity and quality.  Part of 
this is related to inflows of foreign workers, but our success in raising female participation 
Page 3 of 10 
and improving financial incentives to work has played a key role.  On the other, we have also 
radically  transformed  our  energy  sector,  through  the  linking  of  our  system  with  the 
European grid bolstered by investment in new power plants.  
The divergence between our growth and that observed in the rest of the euro area is also 
due  to  the  different  performance  of  our  respective  financial  sectors.    Malta’s  financial 
system  has  proven  to  be  more  stable  than  that  of  neighbouring  countries.    Our  core 
domestic banks have remained sound with strong capital ratios, high liquidity and healthy 
profits.    Asset  quality  has  continued  to  improve,  while  banks  remained  prudent,  boosting 
provisions.  We believe that besides being a testament to the prudence of our local banking 
community, these results are also due to the actions of regulatory authorities.  
 How to address some of the challenges of our economic success 
Rapid economic growth, such as that which Malta is currently experiencing, brings about its 
own  challenges.    Opinion  surveys  confirm  how  the  Maltese  have  shifted  from  worrying 
about  the  cost  of  living  and  economic  uncertainty  to  being  concerned  about  the 
environment and traffic congestion.  This shift is also evident at the level of policymakers.  In 
fact  policy  documents,  such  as  the  2018  Pre-Budget  Document  and  the  Budget  for  2018, 
have  stressed  the  need  to  upgrade  infrastructure  and  enhance  environmental  protection.  
Similarly,  international  institutions  have  emphasised  the  need  to  shift  attention  towards 
sustaining  growth  and  making  it  more  inclusive.    Going  back  to  the  latest  IMF  Article  IV 
mission, their recommendations focus on addressing housing market pressures, closing the 
infrastructure gap, upskilling and reskilling the labour force and strengthening innovation. 
We would like to discuss some of these challenges, before outlining how we think that our 
financial sector can play a role in helping to tackle them. 
 The housing market 
In  last  year’s  speech,  we  touched  upon  the  need  to  avoid  the  formation  of  asset  price 
bubbles.    We  quoted  Central  Bank  research  indicating  that  house  prices  were  still  below 
their  equilibrium  fundamental  value,  but  warned  that  price  trends  would  nevertheless 
continue  to  be  closely  monitored.    House  prices,  as  you  know,  have  continued  to  rise. 
Page 4 of 10 
National  statistics  data  suggest  an  increase  of  5.3%  during  the  first  half  of  this  year,  as 
against  6.1%  in  the  same  period  of  2016  and  3.2%  in  2015.    That  said,  housing  supply  is 
responding to the high demand that is contributing towards house price inflation. In the first 
seven months of 2017 building permits were 62% higher than they were in the same period 
of  2016  and  153%  higher  than  in  2015.    This  increased  supply,  unless  there  is  a  further 
acceleration in demand, should result in housing price inflation moderating. This should also 
help to reduce pressure on the rental market, where there is evidence that from being at 
the  lower  end  of  cross-country  rent-to-wage  ratios,  we  have  moved  relatively  quickly  to 
being close to ratios found in the most expensive European cities. Besides the impact that 
this  rise  could  have  on  our  capacity  to  attract  foreign  workers,  we  need  to  consider  its 
impact on Maltese tenants, which in turn will impact on the broader costs of doing business 
and, consequently, competitiveness. 
We  believe  that,  going  forward,  if  we  continue  to  grow  at  the  rates  observed  in  recent 
years, we will need to have a much more dynamic housing market.  But before discussing 
private  provision,  let  us  discuss  social  housing.  Recent  developments  have  reinforced  the 
case  for  replenishing  our  social  housing  stock.    However,  this  expansion  needs  to  be 
accompanied by a change in approach.  In recent years, most of Malta’s benefit system has 
been  changed  so  as  to  create  clear  incentives  to  shift  from  benefit  dependence  to 
participation in the formal labour market.  
The only area where this is not happening yet is social housing, where the tendency remains 
that,  once  allocated,  social  housing  tends  to  become  a  lifetime  entitlement.    We  need  to 
change  this  so  that  social  housing  schemes  act to  activate  individuals  and  empower  them 
rather  than  encourage  passivity.    Such  a  transition  could  itself  be  helpful  in  financing  the 
expansion  of  social  housing.  Instead  of  seeing  social  housing  as  a  passive  benefit,  we  can 
eventually  develop  projects  which  become  to  an  extent  self-financing,  through  a 
combination  of  social  housing  provision  and  programmes  to  enhance  the  employability of 
individuals, enabling them to eventually pay market rents.  The financial sector could play a 
role here.  We have already seen how some banks have partnered with government to offer 
social  loans,  which  are  beginning  to  decrease  reliance  on  the  social  housing  stock.    Going 
forward,  we  can  see  the  possibility  of  other  innovative  initiatives  where  the  Housing 
Authority partners with financial institutions to develop social housing projects. 
Page 5 of 10 
At this point, I take this opportunity to inform you that the Central Bank of Malta has set up 
a  lean  but  highly  competent  and  proactive  Social  Research  Unit  to  study  amongst  other 
issues, access to credit by the lower income groups. 
Another  area  where  we  need  to  register  progress  is  home  equity  release.    We  have  a 
situation where many elderly persons are asset rich but cash poor.  They live on relatively 
modest pensions, while residing in large and relatively expensive homes.  This creates issues 
for financing long-term care, as many find it difficult to sell their homes outright in order to 
go  into  a  private  home.    If,  over  the  coming  years,  we  manage  to  come  up  with  ways  of 
releasing part of the equity in homes, this could raise the supply of available housing, reduce 
the  pressure  on  state  long-term  care  institutions  and  hospitals  while  guaranteeing  better 
living standards for our elderly.  This, of course, needs to be done carefully, sensitively and 
in a well-regulated environment.  Once again, we believe that financial institutions can have 
a key role to play here.  
The rental market is another area where we believe we need to act, with due consideration 
of  the  trade-offs  involved.    Any  measures  that  are  too  restrictive  could  take  us  back  to  a 
previous situation where the rental market was utterly dysfunctional.  On the other hand, 
we should not shy away from reforms that facilitate a better functioning of the market.  We 
need more legal clarity about the rights and obligations of landlords and tenants.  We also 
need  to  have  this  market  operate  in  the  formal  economy,  with  rent  contracts  duly 
registered. Stabilising this sector will be beneficial to our economy’s competitiveness, whilst 
also helping to address social inequalities.  Although loan-to-value (LTVs) ratios range from 
60% to 90% (and lately we have observed a shift to the upper bound) the banks have largely 
kept  to  their  cautious  approach  when  extending  credit  for  buy-to-let  purposes.    We  think 
that their prudence bears witness to the maturity of our financial institutions, though more 
caution in mortgage credit for secondary residences is called for. 
 The need for long-term investment 
Let’s  now  shift  to  a  more  critical  gear.    At  present,  financial  institutions  deposit  with  the 
Central Bank close to four times the average of the previous ten years. In essence, all the 
growth this year in deposits from Maltese residents has ended up being deposited with us 
Page 6 of 10 
at  the  Central  Bank.    Loans  to  the  private  sector  have  essentially  remained  flat.    Taking  a 
longer term perspective, bank lending to nonfinancial corporations has fallen from 62% of 
GDP  in  2009  to  31%  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.    From  a  situation  where  credit  to  the 
nonfinancial  sector  amounted  to  more  than  half  of  all  bank  loans,  the  share  has  fallen  to 
slightly more than a third.  Now, the usual explanation is that banks welcome any feasible 
projects  that  comes  forward,  and  that  the  decline  is  therefore  demand  and  not  supply 
driven.  Moreover, stricter regulation on bank capital and liquidity has made life tougher for 
bankers,  and  this,  it  is  argued,  has  warrants  a  higher  level  of  caution  regarding  which 
projects are financed.  
Permit  me,  however,  to  submit  some  other  facts  for  your  consideration.    The  recent  IMF 
mission  concluded  that  the  cost  of  bank  borrowing  for  corporates  in  Malta  is  among  the 
highest  in  the  euro  area,  and  the  spread  has  been  widening  in  recent  years.    In  their 
forthcoming  report  in  January  2018  they  will  furthermore  show  that  credit  supply 
constraints  impact  SMEs  disproportionately.    While  surveys  do  not  suggest  that  access  to 
finance is the private sector’s main concern, this is probably due to the fact that firms have 
been  able  to  finance  projects  through  their  own  funds.    Over  the  last  decade,  companies 
shifted to intragroup loans and intercompany lending instead of bank loans as a main source 
of financing.  
One,  of  course,  needs  to  distinguish  between  intragroup  loans  (parent  to  subsidiaries  or 
subsidiaries  to  other  subsidiaries)  which  we  think  make  up  the  bulk  of  “intercompany” 
lending  and  other  intercompany  lending  undertaken  through  factoring,  trade  credit  and 
loan funds. 
Also bear in mind that the Financial Institutions Act related companies (within a group) do 
not need a licence to lend to each other.  To give loans outside the group (intercompany) 
one does need a licence. 
While  it  is  beneficial  to  see  a  diversification  of  firms’  financing  sources,  this  change  raises 
some issues. Let us start with something we discussed last year.  We need to be careful that 
in  the  current  low  interest  environment,  investors’  search  for  yield  does  not  stimulate 
excessive  risk-taking.    Therefore,  we  need  to  complement  the  rise  in  corporate  bond 
issuance  with  a  significant effort  in  improving  investors’  education  and  compel  corporates 
Page 7 of 10 
borrowing from the domestic capital market to provide more information to investors about 
their creditworthiness.  
Secondly,  even  if  we  believe  that  the  recent  disintermediation  process  was  a  matter  of 
choice,  reflecting  firms’  current  liquidity,  this  nevertheless  begs  the  question  as  to  what 
would happen when the economy slows down and internal funds diminish.  We believe that 
if  the  disintermediation  process  goes  too  far,  our  resilience  to  future  shocks  could  be 
hampered.    Whenever  activity slows  down,  firms  will  tend  to  cut  back  on  investment  and 
innovation.    Moreover  as  a  Central  Bank,  we  have  to  be  concerned  that  in  such  an 
environment, the transmission of monetary policy, which mainly occurs through the banking 
channel,  could  be  impaired.    This  would  make  it  harder  for  policymakers  to  react  to 
economic needs. 
The current situation, with a lot of savings lying unutilised at the Central Bank, seems to me 
to be a wasted opportunity to leverage our current success in order to build a better future.  
At a time when everybody agrees that we need to invest strongly in infrastructure and to 
upgrade the competences of our workforce – both of which are long-term investments –, it 
is  painful  to  note  that  we  opt  instead  to  pile  our  savings  in  what  is  essentially  the  most 
short-term  of  investments:  deposits  with  the  Central  Bank.    The  fact  that,  despite  overall 
excess liquidity, some smaller banks continue to borrow from us through regular monetary 
operations,  is  an  indication  that  the  domestic  interbank  market  still  faces  some  structural 
inefficiencies.  
A  more  efficient  financial  system  would  facilitate  the  allocation  of  capital  to  its  most 
productive  uses.    This  would  boost  capital  stock  and  total  factor  productivity  and,  hence, 
sustainable economic growth going forward. 
I  believe  that  the  setting  up  of  the  Malta  Development  Bank  should  help  increase  the 
availability  of  finance  to  the  real  economy,  while  also  supporting  long-term  investment 
projects.  This bank is going to fill in an institutional gap in our financial sector, which recent 
developments have made ever more evident.  In a banking sector, which remains relatively 
well  profitable,  compared  to  their  European  peers,  despite  the  decline  in  lending  to 
nonfinancial  corporations,  we  need  an  institution  that  can  help  create  an  environment 
where banks feel comfortable to extend credit to innovative firms, namely firms that may 
Page 8 of 10 
not be able to provide adequate collateral due to the nature of their business, but which are 
still good business opportunities.  
Besides the Development Bank, there are other policy measures that should help facilitate 
the  flow  of  credit.    At  the  Central  Bank  we  will  continue  to  evolve  our  credit  register  to 
provide  more  information  to  banks  and  help  reduce  credit  risk.    More  broadly  we  will 
continue  supporting  government  in  its  attempts  to  reduce  excessive  bureaucracy  and 
further  improve  the  insolvency  process.    We  will  also  continue  to  take  macroprudential 
measures  to  ensure  timely  policy  interventions  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  
The struggle against bureaucracy is a key element in the broader effort to improve the ease 
of doing business in this country. We are pleased to note that the World Bank Ease of Doing 
Business team is finally making serious efforts to understand our national specificities.  The 
Central  Bank  urges  and  supports  Government’s  ongoing  efforts  to  take  the  Ease  of  Doing 
Business conditions to a new level.  Of course, it would be unforgivable of me not to seize 
this  opportunity  to  urge  the  consultancy  community  to  ensure  that  the  information  we 
provide  to  international  competitiveness  ranking  agencies  is  up  to  date  and  factually 
correct. 
I  also  take  this  opportunity  to  observe  that  in  2018,  Malta  will  undergo  a  comprehensive 
and  detailed  analysis  of  its  financial  sector  through  a  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Programme (FSAP) conducted by the International Monetary Fund.  At the same time, Malta 
will  be  evaluated  against  international  standards  on  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Counter-
Terrorism Financing (AML/CFT) by MONEYVAL as part of the Council of Europe’s peer review 
process.  We are eagerly looking forward to both. 
Our  economy  has  managed  to  outperform  because  we  managed  to  evolve  and  diversify 
rapidly.    I  believe  that  our  financial  services  and  banking  sector  needs  to  mirror  this,  to 
continuously evolve and adapt to the changing economy. 
After the success of recent years, we are now in an excellent position to solidify our gains.  
This requires us all to focus our glance further into the future, and to devote a greater share 
of current economic prosperity towards financing more long-term projects.  If we do not, we 
run the risk of undermining our own future prosperity.  
Page 9 of 10 
I  believe  that  the  financial  services  community  can  and  must  contribute  to  change  our 
nation’s mentality.  At the interface between our nation’s savings and investment it is best 
placed to leverage more effectively our current economic success.  
 Thank you.  
Page 10 of 10 
