Peter Praet: Recent economic developments in the euro area
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Febelfin working group of bank economists, Brussels, 16 November 2017.
 The ECB has introduced several monetary policy measures since June 2014, which have played
a crucial role in supporting the economy and have been demonstratively effective in preventing a
period of disinflation from slipping into one of outright deflation. More than three years later, the
risks  of  deflation  have  mostly  disappeared  due  to  the  effective  transmission  of  our  policy
measures to the real economy, which is clearly evidenced by a broad-based cyclical recovery
with solid momentum. This lays the groundwork for a return of inflation to below, but close to, 2%
over  the  medium  term.  Overall,  inflation  developments,  despite  the  solid  growth,  remain
subdued.  Convergence  of  inflation  towards  our  aim  therefore  remains  conditional  on  a
substantial degree of monetary policy accommodation.
Before focusing more on price dynamics and monetary policy, let me make some observations
about  the  latest  economic  developments.  Real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  has  expanded  for  18
consecutive quarters, growing by 2.5% year on year during the third quarter of 2017, according to
Eurostat – a rate that exceeded our projection at the start of the year. This compares with the
latest potential growth estimates for the euro area of just over 1.4%.  The latest survey data point
to a strong fourth quarter. The composite output Purchasing Managers’ Index – which has a high
correlation with growth in the euro area – remains above its long-term average and is close to
six-year highs. Overall, survey data continue to point to growth in the quarters ahead. Moreover,
Eurostat’s Economic Sentiment Indicator is near a ten-year high.
1
The ongoing recovery has led to solid employment gains. The number of people employed in the
euro area has increased by almost 7 million since hitting a trough in mid-2013. This means that
all  of  the  employment  losses  recorded  during  the  crisis  have  been  offset.  Additionally,  the
unemployment  rate  is  now  at  its  lowest  level  in  eight  years  and  continues  to  decline,
notwithstanding an increase in labour force participation.
Employment  growth,  together  with  the  gradual  increase  in  employee  compensation,  supports
households’  disposable  income  and  is  underpinning  solid  consumption  dynamics.  Robust
consumer spending is driven by buoyant sentiment, favourable bank lending conditions and the
notable progress achieved with respect to deleveraging. The investment outlook is also positive,
supported not only by a need to modernise the capital stock after years of subdued investment
and  an  improving  outlook  for  profitability,  but  also  by  easy  financing  conditions  as  our  policy
measures  have  passed  through  financial  markets  to  affect  the  borrowing  conditions  of
businesses and their customers.
Since the announcement of our policy measures in June 2014, bank lending rates for euro area
non-financial corporations have fallen by around 120 basis points and those for households by
around 100 basis points. Lending rates for very small loans, which can be taken as a proxy for
loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), have declined by almost 190 basis points.
The significant improvement in funding conditions for SMEs is especially encouraging as they
provide two-thirds of total private sector employment in the euro area. Heterogeneity of lending
rates across countries has also fallen sharply. For example, the difference between the average
lending rate for firms in countries that were severely affected by the crisis versus other countries
has narrowed by around 100 basis points over this period. The pass-through of monetary policy
has become more even.
Banks are passing on the favourable funding conditions to their customers due to the second
series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  which  further  supports  these  positive
2
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
developments.   The  sharp  reduction  in  bank  lending  rates  has  been  accompanied  by  easier
access to funding, which continues to improve in the third quarter according to newest survey
results.  Furthermore, bank lending volumes have been gradually recovering since early 2014.
According to the latest Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises, covering the period from
October  2016  to  March  2017,  euro  area  SMEs  have  continued  to  signal  improvements  in  the
availability  of  bank  loans.  Market-based  funding  conditions,  too,  have  improved  significantly  in
response to the corporate sector purchase programme launched in June 2016.
Against the backdrop of this substantial easing of financing conditions, domestic demand has
become  the  mainstay  of  growth  in  the  euro  area,  making  the  recovery  more  resilient  to
developments overseas. Real GDP growth is projected to remain above potential growth in the
coming years. The strength and resilience of the recovery tends to foster our confidence that
reflationary forces will gradually support a return of headline inflation towards a level that is below,
but close to, 2% over the medium term. But inflation dynamics continue to be subdued. After
hovering at levels well below 1% for three years, with occasional dips into negative territory, euro
area headline inflation edged higher towards the end of last year and stood at 1.4% in October
according to Eurostat’s flash estimate. Owing to energy-related base effects, headline inflation
rates are likely to temporarily decline towards the turn of the year. At the same time, measures of
underlying  inflation  have  ticked  up  moderately  since  early  2017,  but  have  yet  to  show  more
convincing signs of a sustained upward trend.
Muted wage dynamics are one important element keeping underlying price pressures subdued.
These are shaped by many factors. In addition to weak productivity developments, the significant
degree of remaining labour market slack is limiting wage growth. When assessing slack, it can
prove worthwhile to also look at broader measures than the unemployment rate. The so-called
“U6 measure” captures unemployment, underemployment (meaning workers who would like to
work more hours) and marginal attachment, namely those workers that are not competing very
actively in the labour market, for example because they are not available to start a new job at
short  notice.  This  measure  currently  covers  just  below  18%  of  the  labour  force  and  is  thus
4
considerably higher than the unemployment rate.
We  are  experiencing  a  solid  and  broad-based  economic  expansion  that  is  contributing  to  a
narrowing  of  the  output  and  unemployment  gaps.  But  there  still  appears  to  be  a  disconnect
between growth and inflation. As  slack  in  the  economy  continues  to  be  absorbed,  reflationary
forces will gradually build up and the traditional Phillips curve relationship between inflation and
the business cycle should eventually reassert itself.
That being said, current estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve still appear to be flatter than
in  previous  times,  which  could  be  interpreted  as  an  indication  that  the  relationship  between
economic slack and inflation has weakened. A mismeasurement of slack (because of structural
changes in the labour market) or an unstable relationship between slack and inflation over time
could be among the reasons. At the same time, this effect could also result from discrete parallel
shifts in the Phillips curve. Such parallel shifts can arise due to temporary changes in wage and
inflation  mark-ups,  or  –  more  concerning  from  a  central  bank’s  perspective  –  the  incipient
dislodging  of  inflation  expectations.  While  unlikely,  an  extreme  scenario  would  see  the
entrenchment of disinflationary developments initiate a downward drift in the Phillips curve and
unmoor inflation expectations. Empirically disentangling these factors is extremely difficult, so we
need to be mindful of such considerations when discussing the relationship between economic
slack and inflation developments, especially in an environment of uncertainty over the anchoring
of inflation expectations. Our primary task as a central bank is to ensure that the reconnection of
the real and the nominal sides of the economy – what I referred to before as the Phillips curve
regularity eventually reasserting itself – occurs at a steady state rate of inflation that is consistent
with our medium-term aim.
We have not yet accomplished our mission, and so we must remain patient and persistent. In
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
light  of  this,  the  October  monetary  policy  decisions  were  taken  to  preserve  the  favourable
financing conditions that are still needed for a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels
that are below, but close to, 2%. In particular, the recalibration of our asset purchases reflects
growing confidence in the gradual convergence of inflation rates towards our inflation aim.
1
2
3
4
See, for example, the European Commission’s “European Economic Forecast – Autumn 2017”.
For more details, see the box entitled “The targeted longer-term refinancing operations: an overview of the take-
up and their impact on bank intermediation”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
See the ECB’s euro area bank lending survey, October 2017, and the ECB’s Survey on the Access to Finance of
Enterprises in the euro area, October 2016 to March 2017.
See the box entitled, “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
