Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Truths in lending
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  General  Membership  Meeting  and  Induction  of  Officers  of  the
Philippine Finance Association, Inc. (PFAI) Makati City, 22 August 2017.
 Philippine Finance Association, Inc. (PFAI) President, Mr. Agerico Verzola; Executive Director,
Mr.  Romeo  Dela  Rosa;    outgoing  and  incoming  PFAI  officers;  members;  esteemed  guests;
ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
Since  1962,  PFAI  has  been  instrumental  in  shaping  the    landscape  for  financing  and  leasing
industries.  We in the Bangko Sentral recognise your crucial role in economic development. I
congratulate PFAI in my own capacity as Governor of the BSP and also on behalf of the Monetary
Board, BSP officers and staff.
I thank you also for the opportunity and privilege to keynote today’s General Membership Meeting
and Induction of Officers.
Borrowers and lenders
Shakespeare  famously  warns,  “Neither  a  borrower  nor  a  lender  be”.  Through  the  Hamlet
character Polonius, the celebrated Bard of Avon gives the didactic rationale, “For loan oft loses
both itself and friend (adding that)  borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.”
What  a  pronouncement!    Without  subtracting  from  the  literary  genius  of  England’s  greatest
playwright  and  without  discounting  (but  also  without  delving  into)  the  moral  risks  involved  in
lending  and  borrowing  from  friends,  we  can  now  acknowledge  how  the  conditions  for  arms-
length financing have changed dramatically and have improved since the 17th century.
In  fact,  it  is  interesting  that  ninety-one  (91)  years  after  Hamlet  was  published,  the  Bank  of
England was founded in 1694, rationalising and influencing the nature and narrative of financing
both in Europe and the world.
Confident of the benefits of prudent borrowing and lending we  those in this room – the PFAI the
Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  and  other  players  in  the  industry,  laud  the  practices’  crucial  and
indispensable  role  in  national  development.  We  know  the  push  that  responsible  financing  can
give to businesses to industries even sharpening and making more efficient — (to the surprise of
Elizabethan playwrights) — the edge of  husbandry!
Five truths in lending
Important to the Philippine financing and leasing industry
As you induct your new leaders today, I wish to share and expound on five (5) truths that I believe
can strategically move the industry forward. Allow me to divert from old English naysaying  and
focus on some “truths in lending.”
favourable  and  allow 
First,  economic  conditions  are 
leasing
operations.  Second,  a  sound  legal  and  regulatory  framework  greatly  ensures  prudent  and
responsible  financing  practices.  Third,  to  be  more  successful,  industries  must  recognise
markets; seize opportunities; leverage on digital technology; and engage in continuous training
and development. Fourth, in doing so, there must be collaboration and cooperation with industry
players;  Fifth  industries  must  allow  open  dialogue,  and  foster  a  healthy  partnership  with  its
regulators.
lending  and 
for  robust 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me expound.
FIRST  TRUTH:    Favorable  economic  conditions  are  present  to  allow  robust  industry
operations
The  Philippines’  positive  economic  outlook  coupled  with  the  Government’s  thrust  to  promote
infrastructure spending, favours the country’s financing and leasing industries.
While  global  economic  and  political  conditions  remain  challenging,  the  Philippine  economy  is
strongly supported by buoyant consumer and corporate demand. It is projected to grow at 6.8
percent in the medium term.  The inflation outlook for the next two (2) years is manageable and
within the Government’s three (3) percent  ±  one (1)  percentage point target.  Moreover, our
international reserves remain at a healthy level USD80.8 billion as of end-July 2017 — enough to
cover almost nine months of imports and payments of goods and services.
These  favourable  conditions  however  do  not  do  away  with  the  need  for  vigilance  on  both  our
parts. Since we are a small, open market economy, the Philippines is vulnerable to abrupt shifts
in global investor sentiment. These shifts can result in some volatility in the financial market.
Moreover,  as  the  BSP  adopts  a  market-determined  exchange  rate  policy,  fluctuations  in  the
peso-dollar exchange rate are expected, as it adjusts to market conditions.
Mindful  of  potential  sources  of  systemic  risk,  the  BSP  has  strengthened  the  framework  for
financial risk surveillance even creating a  dedicated unit responsible for tracking and monitoring
systemic risks and their channels of contagion.
But  these  concerns  will  have  implications  on  your  operations  as  well,  and  it  is  wise  to  be
watchful.
Another  key  development  to  be  mindful  of,  is  the  pace  by  which  the  U.S.  is  normalizing  its
monetary policy. Even though the Fed has been gradual and relatively predictable in its approach,
this nonetheless points to the onset of a rise in global interest rates. From a credit perspective,
this can adversely affect borrowers’ (especially highly-leveraged entities) capacity to pay.
Our  assessment,  however  shows  that  domestic  corporations  remain  to  be  profitable.
Corporations maintain interest coverage ratios generally above standard thresholds.
SECOND  TRUTH:    A  sound  legal  and  regulatory  framework  ensures  prudent  and
responsible financing practices
In 1998, PFAI spearheaded the passage of The Financing Company Act, today’s legal foundation
for the industry’s operations and the bedrock for the regulation and promotion of prudent activities
of financial and leasing companies while curtailing acts prejudicial to the public interest.
To protect the public interest, the BSP also updated  regulations on implementing The Truth in
Lending  Act  four  (4)  years  ago.  To  promote  consumer  protection,  we  have  redefined  and
identified  coverage  with  more  certainty.  This  ensures  a  more  level  playing  field  for  credit
providers, and allows transparency in lending.
Given changing market conditions and increasing sophistication of the financial services industry,
the BSP designed a  corporate governance framework and issued  Basel III-style capital rules. 
BSP’s  comprehensive  guidelines  on  credit  and  operational  risk  management,  including
technology risk and business continuity management are critical to financial institutions’ sound
operations.  The end-goal is to foster good corporate and risk governance in banks.
Recently,  the  Monetary  Board  approved  enhanced  corporate  governance  standards,  aligning
BSP regulations with the SEC’s Code of Corporate Governance for Publicly-Listed Companies
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  international  best  practice.  The  enhancements  cover  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of
Boards in establishing corporate culture and values and appointing key officers, among others.
Future reforms will further strengthen management of liquidity, cybersecurity and market risk in
financial  institutions.  These  intend  to  increase  industry  ability  to  expand,  undertake  prudential
innovation, and participate more actively in market competition while being prepared for emerging
risks.
And while the  BSP adopts a market approach to the exchange rate, it has ongoing efforts to
further  liberalize  foreign  exchange  regulations.  The  purpose  is  to  make  regulations  more
transparent, risk-based and data-driven. The amendments will ease the cost of doing business
and  provide  residents  (including  finance  and  leasing  companies)  better  access  to  foreign
exchange held by the banking system.
Another  important  regulatory  reform  initiative  is  the  adoption  of  the  agricultural  value  chain
financing  framework.  This  framework  expands  the  scope  of  lending  from  individual  farmers.
Other actors of the value chain, including MSMEs, the industry’s primary target market are now
covered.
THIRD  TRUTH:    The  financing  and  leasing  industry’s  success  depends  on  (1)
recognition  of  markets  and  the  seizing  of  opportunities;  (2)  leveraging  on  digital
technology and constant evolution; and (3) continuous training and development
recognise markets and seize opportunities
Historically, MSMEs have been the industry’s primary client base. There is economic basis for
this commercial partnership.  In a report, the OECD cites that asset- and trade-based financing
(such  as  leasing  and  factoring)  appear  to  be  best  suited  for  the  operational  requirements  of
MSMEs.
Industries would do well to apply their unique expertise in alternative financing models to support
MSMEs.  While  MSMEs  constitute  a  lucrative  market  base,  a  higher  motivating  factor  is  that
MSME success is crucial to attaining broad-based and inclusive growth.
MSMEs are diverse across industries, regions and income strata. They account for 99.5 percent
of the country’s total establishments. They employ around 61.6 percent of the workforce. They
contribute 35.7 percent of value-added output. If provided with technical and financial support,
MSMEs  have  the  potential  to  contribute  value-added  output  at  a  rate  at  par  with  our  regional
peers! The PFAI is in a strategic vantage point to make this happen!
We  are  glad  to  report  that  the  institutionalization  of  a  database  on  key  industry  statistics,
including  exposures  to  MSMEs,  will  support  evidence-based  strategic  planning  for  the
industry. Information will provide an objective measure of the extent of the industry’s evolution
and contribution to the country’s economic growth.
leverage on digital technology
The dynamism of our operating environment requires us to be strategic, agile and adaptable in
our  thinking  and  actions.  We  must  remain  open  to  innovation  and  emerging  trends  without
compromising  on  prudential  standards  and  the  industry’s  underlying  vision  of  being  at  the
forefront of providing greater consumer and corporate credit to accelerate inclusive growth.
Digitisation  and  technological  developments  in  the  delivery  of  services  will  be  felt  on  many
fronts. You will find that as companies shift towards the use of technological and digital solutions
to enhance customer platforms and improve their operational efficiency, financing requirements
for equipment and software investments will increase.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
As your clients migrate to digi-tech, so must the PFAI and its members develop its own fintech in
providing services. On this note, I encourage the PFAI to explore ways in how it can encourage
its members to leverage off technology.
In this connection, I would like to share that through the strong sponsorship of the BSP, various
industry  players  have  committed  to  launch  the  National  Retail  Payment  System,  a  digital
ecosystem for retail payments. This will result in a safe, fast, convenient and cheaper way of
effecting electronic fund transfers for you and your clients.
engage in continuous training and development
Keeping up with developments, honing skills and  increasing knowledge must be a continuing
effort.  In this regard, we at the Bangko Sentral recognise  the importance of PFAI’s seminars,
workshops and educational programs. These  programs enhance professional development and
information  databases.  We  note  that  PFAI’s  “SafeTNet”  reinforces  the  industry’s  ability  to
exercise prudent and responsible lending.
FOURTH TRUTH:  Collaboration and cooperation among industry players is essential to
push the industry forward
Collaboration, cooperation and partnerships are central to long-term success. PFAI knows this
only too well.
We  commend  PFAI’s  efforts  to  connect  with  regional  counterparts  through  the Asian  Leasing
Association.  This  is  a  significant  step  in  enabling  industry  practitioners  to  dialogue  with
international experts/regulators, be on top of the latest trends, and benchmark on best practices.
FIFTH  TRUTH:    Continuous  dialogue  and  a  partnership  between  regulators  and  the
regulated  result  in  greater  industry  support,  rationalised  regulations  and  national
development
I am sure that other co-regulators like the SEC and BIR would welcome active, continuous and
open dialogue with its regulated entities. On our part, the BSP’s commitment to the execution of
a market-oriented monetary policy supporting continued robust economic growth requires this
cooperation.
To support a conducive business environment, the BSP works closely with its supervised and
regulated entities.
It also collaborates with other regulatory authorities.
Currently, we are working on the deepening of the local currency bond market.  Regulators are
about to unveil a proposed capital market roadmap. I encourage the industry to actively provide
inputs to the sequencing of priority areas in the plan. A vibrant capital market can serve as an
alternative source of financing for the industry and powerfully complements bank lending.
In closing
As  I  close,  let  me  reiterate  the  truths  I  have  shared  so  far.  First,  economic  conditions  are
favourable  and  allow  for  robust  lending  and  leasing  operations.  Second,  we  have  in  place,  a
sound and evolving legal and regulatory framework to ensure prudent and responsible financing
practices. Third, we urge players in the industry to recognise and serve markets – especially the
MSME sector seize opportunities not just for profit but to actively participate in financial inclusion
efforts leverage on digital technology and engage in continuous training and development. Fourth,
industry players would benefit from collaboration and cooperation. Fifth and finally, continuous
dialogue and a healthy partnership between regulators and the regulated would result in greater
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
industry support, rationalised regulations and national development. We encourage you to help
us in this regard.
Rounding these points up, I will end with sage advice  (again from Shakespeare). The world’s
pre-eminent dramatist and poet said, “Our doubts are traitors, and make us lose the good we oft
might win, by fearing to attempt.”
Given the crucial role we play in economic development and even in financial inclusion. Let us
not fear to attempt.  It is our pleasure in the BSP to stand with you, friends and colleagues of
PFAI,  to endeavour to believe in the great strides we can make together for the betterment of
the    business  environment    for  the  credit,  financing  and  leasing  industries  for  MSMEs  for  our
nation.
Thank you for your kind attention. Congratulations to your new officers. Mabuhay ang ating mahal
na bansang Pilipinas.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
