Encik  Abu  Hassan  Alshari  Yahaya:  Islamic  finance  -  potential
growth areas and challenges
Address by Mr Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the 14th Kuala Lumpur Islamic Finance Forum (KLIFF) 2017, Kuala
Lumpur, 3 October 2017.
 Islamic Finance the Road Ahead: Meeting New Challenges and Opportunities
Last year at KLIFF, I talked about the need for the industry to reflect on its existing strengths; and
to build new capabilities to create new engines of growth within the industry. To seize various
growth  opportunities  and  to  continuously  reinvent;  re-energise;  and  re-anchor  the  industry.
Today, I would like to elaborate on potential growth areas and challenges that are in store for
Islamic finance.
Without a doubt, Islamic finance has made great strides both domestically and globally. We have
witnessed the expansion of industry players – from a few financial institutions to a diverse set of
players.  Customers  that  prescribe  to  Islamic  finance  now,  enjoy  a  wider  range  of  financial
products and services that meet their needs.
Globally,  Islamic  finance  has  continued  to  grow  to  reach  USD1.9  trillion  of  financial  assets  in
2016  –  with  increased  domestic  market  share  for  Islamic  banks  in  18  countries .  Within  our
shores,  progress  has  been  made  at  many  fronts.  The  Islamic  banking  share  of  assets  has
quadrupled from 7.1% in 2001 to 28% in 2016. Takaful penetration now stands at 14.6% of the
population . Our presence in the global Islamic finance system has made its mark largely in the
global sukuk market, where we have sustained our position as the market leader with market
share of more than 50% over the last 10 years.
1
2
Domestically,  our  achievements  have  placed  the  Malaysian  Islamic  finance  industry  at  the
forefront. Islamic finance continues to grow, but as it matures and enters the mainstream, the
days of double digit annual growth are now behind us. Beyond headline numbers, the industry
must  now  seize  opportunities  in  new  growth  areas;  reinforce  the  core  strengths  of  Islamic
finance; unlock its potential; and realise its intended promises.
Aspiration for Islamic finance (IF)
The question is – what lies in the road ahead for Islamic finance? I would like to highlight three
trends  that  are  sweeping  the  world,  which  in  turn  offer  opportunities  for  the  Islamic  finance
industry to capitalise on. First – is the rise of entrepreneurship. Second – is the growing interest
in halal economy; and Third – the global large infrastructure financing needs.
Rise of entrepreneurship
Starting with the first trend on the rise of entrepreneurship – All around the world, we are seeing
more small businesses and start-ups being set up accounting for about 90% of businesses and
over 50% of employment worldwide . These SMEs have become key engines of job creation and
economic growth in developing countries, particularly following the global financial crisis. With the
rise of the digital economy the SME ecosystem is also expanding with increasing number of new
technology  start-ups.  Unfortunately,  access  to  financing  for  SMEs,  especially  those  in  new
growth areas, remains severely constrained in many emerging markets.
3
SMEs  form  the  backbone  of  the  Malaysian  economy  –  being  more  than  95%  of  business
establishments  in  Malaysia ;  and  being  an  important  driver  of  employment  and  growth  –
4
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
responsible for an estimated 36% of the country’s GDP; 65% of the country’s employment; and
5
nearly 18% of Malaysia’s exports .
If we were to look at the financing side, in Malaysia, about 60% of total financing disbursed by
Islamic banks in 2016 is channelled to household. Only about 14% are to SMEs . Meanwhile, for
conventional banks, SME financing forms a larger portion of their business, accounting for 21%
of  total  loans.  Clearly  –  this  represents  an  untapped  market  segment  for  Islamic  banks  to
capitalise.
6
I see value-based intermediation or (VBI) as one of the drivers for Islamic banks to assist SMEs
and  those  seeking  to  start  and  grow  business.  VBI  promotes  greater  involvement  by  Islamic
banks  in  facilitating  entrepreneurial  activities  through  holistic  offerings  which  include  financing
and proactive support. This forms part of VBI’s objectives – that is for Islamic financial institutions
to conduct a more responsible way of doing business – where growth is to be driven by clear
sense of purpose to create positive impact to society; environment; and the broader economy.
Under VBI – business models of Islamic banks are expected to become more customer-driven,
with  greater  understanding  on  customer’s  specific  needs  and  circumstances.  This  approach
necessitates greater empathy, which can pave the way for Islamic banks to develop more tailor
made financial solutions. Assessment of financial applications would also be based on potential
value creation and not on credit scores alone – thus opening up exposure to larger segment of
potentially  viable  businesses.  This  is  central  in  uncovering  new  markets,  such  as  within  the
presently unserved and underserved segment of society. A VBI-driven financial institution – would
actively seek out opportunities to assist aspiring entrepreneurs that may be struggling to obtain
funds, but have business models that, despite being untested, are more socially responsible or
green  in  nature.  VBI  therefore  considers  a  broader  spectrum  of  criteria  as  opposed  to  the
traditional method that places emphasis on credit history and availability of collaterals.
VBI also promotes more holistic offerings for entrepreneurs and I would like to suggest several
examples to illustrate – how Islamic banks can extend its scope of business to benefit SMEs.
In providing infrastructure support, an example is through provision of physical premises that can
be  rented  by  SMEs  to  conduct  their  businesses  at  lower  rentals.    There  is  an  example  of  a
product in the market today, where factory spaces are provided for SMEs to rent at affordable
rates,  equipped  with  amenities  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  the  entrepreneurs.  In  addition,
entrepreneurship training and consulting services are also offered to them. This can particularly
assist in increasing entrepreneurial involvement in the manufacturing industry.  
The Investment Account Platform (IAP) is another avenue for Islamic banks to support growth of
SMEs  and  new  businesses.  It  provides  a  new  source  and  enhanced  access  to  funding  for
ventures,  with  more  competitive  financing  terms  and  variations  in  financing  structures.  It  is
encouraging  to  see  increasing  interest  from  Islamic  banks  to  take  part  in  the  IAP,  and  I  hope
more will participate, as to create an extensive network of sponsoring banks that can cater to the
more diversified needs of both investors and ventures.
Moving  on  to  the  second  trend  –  the  growing  interest  in  halal  economy  given  the  increasing
demand  for  halal  products  –  as  the  halal  market  is  non-exclusive  to  Muslims  alone;  and  has
gained increasing acceptance among non-Muslim consumers. The global halal market is highly
lucrative, with an estimated annual growth rate of 20% that makes it one of the fastest growing
consumer segments in the world.  
Islamic finance can contribute more towards the growth of the global halal economy by playing a
greater  role  in  international  trade  facilitation.  I  believe  our  Islamic  financial  institutions  have  an
advantage  position  to  tap  into  this  new  growth  area  and  be  part  of  the  global  halal  industry
ecosystem – given that Malaysia is a key exporter of halal goods and services.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
What are the opportunities that arise for our Islamic banking players? This is largely seen in the
provision of financial support to boost the trade flow of halal products. In 2016, Shariah-compliant
trade  finance  accounted  for  24.1%  of  total  trade  finance  provided  by  the  Malaysian  banking
sector. However, our Islamic finance industry only financed about 5% of total exports in Malaysia,
again,  signifying  an  untapped  growth  area  with  large  potential.  Increasing  bank  financing  for
SMEs would also encourage more market based solutions  to meet the funding needs of the
halal sector participants, which are now largely reliant on government initiatives.
There are however a number of challenges that may impede trade finance facilitation by Islamic
finance  players.  I  would  like  to  highlight  two.  First  is  –  “process  inefficiencies”  –  that  can
contribute  to  higher  operational  risks  such  as  fraud.  This  can  be  mitigated  through  use  of
technology  that  reduces  reliance  on  traditionally  document-intensive  and  multi-tiered  manual
processes. In Malaysia, I am happy to note that six Islamic banks have embarked on digitalisation
of trade finance processes – through an integrated web-based platform that offers trade finance
and working capital management solutions.
The second challenge is, – the need to improve connectivity between the Islamic finance industry
and  the  international  trade  community  –  to  facilitate  effective  intermediation  of  trade  finance
needs. Again, the use of technology can ease the application and submission of trade-related
information and documents which can expedite the whole process.
If these challenges are not addressed, industry players are at risk of becoming irrelevant in the
trade finance space. This is due to increasing competition from fintech companies that are able
to serve SMEs and the underserved market more effectively as compared to a traditional credit
intermediating bank. Tawreeq, for example, a UAE-Luxembourg fintech platform, – offers supply
chain finance solutions including Shariah-compliant trade finance securitisation – to SMEs and
their corporate partners.
How do we lessen the risk of being overtaken by such competitors? One way is for the Islamic
finance industry, to tap into the expertise of fintech companies – by exploring mutually beneficial
partnerships – to develop innovative financial solutions for the international business community.
In Malaysia, the Regulatory Sandbox is supportive for industry players to explore innovative ideas
and test prototype of technology solutions for trade finance.
Increasing trade flow of halal products – also offers large opportunities for takaful operators to
develop innovative solutions for trade-related risks. A good example is trade credit takaful. This
however, necessitates the development of requisite expertise within the takaful industry and the
need to increase awareness among traders on benefits of trade credit protection.
Global large infrastructure financing needs
The third and final trend that I would like to highlight today is the large infrastructure development
taking  place  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  increasing  global  population.  Global  infrastructure
development financing needs is expected to reach USD94 trillion by 2040 and close to USD52
trillion in Asia alone . The One Belt, One Road initiative by China or recently known as the Belt
and Road initiative – that covers areas primarily in Asia and Europe – would add a further USD1
trillion to financing needs in the region over the next 10 to 15 years. This opens up another area
of opportunities for Islamic finance.
7
Islamic finance has strong potential to mobilise funds for infrastructure and development needs
all around the world – by exploring opportunities – to structure innovative funding modalities for
infrastructure  financing.  The  recent  issuance  of  the  world’s  first  green  sukuk  to  fund  a  solar
project  in  Sabah  that  amounts  to  RM250  million  –  is  an  example  of  an  innovative  financial
instrument to tackle global infrastructure needs and green financing, at the same time.
Enhanced  collaboration  with  global  Islamic  finance  players  and  multilateral  development
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
institutions could also strengthen syndication capabilities, and expand investor base. As a start,
Malaysia’s role as one of the founding members of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank –
opens up new avenues for domestic Islamic financial institutions – to leverage on its extensive
network, institutional expertise, and its good track record to reach out to more diverse investors.
In closing, I would like to again mention that as Islamic finance enters the mainstream – the road
ahead  requires  Islamic  finance  to  seize  opportunities  in  new  growth  areas  and  to  deliver  its
promises. This requires greater positive impact by Islamic finance beyond its shareholders and
immediate stakeholders – to also benefit the society; environment; and the broader economy as
a whole.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
IFSB Islamic Financial Services Industry Stability Report 2017 – 18 countries out of 35 countries tracked by IFSB.
BNM Islamic Finance Handbook December 2016.
International Finance Corporation.
The World Bank – Feature Story 2016.
The World Bank – Feature Story 2016.
BNM Islamic Finance Handbook December 2016.
Thomson Reuters Business News 25 July 2017.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
