Mario Draghi: Structural reforms in the euro area
Introductory remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB
conference "Structural reforms in the euro area", Frankfurt am Main, 18 October 2017.
 It is my pleasure to welcome you all to this conference on structural reforms in the euro area.
As you know, “structural reforms” has become something of a contested term in recent years.
For  many,  it  describes  a  pragmatic  policy  agenda  to  raise  long-term  growth  and  accelerate
adjustment to shocks, which is essential for countries in a monetary union.
But for others, the term is viewed as a “catch-all” for a wide range of policies, some of which
have potentially negative short-run costs and adverse distributional effects.
In  view  of  these  discussions,  it  is  important  to  assess  –  first  –  whether  countries  with  more
flexible structures and more resilient institutions do indeed recover more quickly from shocks and
grow faster over the cycle.
Second,  we  should  evaluate  how  the  design  of  reforms  and  the  overall  policy  mix  affect  the
impact of structural policies, especially during a downturn.
And  third,  we  should  assess  the  distributional  effects  of  reforms,  and  consider  how  we  can
ensure that they benefit everyone in society.
These are the themes I will focus on in my remarks this morning.
Economic structures, adjustment to shocks and long-term growth
First  of  all,  the  crisis  has  helped  us  better  understand  a  key  question  for  the  euro  area:  are
economies that are more flexible also more resilient to adverse shocks, and do they experience
faster recoveries and higher long-term growth?
By and large, the experience of the crisis has shown the answer to be “yes”. What we have seen
is that more economic flexibility and sound institutions do lead to more resilience and higher long-
term growth, including when countries face a common shock.
Indeed, euro area economies that were more flexible at the start of the crisis – as measured by
the World Bank Doing Business Indicator in 2009 – subsequently showed a stronger recovery.
1
GDP per capita rebounded faster and unemployment fell more.
And looking at the last 15 to 20 years – so over the full cycle – euro area countries with sound
economic structures at the outset have shown much higher long-term real growth. 
Confirming this relationship, countries that reformed their product and labour markets during the
crisis have also seen good results afterwards – and the full effects are still materialising.
Focusing just on the labour market, a number of countries have implemented reforms in recent
years which have helped to reduce unemployment – most visibly Spain and Portugal, but also
3
Italy.   These reforms also seem to have made unemployment more responsive to growth.
2
Structural  policies  are  a  main  factor  explaining  these  positive  developments.  But  of  course
supportive financial and macroeconomic policies have been vital, too.
New research also finds that labour market reforms in the euro area reduce the dispersion of
unemployment  and  GDP  across  member  countries  following  a  common  shock,  making  the
4 
1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
single monetary policy more effective for everyone.
But  it  is  clear  that,  to  get  the  best  results,  there  has  to  be  some  broad  coordination  among
countries. Labour market reforms can emphasise more wage adjustment or more employment
adjustment, and countries will only converge in their response to shocks if they have a broadly
5
similar mix. 
This  underscores  why  the  European  Semester  process  is  crucial  –  not  only  for  encouraging
structural reforms, but also for ensuring some degree of beneficial consistency between them.
Lessons on the composition of reforms and their interaction with macro policies
Still, even if some countries have had positive experiences with reforms during the crisis, we
know that for others it has been more difficult. This brings me to my second theme about the
design and implementation of reforms.
There are three key areas where lessons can be drawn: the packaging of reforms, their scope
and the macro-policy mix that accompanies them.
First, the packaging of reforms is crucial for reducing their short-term adjustment costs.
Unlike  what  happened  in  the  years  even  before  the  crisis,  labour  market  reforms  must  be
preceded – or least accompanied by – product market reforms, otherwise wage adjustments will
not be fully passed on to prices. Instead, profit mark-ups will rise and the purchasing power of
households will fall, thereby worsening the economic conditions of consumers and aggravating
6
any recession.
During  the  crisis,  because  of  powerful  vested  interests,  labour  market  reforms  were  not
accompanied by product market reforms in some countries, and so wages fell and prices did not
adjust in tandem.
The key question is then: how do we make sure that product market reforms do indeed take
place? While there are no easy answers, IMF research suggests a central part of the answer
may  be  carefully  designed  fiscal  incentives  to  soften  the  blow  for  those  affected.  In  the  past,
Germany, Ireland and the UK have all successfully used such incentives to bring about these
7
reforms.
The second area where we have learned lessons from the crisis is the scope of reforms.
Much of the focus in the reform debate has been on product and labour markets. But what is
often  forgotten  is  the  scope  for  progress  by  reforming  public  administration  and  the  business
environment.
These reforms are effective at all points of the cycle, since they entail very few short-term costs.
In fact, lessening the time it takes to open a business, or speeding up judicial processes, should
yield  immediate  net  gains. And  institutional  reforms  also  act  as  a  multiplier  for  other  reform
efforts by improving the implementation and enforcement of those measures.
In light of this, many countries have successfully introduced more broad-based reforms during
the crisis. But there are still large gains that could be achieved.
Published  research  and  internal  Eurosystem  simulations  show  that  improved  economic
structures and institutions could result in significantly higher GDP in the long run, depending on
the  specific  reforms  and  approach  used.   It  has  also  been  estimated  that  sound  economic
9
structures could reduce the probability of a severe recession by around 20%.
8
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The final area where we have learned about reform strategy is the overall policy mix.
The  crisis  has  lent  weight  to  the  view  that  a  supportive  macro-policy  mix  leads  to  improved
reform  implementation.
  The  IMF  finds  that,  where  countries  have  fiscal  space,  temporary
public  spending  can  ease  the  transitional  costs  of  some  reforms.  This  is  then  paid  for  in  the
medium term when the growth benefits of those reforms kick in and fiscal positions improve.
10
11
Fiscal  incentives  have  also  been  shown  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  reforms.  The  Italian
“Jobs Act” in 2015, for example, has been followed by an increase of almost half a million in the
number of people employed with a permanent job contract, in large part because hiring subsidies
encouraged firms to take on more people under the new open-ended contract.
12
Perhaps more controversial in  recent  years  has  been  the  question  of  the  interaction  between
monetary policy and structural reforms. It is often said that monetary policy discourages reforms
by taking the pressure off governments to act during crisis times.
But ECB research finds no convincing evidence that high interest rates lead to more reforms, if
one controls for the business cycle and other factors. In fact, the opposite is more likely to be
true:  lower  rates  tend  to  promote  reforms,  since  they  lead  to  a  better  macroeconomic
environment.
  This  is  especially  useful  for  countries  without  the  fiscal  space  to  support
demand.
The challenge of pairing reforms with inclusiveness
13
But we have also learned something else from the crisis: highlighting the benefits of reforms in
terms of growth is not enough to make them widely acceptable to the public. We also need to
take into account the inclusiveness of economic policies.
As we all know, there is an increasing perception that growth in the past has not been sufficiently
inclusive,  and  was  not  always  associated  with  rising  living  standards  for  everyone.  This  has
fuelled the belief that some have been “left behind” by the spread of market forces.
In this context, the case for structural reforms needs to go beyond their efficiency benefits. We
need to show that reforms can contribute to both efficiency and equity.
One way this can be achieved is by focusing more on reforms with positive distributional effects.
Tackling rent-seeking in some product markets tends to benefit those at the lower end of the
income scale, since such reforms lead to lower prices and increased consumption choices, and
therefore improve the welfare and purchasing power of poorer people in particular.
14
Addressing tax avoidance and evasion would also help reduce inequality. Indeed, the payoff of
efforts in this area can be significant. In 2015, EU countries lost around 12% of total expected
revenues  in  value-added  tax,  partly  because  of  tax  evasion  and  inadequate  tax  collection
systems.
15
16
Still,  some  reforms  will  always  have  negative  distributional  effects,  at  least  in  the  short
term.
  But  in  these  cases  we  can  do  more  to  reduce  inequality  by  ensuring  that  flexibility  is
combined  with  security.  Inclusive  labour  markets  are  ones  with  well-functioning  active  labour
market policies that allow people to reskill, and proactive macroeconomic policies that shorten
job transitions.
Before the crisis, several countries introduced labour market reforms to increase flexibility, but
did little to make their labour markets more secure. This ended up disproportionately penalising
young people, who had weak job protections and meagre support during unemployment.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
As I said in a recent speech in Ireland, young people do not want to live on subsidies. They want
to  work  and  expand  their  lifetime  opportunities.
  So  we  should  never  think  that  simply
compensating  the  “losers”  of  reforms  is  enough.  Public  policies  have  to  be  designed  to  help
people back into work, and into jobs where they can develop and refine their skills.
17
Given the ongoing polarisation of skills in labour markets, this points to the crucial importance of
strong education and training systems. Job polarisation is not just putting increasing pressure on
workers with mid-level skills, but also complicating the possibilities for unskilled workers to find
more skilled jobs, meaning that they continue to be trapped in low-paid jobs.
18
The  main  answer  is  education  and  training  that  disseminates  marketable  skills  more  widely.
Otherwise,  there  is  a  risk  that,  rather  than  being  seen  as  an  agent  of  jobs  and  opportunity,
structural reforms are seen as a catalyst for a low-wage, precarious economy.
Conclusion
Let me sum up.
The crisis has confirmed that more flexible economies are more resilient, especially for countries
that are part of a monetary union. Lessons about how to design and implement reforms so as to
maximise their benefits and minimise their short-term costs should be put into practice.
Reforms  have  to  take  into  account  equity  as  well  as  efficiency.  Vested  interests  have  to  be
tackled and those who have lost out given proper support.
With monetary policy being accommodative, we now have a window of opportunity to take these
measures. I hope the insights at this conference can move this agenda forward.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
This holds true for both the countries that joined the euro area early on (by 2001) and the former communist
countries that joined later. However, for a given “Doing Business” level (World Bank measure of business
regulations)  the  latter  group  seem  to  have  generally  outperformed  the  former,  possibly  due  to  their  larger
catching-up potential.
See Banco de España (2015), “Competitive adjustment and recovery in the Spanish economy”, Annual Report,
Box 2, pp. 39-63; Vansteenkiste, I. (2017), “Did the crisis permanently scar the Portuguese labour market?
Evidence from a Markov-switching Beveridge curve analysis”, Working Paper Series, No 2043, ECB, Frankfurt
am Main, April; and Sestito, P. and Viviano, E. (2016), “Hiring incentives and/or firing cost reduction? Evaluating
the impact of the 2015 policies on the Italian labour market”, Questioni di economia e finanza (Occasional
Papers), No. 325, Banca d’Italia, March.
Based on a static relationship between changes in the employment rate and percentage changes in GDP for
the period between the first quarter of 1999 and the second quarter of 2015. The period of the recovery analysed
is  from  Q2  2013  to  Q2  2015.  See  the  article  entitled  “What  is  behind  the  recent  rebound  in  euro  area
employment?”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB, 2015.
Calculations based on estimation results from Abbritti, M. and Weber, S. (forthcoming), “Reassessing the Role
of Labor Market Institutions for the Business Cycle,” International Journal of Central Banking.
Abbritti, M. and Mueller, A. (2013), “Asymmetric Labor Market Institutions in the EMU and the Volatility of Inflation
and Unemployment Differentials,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 45(6), pp. 1165-1186.
See  Blanchard,  O.  and  Giavazzi,  F.  (2003),  “The  Macroeconomic  Effects  of  Regulation  and  Deregulation  in
Goods and Labor Markets”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118, August, pp. 879-907.
Banerji, A. et al. (2017), “Labor and Product Market Reforms in Advanced Economies: Fiscal Costs, Gains, and
Support”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, March.
Simulations based on ECB staff research (Masuch, K., Moshammer, E. and Pierluigi, B. (2016), “Institutions,
public debt and growth in Europe”, Working Paper Series, No 1963, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, September) show
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
that enhancing institutions towards average practices in the EU could lift long-term real GDP per capita for some
countries by between 5% and 18% (in the course of about ten years).
Sondermann,  D.  (2016),  “Towards  more  resilient  economies:  the  role  of  well-functioning  economic
structures”, Working Paper Series, No 1984, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, November.
For an early example of this view, see Gordon, R. (1996), “Macroeconomic Policy in the Presence of Structural
Maladjustment”, NBER Working Paper Series, No 5739, National Bureau of Economic Research, September.
Banerji, A. et al., op. cit.
Between the first quarter of 2015 and the first quarter of 2017, see Eurostat’s European Union Labour Force
Survey. See also Sestito, P. and Viviano, E. (2016), “Hiring incentives and/or firing cost reduction? Evaluating the
impact of the 2015 policies on the Italian labour market”, Questioni di economia e finanza (Occasional Papers),
No. 325, Banca d’Italia, March.
Dias  Da  Silva,  A.,  Givone,  A.  and  Sondermann,  D.  (2017),  “When  do  countries  implement  structural
reforms?”, Working Paper Series, No 2078, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, June.
For more on this mechanism, see Fajgelbaum, P. D. and Khandelwal, A. K. (2014), “Measuring the unequal
gains from trade”, NBER Working Paper Series, No 20331, National Bureau of Economic Research, July.
Center for Social and Economic Research (2017), “Study and Reports on the VAT Gap in the EU-28 Member
States: 2017 Final Report”.
The OECD finds that: “Social protection and labour market reforms are the sources of most of the trade-offs
between  growth  and  equity  objectives.  Reductions  in  the  generosity  of  unemployment  benefits  and  social
assistance are found to leave poor households behind” (see Causa, O., Hermansen, M. and Ruiz, N. (2016),
“The  distributional  impact  of  structural  reforms”, Economics  Department  Working  Papers,  No  1342,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, November).
Draghi, M. (2017), “Youth unemployment in the euro area”, speech for the Henry Grattan Lecture Series at Trinity
College, Dublin.
OECD Employment Outlook 2017.
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
