Ravi Menon: Economic possibilities of blockchain technology
Keynote address by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at
the Global Blockchain Business Conference, Singapore, 9 October 2017.
 Honourable Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
Andhra Pradesh and Singapore
I am delighted to be here in Andhra Pradesh – the land of the Tiruppati temple, Carnatic music,
Kuchipudi  dance,  and  of  course,  the  charming  sea  town  of  Vishakapatnam.    I  am  grateful  to
Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu for his kind invitation to speak at this conference.
Andhra Pradesh and Singapore share in common a modern outlook. 
We both believe in the value of innovation for economic growth and harnessing the power of
technology for the common good.
That Andhra Pradesh is organising a global conference on the topic of blockchains shows its
progressive nature.
It is also a tribute to the vision of Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu, who has inspired an IT
revolution in Andhra Pradesh.
Little  wonder  that Andhra  Pradesh  and  Singapore  have  forged  good  relations  and  have  been
working closely together.
The Andhra Pradesh government has appointed a Singapore consortium to develop the new
capital city of Amaravati.
The Andhra Pradesh government and the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) signed a
FinTech cooperation agreement in October last year.
A delegation of more than 10 FinTech startups from Singapore attended the FinTech
Valley Vizag Spring Conference in March this year.
Establishing trust in a decentralised way
Trust  underpins  all  economic  transactions.    In  the  absence  of  direct  trust  among  parties,  the
alternative is to rely on trusted central parties.
In  payments  and  settlement,  there  is  a  central  operator  that  records  and  updates  the
balances of the clearing participants
But trusted central parties are not always available.  And even if they are, what if they fail?  Single
points of failure make attractive attack targets.  And what if trust is broken?  What if the central
party colludes?
The key breakthrough of blockchain technology is its ability to establish trust in a decentralised
system.
Blockchain technology allow diverse parties to collaborate without trusted central parties.
All parties to a set of transactions are able to maintain a coherent and consistent view of the
state of the world.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
When I am confident that what you see is what I see, we can collaborate more seamlessly
without a third party to maintain a “golden source of truth”.
How does a blockchain make sure that what you see is what I see without third party verification?
First,  data  are  recorded  and  shared  in  a  way  that  ensures  a  consistent  view  across  multiple
parties.
Copies of the data are spread around all the nodes of the blockchain network.
Rather than trusting any single party, the trust is placed in the collective view of all parties.
Anybody can check whether something is wrong.
Second, data are heavily encrypted or signed with digital signatures that makes the blockchain
secure against tampering.
This means that all parties in the blockchain can be sure that no one can unilaterally make
changes without the signature of the others.
Third, data are generated by smart contracts which always execute in the same expected way.
The smart contract acts as an impartial judge.
It executes contracts faithfully in accordance with the pre-defined contractual terms that all
parties on the blockchain have agreed to.
A  blockchain  is  essentially  a  database  that  provides  proof  of  who  owns  what  at  any  given
moment and an immutable record of all transactions.  It is, in other words, a distributed ledger.
Distributed  ledger  technology,  or  DLT,  has  the  potential  to  transform  many  industries  and
economic activities.
This  goes  well  beyond  the  original  application  of  blockchains  to  Bitcoins  and  crypto-
currencies.
In fact, although crypto-currencies have attracted the most public attention, it is the broader
applications of DLT that hold more promise over the short to medium term.
Industry applications of distributed ledger technology
DLT is particularly suited for industry applications where it is important to know the histories of
ownership but there is no trusted central party or reliance on the central party is inefficient or
costly.
Take supply chain management for instance. 
DLT can provide the means for registering, certifying, and tracking the supply chain process
at low cost.
All goods will be uniquely identified and transferred through the distributed ledger, with each
individual transaction verified, time-stamped, and encrypted in a transparent process.
In financial services, DLT is being experimented with for a variety of applications.
DLT may provide a more efficient alternative to credit bureaus that compile consumer credit
information from banks.
The  insurance  industry  in  Singapore  is  looking  at  how  DLT  can  help  prevent  duplicate
insurance claims.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Probably, one of the potentially more powerful applications in financial services is in customer
verification, the so-called “know-your-customer” or KYC process.
Banks  spend  an  inordinate  amount  of  time  and  money  on  KYC,  and  yet  struggle  to
effectively detect and deter money laundering, tax evasion, and other forms of illicit finance.
DLT  brings  about  opportunities  for  a  shared  industry-wide  KYC  utility  that  can  verify
customers and transactions in a more efficient and robust manner.
This is not just conjecture.  It is beginning to happen.
In  Singapore,  OCBC  Bank,  HSBC  and  MUFG  announced  last  week  that  they  have
completed  a  KYC  blockchain  project  to  reduce  the  duplicity  of  KYC  processes,
providing convenience for customers and efficiency across the banks.
The “killer app” for DLT is really in cross-border transactions.
When multiple entities across different jurisdictions are involved, there is no natural trusted
central party.
DLT allows the possibility of various parties working directly with one another to make cross-
border transactions cheaper, faster, and safer.
Cross-border trade is a good example.  In Singapore, we are exploring two specific applications
– trade finance and trade documentation.
In trade finance, DBS Bank and Standard Chartered Bank are exploring the use of DLT to
prevent the problem of duplicate invoicing while preserving client confidentiality.
In  trade  documentation,  Singapore  is  exploring  how  we  can  use  DLT  to  link  our  National
Trade Platform to trade platforms in other countries, such as Hong Kong.
The DLT-based platform will allow users to exchange digital trade documents across
borders with confidence.
A vibrant and growing DLT ecosystem in Singapore
Innovation and technology will be the main drivers of growth in the future.
The MAS has been working actively with the financial industry to create a Smart Financial
Centre, where innovation is pervasive and technology is used widely. 
We  want  to  do  this  to  increase  efficiency,  manage  risks  better,  create  opportunity,  and
improve people’s lives.
Building  a  strong  DLT  ecosystem  is  part  of  this  broader  FinTech  strategy.    And  the  DLT
ecosystem in Singapore has been growing handsomely.
There are now approximately 50 locally based FinTech startups in the DLT space.
The local universities are doing research in various aspects of DLT.
Venture capitalists are looking for interesting DLT ideas to invest in.
Major  technology  consulting  firms  and  system  integrators  have  set  up  in  Singapore
dedicated practices or teams for DLT.
An effective way to develop the ecosystem is through collaborative projects that bring together
various parties.  And MAS has been an active participant in such projects, helping to co-create
solutions together with the industry.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Project Ubin: Using DLT for inter-bank payments
Project Ubin is a good example of such collaboration as well as challenging the status quo.
The problem statement is this: 
In a real-time gross settlement payment system, transactions typically go through a single
trusted party, often the central bank.
The challenge MAS posed itself was: can we create a more efficient inter-bank payment and
settlement system without MAS acting as the trusted party?
This began Project Ubin – a collaborative effort among MAS, the Singapore Exchange, ten banks,
six technology companies, and six academic institutions. 
Over the course of the project, more than 150 people were trained in DLT.
Phase  1  of  Project  Ubin  successfully  demonstrated  that  banks  are  able  to  transact  with  one
another on an Ethereum-based prototype without going through the MAS.
MAS issued a digital representation of the Singapore Dollar – a central bank digital currency
– and placed it on the distributed ledger for domestic inter-bank settlement.
Phase  2  of  Project  Ubin  –  just  recently  concluded  –  successfully  produced  three  software
models that achieved decentralised netting of payments in a manner that preserved transactional
privacy.
The  next  step  in  Project  Ubin  is  to  extend  the  application  to  cross-border  payment  and
settlement. 
Cross-border payments today rely on a correspondent banking network. 
Banks  hold  balances  with  one  another  and  settlement  occurs  through  the  adjustment  of
these relative balances.
There is counterparty risk, liquidity is split, and reconciliation is a major pain point.
In cases where multiple correspondent banks are involved, transactions may take days and
at high cost to customers.
We  are  therefore  exploring  how  Project  Ubin  can  be  linked  up  with  other  central  bank  DLT
projects to facilitate cross-border payments.
If successful, it will help bring about significant improvements in efficiency, cost, speed, and
risk management.
The grand vision is a DLT-based settlement system that paves the way for 24/7 operations
and allows cross-border transactions to be settled instantly.
Collaboration between Singapore and Andhra Pradesh through DLT
DLT is a natural platform for collaboration.
With the strong trade flows between Singapore and India, there are good opportunities for
FinTechs and financial institutions in Singapore and Andhra Pradesh to collaborate.
We  can  explore  how  our  customs  and  trade  platforms  can  be  linked  up  to  facilitate
exchange of trade documents and advance the digitalisation of trade.
Our  banks  can  work  together  on  new  models  of  cross-border  payments  to  improve
settlement time, allow for round the clock operations, and reduce settlement risk.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  is  an  opportune  time  for  DLT  collaboration,  and  more  broadly  FinTech  collaboration,
between  Andhra  Pradesh  and  Singapore.    I  look  forward  to  seeing  FinTechs  in  Singapore
developing solutions for use cases in Andhra Pradesh that will create value and opportunity for
the people of this up-and-coming state.
Thank you and I wish you fruitful and stimulating discussions.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
