Andreas Dombret: To count or not to count – the future of internal
models in banking regulation
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the EBA Policy Research Workshop &quot;The future role of quantitative models in financial
regulation&quot;, London, 28 November 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Dear Andrea Enria
Thank you for the invitation and your kind introduction. After I accepted to give the keynote at this
risk modelling conference, a colleague shared with me an unflattering comparison of financial
risk modellers with weather forecasters. He asked: Why do you think weather forecasters like
financial risk modellers so much? His answer: Because the only kind of storm less well predicted
than hurricanes and tornadoes are financial storms.
In my keynote today, I will frame this conference in a more positive tone, as I see a lot of merit in
financial risk modelling – and in weather forecasting, too, for that matter.
Yet during and after the financial crisis we witnessed severe instances of risk model failure –
where internal calculations of many banks grossly underestimated actual risks. Remember for
example the systematic underestimation of a market freeze or a price bubble before the sub-
prime crisis broke. The many unexpected lawsuits pointed to further blind spots – all of which
suddenly led to capital cushions melting away.
However, focusing on these failures alone misses the fact that, overall, financial risk modelling
has improved risk measurement substantially. It has inspired us to reconsider the role and the
liberties of internal modelling.
And  this  is  partly  why  you  are  at  today’s  EBA  workshop  –  to  improve  internal  models.  Your
agenda includes challenging topics. My aim is far more modest. In my statement this morning I
will take stock of risk modelling and the “lessons learned” from the financial crisis. I will highlight
both  the  limitations  and  the  strengths  of  internal  modelling.  Second,  I  will  present  general
principles that should guide future work. And, third, I will outline my take on where current and
future EU projects on internal models should be heading.
2. Financial crisis, regulatory reform and internal models
But first, let’s take a step back. Fifteen years ago, internal risk models were considered the gold
standard for optimising capital allocation. What made them so successful was the efficient use
of capital and their high risk sensitivity – which was made possible by granting banks substantial
freedom  in  using  their  internal  models  for  regulatory  capital  calculation.  Even  though  Basel  II
limited the freedom of banks by setting several parameters for the internal ratings-based (IRB)
approaches, IRB banks had substantial room for manoeuvre when calculating their capital ratios.
This made internal risk models prone to abuse. But those who pointed to these shortcomings, or
just  to  their  unrealistic  assumptions,  have  frequently  been  called  unscientific  and  opposed  to
innovation.
Then the financial crisis erupted, changing almost everything in finance. Models played their part
in contributing to the turmoil. Risk modelling moved from panacea to placebo or even steroid.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Individual calculations of many banks were not crisis-proof, as their assumptions were way too
optimistic. In fact, some models even fostered herding behaviour.
In  2010,  the  Basel  Committee  decided  to  take  a  closer  look  at  the  root  problems  of  internal
models.  The  core  question  was  whether  differences  in  capital  ratios  of  banks  were  due  to
differences in portfolios or due to illegitimate differences in modelling practices. In three studies
we  assessed  the  risk-weighting  of  banking  and  trading  book  assets.  Material  variances  in
regulatory capital ratios were found. Only a part of these could be explained by differences of risk
profiles. But another substantial part of the variation arose not from differences in the riskiness of
bank portfolios, but instead from other factors that are due to modelling problems – for example,
some banks gamed model weaknesses, and some of the terms specified by supervisors proved
to be problematic.
One of the main reasons for these unwarranted differences is that models were even applied to
portfolios where the statistical presumptions are violated. For example, in low default portfolios
you simply do not have enough historical cases of default to calculate a reliable credit default
figure. Another prominent example is that extreme events, meaning crises, occur more often in
real life than the distribution of most models assumes.
But there is an even bigger threat when applying modelling techniques. The big mistake is to
believe  that  financial  risk  models  can  ever  be  fully  accurate  or  even  close  to  it.  The  point  is
fundamental, yet simple: risk models have fundamental limits that can never be fully remedied –
which is why strong regulatory boundaries and supervisory controls are indispensable.
To make my point, I have to get a bit philosophical. There are two types of limits, and let us turn
to a great economist to define their nature. In 1921, Frank Knight differentiated between risk and
1
uncertainty.
Uncertainty describes the unexpected events. The first limit of models is that they cannot capture
uncertainty. Uncertainty is fundamental, because we do not know what the future will bring – it is
hardly  manageable.  It  is  quite  substantial  when  it  comes  to  financial  risk  modelling.  That’s
because financial risk modelling is a social science. The models can only provide a simplified
heuristic of real social interaction, but it is impossible to fully grasp the complexity.
The second limit of models concerns how Knight defined risk. Risk is what we can somehow
manage, thanks to the law of large numbers, with a margin of error. Risk is what we can model.
Yet,  even  in  this  comfort  zone  of  risk  models  some  limitations  exist:  real  events  can  only  be
forecasted,  like  weather,  but  cannot  be  predicted  –  data  as  well  as  methods  face  natural
limitations.
All  in  all,  this  means:  Modelling  is  probably  as  scientific  as  it  can  get  in  banking  regulation.
However, models can never get a calculation fully right. To limit mis-measurement, we have to
deal with risk and uncertainty:
First, close gaps in the regulation of risk measurement. This includes data limitations: we
can only model where sufficient data are available. Defaults in sovereign bonds, for example,
clearly do not fulfil this condition.
Second, work is needed on methodological shortcomings: we have to insist on robustness
checks and need to limit the degrees of freedom for financial institutions, for example with
regard to assumptions about distributions.
Third,  one  has  to  accept  Knightian  uncertainty  and  protect  regulation  against  it  –  human
behaviour  changes,  irrational  exuberance  prevails,  extreme  events  like  herding  behaviour
repeat  themselves,  and  market  actors  will  always  test  the  limits  of  models.  We  cannot
model  these  challenges  away.  That’s  why  we  need  backstops.  Models  need  checks  and
balances, since a sole focus on model-based capital minimisation would be dangerous for
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial stability.
3. Benefits of internal models
So, internal risk modelling for regulatory purposes clearly has its weaknesses. Nevertheless, I
am convinced that the benefits very much outweigh the drawbacks.
The first advantage of risk models doesn’t sound very encouraging, but it is nevertheless quite
important. Their strength is that they get it less false than any other approach we have. For as
long as we work on the approach of risk-based regulation, we have to somehow quantify risks;
and there is no way we can do without educated guessing. Any minimum capital requirement we
impose on institutions requires more or less uncertain assumptions about the riskiness involved.
This holds true not only for internal models, but also for standardised approaches to risks. Even
the rather conservative regulatory risk weights of standardised approaches may result in over-
optimistic  capital  charges  –  just  look  at  sovereign  bonds.  Moreover,  institutions  using
standardised approaches can engage in “risk shifting” – that is the search for the most profitable,
but also the most risky assets among equal risk weights.
Thus, even if we banned models entirely from regulation, we would still end up with a vulnerable
way to measure risk. Risk models are the better imperfect options.
The second strength of models actually is their variation. For not all of the variability of internal
models is necessarily undesired. There may be good reasons for divergent capital requirements
based  on  similar  credit  portfolios,  for  instance  because  of  dissimilar  effectiveness  of  risk
management in banks or given a different legal environment in which banks are operating. Also,
model variability reduces the risk of herding behaviour, which would arise if every bank were to
use the same standardised approach.
The third – and in my view most important – strength of risk models is their high degree of risk
sensitivity. For each type and each category, capital requirements calculated by an institution’s
own models is typically a lot more in line with historically observed risk. And this, in turn, has
positive  consequences.  For  example,  it  incentivises  risk-adequate  behaviour  in  financial
institutions  in  general.  From  a  supervisory  point  of  view,  we  are  especially  interested  in  the
additional  incentives  it  offers  to  banks  to  develop  and  maintain  a  thorough  risk  assessment
approach – which also supports and strengthens the internal risk management.
4. To count or not to count: internal models after regulatory reform
So far I have reminded us why internal model-based capital calculation – despite its weaknesses
– remains a worthwhile regulatory tool. Accordingly, the post-crisis regulatory agenda still builds
on  the  principle  of  risk-based  regulation  and  still  encourages  the  use  of  internal  modelling
techniques.  The  Basel  Committee  has  decided  to  remove  only  one  internal  approach  in  its
entirety – the Advanced Measurement Approach for operational risk, AMA for short. Apart from
that,  models  still  play  an  important  role  in  the  Basel  III  finalisation  package.  And  as  I  have
mentioned, there are good reasons for that.  
Yet,  moving  forward,  we  need  to  incorporate  the  “lessons  learned”  into  regulation  and  into
supervisory processes.
We have done this by installing additional constraints and backstops to close gaps that internal
models  cannot  close  –  most  prominently  the  leverage  ratio  and  the  output  floor.  Further
safeguards are implemented by more rigorous methods, data rules and input floors. This means
that  regulation  has  become  multi-polar  –  supervisors  rely  on  various,  complementary
requirements.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
But at the same time there is also a need to support the benefits of internal models. On the Basel
Committee, the German representatives resolutely argued in favour of maintaining risk sensitivity
in regulation, because this is the best way to capture the actual risks of a financial institution and
to set the right incentives, thereby discouraging excessive risk-taking. This especially concerns
the subject of calibrating the output floor, which is – as most of you know – a limit to internal
model  calculations  based  on  the  standardised  approaches.  With  the  advantages  of  internal
modelling in mind, this topic is understandable. And for me, the current state of negotiations – an
output floor of 72.5 per cent – is too high; but it is still enough for models to remain an attractive
tool.  While  risk  sensitivity  will  be  diminished  by  setting  the  output  floor  at  this  level,  it  still
represents a far better outcome than the originally envisioned output floor of 80 per cent.
Basel  III  is  better  than  its  critics  claim:  While  some  countries  may  gold-plate  their  national
regulations through a ban of internal models – the new standard also enables the Basel countries
to continue the use of internal models. And this is an important outcome.
5. You can count on that: better models for the future
Now  we  have  to  look  ahead.  We  should  take  the  Basel  III  reforms  and  implement  them  in  a
manner that improves risk models further.
Banks have to build better models, models that not only focus on the efficient use of capital but
also ensure that a bank can weather future storms. Both goals must weigh equally, meaning that
the storm-forecasting part has to be given much more attention.
Authorities like the SSM and EBA on the other hand will have to roll up their sleeves and build a
regulatory and supervisory framework for the future of risk measurement.
This will be challenging not only for the sheer technical complexity, but also because we have to
strike two balances at once:
The  first  balance  is  to  maintain  the  incentives  for  fine-tuned  risk  measurement  and
management on the one hand, while improving the checks and balances on risk models on
the other.
When pursuing this balance, we obviously have to do this on EU level. In that context, we
need to strike the second balance: in order to guarantee the same high standards in the
entire SSM, we have to achieve EU- and SSM-wide harmonisation on the one hand; on the
other  hand,  however,  we  should  not  go  too  far,  meaning  that  we  cannot  achieve  an
exhaustive list for each and any model decision. While we need harmonisation of definitions
and supervisory procedures – in order to close relevant gaps – supervisory agencies should
not be condemned to taking a box-ticking approach. Since every model is different, the box-
ticking approach would only undermine a critical review of a bank’s model.
I believe it to be important that we keep these balances in mind when we come to design new
rules or redesign old ones.
Let me now outline the priorities for future work on improving internal models in the EU from the
Bundesbank’s point of view.
With  regard  to  credit  risk  and  the  boundaries  for  the  IRB  approaches,  it’s  important  that  we
implement the Basel III compromise in a rigorous way. This means that input and output floors
will prevent the internal calculations of regulatory capital requirements from going too low. But at
the same time, it maintains the internal modelling approach and, with that, substantial freedoms
for banks to calculate regulatory capital.
Another  important  point  concerns  credit  risks,  but  also  other  risk  type  models.  The  targeted
review of internal models, the TRIM project, by the SSM should be conducted in a responsible
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  considered  manner  –  it  needs  to  strike  the  two  balances  that  I  highlighted.  This  means
specifically:
The  biotope  of  risk  modelling  approaches  must  be  kept  diverse. A  right  understanding  of
harmonisation means not only treating equal things equally, but also treating unequal things
unequally. TRIM must ensure, that the playing field for banks is levelled, but not create a
monoculture of models driven by supervisory rules.
Furthermore, it means that we have to balance conservativism and precision. Supervisors
will  always  be  tempted  to  make  risk  estimates  more  conservative  –  which  is,  of  course,
prudent. Being too conservative, however will make risk models less attractive for banks to
use it not only as a regulatory instrument but also as an effective internal risk management
tool.
Finally, changes that we will introduce through the TRIM project must be implemented in a
reasonable manner. Banks need a transitional period to adopt the new standards.
Let  me  close  these  policy  guidelines  with  a  clear  statement:  Throughout  all  regulatory  and
supervisory  projects  to  finalise  the  reform  agenda  for  internal  modelling,  the  Bundesbank  will
advocate the retention of risk sensitivity.
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
You have a full agenda of challenges in risk modelling ahead of you. Moreover, during the coming
years you hopefully will help to make financial risk models better. My key take-aways for these
one and a half days and your future work are:
First,  internal  models  have  rightfully  lost  their  sacrosanct  status,  as  they  revealed  big
weaknesses during the last financial crisis. Models will never be perfect. We always have to
be aware of the underlying assumptions and their shortcomings.
Second: after regulatory reform, internal models rightly continue to play a big role, but now a
complementary one. Limits have been set. But we shouldn’t overreact. It is also important to
maintain incentives for banks with regard to a risk-sensitive framework. This is why, on the
Basel  Committee,  German  authorities  have  resolutely  argued  in  favour  of  sufficient
incentives for internal models.
Third: on the basis of the limits set by the Basel III reforms, we have to look forward now,
and NCAs, EBA and SSM have to set about improving internal models further so that they
can contribute to efficient and stable financial markets – at the service of the real economy.
Again, many thanks for inviting me – I wish all of you a fruitful workshop. Thank you for your kind
attention.
1
Knight, F. H. (1921) Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston, MA: Hart, Schaffner & Marx; Houghton Mifflin Company.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
