Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Statistical and actual inclusion
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 2017 BSP-DepEd Annual Oratorical Contest, Manila, 27 October
2017.
 National  Satistician  Lisa  Grace  Bersales  of  the  Philippine  Statistics  Authority,  DepEd
Undersecretary Victoria Catibog, distinguished members of the Board of Judges, our sixteen (16)
contestants this afternoon, their families, friends, fellow public servants and BSPers, a pleasant
afternoon to you all.  On behalf of the Monetary Board and the BSP, I welcome you — guests,
ladies and gentlemen to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.
It  is  very  invigorating  to  join  you  this  afternoon  at  the  BSP-DepEd Annual  Oratorical  Contest
where  the  fundamental  role  of  statistics  in  attaining  our  collective  aspirations  is  highlighted. 
There is such a young and promising crowd here today.
The presence of our partners in furthering financial inclusion, the Department of Education and
the Philippine Statistics Authority, is also very heartening.
The  Philippine  Statistics Authority  has  played  a  crucial  role  in  helping  us  conduct  our  public
perception surveys.  These surveys allow us to gauge public awareness of our mandates, our
initiatives  and  advocacies  so  that  we  can  better  serve  our  citizens,  address  the  issues  they
deem  important  and  discover  their  needs.   Also  the  PSA  is  one  of  the  government  agencies
crucial to the development and implementation of a national ID system which when launched, we
believe  will  foster  a  more  inclusive  financial  system,  granting  the  unserved  and  underserved
access to financial services.  Maraming Salamat  PSA.
Aside from the holding of this annual contest, the DepEd and the BSP have worked together in
the  development,  publication  and  use  of  very  important  teaching  guides  on  financial  literacy,
which is used by different grade levels across the country.  The goal is to equip school children
with the knowledge and skills to manage their resources at an early age through integration of
financial lessons in the elementary curriculum.  We have important advocacy projects together
such  as  the  annually  held  Guro  ng  Pagasa,  where  outstanding  teachers  are  recognised  and
awarded for their innovative ways in imparting financial literacy and for conducting lessons on
savings  and  entrepreneurship,  markedly  changing  their  communities  for  the  better.    The
partnership we have recognises the importance of the youth in development and the crucial role
that education plays in their development and future betterment...   Maraming salamat DepEd.
Today,  we  shall  toast  the  importance,  role  and  indispensable  value  of  statistics  in  nation-
building.   As  a  central  banker  of  thirty-six  (36)  years,  I  have  seen,  first-hand,  how  important
statistics is in policy development.  As policy makers, we know that statistics provides reliable
snapshots of our realities.  Statistics allows us to paint a picture of what we hope for so that we
could concretely visualize and set our goals.  It allows us to form sound policy and quantitatively
measure and monitor the progress of our initiatives and programs.    
In the Bangko Sentral, policy formulation is both data driven and data intensive.  Sound statistics
point us to issues and vulnerabilities that must be addressed.  Statistics and careful statistical
analysis  are  crucial  input  to  our  monetary  policy  actions.    Likewise,  banking  regulations  and
financial policies must also be grounded on comprehensive banking statistics and an extensive
set  of  financial  indicators.    These  evidence-based  policies  support  monetary  and  financial
stability, so that there would be strong and stable economic growth.
Our national vision for development – Ambisyon Natin 2040 itself was crafted based on statistical
data – data from a rigorous consultative process involving  the conduct and analysis of a national
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
survey, focus group discussions and technical studies.  In the end, the responses and numbers
articulate  the  needs  and  desires  of  all  Filipinos  which  were  simplified  into  a  vision  broadly
understood and accepted by all.
In Ambisyon Natin 2040, Filipinos express the hope for strongly-rooted, comfortable and secure
lives.  Sa Filipino, ang hangarin ng bawa’t isa sa ating mga kababayan ay ang magkaroon ng
matatag, maginhawa at panatag na pamumuhay.
In the BSP, this too is our vision... to be a catalyst for a financial system that delivers a high
quality of life for all Filipinos.  We believe we are on the right track as the indicators tell a positive
story.
We are now one of the fastest growing economies in Asia, with an annual GDP growth of more
than  6.0  percent  since  2012,  notably  exceeding  the  long-term  average  of  4.3  percent.    Our
external  position  continues  to  be  favorable,  with  Gross  International  Reserves  (GIR)  of  $81.3
billion as of end-September.  Inflation is benign and broadly within the BSP’s target range.
The Philippine Banking system sustains its growth momentum and remains supportive of long-
term economic growth and stable financial conditions.  These economic gains are fruits of years
of  reforms  and  prudent,  evidence-based  policy  making,  where,  yes,  statistics  and  statistical
analysis played an indispensable part.
But amidst these positive numbers, statistics also tell another story.  It reveals an issue that we
must not ignore.  Poverty incidence and unemployment rates are still high.  Social inequalities
remain  with  lingering  wide  disparities  in  income  and  quality  of  life  across  different  sectors  of
society.
At present, one in five Filipinos are poor.  This translates to 21.9 million Filipinos in 2015.  These
Filipino families living in poverty have less than P9,064 a month on average to spend on basic
needs.
A  significant  portion  of  our  population  remains  unbanked  and  without  access  to  appropriate
financial  products  and  services.   According  to  the  2014  Consumer  Finance  Survey,  86%  of
households,  do  not  have  a  deposit  account.    Meanwhile,  the  results  of  the  National  Baseline
Survey on Financial Inclusion rolled out in 2015 indicates that only 43.2% of Filipino adults have
savings, 32.2 percent have stopped saving money, and the remaining 24.5% have never even
saved.  Of those who have never saved, 9.1 percent said that they did not have enough money to
start.
Clearly, there is much more to be done. 
In the BSP, we believe that for economic development to be more meaningful, there must be
greater financial inclusion... More and more of our countrymen must be granted access to, and
usage  of,  financial  services  and  products,  have  greater  financial  literacy  and  education  and
increased  awareness  and  consumer  protection.  This  is  to  empower  them  to  make  more
informed decisions with respect to savings, investments and credit, so that they can participate
in the financial system.
In identifying and analyzing existing inclusion gaps, the BSP utilizes statistical tools and analysis. 
In 2015, a national baseline survey on financial inclusion was rolled out to assess the current
financial inclusion landscape to help the BSP respond with appropriate evidence-based policies
and regulations.  This is part of a comprehensive financial inclusion data framework developed
by the BSP to identify and analyse inclusion gaps and opportunities.
I  believe  there  is  much  hope  for  the  future.    With  the  collaboration  and  cooperation  of  our
government agencies – like the DEPED and the PSA, our partners in the private sector and the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
public, accomplishment of our collective vision is forthcoming. 
After all, a collective vision demands collective action.  Together, we can achieve the statistical,
actual, and meaningful financial inclusion of our countrymen as we progress economically.
I must now wrap this message up otherwise, I might be mistaken for an oratorical contestant.... 
As I close, allow me to congratulate each of the sixteen (16) contestants here who have won
their respective division levels.  Just by being part of this elite group of finalists, you have already
accomplished a lot.  By recognizing and being able to voice your sentiments and reflections on
how timely, relevant and sound statistics play an important role in raising the standard of living for
all  FIlipinos,  already,  you  are  all  winners.    This  is  such  an  important  principle,  from  which
numerous insights can be culled.... 
Moreover, I congratulate each one of you for knowing and wielding the power of words to convey
transformative ideas, and for your lucid eloquence, which, if you did not possess, you would not
be here today...  Please, let us give all contestants here a round of applause.   I wish each of you
the best of luck and Godspeed.  We look forward to hearing from each of you.
Maraming Salamat sa inyong lahat.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
