Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: Practical aspects of dispute resolution in
Islamic finance facilities
Remarks by Mr Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Association  of  Islamic  Banking  Institutions  Malaysia  (AIBIM)  Law
Seminar  on  "Practical  Aspects  of  Dispute  Resolution  in  Islamic  Finance  Facilities",  Kuala
Lumpur, 14 November 2017.
 “Past, present and future: Legal certainty and Islamic finance in Malaysia”
It is my honour to join all of you today in exploring this interesting topic on the practical aspects of
dispute  resolution  in  Islamic  finance.  This  seminar  marks  another  significant  step  in  fostering
dialogue between Islamic financiers, Shariah scholars and the legal fraternity. Gatherings such
as this serve as an important platform for Islamic finance practitioners to develop a better grasp
of legal issues, and for lawyers to gain a keener sense of Islamic finance. I am encouraged to
see the Association of Islamic Banking Institutions Malaysia (AIBIM) taking the lead in advancing
this mission.
Disputes  in  business  transactions  have  been  around  for  as  long  as  commerce  itself.  It  is
therefore no surprise that we come across judges and lawyers very early on in human history.
Earlier than bankers – and definitely long before we see the first central banker . Disputes are
bound to happen. One party may not be able or willing to honour their obligations. The other party
may  be  dissatisfied  with  how  an  obligation  is  performed.  Still,  there  may  be  a  fundamental
disagreement between the parties about what was agreed in the first place. It is the inevitability of
disputes that makes the existence of dispute resolution systems so universal.
Dispute resolution in Islamic finance is gaining more attention these days. I would take this to be
a  good  sign.  In  a  legal  system,  disputes  may  be  viewed  as  an  indicator  of  vigour  rather  than
weakness  –  so  long  as  they  are  resolved  effectively  and  efficiently.  The  common  law  legal
system is exemplary in this regard. Today, common law systems are the most widespread in the
world, in terms of GDP generated under these jurisdictions . The large volume of commercial
disputes resolved by these jurisdictions are a reflection of the widely-accepted strength of the
common law legal system in providing certainty to business dealings.
Today, legal certainty is widely said to be central to the rule of law . It is important that the law be
accessible,  clear  and  predictable.  People  should  be  assured  that  questions  of  legal  right  and
liability will be determined by rules that meet these characteristics. This is not just crucial for
social  justice  –  this  ensures  a  stable  environment  to  facilitate  sustained  business  growth.  Of
course, legal certainty does not mean that the laws are inflexibly set in stone such that justice
and common sense are frustrated. In fact, dispute resolution in a healthy legal system will lead to
evolution  in  the  law  over  time  –  often  with  positive  knock  on  effects.  For  instance,  landmark
judgments may not only re-shape policies, but also lead to improvements in risk management
practices or fairer outcomes to the customers. The series of legal cases involving the sale and
purchase  contract  (Bai`  Inah)  highlight  several  important  lessons  in  this  regard.  For  Islamic
banking institutions, the decisions have led to further enhancements to the legal documentations
for Bai` Inah contracts itself.
In the context of Islamic finance, the task of upholding legal certainty is even more complex, for
two reasons. First, Shariah principles and requirements must be infused into the law of the land
from the religious sources. Secondly, these prescriptions – written many centuries ago – must
be applied to the context of modern finance. For brevity, I will refer to these two aspects of legal
certainty as Shariah certainty.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
My remarks today will focus on the importance of legal certainty in the development of Malaysia’s
Islamic  finance  industry  –  with  a  particular  emphasis  on  Shariah  certainty.  I  will  begin  by
reflecting on the past, before sharing some thoughts about some considerations for the present
as well as future.
Looking at the past, Islamic finance has developed rapidly in Malaysia over the recent decades.
To a large extent, this progress is attributable to the certainty provided by the legal framework for
Islamic finance in Malaysia. This can be traced back to the enactment of the Islamic Banking Act
in  1983  and  the  Takaful Act  in  1984  which  facilitated  the  birth  of  the  first  full-fledged  Islamic
banking institution and takaful operator. Prior to this, Islamic finance was very niche. Its relevance
was  mostly  limited  to  the  provision  of  custodian  services  such  as  the  pilgrimage  fund  as
managed by Tabung Haji.  There was no appeal to the wider market, then.
Since  the  early  1980s,  we  have  witnessed  a  significant  transformation  of  Islamic  finance  in
Malaysia. Over the years, this sector began to offer a wider range of solutions to cater for the
evolving needs of the national economy and the local communities. Islamic finance now makes
up a significant and growing share of the domestic market. The share of Islamic banking assets
more than doubled from 12.9% in 2007 to 28% in 2016. Takaful penetration has now reached
14.6% of the population. Globally, Malaysia has established itself as a leading hub for Islamic
finance. In the global sukuk market, we hold a share of more than 50% of the global outstanding
sukuk.
To  cater  for  the  growing  size  and  sophistication,  the  legal  foundation  for  Islamic  finance  has
undergone several enhancements over the years. The Shariah Advisory Councils – or the SACs
–  of  the  Securities  Commission  and  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  were  established  roughly  twenty
years  ago  to  promote  greater  Shariah  certainty.  They  since  have  played  an  increasingly
important role in the ascertainment of Shariah for matters of Islamic finance. The Central Bank of
Malaysia Act 2009 formally established a “dual financial system” in this jurisdiction, setting the
pace for the progressive development of an Islamic financial system that is equally competitive
and sound as the conventional system. The Islamic Financial Services Act 2013 consolidated
and updated the earlier legislations on Islamic banking and takaful. Its focus was to elevate the
standards of Islamic finance regulation in Malaysia; drive greater innovation; and promote more
inclusive growth.
Today,  Malaysia  is  internationally  recognised  for  its  comprehensive  legal  and  regulatory
framework for Islamic finance. Many emerging Islamic finance markets now see Malaysia as a
model to emulate in this respect. Looking back, I believe that the certainty provided by our legal
and  regulatory  framework  has  contributed  significantly  to  the  development  of  a  sound  and
progressive Islamic financial system in Malaysia.
This brings me to my second point, – which is the present. We are faced with both opportunities
and challenges as we move forward.
Global  Islamic  financial  assets  stood  at  USD1.9  trillion  in  2016  –  and  is  estimated  to  reach
USD3.2 trillion by 2020. Muslims now make up 24% of the world’s population . This is a very
large and rapidly expanding market. The potential is enormous. Islamic financial institutions and
legal professionals in Malaysia stand to gain –from this, only if we position ourselves well enough
to serve this boom. Doing this will require a variety of measures, and it is beyond the scope of
my address today, to talk about all of them now. But one thing is clear – in order to remain as a
leading Islamic financial hub, Malaysia must uphold legal certainty for effective dispute resolution.
As I mentioned earlier, Shariah certainty entails two unique challenges – Shariah prescriptions
must both be infused into law, as well as applied to contemporary settings.
These  challenges  are  augmented  by  the  fast-changing  times  in  which  we  live.  Business  is
constantly  evolving,  and  finance  is  likewise  far  from  static.  The  expectation  now  for  our  legal
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
system is to apply the principles of Shariah to novel products and approaches in a timely manner
–  while  remaining  clear,  sufficiently  flexible  to  innovation  and  yet  faithful  to  the  tenets  of  the
religious  sources.  This  is  a  tall  order,  and  the  jurisdiction  which  succeeds  in  doing  this  most
reliably, will stand in good position, to ride the wave of the Islamic finance boom.
Certainty  around  the  Shariah  rules  applicable  to  a  particular  Islamic  finance  facility  is  crucial.
Equally important is certainly on the legal enforceability of obligations in the event that there is
non-compliance to the relevant Shariah requirements. Uncertainty in any of these areas may lead
investors to view such facilities as high risk instruments, and in extreme cases even destabilise
the Islamic finance market more generally. An interesting case in point is the one involving Dana
Gas,  which  is  now  being  considered  by  the  High  Court  in  London.  The  UAE-based  energy
company declared that its USD700 million sukuk was no longer Shariah-compliant – and thus
unenforceable – because the scholarly consensus was said to have shifted since issuance in
2003.
Now, let’s move on to the future – we need continued certainty. We have come a long way in
setting in place the strong foundation of a legal framework. The law review and harmonisation
committees    have  done  good  work  in  ensuring  that  Shariah  principles  can  be  imported  into
Malaysian law in a way that is effective and seamless. The progress of the past has positioned
us with both opportunity and challenge at present. To navigate these well, we need to promote
continued  certainty  as  we  move  into  the  future.  This  will  require  excellence  at  both  the
institutional and individual levels.
Institutional excellence
At the institutional level, the judiciary plays a vital role in upholding legal certainty. Judges – along
with  arbitrators  –  ensure  that  disputes  are  settled  by  the  application  of  the  law,  rather  than
unbounded  discretion.  The  courts  also  ensure  that  these  laws  are  intelligible,  clear  and  also
predictable.
For  Islamic  finance,  the  Shariah Advisory  Councils  (SACs)  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the
Securities Commission play a complementary role to the courts – by providing Shariah certainty.
It is important to note that this role does not [in any way] substitute the function of the judiciary in
upholding legal certainty. Rather, the SACs support the courts – by providing predictability and
uniformity in the interpretation of Shariah rulings that are applicable to Islamic financial business.
Unlike a scientific question, a Shariah question can be answered by reference to at least four
different  schools  of  thoughts,  all  of  which  provide  valid  answers  from  a  Shariah  perspective.
Having the SACs as central authorities for providing finality of Shariah rulings – helps the court
apply the rulings to the specific circumstances of a particular case with full certainty. This will
then inform the final judgment by the courts.
A clear process has been set out to facilitate judges, arbitrators and Islamic financial institutions
to refer matters which require the ascertainment of Islamic law to the SACs for their ruling or
advice. Matters beyond the ambit of the SACs’ authority will be left for the courts to adjudicate.
The composition of the SACs, which includes former judges, ensures it functions well within the
boundaries  of  its  purview.  To  promote  procedural  legitimacy,  efforts  have  been  also  directed
towards  ensuring  that  the  reasoning  of  the  SACs  are  well-documented  and  accessible  to  the
public.
Other  than  the  courts  and  the  SACs,  another  important  institutional  arrangement  for  our  path
forward will be the financial regulators. In particular, Bank Negara Malaysia and the Securities
Commission will continue to play a proactive role in identifying pertinent Shariah issues that need
to be clarified for the domestic market. By the end of this year, Bank Negara Malaysia will have
completed  a  compendium  of  regulatory  standards  to  provide  clarity  on  the  Shariah  and
operational requirements for 14 Islamic finance contracts. This endeavour began in 2013, and
incorporates the interpretation of the SAC. The task for the regulators is to come up with similar
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
standards  in  the  future  –  especially  as  the  market  ventures  into  novel  and  more  innovative
approaches. This will provide an invaluable resources in helping Islamic financial institutions and
their lawyers in structuring Islamic finance products as well as identifying the necessary legal
documentation.
Individual excellence
At  the  individual  level,  the  promotion  of  legal  certainty  will  require  a  strong  base  of  legal  and
Islamic  finance  professionals. As  the  domestic  industry  and  global  market  for  Islamic  finance
grows, so must our talent pool. Lawyers involved in product structuring, for example, can provide
value-added advice to their clients on the parameters of Shariah requirements and legal rules,
which helps in the design and developing the documentation of the products. Litigation experts
with  sound  understanding  of  Shariah  requirements  can  reason  better  in  courts.  Certification
programs  and  targeted  seminars  such  as  today’s  will  be  important  in  equipping  legal
practitioners with a solid understanding of both applied Shariah knowledge and the necessary
legal expertise.
In  conclusion,  the  world  of  modern  finance  is  in  need  of  anchoring  principles  to  ensure  that
intermediation serves rather than enslaves the real economy. Islamic finance, ingrained with the
values of socio-economic justice and the spirit of cooperation, has the potential to provide an
answer  to  this  quest. Already,  it  is  gaining  much  traction  around  the  globe.  “For  Malaysia  to
remain a central part of this solution”, we must build on our experience and continue to promoting
legal certainty for Islamic finance – especially in importing and applying Shariah requirements to
the  Malaysian  law.  I  certainly  believe  we  can.  I  wish  you  all  the  best  in  your  interesting
discussions on dispute resolution today, and also in the days to come.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
