Andreas  Dombret:  Interest  rates  and  the  banking  industry  –  a
topsy-turvy world?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the 63rd Kreditpolitische Tagung 2017, Frankfurt am Main, 10 November 2017.
1. A topsy-turvy world (of interest rates)?
 Mr Otto
Ladies and gentlemen
I recently heard a banker say that if things continued the way they are going, he would soon take
out a loan for a few million euros and simply live off the interest. He will have known, of course,
that even in the current environment those sums wouldn’t add up. Nevertheless, it captures the
feeling  that  many  people  in  the  surrounding  office  blocks  here  in  Frankfurt  and  all  across  the
country share – that a long-standing system of values is in danger of being toppled by interest
rate developments.
This system of values concerns the distribution of roles in our society. According to this system,
borrowers hold debt, and holding debt means making some sort of sacrifice elsewhere. Savers,
on the other hand, have an asset – something of value – which they have built up by foregoing
consumption  –  and  they  should  therefore  be  rewarded  for  their  efforts.  However,  as  negative
interest  rates  have  now  been  unmistakably  showing  us,  when  it  comes  to  the  supply  of  and
demand for money and loans, some seemingly absolute limits are ultimately only relative.
It  should  be  noted  that  this  change  in  the  system  of  values  did  not  begin  with  expansionary
monetary policy. Indeed, the interest rate level has been steadily falling in Germany for decades.
If  you  look  at  real  deposit  rates  rather  than  nominal  rates,  losses  are  by  no  means  a  new
phenomenon. There were already negative real interest rates on short-term bank deposits in the
1970s, the early 1990s, and in the 2000s.
Values,  however,  do  not  change  nearly  as  fast  as  interest  rates  on  the  interbank  market.
Everyone  affected  is  still  used  to  other  interest  rate  levels  and,  above  all,  to  positive  interest
rates. A transvaluation of traditional values can therefore be seen in the interest rate level.
As much as I empathise with and share the general feeling that interest rates are topsy-turvy, this
provides no help to you, me or anyone else in the industry who must coolheadedly crunch the
numbers. I therefore support one of the statements found in the flyer of the 63rd Kreditpolitische
Tagung: Merely hoping for circumstances to change for the better, for a return to the familiar, is
too vague and simply inadequate. In my speech today I will even go so far as to say that hope is
fundamentally the wrong approach in this case.
In  the  following  I  want  to  tell  you  my  views  on  the  “topsy-turvy”  world  of  interest  rates  and
consider,  with  you,  what  we  can  learn  –  and  what  we  can’t  –  from  the  viewpoint  of  banks,
savings banks and supervisors.
2. What we can disagree on
Let  me  begin  with  the  topic  of  interest  rates.  There  are  many  things  about  which  reasonable
people can disagree, and interest rates are a splendid example. One reason is that there are
almost  no  simple,  clear-cut  answers  on  account  of  the  complex  interrelationships  involved.
Indeed, monetary policy is only one of many factors influencing the supply of and demand for
money and loans. Other longstanding factors have also been contributing to falling real interest
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
rates. For example, productivity growth in Germany has been slowing since as far back as the
1970s. There are many explanations for this, not least the ageing population.
Furthermore, I am not here as a monetary policymaker and I’m not going to talk to you about the
mandate  of  the  ECB.  I  am  here  in  my  capacity  as  a  representative  of  German  banking
supervisors, who must get to grips with the consequences of a low interest rate level for banks
and savings banks in Germany. A lot of damage is becoming visible.
As a German banking supervisor, I have in mind, in particular, the earnings position of German
institutions, as these are without a doubt being strongly affected by the interest rate environment,
and unfortunately even more so than credit institutions in other (European) countries. Just as a
reminder, net interest income in 2016 was far and away the largest source of income among
German  institutions,  accounting  for  73.2%  –  and  this  despite  a  year-on-year  fall  of  nearly  five
percentage points. It is therefore hardly surprising that our recently published low-interest-rate
survey reveals a massive worsening of the earnings situation – both in the planning scenarios of
banks and savings banks and in the scenarios of stable interest rates predefined in our survey.
In addition to the interest rate level, the asset purchase programme of the ECB is also an issue.
As you all know, at the Bundesbank we are critical of government bond purchases because they
increasingly  blur  the  boundaries  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  I’ll  come  to  the  other
consequences in just a minute. The decision of the ECB Governing Council to reduce net bond
purchases from 1 January 2018 from €60 billion to €30 billion and to continue the programme
until at least September next year certainly doesn’t amount to slamming on the monetary policy
brakes – it’s the equivalent of removing the accelerator from the floor – but only ever so slightly.
At the same time, we need to bear in mind that Europe is currently experiencing a broad-based
economic upturn. According to forecasts, the output gap in the euro area will close in the coming
year. In the short term, economic growth might even exceed previous forecasts. In light of the
healthy economic situation and the gradual upturn in inflationary pressure in the euro area, from
our perspective it would have very much been appropriate to make a clear end to the purchase
programme.  It  is  therefore  my  firm  conviction  that  we  should  make  an  exit  from  ultra-
accommodative monetary policy as soon as possible. At the Bundesbank, that is what we will be
pushing for.
The negative interest rates in the euro area are making things very difficult for banks – that much
is clear. At the same time, there is a reluctance within the banking industry to pass on negative
interest rates to individuals. As a result, the majority of banks are not planning to impose negative
interest rates in their retail business.
However,  the  implications  of  extremely  low  interest  rates  extend  far  beyond  the  profitability  of
banks and savings banks.
From the perspective of savers and investors, this is about key issues such as their pensions.
For  some,  extremely  low  interest  rates  are  making  financial  planning  into  retirement  simply
impossible. When individual investors talk about a “topsy-turvy world", they are not just talking
about their interest income; they are talking about fundamental questions of orientation and about
the fear of a potential lack of funds in their old age. Let me put it clearly: if large swathes of our
society  can  no  longer  manage  with  their  long-term,  planned  savings,  then  our  society  has  a
serious problem.
Significant distortions are even being caused by the monetary policy setting. We can see this
most obviously in the area of government debt. Current monetary policy has made government
borrowing  artificially  easy.  This  cannot  be  the  spirit  of  sustainable  government  finance.  In
addition, the low interest rate level in the periphery countries of the euro area means that urgently
needed structural reforms can be postponed. This, however, is exactly the wrong approach and,
over the long-term, it does not help but rather harms the country in question and the euro area as
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
a  whole.  Similarly,  due  to  distorted  price  signals,  there  is  a  growing  danger  of  capital
misallocation in the private sector.
Overall,  this  leads  to  false  incentives  as  market  pressure  is  undermined.  However,  if  this
pressure to adapt is reduced by a very loose monetary policy, then, in the financial sector, we run
the risk of creating zombie banks that would otherwise be unable to survive without an ultra-loose
monetary policy.
But the low-interest-rate environment also harbours other dangers. In the light of lower earnings
from  interest  business,  institutions  tend  to  ramp  up  their  searches  for  profitable  investment
opportunities – this is known as the “search for yield". This, in turn, raises the danger of an asset
price bubble. In this interest-rate environment, it is therefore of critical importance to pay close
attention to these risks and to manage them in a systematic way.
Incidentally,  these  problems  would  be  even  greater  if  banking  supervision  were  more  lenient.
However, things can also turn out differently, as seen in the example of Scandinavia, where, after
some initial hesitation, drastic measures were taken and banks’ balance sheets were cleaned
up.  The  pain  did  not  last  long  and  the  region  recovered  economically.  By  contrast,  Japan
continues to wrestle with the consequences of a less courageous intervention. Because zombie
banks were propped up for years and were offered continued protection, they were actually able
to  support  insolvent  enterprises.  As  a  result,  the  economy  fared  considerably  worse  than  if
authorities had intervened more courageously.
What we must learn from this is that staving off economic death with artificial life support only
leads to harm in the long run – not least for the sectors of a national economy that are actually
healthy. And this brings us to what I call the “topsy-turvy world".
In Europe, we need to take great care that we do not permanently find ourselves in such a topsy-
turvy world. This threat continues to exist. New lending and growth are suffering under the huge
volumes  of  non-performing  loans  –  NPLs  for  short  –  on  the  balance  sheets  of  institutions  in
certain member states. It appears that many NPLs were not tackled decisively enough by these
institutions. The first successes were seen only after European supervisors had pressured them
to act. The significant institutions in the euro area, which have been supervised by the ECB since
the beginning of 2015, have reduced their NPL holdings from 7.5 per cent to a current level of
5.5  per  cent.  But  this  figure  is  still  not  entirely  satisfactory.  It  therefore  remains  all  the  more
important  to  apply  appropriate  pressure  to  act  and  to  set  the  right  incentives.  In  this  regard,
Europe must not react defensively, but needs to decisively push ahead in reducing volumes of
NPLs. The current infighting over powers at the European level is not helpful here, either. I can
only appeal to all those involved to approach this subject with urgency – in the interest of all those
involved.
Ladies and gentlemen, the ECB’s crisis policy has received much praise – and rightly so, in my
opinion.  Through  its  intervention,  it  successfully  stabilised  the  extremely  unsettled  European
financial  sector.  However,  the  side  effects  of  continuing  this  policy  are  becoming  ever  more
apparent. We need to respond.
3. Challenges in a topsy-turvy world
So you see, So you see, I share the assessment of the majority of Germans – sooner or later,
artificially maintaining low interest rates will lead to a topsy-turvy world. This is not only about
interest margins, but also about pensions, savings plans, and fundamentally distorted incentives
in the financial system.
This now brings us to the second and – for some credit institutions – more uncomfortable part.
As I have mentioned, hope alone is not only not enough for banks and savings banks – hope may
also be the wrong approach entirely.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regardless of whether the world of interest rates is topsy-turvy or not, banks must ultimately be
capable of turning a profit at any level of interest rates. In cases of doubt, this means that they
must  adapt  their  business  models  to  make  themselves  less  dependent  on  interest  business.
And,  alongside  the  interest  rate  level,  further  structural  challenges  await  banks  and  savings
banks.
This means that established earning opportunities are diminishing: the earnings of German credit
institutions have been falling for more than 15 years – between 1999 and 2015 this fall amounted
to around 30%.
Likewise, there is a reason for the debate on excess capacity. Credit institutions in the euro area
may have trimmed their balance sheets by slightly more than 15% between 2008 and the end of
2015, and German banks have shrunk their balance sheets by roughly 30%. However, you must
remember  that  the  European  banking  sector  previously  experienced  immense  balance  sheet
growth. The balance sheet reduction we have been witnessing since 2008 therefore has to be
seen in the light of a significantly larger – probably excessively large – balance sheet expansion
in the preceding years. Back in 2014, the European Systemic Risk Board was already sounding
warnings of excess capacity. And the International Monetary Fund confirmed in 2016 that this
problem  was  far  from  resolved.  More  work  therefore  still  needs  to  be  done  to  pare  back  the
excess capacity that has accumulated over a number of years.
To neglect structural change would be to jeopardise our ability to evolve and adapt. If economic
realities change, banks and savings banks must likewise adapt. That is my message to German
banks, without wishing to appear in any way cynical. There is an awful lot banks can do to ensure
their long-term survival. Many institutions have recognised this and are increasingly taking the
appropriate action.
I could say a lot just on the subject of digitalisation and the changes happening in the banking
sector. It would simply be naive to neglect these changes. Other areas also leave plenty of scope
for  entrepreneurial  activity.  Specifically,  I  am  referring  to  specialisation  and  mergers,  and  of
course the subject of cost-cutting. German banks’ cost-income ratio averaged 69.2% in 2016,
only  slightly  better  than  in  2015  and  towards  the  bottom  of  the  European  league  table.  That
means there is scope for improvement.
How banks go about effecting such improvements is up to each individual institution. Supervisors
should  not  get  involved  in  the  competition  to  see  where  the  future  of  banking  lies  and  should
certainly not be responsible for corporate earnings. When we examine business models, we do
so primarily under the aspect of capital adequacy. We are not the better bankers and should
keep out of any business decisions as much as possible.
4.The role of supervisors in a topsy-turvy world
As supervisors, we are interested, first and foremost, in a healthy and stable banking system.
For this, we have a clear mandate. That certainly does not involve pleasing all credit institutions,
but it does mean that we have to supervise the sector diligently and conscientiously.
Nonetheless, we too have some leeway in deciding when and where we impose what measures.
That is particularly true when interest rates are topsy-turvy. We are therefore justified in looking to
see  where  we  can  mitigate  the  burden  for  banks  and  savings  banks  without  neglecting  our
duties. Specifically, I am thinking of three issues.
First: proportionality in regulation and supervision. We have already incorporated this into many
areas of our supervisory activities. We have already relaxed requirements for smaller institutions
in  many  areas  of  regulation.  But  in  my  opinion,  a  lot  more  could  be  done.  We  therefore  put
forward very concrete proposals in the first half of this year as to how we can further strengthen
the principle of proportionality. I am very confident that our proposals will be heard and meet with
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
support in the ongoing negotiations in Brussels.
Second:  the  subject  of  ad  hoc  inspections.  Without  doubt,  ad  hoc  inspections  present  an
extraordinary burden for banks. When considering a possible ad hoc inspection, it is therefore
important and right in the current environment that we ask ourselves some probing questions
about whether it is really justified in the current difficult situation or whether it could perhaps be
postponed to a later date.
And third: the large area of regulation. Once we have concluded the Basel III reforms, which will
hopefully be soon, I will appeal for a period of calm and reflection to examine the overall effects of
regulation. It is now time to turn our gaze away from individual measures to the big picture in
terms  of  regulatory  reforms  and  their  impact.  I  believe  it  would  be  a  good  idea  to  take  a
“regulatory break".
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, before concluding, I would like to clarify three things.
First, I can very well understand that many of you feel as though you are in a topsy-turvy world of
low interest rates. To the extent that artificially low interest rates not only frustrate the long-term
strategies of savers, investors and credit institutions, but also prevent economically necessary
adjustments, we are indeed in a “topsy-turvy world". The danger that comes to my mind, in my
role as a banking supervisor, is of zombie banks which pump themselves full of loans yet are
economically not viable – and this is not necessarily (only) the case in Germany, but not least
also  in  other  European  countries.  With  this,  and  other  factors,  in  mind,  the  exit  from  loose
monetary  policy  must  happen  as  soon  as  possible.  The  time  may  not  yet  be  ripe  given  the
various  economic  developments  in  the  euro  area.  But  we  at  the  Bundesbank  will  continue  to
campaign to ensure that the right moment is not missed.
In the meantime, credit institutions must apply risk management. In the current environment, and
in the face of adversity, caution is key, and risks must be very carefully managed.  
Second, regardless of whether the world is topsy-turvy or not, a bank must be capable of turning
a profit at any level of interest rates. That may include restructuring its own business model in
order to be less dependent on interest rate business. Given the challenges facing the sector,
supervisors are interested in examining exactly what burdens for the institutions are truly justified
in order to avoid placing any further, unnecessary obstacles in their way.
And third, I would like to stress that we must not concentrate solely on the interest rate level. We
face a number of quite different challenges, too. To name just one example, I expect that the
London banks that are likely to move to Germany and to Frankfurt as a result of Brexit will try to
poach  qualified  staff  from  local  banks.  To  paraphrase  Helmut  Qualtinger,  an  Austrian  actor,
author and cabaret artist: a lot of things get worse by looking at them, but nothing gets better by
looking away.  To this end, the room for manoeuvre must be recognised and utilised.
1
I now look forward to the other speakers at today’s event and am interested to see what issues
they will focus on.
Thank you very much for your attention.
1
Helmut Qualtinger, Austrian actor, writer and cabaret artist (1928-1986).
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
