November  8,  2017
Bank  of  Japan
Economic Activity, Prices,
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Miyazaki 
Yukitoshi Funo 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 I. Recent Economic and Price Developments 
A. Overseas Developments 
I would like to begin my speech by talking about overseas economies. Business sentiment 
of manufacturing firms has been on an improving trend on a global basis, and the world 
trade volume has been recovering. In this situation, overseas economies have continued to 
grow at a moderate pace on the whole. 
 
In terms of the outlook, overseas economies are expected to continue growing at a moderate 
pace.  According  to  the  World  Economic  Outlook,  released  in  October  2017  by  the 
International Monetary Fund, the global growth rate is projected to be 3.6 percent in 2017 
and 3.7 percent in 2018. 
 
Looking  at  developments  by  major  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  continued  to  recover 
firmly, mainly in household spending, owing to a steady improvement in the employment 
and income situation. As for the outlook, the economy is expected to continue to see firm 
growth driven by domestic private demand. 
 
The  European  economy  also  has  continued  to  recover  steadily.  As  for  the  outlook,  the 
economy will likely follow a moderate recovery trend, while uncertainty -- associated, for 
example, with political issues such as those regarding negotiations on the United Kingdom's 
exit from the European Union (EU) -- is expected to be a burden. 
 
The Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth on the whole, partly due to the 
effects  of  authorities'  measures  to  support  economic  activity.  As  for  the  outlook,  the 
economy is likely to broadly follow a stable growth path as authorities conduct fiscal and 
monetary policy in a timely manner. 
 
Emerging economies other than China and commodity-exporting economies have picked up 
on  the  whole.  As  for  the  outlook,  their  growth  rates  are  likely  to  increase gradually,  due 
mainly to the spread of the effects of steady growth in advanced economies and the effects 
of the economic stimulus measures. 
 
1 
Risk factors to the overseas economic outlook are wide ranging, as exemplified by (1) the 
U.S. economic policies and their impact on global financial markets, (2) developments in 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies, (3) negotiations on the United Kingdom's 
exit from the EU and their effects, (4) prospects regarding the European debt problem, and 
(5) geopolitical risks. I hold the view that it is important to stay vigilant regarding these risk 
factors, especially now that the growth rates of overseas economies are rising moderately. 
 
B. Japan's Economy and Prices 
1. Economic activity 
I  will  now  discuss  the  economic  situation  in  Japan.  Japan's  economy  is  expanding 
moderately, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending operating. The real GDP growth 
rate  for  the  April-June  quarter  of  2017  was  0.6  percent  on  a  quarter-on-quarter  basis, 
representing positive growth for six consecutive quarters for the first time in about 11 years. 
The growth rate was above the potential growth rate, which is estimated to be in the range 
of 0.5-1.0 percent.1 
 
With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is likely to continue its moderate expansion. 
Through fiscal 2018, domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle 
from income to spending being maintained in both the corporate and household sectors, on 
the  back  of  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  fiscal  spending  through  the 
government's large-scale stimulus measures. Meanwhile, exports are expected to continue 
their moderate increasing trend on the back of growth in overseas economies. In fiscal 2019, 
the economy is expected to continue expanding, supported by external demand, although 
the  growth  pace  is  projected  to  decelerate  due  to  a  slowdown  in  domestic  demand.2 
According  to  the  October  2017  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the 
Outlook Report), released by the Bank of Japan, the medians of the Policy Board members' 
                                                   
1  Under  a  specific  methodology,  Japan's  potential  growth  rate  is  estimated  to  be  in  the  range  of 
0.5-1.0  percent.  However,  the  estimate  of  the  potential  growth  rate  varies  depending  on  the 
methodologies employed and could be revised as the sample period becomes longer over time. Thus, 
it should be regarded as being subject to a considerable margin of error. 
2  It  is assumed that the consumption tax will be raised to 10 percent in October 2019 and that a 
reduced tax rate will be applied to food and beverages -- excluding alcohol and dining-out -- and 
newspapers. 
2 
forecasts of the economic growth rate are 1.9 percent for fiscal 2017, 1.4 percent for fiscal 
2018, and 0.7 percent for fiscal 2019. 
 
2. Prices 
Let me now explain price developments. The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer 
price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food has been accelerating and is in the range of 
0.5-1.0  percent,  while  the  rate  of  change  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  and  energy  has 
remained slightly positive. 
 
With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh 
food)  is  likely  to  continue  on an  uptrend,  mainly  on  the  back  of  the  improvement in  the 
output gap and the rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. The rate will likely 
reach around 2 percent in around fiscal 2019. Specifically, the medians of the Policy Board 
members' forecasts of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) 
presented in the October 2017 Outlook Report are 0.8 percent for fiscal 2017, 1.4 percent 
for fiscal 2018, and, excluding the direct effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike, 1.8 
percent for fiscal 2019.3 
 
II.  Characteristics  of  Japan's  Economy  and  Keys  to  Assessing  the  Outlook  for 
Economic Activity and Prices 
In what follows, I would like to outline my understanding of the characteristics of the recent 
developments  in  Japan's  economy  and  then  discuss  several  points  that  I  think  deserve 
particular attention in terms of realizing the outlook for economic activity and prices that I 
mentioned earlier. 
 
                                                   
3  The  consumption  tax  hike  scheduled  to  take  place  in  October  2019  --  to  10  percent  --  and  the 
reduced  tax  rate  to  be  applied  to  food  and  beverages  --  excluding  alcohol  and  dining-out  --  and 
newspapers  are  incorporated  in  the  forecasts,  but  individual  Policy  Board  members  make  their 
forecasts of the CPI based on figures excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike. The 
forecasts for the CPI for fiscal 2019 that incorporate the direct effects of the consumption tax hike 
are  constructed  as  follows.  First,  the  contribution  to  prices  from  the  tax  hike  is  mechanically 
computed on the assumption that the tax increase will be fully passed on for taxable items. The CPI 
will be pushed up by 0.5 percentage point. Second, this figure is added to the forecasts made by the 
Policy Board members. 
3 
A. Characteristics of the Recent Developments in Japan's Economy 
One  of  the  characteristics  of  the  recent  developments  in  Japan's  economy  is  how  the 
economic growth has been led by various components in a well-balanced manner. In terms 
of  external  demand,  exports  have  been  on  an  increasing  trend,  with  overseas  economies 
continuing  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace.  For  domestic  private  demand,  business  fixed 
investment  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  with  corporate  profits  and  business 
sentiment  improving,  and  private  consumption  has  increased  its  resilience  against  the 
background  of  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation.  Regarding 
public demand, public investment also has been increasing as the positive effects resulting 
from the set of stimulus measures formulated in fiscal 2016 became evident.   
 
The recent environment in which multiple components of the economy are contributing to 
its  overall  expansion  in  a  well-balanced  manner  is  necessary  for  Japan's  economy  to 
continue expanding moderately. I consider that such environment is especially important in 
the  operation  of  the  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  and  the  functioning  of  the 
mechanism in which inflation rises moderately accompanied by wage increases. 
 
B. Employment and Income Situation 
Let  me  now  talk  about  the  employment  and  income  situation  as  one  of  the  factors  to 
consider  in  assessing  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices.  Supply-demand 
conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  continued  to  tighten  steadily.  The  active  job 
openings-to-applicants ratio -- which has followed a steady uptrend -- has been at a high 
level  last  seen  in  the  first  half  of  the  1970s,  as  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  number  of 
employees  has  continued  to  show  growth  of  around  1.5  percent.  Moreover,  the 
unemployment rate has been in the range of 2.5-3.0 percent recently and a perception of 
labor  shortage  has  heightened.  It  is  expected  that  the  number  of  employees  will  keep 
increasing and that the supply-demand conditions in the labor market will tighten further. 
 
On the wage side, total cash earnings per employee have risen moderately, albeit with some 
fluctuations.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  hourly  scheduled  cash  earnings  of 
part-time employees, which are responsive to supply-demand conditions in the labor market, 
recently registered relatively high growth of around 2.5 percent. With regard to the outlook, 
4 
the  pace  of  increase  in  full-time  employees'  cash  earnings  is  expected  to  accelerate 
moderately, with that in base pay accelerating as the rise in inflation expectations becomes 
more evident. 
 
In  light  of  such  employment  and  wage  conditions,  employee  income  has  increased 
moderately,  albeit  with  fluctuations.  Going  forward,  it  is  likely  to  increase at a moderate 
pace,  but  with  differences  in  wage-setting  mechanisms  between  full-time  and  part-time 
employees,  there  is  a  risk  that  firms  will  remain  cautious  with  their  decisions  on  wage 
setting.  In  this  context,  I  am  paying  attention  to  firms'  stance  regarding  wages  going 
forward. 
 
C. Prices 
Next, I will discuss the output gap and inflation expectations, which are the main factors 
that determine inflation rates. First, the output gap has improved steadily, being in the range 
of 1.0-1.5 percent in the April-June quarter of 2017. Considering the improvements seen in 
various  indexes,  the  output  gap  likely  will  have  expanded  somewhat  within  positive 
territory in the July-September quarter. With regard to the outlook, it is projected to widen 
further within such territory in fiscal 2017; thereafter, it is projected to continue expanding 
moderately  within  positive  territory  both  on  the  capital  and  labor  sides,  reflecting  the 
increase in demand at home and abroad. In the second half of fiscal 2019, although such 
expansion is likely to pause due to the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike, the 
output gap is expected to remain substantially positive. 
 
Second, medium- to long-term inflation expectations have remained in a weakening phase. 
As  for  the  outlook,  they  are  likely  to  follow  an  increasing  trend  on  the  back  of  the 
following: (1) in terms of the adaptive expectation formation mechanism, firms' stance is 
likely to gradually shift toward raising wages and prices with the improvement in the output 
gap, and (2) in terms of the forward-looking expectation formation mechanism, the Bank 
will pursue monetary easing through its strong commitment to achieving the price stability 
target. 
 
I  would  note  that  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  the  possibility  that,  depending  on  the 
5 
developments in firms' price-setting stance, there might be items for which prices are not 
particularly  responsive  to  the  output  gap  and  the  rise  in  inflation  expectations  might  be 
delayed. 
 
III. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Let me now turn to the Bank's monetary policy. 
 
The Bank has set the price stability target at 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  and  has  been conducting  monetary  policy  to  achieve  this  target at the 
earliest possible time. 
 
There are three reasons why the Bank is aiming at 2 percent inflation. The first is a bias in 
price statistics. Since the CPI has a statistical tendency of demonstrating a higher inflation 
rate  than  the  actual  one,  a  sufficiently  high  inflation  rate  is  necessary  in  order  to  ensure 
price stability. The second reason is with regard to securing policy room for the future. The 
level  of  nominal  interest  rates  is  usually  determined  in  accordance  with  that  of  inflation 
rates.  With  a  high  level  of  nominal  interest  rates,  the  Bank  will  have  more  room  for  a 
monetary policy response by being able to push down the policy interest rates to stimulate 
the economy at times of economic downturns. The third reason is that the 2 percent target is 
a  global  standard.  Central  banks  in  major  economies  are  currently  conducting  monetary 
policy with the aim of achieving around 2 percent inflation. For this reason, it is considered 
that  the  Bank's  aim  of  achieving  2  percent  inflation  will  lead  to  stable  foreign  exchange 
rates in the long run and also contribute to the stability of corporate activities. 
 
What is important here is that the Bank conducts monetary policy based on the principle 
that  the  policy  shall  aim  at  "achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound 
development of the national economy," as stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act. The Bank is 
not simply trying to achieve a rise in prices, but it is aiming for an economy with a virtuous 
cycle in which the incomes of people increase firmly as the price stability target of 2 percent 
is achieved. If prices rise in a stable manner and firms and households start to behave based 
on this assumption, prices of goods and services will rise, which in turn will increase firms' 
sales and profits. With such increases, wages would rise accordingly, leading to more active 
6 
consumption. The Bank is aiming to achieve a sustainable price stability in which such an 
economic virtuous cycle operates. 
 
With  a  view  to  achieving  the  price  stability target,  the  Bank  introduced  Quantitative  and 
Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control in September 2016, and has 
been implementing powerful monetary easing policy under this framework.   
 
This policy framework consists of two major components. The first is yield curve control, 
in which the Bank facilitates the formation of short- and long-term interest rates that are 
considered  most  appropriate  for  maintaining  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price 
stability target, taking account of developments in economic activity and prices as well as 
financial  conditions.  Specifically,  at  present,  according  to  the  guideline  for  market 
operations,  the  Bank  sets  the  short-term  policy  interest  rate  at  minus  0.1  percent  and 
purchases  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  so  that  10-year  JGB  yields  will  remain  at 
around 0 percent. The second component is an inflation-overshooting commitment in which 
the  Bank  continues  with  the  monetary  easing  framework,  aiming  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. On 
this point, the Bank makes clear that it will continue expanding the monetary base until the 
year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  observed  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  exceeds  2 
percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. 
 
Currently, the momentum toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent is being 
maintained firmly, and the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to increase 
toward  2  percent.  Nevertheless,  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  to  achieve  the  target. 
Considering the current developments in economic activity and prices, as well as financial 
conditions,  I  believe  that  it  is  important  that  the  Bank  continue  to  persistently  pursue 
powerful monetary easing under QQE with Yield Curve Control. 
 
IV. Challenges for Japan's Economy 
I  would  now  like  to  express  my  thoughts  regarding  the  current  situation  for  Japan's 
economy from a longer-term perspective. 
 
7 
According to the Bank's estimates, the potential growth rate, which was about 4 percent in 
the latter half of the 1980s, has been in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent recently. It can be said 
that  the  rate  --  although  it  has  been  on  an  increasing  trend  in  recent  years  --  has  been 
trending  downward  over  the  long  term, mainly  reflecting  the  population  decline  and  low 
productivity growth. This has led to a decline in growth expectations in Japan, engendering 
some pessimistic views on the prospects for the economy. 
 
Although it is true that the population decline has a large impact on the economy and that 
productivity  improvement  takes  time,  I  consider  it  unnecessary  to  underestimate  the 
potential of Japan's economy; my view is that it is possible to boost the potential growth 
rate. Let me add that raising the potential growth rate is also important as the Bank aims for 
sustainable price stability, and efforts by a wide range of entities are necessary to this end. 
 
To raise the potential growth rate of the economy, from the viewpoint of the management of 
firms, they not only need to streamline or upgrade their supply systems, but also explore 
new  demand  and  arrange  their  supply  systems  in  a  way  that  would  match such  demand, 
given that we are in a time when consumers' demand varies and constantly changes. In other 
words, it is necessary for firms to tap potential demand and work on product innovation -- 
which aims to develop and provide new products that are unique and have high value-added 
-- over the long term in a sustainable manner. 
 
To this end, I believe that two factors are especially important: personnel who can develop 
new products, and an environment in which such products are desired. Needless to say, it is 
necessary to acquire personnel who are capable of producing and implementing new ideas 
to  generate  innovations,  regardless  of  their  scale  --  that  is,  innovations  ranging  from 
paradigm-shifting developments to refinements to existing products. Let me also highlight 
the importance of an environment in which new products are desired. In order for a number 
of innovations to be created in Japan, it is essential to maintain the virtuous cycle between 
demand and innovation by appropriately stimulating demand. It is said that necessity is the 
mother  of  invention.  In  other  words,  innovation  is  unlikely  to  occur  when  not  many 
consumers  seek  products  that  outperform  existing  ones.  Having  said  that,  the  current 
situation, in which the Bank's accommodative monetary policy is appropriately stimulating 
8 
demand, is likely having a positive impact in terms of bringing about innovation. Of course, 
it takes time to tap potential demand and transform this into actual demand. Therefore, I 
believe it is important to persistently maintain accommodative financial conditions with a 
view to accelerating innovation. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
9 
