Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference  following  the  release  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  25  October
2017.
 Good  morning.  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Wilkins  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  to  answer  your
questions about today’s interest rate announcement and our Monetary Policy Report (MPR).
As you know, Governing Council decided to raise interest rates at each of its July and September
meetings, in the context of stronger-than-expected economic growth and a very strong labour
market. Furthermore, over the course of the summer, we saw a firming of inflation indicators and
a  rapidly  closing  output  gap.  As  we  predicted  in  July,  the  economy  is  showing  signs  of
moderating in the second half of the year. Nevertheless, we expect the economy to continue to
grow at an above-potential pace.
Today, we left our policy rate unchanged at 1 per cent. We regard this level as appropriate in light
of our updated projection for the economy and inflation—in particular, we expect inflation to reach
our 2 per cent target in the second half of 2018. This is a little later than we projected in July,
primarily because the Canadian dollar has strengthened in 2017.
Before  taking  your  questions,  let  me  offer  a  few  comments  around  Governing  Council’s
deliberations.
Governing Council agreed that the economy is likely to require less monetary stimulus over time,
but  we  will  be  cautious  in  making  future  adjustments  to  our  policy  rate.  Four  key  issues  are
adding  uncertainty  to  the  projection.  These  are  the  same  four  issues  that  I  highlighted  in  my
recent speech in St. John’s, and they played an important role in our deliberations for today’s
decision. Discussion of these issues features strongly in today’s MPR.
The first issue on which Governing Council spent considerable time is around inflation itself. In
this MPR, we investigate a number of conjectures around the apparent softness of inflation in
several advanced economies. I refer you to Box 1 of the MPR. These conjectures include a role
for technology, specifically digitalization, which may be putting downward pressure on inflation; a
role for imported disinflation from lower-cost countries; or more generally, a role for the forces of
globalization. Suffice to say that for the Canadian data, this work has generally confirmed our
faith in our model of inflation, in which inflation depends mainly on the degree of excess demand
or excess supply in the economy, and this process operates with a lag. In short, we believe that
we understand how Canada’s inflation rate has been evolving. If we have been surprised in the
past, it has been either because of sector-specific shocks, or because economic growth was
slower than expected and there was more excess capacity than we previously believed.
Indeed, the second issue that preoccupied Governing Council was the degree of excess capacity
in  the  economy.  The  economic  growth  we  experienced  in  the  first  half  of  the  year  has  been
sufficient  to  bring  the  level  of  production  close  to  our  estimates  of  capacity.  Let  me  reiterate,
inflation has always been and remains a question of supply and demand. Therefore, one might
expect continued above-potential economic growth—which we are forecasting for the next few
quarters—to cause inflation to rise over time. However, the economy builds new capacity every
day, through new companies and through investment and increased employment. We note that
there is still some excess capacity in the labour market: there are people who are working part
time who would prefer full-time work, there is still below-trend participation in work by youth, and
hours worked are lower than we would expect. Accordingly, what we expect to see—and what
occurs at this stage of virtually every economic cycle—is capacity-augmenting investment and
the creation of new jobs at existing firms or at new firms, along with rising productivity. All of this
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
could mean higher potential output than we have built into our projection. Because this process is
highly  uncertain  as  to  timing  and  size,  we  build  it  into  our  projection  conservatively.  But  the
bottom line is that the economy could be capable of generating more non-inflationary growth than
we are assuming.
The third issue is the continued softness in wage growth in the context of an unemployment rate
that is now about the same as it was prior to the global financial crisis. While employment growth
has certainly been strong, wage increases have not kept pace. This softness is due in part to the
excess capacity in the labour market that I just mentioned, and the link between excess demand
and higher wages also operates with a lag. But it is also possible that other factors, including
globalization, may be affecting wage dynamics.
The fourth issue that preoccupied Governing Council was elevated household debt and how that
might  affect  the  economy’s  response  to  higher  interest  rates.  We  have  enhanced  our  main
macroeconomic model used for projections to capture relevant details around housing and debt,
and we have re-estimated all of our model’s parameters using advanced methods. You can find
details in the appendix in the MPR. We do find that the economy is likely to respond more to
higher interest rates at today’s debt levels than historically. Even so, we have to allow for the
possibility that these improved estimates fall short of the mark. Furthermore, we have to watch
how the household sector reacts to the new rules around mortgage underwriting. It will take time
to understand the impact of these changes as well as the economy’s sensitivity to higher interest
rates.
Governing Council expects that incoming data and new research will shed more light on these
four issues as we move forward. There is also a range of other risks that we outline in the MPR,
which,  taken  together,  give  us  a  balanced  outlook  for  inflation.  As  well,  there  is  uncertainty
surrounding  the  possibility  of  a  significant  shift  toward  more-protectionist  trade  policies  in  the
United States, which we have chosen not to incorporate in our projection.
Given our recent history with inflation running below target, we continue to be more preoccupied
with the downside risks to inflation. The bottom line is that Governing Council will be cautious in
considering future interest rate adjustments and will be guided by incoming data to assess the
sensitivity of the economy to interest rates, the evolution of economic capacity, and the dynamics
of both wage growth and inflation.
With that, Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I will be happy to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
