Bank of Italy conference on ‘How financial systems work:  
evidence from financial accounts’
Opening remarks: Luigi Federico Signorini,  
Bank of Italy, Deputy Governor
Thursday, 30 November 2017
It is a pleasure to welcome you to the Banca d’Italia for this workshop. As a former 
head of the Statistical Directorate I am particularly happy to see such a distinguished list of 
speakers and guests on this occasion. I would like to thank all those who contributed, from other 
institutions, from academia, and from inside the Bank. 
Financial accounts have a long history and we take some pride in having worked on them 
almost from the beginning. As many in this room will know, the first model accounts were 
developed by Morris A. Copeland for the US.1
The picture above, which has a nice vintage feel to it, summarises his idea of the economy 
as  a  money  circuit,  showing  the  connections  between  the  institutional  sectors.  In  1955  the 
Federal Reserve published its first version of the annual flow of funds. 
Italy’s first financial accounts appeared about ten years later, in the Annual Report of 
the Banca d’Italia for the year 1964. We were among the first countries for which financial 
accounts became available. Of course, the pioneering work at the Fed was an inspiration, but 
there had been some significant preparatory work here as well. Since the 1940s Paolo Baffi, 
who was to become Governor many years later (1975-79), had been working on reconstructing 
1  Copeland M. (1952), A Study of Moneyflows in the United States, NBER, New York. Here we draw from 
De Bonis R. and A. Gigliobianco (2012), ‘The origins of financial accounts in the United States and Italy: 
Copeland, Baffi and the institutions’, in De Bonis R. and A. Pozzolo (eds.), The Financial Systems of Industrial 
Countries. Evidence from Financial Accounts, Springer.
the financial statements of the institutional sectors. He was influenced by Giorgio Mortara, an 
eminent statistician and his teacher, and by Wesley Mitchell, whose work on business cycles he 
had translated.2 
They used to tell a story here at the Bank of Italy about how Baffi visited the Federal 
Reserve Board in the mid-1950s, as Head of Research, to discuss the construction of financial 
accounts. Proof that this was no myth was recently discovered in our historical archives in the 
form of several letters (one is pictured below) exchanged between William McChesney Martin, 
Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System from 1951 to 1970, and 
Donato Menichella, Governor of the Bank of Italy from 1950 to 1960. Baffi stayed at the Fed 
for a few months in 1956.
In the 1960s other countries – the UK and Germany among them – began to publish 
national financial accounts on a regular basis. These accounts became part of a triad that also 
included non-financial national accounts and input-output tables.3
Real national accounts had begun to be compiled following the Keynesian revolution, 
as  the  invention  of  macroeconomics  and  the  definition  of  the  attending  concepts  (income, 
consumption, investment, savings) prompted the development of statistical methods to produce 
a reasonable approximation of the real-world counterparts to those concepts. The first release 
of  the  United  Nations’  Systems  of  National  Accounts  came  in  1947.  Once  the  statistical 
foundations for real national accounts had been laid, moving on to financial accounts seemed 
natural. As we were soon to learn, this was no easy task. Even more, making the two sets of 
macro accounts consistent, i.e. integrated – a logical and easy step in theory – was in fact very 
difficult in practice.
The effort to understand and possibly control business cycles after the devastation of the 
Great Depression was itself a powerful driving force for the development of financial accounts. 
Financial  variables  such  as  bank  loans  and  deposits,  bonds  and  shares,  arranged  within  a 
consistent framework, were seen as necessary to get a full picture of the cyclical factors in the 
economy. 
2  Baffi was worried about the lack of good data: ‘At the Research Office, where we follow and analyse statistics, 
principally of a monetary and financial nature, we find ourselves poorly equipped to understand the movements 
of non-monetary aggregates, barring those associated with foreign trade and the manufacture of some products. 
Yet such movements are among those at the root of financial phenomema …. We are at a similar disadvantage 
as regards our knowledge of the problems encountered by business enterprises …’ (excerpts from a letter 
written in January, 1941).
3  Klein  L.  R.  (2003),  ‘Some  Potential  Linkages  for  Input-Output Analysis  with  Flow-of-Funds’,  Economic 
Systems Research, 15, September, 269-277.
4
The availability of information on financial flows may also have been regarded in those 
days as instrumental to economic planning; in some Western countries this was considered a 
very important and effective tool of economic policy in the post-war period. With illusions of 
top-down planning long forgotten in many market economies, this point is easily overlooked 
nowadays, but it was surely another significant factor in those times. 
5
There was a golden age of financial accounts between the 1960s and the early 1970s. James 
Tobin, among others, used them to look at the way agents allocate wealth across financial and  
non-financial assets; in his Nobel Memorial Lecture in 1981, he discussed ‘Money and finance in 
the macro-economic process’ using flow-of-fund tables. Tobin and others had built models based 
on the interaction between the real and the financial sectors. This idea was taken up by central 
banks. For instance, the 1986 version of the Bank of Italy Quarterly Econometric Model contained 
a complete description of the links between saving, non-financial investments and financial flows.4 
Financial accounts were also a rather popular subject for research. Surveys of the literature list 
around 250 works on flows of funds published in twenty years or so after Copeland’s book.5 
Interest in financial accounts declined in the 1980s, only to pick up again after the crisis. 
Many  factors  were  at  play:  a  growing  focus  on  the  micro  foundations  of  macroeconomics; 
an increasing concentration on inflation as a target, and on money and credit aggregates as 
instruments, for monetary policy; some neglect of interconnections across the financial system; 
and much trust (too much, one would say in retrospect) in the self-correcting mechanism of 
price adjustments, which implied less interest in the quantities (flows and stocks) that make up 
financial accounts. On the statistical front, the main effort then was directed at fuller international 
harmonisation of real statistics, which resulted in the 1993 System of National Accounts; at the 
same time, as I mentioned earlier, integrating real and financial accounts was proving elusive. 
4  On these issues see Ando A. and F. Modigliani (1975), ‘Some reflections on describing structures 
of financial sectors’, in Fromm G. and L. R. Klein (eds.), The Brookings Model: Perspective and 
Recent Developments, New York, North-Holland.
5  Cohen,  J.  (1972),  ‘Copeland’s  Moneyflows  after  Twenty-Five  Years:  A  Survey’,  Journal  of  Economic 
Literature,  1,  March;  Bain, A.D.  (1973),  ‘Surveys  in Applied  Economics:  Flow  of  Funds Analysis’,  The 
Economic Journal, December; Roe, A.R. (1973), ‘The Case for Flow of Funds and National Balance Sheet 
Accounts’, The Economic Journal, 330, June. 
6
Financial accounts continued to be used, though to a lesser extent, by economists such 
as Wynne Godley and Raymond Goldsmith.6 Then the Asian crisis of the late 1990s showed 
the importance of sectoral financial connections and the need to study the balance sheets of 
banks, firms, and households.7 Since the start of monetary union, the ECB’s monetary analytical 
framework has included financial accounts as a tool for cross-checking its ‘first pillar’ (economic 
analysis) against its ‘second pillar’ (monetary analysis).8 
However, it was the global financial crisis that generated renewed interest. A lesson of the 
crisis was that tracking sectoral imbalances was important; that an excessive level of debt may 
cause vulnerabilities; and that therefore the pursuit of financial stability required monitoring the 
level of corporate and household debt and the leverage of financial institutions. Finance was no 
longer a mere veil.
In 2011 the European Union adopted a surveillance procedure to monitor and correct 
macroeconomic imbalances. Among the indicators used are three key elements of the financial 
accounts: the stock and the flow of private sector debt and the change in the financial sector’s 
liabilities.9 
Finally, the importance of the interactions between the real economy and the financial 
sector for econometric modelling is now well-recognised and efforts are being made to integrate 
macro-financial relationships for key sectors such as non-financial corporations and households 
into large macro models.10 
6  Godley constantly followed the idea that economic models should be founded on flows and stocks, 
and developed consistent models of the US economy and the economies of other countries (see 
Godley, W. and M. Lavoie, 2007, Monetary Economics: An Integrated Approach to Money, Credit, 
Income,  Production  and  Wealth,  Palgrave  MacMillan,  Basingstoke).  Goldsmith  dedicated  his 
research programme to the building of national and sector balance sheets, exploiting the financial 
accounts  time  series.  See  Goldsmith  R.  W.  (1969),  Financial  Structure  and  Development, Yale 
University Press; Goldsmith R. W. (1985), Comparative National Balance Sheets, A Study of Twenty 
Countries 1688-1978, The University of Chicago Press. 
See Allen M., C. Rosenberg, C. Keller, B. Setzer and N. Roubini (2002), ‘A balance sheet approach to financial 
crisis’, IMF Working Papers, No. 210, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
See  L.  D.  Papademos  and  J.  Stark  (2010),  Enhancing  Monetary Analysis,  ECB,  in  particular  chapter  7,  
‘Cross-checking and the flow of funds’.
7 
8 
9  Actually, before the crisis we wrote a paper on the use of financial accounts and other statistics for the analysis 
of financial stability. See R. De Bonis, G. Grande, S. Magri, L. F. Signorini and M. Stacchini (2005), ‘Financial 
stability: an overview of Bank of Italy statistics’, Irving Fisher Committee Bulletin, 23, October. 
10  For  an  example  see  Duca,  J.  and  J.  Muellbauer  (2014),  ‘Tobin  lives:  Integrating  evolving  credit  market 
architecture into flow of funds based macro-models’, in A Flow-of-Funds Perspective on the Financial Crisis, 
Vol. II, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke. We also draw from Muellbauer J. (2016), Macroeconomics and 
consumption: Why central bank models failed and how to repair them, Vox.eu, 21 December. 
7
Here at the Bank of Italy financial accounts have been used rather intensively in research 
over  the  years. An  incomplete  list  of  articles  and  books  based  on  Italian  financial  accounts 
includes around 100 works by Bank of Italy authors alone. Research has covered, among other 
things, the structure of the Italian financial system, household wealth, firms’ financial structure; 
convergence of financial systems, and macro financial imbalances. A 2012 collection of essays on 
the evolution of financial systems is one example. We regularly comment on financial accounts 
statistics in the Annual Report, the Economic Bulletin and the Financial Stability Report. 
Let me now turn briefly to purely statistical issues. As I mentioned, the Bank of Italy has 
regularly published the country’s financial accounts (stocks and flows) since the 1960s; yearly 
stocks have been reconstructed for the main institutional sectors as far back as 1950. Below is 
the first statistical manual we published in 1969. We implemented the SEC79 standards (and 
showed quarterly figures for the first time) in the early 1990s, the ESA95 standards in 2002 
(during my time in Statistics), and the ESA2010 standards in 2016.
Over the years countless methodological improvements have been made to coverage and 
estimation methods. Many people here will be familiar with the multiple challenges of using 
diverse sources, often designed for non-statistical purposes and lacking common methodological 
standards, to obtain consistent statistics;11 of reconciling inconsistent classifications; of building 
11  Here we draw from De Bonis R., C. Giron, L. Infante and G. Quirós (2017), ‘Financial accounts uses’, in  
P. van de Ven and D. Fano (edited by, 2017), Understanding Financial Accounts, OECD.
8
statistical  bridges  across  valuation  criteria  (historical  cost  vs.  market  prices)  and  recording 
conventions (cash vs. accrual); and of credibly interpolating low-frequency data. Work continues 
on these and other fronts and there is still much to do. Tomorrow Luigi Cannari will talk to 
you about some of the main pieces of work in progress, including the reconciliation of micro 
and macro financial data; the integration of financial and non-financial assets in a consistent 
balance-sheet framework for each sector; and the improvement of statistics on cross-border 
flows and holdings.
Before I leave the floor, let me take this opportunity to pay tribute to the memory of our 
colleague, Andrea Generale, a talented, committed researcher and then regulator, who passed 
away a year ago after a long illness. Besides being a highly qualified senior professional, Andrea 
9
was generous and open with everyone. He had a lifetime commitment to the analysis of banks, 
corporations, financial institutions and financial systems. For some time Andrea coordinated the 
Bank’s research on financial flows and significantly contributed to our body of research based 
on the use of financial accounts.12 We shall remember him with affection and gratitude. 
This is all on my part. I see that you have a full agenda, with three keynote lectures and 
twelve papers packed into one and a half days. I wish you all some very fruitful and enjoyable 
presentations and discussions. 
12  One contribution is in Bartiloro L., R. De Bonis, A. Generale and I. Longhi (2008), The financial structures 
of  the  leading  industrial  countries:  a  medium-term  analysis,  paper  presented  at  the  conference  “Financial 
Accounts: History, Methods, the case of Italy and International Comparisons”, Perugia, December 2005. 
10
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
