Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Optimum navigation
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  9th  General  Membership  Meeting  of  the  Financial  Executives
Institute of the Philippines (FINEX), Makati City, 20 September 2017.
 When I was Deputy Governor of the BSP’s Supervision and Examination Sector I had the honor
of speaking at some of your membership meetings and the pleasure of participating in your golf
tournaments and now, formally, one of you. 
Today, I thank you for inviting me, and for the opportunity to congratulate FINEX’s new members
as Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas….
FINEX  President  Benedicta  Du-Baladad,  MBM  Val Araneta,  MD  Jane  Chiong,  FINEX  directors
and officers, esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen, a pleasant afternoon to you all.
In the theme, there is reference to a new BSP roadmap… As requested, I am here to talk about
some of our plans, in my presentation and in our Q and A.
Since the BSP’s establishment on 3 July 1993, our core mandates have remained the same. 
The target of making the Philippine economy more globally competitive, and its financial system
more robust and stable is unchanged.  Each and every Governor was focused on reaching this
destination… As new BSP Governor, do I have a new roadmap? 
This is an interesting question and one often asked of me… When I first became Governor, I
emphasized the importance of building on my predecessors’ legacies of excellence… This was
summed up in the phrase, “Continuity Plus Plus.”
In this sense, I can’t say that there is a new roadmap… Rather, what there is, is an on-going
journey… a strategic one at that… as we pursue deeper financial sector reforms. 
Interactive Road Maps
Do you use Waze or Google maps? 
I think these are wonderful apps… Waze relies on community and user reporting… When users
report  on  accidents,  blocked  roads,  weather  conditions,  this  information  is  collected  and
immediately  analysed.    Wazers  are  then  informed  of  the  optimum  route  to  get  to  their
destinations… 
Google Map on the other hand, is created through collaboration with Google Earth.  It depends on
images from third-party satellites fed into powerful computers to provide high-resolution images
taken from above.
Sometimes, mid-journey, these digital maps recalculate and advise when there is a route that is
several  minutes  faster!  …  I  like  how  technologically  powered  roadmaps  like  these  are
interactive… dynamic, smart, sensitive and are responsive to changing conditions! 
I am not saying that the BSP is only just now adopting these mapping or planning frameworks. 
Even under the Governorships of my predecessors, the path of central banking has never been
static… We evolve and adapt innovative ways of preserving financial stability as we deal with
inter-related 
the  growing  sophistication  of
interconnected markets, and developing technology.
regionalization,  globalization, 
transactions, 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
We Are Here
Whether one uses Waze, Google Maps or an ordinary paper roadmap, the first thing one needs
to determine is the start point… the “we are here mark” on the map…  So where are we?
I am happy to report that the Philippines has sustained strong macroeconomic fundamentals… 
We continue to be one of the fastest growing economies in Asia, registering a 6.5 percent annual
growth in gross domestic product (GDP) in the second quarter of 2017…
While  headline  inflation  rose  to  3.1  percent  in August  2017,  it  is  still  within  the  Government’s
target range for 2017, and also 2018–19.  We have established credibility in hitting our inflation
target.
Our level of gross international reserves (GIR) is healthy at $81.72 billion as of end-August 2017,
which amount can adequately cover 8.6 months’ worth of imports… In June, our foreign direct
investments (FDI) have grown by 182.7 percent to $674 million. 
The banking system is sound and stable with a double-digit growth in resources at 13.5 percent
to reach P14.2 trillion as of end-June 2017… Growth is fuelled by sustained inflows of deposits
reaching its P11.0 trillion mark… The total loan portfolio likewise grew by 18.0 percent to P8.0
trillion.
Our financial market is deepening but domestic credit to GDP is still the second lowest among
Asia Pacific countries at 63.6%…
Loan  quality  of  the  banking  system  is  satisfactory  as  NPL  ratios  continue  to  decline  at  1.9
percent… Banks have taken enough buffers for expected and unexpected losses arising from
their  expanding  lending  activities.  Further,  banks  maintain  ample  liquidity  and  strong  core
earnings.
Recalculating for Faster Route: Deepening Markets
There are happy instances when Waze suddenly beeps and an electronic voice announces that
it has found a better route…  Are you familiar with this? 
As we have been moving along, there are conditions that indicate room for more growth in the
domestic bond market!  Outstanding local currency (LCY) bonds represent just 34.2 percent of
the country’s GDP.  The outstanding LCY bonds amounted to P5.2 trillion (USD102 billion) as of
end-June 2017. This resulted in an increase of 10.2 percent year-on-year supported by gains in
both the LCY government (P4.2 trillion) and corporate bond (P1.0 trillion) segments. During the
same  period,  outstanding  LCY  bonds  consisted  of  81.5  percent  government  bonds  and  18.5
percent corporate bonds.
Today  the  bond  market  is  still  largely  composed  of  government-issued  debt,  but  we  see  a
promising performance in corporate bonds given their faster annual growth rate of 18.4 percent
as of end-June 2017.
In the dollar bond market, early this year, the Government issued a US$2 billion bond with a 25-
year  tenor.  The  bond  offering  had  a  record-low  yield  of  3.7  percent.  Corporate  issuers  with
outstanding dollar bonds are looking to the LCY bond market to refinance foreign borrowings and
to cushion the impact of exchange rate volatility. Both reflect prudent liability management amid
rising foreign interest rates.
The local bourse is also upbeat.  The PSE composite index is reaching all time highs.    Year-to-
date, the PSEi has gained something like 20 percent.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Oh… but wait… like the Waze and Googlemap apps that report possible challenges ahead, we
also see downside risks such as uncertainty from monetary policy in advanced economies and
geopolitical  risks.  Seeing  these  risks,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral,  have  taken  stock  of  our
strengths, and remain vigilant.
Medium Term Philippine Development Plan on Capital Market Development
This  optimum  route  towards  economic  development  is  consistent  with  the  Government’s
medium  term  development  plan.    In  this  plan,  the  administration’s  initiative  to  foster  capital
market development by promoting efficiency in trading, settlement and delivery of securities is
outlined.  This underscores the vital role of the capital market to complement  bank lending for
purposes  of  supporting  long-term  financing  requirements  of  corporates  and  the  Government,
particularly for its “Build, Build, Build” program.
In  deepening  the  capital  market,  there  is  need  to  secure  reliability,  quality,  and  integrity  in  the
pricing  and  valuation  of  financial  instruments.    There  is  also  need  to  establish  an  integrated
financial  market  infrastructure.  These  initiatives  are  significant  in  promoting  price  discovery,
transparency, orderly trading, clearing, and settlement of the full range of financial transactions.
BSP Support for the Capital Market Reform Program
The BSP is highly supportive of a capital market reform program. We desire a more balanced
financial  ecosystem  where  a  well-functioning  banking  system  is  complemented  by  deep  and
liquid  debt  and  equity  markets  and  where  there  are  viable  alternative  sources  of  financing  for
long-term investments, including the development of necessary financial market infrastructures
(FMI).
Recently,  the  BSP  in  collaboration  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),
Department of Finance (DOF), and the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr) unveiled a package of joint
and coordinated initiatives to spur domestic debt market development to be undertaken over an
18-month timeframe once we get going. 
The capital market reform agenda will initially focus on benchmark markets (the money market
and the treasury bond market).  Improving discovery of benchmark yields is critical in pricing risk
assets.
Strengthening  these  foundational  elements  will  facilitate  development  of  the  broader    capital
market.
The  BSP,  on  its  part,  has  already  implemented  various  reforms  in  expanding  the  depth  and
breadth of capital market transactions as well as enhancing market conduct.  For instance, we
have  already  started  the  groundwork  for  project  financing  under  Circular  No.  914  last  year  in
support of the Government’s “Golden Age of Infrastructure”.
The BSP’s fine-tuning of the Interest Rate Corridor (IRC) system to make it even more market-
oriented is also aligned with this purpose. The IRC system will guide market interest rates closer
to the BSP’s policy rate. We see this as a contribution to capital market development through
better price discovery for very short term interest rates.
There is also an initiative to further liberalize foreign exchange (FX) regulations to achieve more
efficiency and to facilitate ease of doing business.  This includes higher standards of governance
and conduct for market participants in the FX market. These elements, in turn, will also support
the deepening of the domestic capital market.
Equally important is the digitalization of the financial system.  Creating an efficient digital platform
is complementary to capital and FX market reforms.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In this area, the BSP together with industry stakeholders, launched the National Retail Payment
System (NRPS) Framework to facilitate a safe, efficient, and reliable electronic retail payment
system  that  is  interconnected  and  interoperable.    The  NRPS  aims  to  promote  a  “cash-lite”
economy and ultimately improve the country’s economic competitiveness.
While the BSP pursues these reforms, we also stress the value of good corporate governance
and the promotion of a risk management culture. As markets continue to evolve, it is important
that risks are fully priced to generate reasonable and sustainable returns to the investor.
Moreover, we are also working closely with both houses of Congress for the enactment of some
critical financial sector reforms. Allow me to provide you a brief overview:
Critical Legislative Amendments. These include the amendment of the BSP Charter, Anti-
Money Laundering Act (AMLA), and the Deposit Secrecy Law. As a financial supervisor, it is
paramount  that  BSP’s  supervisory  powers  are  well-enshrined  in  the  law.  This  will  further
enable the BSP to effectively discharge its mandate. 
Other Legislative Reforms. Other important pieces of legislation in our reform agenda are
the Payment System Act (PSA) and Collective Investment Schemes Law (CISL).  The PSA
intends to formalize BSP’s oversight of the national payment system while the CISL intends
to provide a harmonized legal framework for the pooled vehicles of investments.
Optimum Navigation – Evolving Roadmaps
The interesting thing about the apps I mentioned – Waze and Google Maps – is that they are
interactive.  When you open Waze, your smart phone automatically shares information with the
other Waze users on the road and you are rerouted around potential traffic jams, stalled cars and
are even warned of traffic police!
Google Maps is similar. It uses other smartphones, which if these have Google Maps open and
location services turned on, send anonymous data back to Google to determine how traffic is
flowing.  In effect, people send information to other people so that they would not make the same
mistakes they have made, and also to watch out for hazards they have seen.  I have read that
Google also combines this new information with historical data from satellites built up through the
years!
I think this is wonderful!  In effect, people help each other make evolving roadmaps! 
This is what we have been doing as we, the BSP collaborate and cooperate with you, ladies and
gentlemen of FINEX.  This ensures our continued success.
Indeed,  together  along  with  various  stakeholders:  such  as  the  SEC,  DOF,  BTr,  private
corporations  and  other  market  participants,  we  have  achieved  significant  inroads  in  capital
market development.
Recent financial markets indicators and upbeat investor sentiment validate the point that we are
moving and are making progress toward our intended destination.
While  much  remains  to  be  done,  we  rely  on  your  continued  support  for  our  reform  initiatives
moving forward. These collaboration and cooperation are needed for optimum navigation.
On  behalf  of  the  Monetary  Board  and  the  BSP,  I  thank  FINEX  for  its  invaluable  partnership  in
working towards the development of a fully functioning, deep and vibrant local capital market that
can  effectively  provide  another  robust  source  of  financing  to  the  domestic  economy.    Let  us
continue  writing  the  evolving  roadmap  together  as  journey  towards  our  shared  desired
destination.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Mabuhay ang FINEX,  mabuhay ang ating bansang Pilipinas.  Magandang hapon sa inyong lahat. 
I thank you for your kind attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
