Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before the
Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,
Brussels, 20 November 2017.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am glad to be back at the European Parliament for my last hearing of this year.
Since  we  last  met,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  taken  important  decisions  on  the
recalibration of its monetary policy instruments beyond the end of the year.
Therefore, in my remarks today, I will first discuss the outlook for the euro area economy and the
recalibration of our monetary policy measures.
Then, at the request of this committee, I will discuss the role of TARGET2 in supporting financial
integration  and  the  implementation  of  our  monetary  policy,  which  in  turn  have  implications  for
interpreting TARGET balances.
The economic outlook
The economic expansion remains solid and broad-based across countries and sectors in the
euro area, mainly supported by domestic demand.
According  to  the  recent  Eurostat  flash  estimate,  real  GDP  growth  has  continued  in  the  third
quarter  at  a  rate  of  2.5%  year  on  year.  This  amounts  to  four-and-a-half  years  of  continuous
quarterly expansion, and the latest survey data point to unabated growth momentum in the near
term.  GDP  growth  is  also  increasingly  broad-based  across  countries  and  sectors.  The
dispersion of GDP growth rates across euro area countries has fallen to its lowest level since
1
1997, caused by a general upward convergence.
The labour market continues to benefit from the recovery and the deep and painful employment
losses recorded during the crisis have now been offset, at least in the aggregate. The number of
people unemployed in the euro area declined from 18.6 million in the second quarter of 2014 to
14.6 million in the last quarter. Relative to past patterns, employment growth has been broad-
based across countries and sectors. 16 of the 19 euro area countries have experienced positive
annual employment growth since mid-2014 and employment has been increasing in about 60%
of sectors, compared with zero in mid-2014.
These employment gains, together with increasing household wealth, are supporting the private
consumption outlook. Business investment also remains on an upswing, aided by improvements
in corporate profitability.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  played  a  key  role  in  supporting  both  consumption  and
investment  demand  by  ensuring  favourable  financing  conditions  for  euro  area  firms  and
households. Since end-May 2014, bank lending rates for non-financial corporations, for instance,
have fallen by around 120 basis points and those for households by around 100 basis points.
Lending  rates  for  very  small  loans,  which  can  be  taken  as  a  proxy  for  loans  to  small  and
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs),  have  declined  by  almost  190  basis  points.  The  significant
improvement in funding conditions for SMEs is especially encouraging as they provide two-thirds
of total private sector employment in the euro area.
This  improvement  in  financing  conditions  has  been  accompanied  by  reduced  heterogeneity
across countries in bank lending rates. For example, the difference between rates for firms in
euro area countries most severely affected by the crisis versus the other countries has narrowed
2
by around 100 basis points since mid-2014.
Despite the firm economic recovery, inflation dynamics have yet to show convincing signs of a
self-sustained  upward  trend.  Headline  inflation  was  1.4%  in  October  and  is  expected  to
temporarily decline towards the turn of the year, mainly owing to a weaker energy component as
a result of base effects.
Underlying inflation pressures are still subdued as labour market slack remains significant. The
improvements  in  labour  markets  that  we  have  observed  still  need  time  to  translate  into  more
dynamic wage growth.
The ECB’s recent monetary policy decisions
In the light of this economic outlook, at our monetary policy meeting in October, we decided to
recalibrate our monetary policy instruments.
The re-calibration of our policies for the period beyond the end of this year is meant to preserve
the degree of monetary stimulus that is still necessary to secure a sustained return of inflation
rates towards levels below, but close to, 2% in the medium term. Let me briefly explain the four
main decisions the Governing Council took.
First, the improved outlook and our growing confidence in the gradual convergence of inflation
rates towards our inflation aim allowed us to adjust the pace of our asset purchase programme
(APP).  Accordingly,  we  announced  that,  starting  in  January  2018,  net  asset  purchases  are
intended to continue at a monthly pace of €30 billion until the end of September 2018, or beyond,
if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the
path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim.
Second,  as  regards  our  re-investment  policy,  we  stated  that  the  Eurosystem  will  reinvest  the
principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of
time after the end of the net asset purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary. This will
contribute both to favourable liquidity conditions and to an appropriate monetary policy stance. In
this  context,  let  me  also  mention  that  we  provided  additional  information  on  the  redemption
amounts for each component of the APP, as our policy to maintain the stock of our securities
holdings and continue to re-invest the proceeds of those securities that come to redemption for
an extended period of time has become more important as the size of that portfolio has grown.
Our website now reports all the details of the expected monthly redemption amounts for the next
12 months.
Third, on policy rates, we kept them unchanged and reconfirmed that we expect our key interest
rates to remain at their present levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of
our net asset purchases. This sequenced ordering of the outlook for our net asset purchases
and the policy rate path is a central element of our monetary policy at present. The “well past”
condition  that  governs  the  policy  rate  horizon  lays  out  a  critical  enabling  factor  for  asset
purchases to have their full impact.
Finally, we decided that our regular refinancing operations would continue to be conducted as
fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment for as long as necessary, and at least until the
end of 2019. This will ensure the continued smooth implementation of monetary policy while also
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
safeguarding favourable conditions in euro area money markets.
As the Governing Council concluded at the end of its last monetary policy meeting, the monetary
policy support that we provide today comes from the combined effect of the additional net asset
purchases,  the  sizeable  stock  of  acquired  assets  that  have  been  accrued  under  our  asset
purchase programme in the past and the forthcoming reinvestments of the maturing securities,
and our forward guidance on interest rates. Taken together, these measures will preserve the
current  financing  conditions  and  ensure  the  ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  that  is  still
necessary for a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but close to, 2%.
Payment systems and monetary policy implementation
Let me now turn to the topic of TARGET balances.
3
TARGET2  is the Eurosystem’s real-time gross settlement system, through which payments in
euro can be safely and efficiently processed between banks, both within and across borders. It
provides a state-of-the-art payment infrastructure that is used to settle, in central bank money,
payments related to a wide variety of transactions, including monetary policy operations, financial
market instruments, and interbank and customer payments. Last year, TARGET2 processed a
daily average of about 342,000 payments, representing a daily average value of €1.7 trillion. It
therefore  plays  a  key  role  in  ensuring  the  smooth  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  correct
functioning of financial markets and banking, and financial stability.
By  supporting  financial  integration  and  the  implementation  of  our  monetary  policy,  TARGET2
represents  a  cornerstone  of  our  monetary  union.  In  the  TARGET2  system  each  Eurosystem
national  central  bank  (NCB)  has  a  debtor  or  creditor  position  (a  balance)  vis-à-vis  the  ECB,
which  keeps  track  of  the  money  entering  and  leaving  each  participant  country  for  accounting
purposes. The TARGET balances of individual NCBs therefore merely reflect the settlement of
cross-border payments executed via TARGET2.
Payments undertaken as part of the asset purchase programme are also settled via TARGET2.
APP  implementation  is  distinct  from  that  of  refinancing  operations  because  it  can  entail
immediate cross-border payments. Indeed, around 80% of total NCBs’ purchases have been by
financial  market  parties  that  are  not  resident  in  the  same  country  as  the  purchasing  central
banks, thereby impacting TARGET balances.
Moreover,  the  sellers  of  the  assets  purchased  under  the  APP  can  reinvest  the  proceeds,
inducing  a  cross-border  rebalancing  of  their  portfolio.  This  phenomenon,  referred  to  as
international portfolio rebalancing, can prompt further changes in TARGET balances, following
the same logic I have just outlined.
All this notwithstanding, we  have  seen  TARGET2  has  been  instrumental  in  the  smooth  pass-
through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  to  the  financing  conditions  of  households  and
businesses.
Conclusions
Let me conclude.
The EU Treaties gave the ECB the primary objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area
as a whole. This is the best contribution we can make to the welfare of our fellow citizens.
Ensuring price stability is a precondition for the euro area economy to achieve a balanced growth
path that can be sustained in the long run. But this is not the only condition.
Achieving a balanced growth path also requires to strengthen the euro area ability to deal with
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
risks, whenever they will materialise. The current economic outlook provides a unique opportunity
to reduce the likelihood of severe shocks by strengthening the economic structures of Member
States, with policy actions both on the fiscal and structural side.
At the same time, boosting the resilience of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) implies
also reinforcing our common institutional set-up so as to prevent and manage shocks.
I thus welcome the European Parliament’s role in such discussions and the renewed efforts by
euro  area  leaders  and  ministers  to  tackle  the  issue,  as  reflected  in,  for  instance,  the  recent
Eurogroup meeting. It is in this spirit that I look forward to the upcoming Euro Summit meeting on
EMU governance.
Thank you for your attention. I am at your disposal for questions.
1
2
3
Excluding Ireland, due to the country’s exceptionally high GDP growth in 2015 linked to specific activities of
multinational enterprises.
Using composite cost of borrowing indicators.
TARGET  stands  for  Trans-European  Automated  Real-time  Gross  settlement  Express  Transfer  system.
TARGET2 is the second generation of TARGET.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
