Andreas  Dombret:  The  German  economy  and  the  demographic
factor
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the forum WHU - Otto Beisheim School of Management, Vallendar, 17 November 2017.
1. Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen, dear students
 Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  this  event  examining  Germany’s  future  on  the  world
stage.
One key factor which is set to have a huge bearing on Germany’s economic future is the impact
of demographic change. In my speech here today, I will therefore be discussing the outlook for
the  German  economy,  focusing  some  of  my  remarks  on  the  implications  of  demographic
change. 
I’m  a  baby  boomer,  a  member  of  the  generation  born  prior  to  the  “baby  bust”  –  the  sharp
decrease in the birth rate attributed to the introduction of the contraceptive pill in the second half
of the 1960s.
In actual fact, the pill was arguably less to blame for the decline in the birth rate than economic
and societal developments were. 
For example, women’s increasing desire to have a career of their own at a time when it was
difficult to balance professional and family commitments resulted in fewer children being born.
By the end of the next decade, most of the baby boomers will have retired, and this will have
grave implications for our social welfare systems.
It will add substantially to the number of people already drawing a pension, while the number of
people whose contributions are expected to fund these pension entitlements will remain static or
decrease. On top of this, life expectancy is climbing ever higher, which means that the average
pension-drawing period is getting longer.
Whilst insured persons who retired in 1960 at the age of 65 could look forward to living a further
13½ years, this figure now stands at almost 20 years. And medical advances suggest that this
figure will rise still further in the decades to come.
The  gradual  increase  in  the  statutory  retirement  age  to  67  by  2031  has  made  the  pension
insurance scheme more sustainable, but it hasn’t put the scheme on a sound footing once and
for all. That’s why it is not necessarily pessimistic to believe that further reforms are required to
address the post-2031 period. It’s safe to say that the reforms enacted during the last legislative
period  –  I’m  talking  here  about  full  pensions  for  persons  with  an  exceptionally  long  insurance
record, and mothers’ pensions – did nothing to boost the sustainability of the statutory pension
scheme.
Assuming a far lower pension level and a far higher contribution rate are out of the question in the
future, policymakers will probably have no option but to push retirement age higher still.
The pension system and other social security funds aren’t the only areas where demographic
change is making itself felt; it also weakens the forces of growth in our economy.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
So the positive state of the economy right now should not blind us to the huge challenge which
demographic change is also presenting in the sphere of economic policy. In any case, the upbeat
economy is no reason to be patting ourselves on the back or resting on our laurels.
2. The German economy
The German economy is currently in very good shape. Sentiment is also fine: the Ifo business
climate index rose to a new all-time high in October. Businesses are looking ahead with great
optimism.
According  to  the  latest  projection  of  the  German  Council  of  Economic  Experts,  the  German
economy will experience real growth of 2% this year and 2.2% next year.
The Council of Economic Experts thus finds itself in line with other institutions which have made
similar predictions.
Economic  output,  then,  is  outpacing  production  capacity,  which  means  that  utilisation  is
continuing to increase.
A positive factor is that the upturn in Germany is not only ongoing, but also becoming broader:
besides private consumption, export demand and investment are also making a contribution to
growth.
The German economy is benefiting from the fact that the global economy, including the countries
in the euro area, is regaining momentum following years of crisis-induced sluggishness.
According to IMF forecasts, the global growth rate, which was 3.2% last year, will go up to 3.6%
this year and 3.7% in 2018. This means that world trade, too, will finally gain more impetus, with
growth accelerating from 2.4% last year to 4.2% this year.
That  is  good  news  for  German  exporters.  The  debates  on  trade  restrictions,  which  are  being
conducted in some countries, are causing headaches for export-oriented enterprises, however.
Protectionist  tendencies,  alongside  geopolitical  conflicts,  are  among  the  most  significant
downside risks to global economic activity.
Economic  activity,  especially  in  the  euro  area,  is  also  being  buoyed  by  what  remains  a  very
accommodative monetary policy.
And let me add that, with inflation still muted, I believe that an accommodative monetary policy
stance is still appropriate for the euro area. Views can differ over the correct degree of monetary
policy expansion and the proper instruments, however.
As  you  know,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  decided  to  halve  its  monthly  bond
purchases from January 2018 onwards, but to continue them until at least September 2018.
Furthermore,  the  Governing  Council  has  announced  that  interest  rates  will  remain  at  their
present levels “well past the horizon” of its net purchases.
It  is  clear  that  monetary  policy  will  remain  very  accommodative  even  after  the  net  purchases
have ended, as the Eurosystem already has a very large volume of bonds and the Governing
Council of the ECB has taken the decision to reinvest the proceeds of the bonds as they mature.
Given positive economic growth in the euro area and gradually increasing inflationary pressure,
the Bundesbank believes that discontinuing the net purchases more rapidly and with a clearly
communicated  end-date  would  have  been  appropriate.  The  main  reason  I  say  that  is  that
purchasing sovereign bonds in the monetary union is something we have been viewing critically
for  a  long  time  anyway:  in  a  single  currency  area,  sovereign  bond  purchases  blur  the  very
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
important distinction between monetary policy and fiscal policy. The Eurosystem central banks
have now become the countries’ biggest creditors. That could ultimately lead to political pressure
being exerted on the Eurosystem to persist with the very loose monetary policy and low interest
rates for longer than would be appropriate with regard to price stability.
Low interest rates are designed to encourage consumers to save less and consume more for a
temporary period.
German  consumers  are,  in  actual  fact,  in  a  first-class  mood  for  spending.  It  is  true  that  the
propensity  to  spend,  as  measured  by  the  market  research  institute  Gesellschaft  für
Konsumforschung (GfK), has declined slightly of late, but it is still at a very high level.
This is due chiefly to the positive situation on the labour market and income trends in Germany,
which  are  also  being  favoured  by  the  very  accommodative  monetary  policy:  households’
disposable income went up by 2.8% in 2016 and by as much as 3.6% in the first half of 2017.
The number of people in employment is at an all-time high. The unemployment rate has fallen to
its  lowest  level  since  1991;  the  seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  rate  stood  at  5.6%  in
October.
In some industries and regions, enterprises are finding it increasingly difficult to fill vacancies.
The  shortage  of  labour  in  manufacturing  and  the  main  construction  sector  has  worsened
noticeably of late: the percentage of firms whose output is being hampered by a labour shortage
has climbed to its highest level since German reunification. This is a trend that is likely to go on
intensifying as demographic change takes hold.
Against  this  backdrop,  it  may  be  somewhat  surprising  that  wage  growth  has  so  far  not  been
stronger in Germany.
The increasing scarcity of labour would normally suggest that wage growth should be stronger.
Obviously, countervailing factors are at play here.
One  of  the  main  factors  dampening  wage  growth  is  net  immigration  of  labour  from
other  EU  countries. Another  is  that  it  is  evident  from  pay  negotiations  that  the  labour  side  is
setting somewhat different priorities than it did earlier. Employees are now placing greater value
on more flexible or fewer working hours, for example.
The most recent collective bargaining agreement for the railways, for instance, gave employees
a choice between 2.6% more pay or six additional days of holiday: more than half (56%) opted for
more holiday.
Given a continuing decline in unemployment for the coming years, the pace of wage growth may
nevertheless be expected to accelerate.
But public finances, too, are benefiting from positive economic growth and low rates of interest.
Demographic change is not yet making itself felt here, especially since it is still those born in the
post-war era in years that tended to have lower birth rates who are now entering retirement.
The aggregate general government budget is running a surplus, and that will remain the case in
the coming years, as long as the new Federal Government does not embark on a noticeably
more expansionary fiscal course.
The government debt-to-GDP ratio, which went up to more than 80% of GDP in the wake of the
financial crisis, has now gone down to 66%. It could therefore soon, in a few years’ time, fall
below the reference value of 60% enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regrettably, the majority of euro area countries are unable to claim that about themselves. In
France and Spain, government debt stands at almost 100% of annual economic output, with the
figure for Italy being as high as over 130%.
Debt-to-GDP  ratios  provide  no  more  than  limited  information  on  the  sustainability  of  public
finances,  however.  That  is  because,  behind  explicit  government  debt,  there  is  concealed
government debt in the form of pay-as-you-go social security funds, principally in pension and
long-term  care  insurance.  But  the  pension  rights  of  civil  servants  also  represent  implicit
government debt if no reserves are formed for them.
Experts estimate that the German government’s implicit debt is more than twice as high as its
explicit debt. These are burdens that we are shifting onto the taxpayers of tomorrow and the day
after tomorrow. With this in mind, a further reduction in debt is especially important.
3. How demographic change affects potential output
Demographic change is not just an issue of interest for public finances, however.
It will also act as a drag on the medium to long-term growth prospects of the German economy.
The declining population and rising average age of the labour force will cause the potential growth
rate to shrink.
An  economy’s  potential  output  is  determined  by  its  inputs  of  labour  and  capital  as  well  as
production  technology.  Potential  output  is  understood  to  mean  the  highest  possible  level  of
economic  output  that  can  be  achieved  with  a  given  level  of  technology  using  the  available
production factors of labour and capital at normal capacity.
The percentage change in potential output therefore denotes an economy’s trend rate of growth.
I  am  telling  this  even  though  I  expect  you  will  have  already  heard  about  it  in  one  of  your
economics lectures, but you know, you can’t always remember everything ...
Graphically, this change is usually illustrated as follows: a line shows trend GDP growth over
time, while actual GDP sometimes grows faster and sometimes slower, which is shown by a
cyclical curve along the trend line. If the potential output growth rate increases, the line becomes
steeper, and if it decreases, the line runs flatter. The latter is what happens when demographic
change takes hold.
Bundesbank economists estimate that demographically-induced trends in the potential number
of hours worked are a major factor in the slowdown in potential growth: from a mean of almost
1¼% over the last five years to just over ¾% in the first half of the 2020s.
Now  that  doesn’t  sound  all  that  remarkable,  but  in  the  long  run,  it  will  make  a  considerable
difference  to  output,  particularly  since  most  other  industrial  countries,  not  to  mention  the
emerging market economies, will be running at significantly higher trend growth rates over the
coming decades.
According to a long-term OECD forecast for 42 economies, by 2060 not a single country will be
growing at a slower pace than Germany, and this is mainly down to the demographically-induced
decline in the number of hours worked. Per capita growth looks somewhat better because of the
shrinking population, but here again, Germany ranks no better than mid-table compared with its
European peers, according to the OECD.
Our economists’ estimate of potential output I mentioned just now is based, then, on the best
possible forecast of how the labour supply will develop in the years ahead.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Notable shifts in the composition of the labour supply will be evident within the space of just a few
years.
The working-age population is a relevant factor for determining potential output. This labour force
potential is defined relatively broadly, with ages ranging between 15 and 74.
Depending  on  which  net  immigration  flows  one  assumes,  this  potential  will  pass  its  peak
between 2020 and 2023.
Given cumulative net immigration of 2.5 million people, the labour force potential in 2025 will be
roughly as high as today’s.
The age structure will have changed considerably, however.
The number of people aged between 60 and 74 will have risen by more than three million, but the
number of employed people will have increased by just one million, assuming that labour force
participation in this age cohort remains unchanged.
By  contrast,  the  45  to  54  age  cohort  will  have  fallen  by  3½  million.  Because  labour  force
participation  is  very  high  in  this  age  group,  the  decrease  will  push  down  the  labour  force  to
almost the same degree. This can be blamed on the decline in the birth rate in the 1960s that I
mentioned earlier, so it has long been expected.
Another population decline has been forecast, this time in the under-35 age cohort, though much
of this particular effect will be offset by immigration.
Migrants  tend,  on  average,  to  be  far  younger  than  the  existing  population.  One  out  of  two
migrants since 2010 has been aged between 20 and 30 years old.
The strong influx of refugees to Germany in 2015 even caused the average age of the population
in Germany to fall for the first time since reunification: from 44 years and four months to 44 years
and three months.
Labour force participation will presumably continue to rise in certain age groups. Increasing the
statutory retirement age should therefore see to it that the actual age when people retire goes up
as well. The proportion of physically demanding jobs is also on the wane, so older people will be
able to stay in work for longer. The “flexi retirement” scheme launched this year is also making it
easier for retirees to earn additional income and thus encouraging them to keep working.
Yet  another  area  offering  potential  is  the  participation  of  women  in  the  labour  force,  where
improved conditions for balancing work and family commitments have already sent participation
levels sharply higher. The difference between the ratios of women and men in employment has
more than halved within the space of two decades, and the higher the level of education, the
narrower the gap between women and men.
However,  there  continues  to  be  a  much  higher  proportion  of  women  who  work  part-time
compared to men. Almost half of all women work part-time, compared with just one in ten men.
Because  age  cohorts  with  a  stronger  tendency  to  work  part-time  will  be  larger,  the  average
weekly working hours per employed person are likely to decline slightly by 2025. The potential
number  of  hours  worked,  then,  is  likely  to  be  somewhat  lower,  and  this  will  likewise  drag  on
potential growth in the German economy.
The  projected  potential  growth  rate  of  just  over  ¾%  will  originate  primarily  from  productivity
growth,  where  it  is  assumed  that  labour  productivity  will  move  at  a  less  dynamic  pace  as
demographic  change  makes  itself  felt.  This  means  that  productivity  growth  will  mainly  be
propelled by technological progress.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
One factor to be considered when it comes to labour productivity is that physical and cognitive
capacities deteriorate after a certain age, though this can be offset by experience. As the saying
goes: young people run faster, but seniors know the shortcuts.
Another  factor  is  that  as  society  ages,  parts  of  the  value  added  chain  will  shift  from  goods
production to the services sector, moving chiefly into the long-term care sector.
This also tends to dampen productivity growth, however, because experience has shown that
service providers are less productive than the production sector.
Of  course,  potential  output  depends  not  just  on  the  number  of  hours  worked  and  labour
productivity, but also on capital investment, and at the end of the day, demographic trends also
impact on fixed capital formation.
So  the  investment  restraint  observed  in  recent  years  might  have  something  to  do  with  the
impending demographic change.
Put more simply: why should a company invest in new machinery if, looking ahead, it won’t have
the employees it needs to operate this machinery? And wouldn’t it make more sense to invest in
regions with more vibrant economies where the relevant end customers can also be found?
It’s  also  worth  considering  the  German  economy’s  high  current  account  surplus  in  a
demographic context.
At €260 billion, Germany ran the biggest current account surplus in the world last year.
This was primarily down to the large surplus in the goods account. And yet you can also interpret
a current account surplus as a savings surplus, as saving up abroad.
And for a rapidly ageing society like ours, that makes perfect sense: assets accumulated abroad
by way of a current account surplus enable the German economy to share in what are potentially
more dynamic economic developments in other countries.
Those external assets can be run down at a later point in time as more and more employees
retire and draw on their savings. This is how Germans are providing for their old age.
But still, demographic trends can’t explain a current account surplus of over 8% of GDP. That
needs to be stated quite clearly.
Other forces have been driving the surplus higher in recent years, above all the much lower oil
price, which has diminished the cost of imports.
The  jury  is  out  on  the  extent  to  which  Germany  should  embrace  an  activist  policy  stance  to
reduce this surplus. There have been repeated calls from abroad for Germany to adopt a more
expansionary fiscal or wage policy, but Germany regularly sweeps them aside.
The Bundesbank also sees little logic in them, particularly since simulations show that measures
designed  to  bolster  demand  in  Germany  would  have  negligibly  small  spill-over  effects  on
countries saddled with chronic current account deficits.
A  more  prudent  course  of  action  would  be  to  introduce  policies  that  make  Germany  more
investment-friendly. If businesses had incentives to boost domestic investment, this would act to
temper the current account surplus, while at the same time increasing potential growth.
4. Consequences for economic policy
Which  brings  me  to  the  concluding  question:  what  can  policymakers  actually  do  to  stem  the
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
decline in potential growth driven by demographic change?
As I pointed out earlier, improving the framework conditions for investment is a good place to
start.  Here  I  am  thinking  in  particular  about  digitalisation,  which  holds  many  a  promise  –
especially  in  the  face  of  demographic  change.  As  far  as  digital  infrastructure  goes,  some
countries are way ahead of us.
According to OECD figures, in 2016 only 2% of all broad-band connections in Germany were
based on glass fibre technology, while the average was 20% in the OECD countries with the
figures  in  Japan  and  Korea  even  exceeding  70%.  The  demographically-induced  decline  in  the
potential  labour  force  can  be  counteracted  by  measures  to  further  increase  labour  force
participation.
Incentives to stop working early, such as the option to retire on a full pension at 63, are no longer
in keeping with the times and should be phased out. At the same time, employers have to create
suitable conditions and lay the right groundwork to enable people to actually work for longer. This
includes measures for promoting health management or providing an appropriate workplace, for
instance. We also have to commit to a culture of lifelong learning so that people can adapt more
quickly and more successfully to an ever changing environment.
This would make it easier for employees who lose their job at 50 plus to find new employment. In
times  where  specialised  labour  is  in  short  supply,  older  employees  should  be  held  in  higher
esteem anyway – and I’m not just saying that because I am one of them.
The participation of women in the labour force can be increased by further improving conditions
for balancing work and family commitments. Expanding the provision of all-day schools across
the country would enable more women to work full time.
But that’s not the only reason why investment in education is essential. When, in future, fewer
young people join the workforce, it will be all the more important for them to be trained as well as
possible. For this, we need an education system that meets high standards and gives young
people the opportunity to realise their full potential.
By choosing to attend an internationally renowned business school, you, of course, have already
heeded Benjamin Franklin’s advice: "An investment in knowledge always pays the best interest."
But  this  does  not  just  apply  to  investment  in  academic  training.  Studies  have  shown  that
educational achievement in Germany is still closely correlated with social background, and this
also  has  a  negative  impact  on  subsequent  employment  prospects.  Because  educational
achievement in later life is often decided to a significant degree at the pre-school stage, society
as a whole would reap the benefits of investing in education for infants and pre-school students.
Education also plays a key role in the integration of immigrants.
But immigration is certainly not the answer to our demographic problems. Yet, it helps to curb the
decline in the potential labour force. That is why a systematic approach to attract labour from
abroad with the qualifications that are needed here would go a long way towards cushioning the
impact of an ageing society on the labour market.
To sum up, it is essential that the German economy’s current excellent condition does not blind
us to the major challenges that lie ahead.
The demographic factor will increasingly take a toll on growth and welfare. Softening this blow, at
the very least, will be a key task over the coming decades.
Thank you for your attention.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
