Makoto Sakurai: Economic activity, prices, and monetary policy in
Japan
Speech by Mr Makoto Sakurai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting
with business leaders, Hakodate, 18 October 2017.
I. Economic Activity at Home and Abroad: Recent Developments and the Outlook
 A. Overseas Economies
Let me start with developments in overseas economies.
Overseas economies have continued to grow at a moderate pace. Trade activity was sluggish
globally following the financial crisis of 2008, but has recovered since the second half of 2016,
providing support for the recent growth in the global economy. In many countries, business fixed
investment has been increasing, accompanied by an improvement in corporate profits. Private
consumption has also been solid against the background of an improvement in the employment
and  income  situation.  Global  financial  markets  have  responded  temporarily  to  the  increasing
seriousness of the situation regarding North Korea, but so far, there have been only limited signs
of investors’ risk aversion.
Let me elaborate on developments by region. The U.S. and European economies have continued
to  recover  firmly.  Exports  have  been  increasing  moderately  as  global  trade  activity  has
recovered.  Private  consumption  has  been  on  a  trend  increase  against  the  background  of  an
improvement in the employment and income situation. Meanwhile, an upturn in business fixed
investment  has  continued,  accompanied  by  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits.  Although
economic  activity  in  the  United  States  is  likely  to  be  temporarily  slowed  by  the  effects  of  the
recent powerful hurricanes, experience suggests that the economy will maintain its momentum
toward recovery, underpinned in part by demand for reconstruction. The European economy has
been  experiencing  a  further  increase  recently  in  its  cyclical  momentum  toward  recovery,  in  a
situation  where  uncertainties  have  been  easing  following  events  such  as  elections  in  major
countries in the region.
Let me turn to emerging economies. The Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth
on  the  whole.  The  momentum  for  growth  in  fixed  asset  investment  in  the  private  sector  has
slowed, due in part to the cumulative effects of monetary tightening, but public investment has
maintained high growth under fiscal policy conducted in a timely manner. Exports have been on a
pick-up trend, and private consumption has been resilient against the backdrop of a favorable
employment and income situation. In the NIEs and ASEAN countries, with an uptrend in exports,
domestic demand has been resilient, on the back of an improvement in business and household
sentiment and the effects of economic stimulus measures in these countries. A recovery trend in
commodity-exporting economies has been apparent recently, partly reflecting a bottoming out of
commodity prices.
In  terms  of  the  outlook,  moderate  growth  in  overseas  economies  as  a  whole  is  projected  to
continue.  Advanced  economies  are  likely  to  continue  growing  steadily,  and  a  recovery  in
emerging  economies  is  expected  to  take  hold  on  the  back  of  the  steady  growth  in  advanced
economies and the effects of policy measures taken by emerging economies. According to the
October  2017 World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  released  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund
(IMF),  the  global  growth  projection  represents  an  upward  revision  from  the  previous  estimate
made in July 2017; global growth is now expected to rise from 3.2 percent in 2016 to 3.6 percent
in 2017 and 3.7 percent in 2018, picking up pace.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Needless  to  say,  the  outlook  is  not  free  from  uncertainty.  For  example,  particular  uncertainty
seems to remain in the United States over economic policy management, including tax reform. In
a situation where further normalization of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve is in sight, the
impact of U.S. interest rate hikes on the global flow of funds is an issue which also calls for close
attention. As massive capital inflows have been observed in some emerging economies since
2016, there is the risk of an increasing impact should there be a reversal of funds. Moreover,
geopolitical risks have been heightening, including with regard to North Korea. Negotiations on
the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union (EU) and the effects they will have are also
risks to the outlook. In the longer run, I believe that particular attention must continue to be paid to
the  growing  protectionist  mood  of  recent  years.  The  establishment  of  supply  chains  through
trade and direct investment  has  long  been  driving  global  economic  growth.  If  the  protectionist
mood  gains  traction,  this  will  limit  trade  and  direct  investment,  making  it  necessary  to  rebuild
existing supply chains. This could cause significant disruption to the global economy and deprive
it  of  its  main  growth  engine.  Keeping  a  watchful  eye  on  these  uncertainties,  I  will  continue  to
carefully monitor overseas developments.
B. Recent Developments in Japan’s Economy
Next, I will discuss developments in Japan’s economy.
The economy is expanding moderately. Exports have continued on an increasing trend, reflecting
moderate growth in overseas economies. The implementation of the government’s large-scale
economic stimulus measures has made progress, and the synergy effects between monetary
and fiscal policies have become profound. A virtuous cycle operating from income to spending
has become stronger in both the corporate and household sectors, and economic growth is in
the  process  of  shifting  from  one  led  by  external  demand,  to  a  more  self-sustaining  one
accompanying a recovery in domestic demand. Improvements have been seen in wider sections
of the economy; from urban areas to regional areas, and from large firms to small firms. In this
way, I feel that the robustness of the economy has been further enhanced. The GDP growth rate
has increased for six consecutive quarters for the first time since 2006; the annualized rate of
average quarterly growth during this period marked relatively high growth of 1.7 percent, thereby
maintaining a significantly higher figure than the potential growth rate, which is estimated to be in
the range of 0.5-1.0 percent. This shows that the output gap — an indicator of the utilization of
capital  and  labor  —  has  clearly  improved.  This  consecutive  growth  for  several  quarters  also
seems to have steadily exerted a positive influence on household and business sentiment.
Looking at developments in detail, in the corporate sector, exports have followed an increasing
trend, particularly in automobile-related and capital goods. Corporate profits have been improving
markedly  since  the  second  half  of  2016.  According  to  the Financial  Statements  Statistics  of
Corporations by Industry, Quarterly (FSSC), the seasonally-adjusted ratio of current profits to
sales for all industries and enterprises reached the historically high level of 6.16 percent in the
April-June  quarter  of  2017.  Business  sentiment  has  also  been  improving.  In  the  Bank’s
September  2017 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan)  released  on
October 2, the diffusion index for business conditions for all industries and enterprises — the
proportion of firms responding that business conditions were “favorable” minus the proportion of
those responding that they were “unfavorable” — reached its highest level since 1991, when the
economy  was  experiencing  an  asset  bubble.  Improvements  in  economic  activity  have  been
observed in many regions and firm sizes, making it possible to conclude that the recovery has
been spreading across wider economic entities. I believe this is one of the salient characteristics
of the current economic expansion phase. In this situation, business fixed investment has been
on  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  mainly  in  investment  related  to  the  Olympic  Games  and  the
redevelopment of urban areas, and labor-saving and efficiency-improving investment to address
labor shortages. Firms planned to substantially increase their business fixed investment for fiscal
2017 compared with the plans they made in the previous fiscal year. The rate of increase was up
6.9 percent for all industries, including the financial industry, according to the September Tankan,
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  up  11.2  percent  for  major  firms  in  all  industries,  according  to  a  survey  conducted  by  the
Development Bank of Japan.
Let  us  turn  to  the  household  sector.  Labor  market  conditions  have  tightened  steadily,  as  the
number  of  employees  has  continued  to  increase.  The  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio
registered 1.52, exceeding the peak level observed during the bubble period, and reaching the
even  higher  level  seen  in  the  first  half  of  the  1970s.  The  unemployment  rate  is  currently  2.8
percent, which essentially represents a situation close to full employment. Wages of part-time
employees, which are responsive to labor market conditions, have risen markedly, but wages of
regular  employees  —  the  majority  of  employees  —  have  only  increased  moderately.  Private
consumption  has  increased  its  resilience  against  the  background  of  improvement  in  the
employment  and  income  situation.  This  resilience  seems  to  have  been  underpinned  by,  for
example, the replacement of durable goods, which consumers were encouraged to purchase by
a number of demand-boosting measures implemented following the financial crisis, including the
eco-point system for energy-efficient household electrical appliances. Private consumption has
also been supported by large-scale economic stimulus measures carried out last year to support
households,  such  as  lowering  employee  insurance  premiums.  As  seen  also  in  Hakodate,
consumption by foreign visitors to Japan — which has been on an uptrend in recent years — is
contributing to sales at retail stores and in the services sector, not only in urban areas but across
wider regions in Japan.
On this basis, from an overall perspective, despite the steady improvement evident in economic
activity as a whole, wages have been slow to recover. Some people suggest that this is due to
Japan’s  employment  practice,  which  places  importance  on  securing  jobs.  Firms  are  cautious
about raising regular employees’ wages because they are difficult to cut even during periods of
recession, and labor unions seem to be reluctant in general to demand sharp wage hikes, since
they  prioritize  stability  of  their  employment  in  the  long  run.  Moreover,  an  increase  in  the  labor
supply  in  recent  years  —  resulting  in  part  from  the  government’s  initiatives  to  promote  the
empowerment  of  women  and  the  elderly  —  has  been  another  factor  in  easing  any  upward
pressure  on  wages.  Especially,  in  practice,  considering  that  wages  paid  to  women  and  the
elderly tend to be low, my view is that firms facing a labor shortage have consequently been able
to obtain low-cost labor.
C. Outlook for Japan’s Economy
As  for  the  outlook,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  its  moderate  expansion,  mainly
supported  by  the  growth  in  overseas  economies  and  the  synergy  effects  between  monetary
easing measures and stimulative fiscal measures.
In  the  corporate  sector,  profits  are  projected  to  follow  an  increasing  trend  due  to  growth  in
demand at home and abroad. Exports are likely to maintain their increasing trend as global trade
activity  continues  to  recover.  Business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  continue  to  see  a
moderate  increase  on  the  back  of  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  accommodative
financial conditions.
As for the household sector, upward pressure on wages is likely to strengthen further with the
increase in demand for labor. Private consumption is expected to follow a moderate increasing
trend as there will continue to be replacement demand for durable goods, and the employment
and income situation will continue to improve.
In the light of these developments, the positive output gap is also expected to widen further, as
the economy is likely to continue growing at a relatively high pace above its potential.
II. Prices
A. The Current Situation of Prices
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Next, I will turn to price developments, an issue of much interest in Japan recently.
The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food
has increased to 0.7 percent. The rise in energy prices has contributed to the increase in the
CPI, against the background of a pick-up in crude oil prices since the spring of 2016. It must be
noted, however, that developments in the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy remain
relatively weak, with the year-on-year rate of change standing at 0.2 percent.
In a situation where wages are increasing, albeit moderately, firms are facing higher labor costs.
However, instead of directly passing on the cost increases to sales prices, most firms are trying
to absorb these increases by improving productivity. Among the initiatives they have adopted are:
(1)  streamlining  of  excessive  services  and 
including
discontinuation  of  late-night  business  and  reduction  of  parcel  delivery  time  slots;  (2)  more
efficient  reallocation  of  human  resources,  including  sending  staff  temporarily  to  different
departments when necessary, for example, from an administrative to an operational section; and
(3)  investment  in  labor-saving  and  efficiency-improving  machinery  and  equipment,  including
installment  of  self-checkout  machines,  full  automation  of  distribution  facilities,  and  adoption  of
online booking systems.
inefficient  business  procedures, 
Behind  firms’  reluctance  to  pass  on  cost  increases  to  sales  prices  is  the  fear  of  losing
customers. While this is not surprising given the highly competitive business environment they
are in, I believe that the following factors are responsible for further heightening this fear. First,
given  that  the  inflation  rate  has  remained  stable  at  an  extremely  low  level  for  the  past  few
decades, I believe firms have become increasingly afraid to raise prices because consumers are
not  accustomed  to  price  hikes,  or  because  firms  anticipate  a  negative  reaction  to  price  rises
from those consumers. And second, the widespread use of smartphones and the expansion of
e-commerce may have had an impact. Consumers can now easily refer to and compare a wide
range of information on prices at the press of a button, and purchase goods and services as
necessary,  even  from  a  distance.  I  believe  these  changes  have  increased  convenience  for
consumers  while,  at  the  same  time,  increasing  their  responsiveness  to  prices,  consequently
somewhat accelerating price competition among firms.
B. Outlook for Prices
That being said, I do not believe that firms will be able to avoid price hikes forever. Cost cutting
efforts  such  as  streamlining  of  business  processes  and  efficient  reallocation  of  human
resources have their limitations. It will gradually become difficult for firms to absorb increases in
labor  costs  even  if  they  are  reluctant  to  raise  prices.  In  this  situation,  competing  firms  in  the
same environment are likely to be faced with similar limitations. Therefore, I believe there will be
cases of a price hike starting at an individual firm, followed by hikes at competing firms. Once
price hikes actually start to become common, consumers are, to some extent, likely to accept
increases  in  prices  as  a  matter  of  course.  Subsequently,  there  will  be  even  greater  room  for
firms to raise prices. Employees will then start to demand a raise in wages to reflect these price
increases. Under such a cyclical mechanism, the uptrend in the inflation rate is likely to gradually
strengthen toward the 2 percent price stability target.
It is difficult to predict precisely when such a cyclical mechanism will start to operate. Having said
that, however, I would like to point out that some firms, in the transportation and food service
industries for example, have begun to raise prices due to increasing labor costs. There are also
frequent news reports that more firms are considering raising prices in the near future. While the
situation may differ largely by industry, my view is that, in general, the momentum toward price
hikes is starting to increase. Moreover, I feel that the perception of the general public toward price
hikes has gradually become more positive recently, as reflected in major rises in the price of
stocks  of  firms  that  have  announced  price  hikes.  In  other  words,  given  the  evidence  of
successful cases of price increases, more people have begun to think that firms do not always
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
lose customers by raising the price of the goods and services they offer. Consumers might be
gradually showing their understanding of the situation firms are placed in, hearing more frequent
news reports of labor shortages.
In sum, despite the relatively weak price developments at present, a cyclical mechanism toward
price increases is likely to operate going forward, as labor market conditions tighten further with
improvements in economic activity. There are signs of such a mechanism working, and in my
judgment, a process toward price increases has been evolving steadily.
III. Monetary Policy
A. Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control
In September 2016, the Bank introduced QQE with Yield Curve Control as a new framework for
strengthening monetary easing. The framework consists of the two components of an inflation-
overshooting commitment and yield curve control.
Under the inflation-overshooting commitment, the Bank commits itself to continuing to expand
the monetary base until the observed year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, for all items less
fresh food, exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable
manner.  For  people  to  regard  a  rise  in  prices  of  around  2  percent  every  year  as  a  matter  of
course, I believe it is important that the Bank shows such strong commitment and that people
actually experience an inflation rate of above 2 percent.
Under yield curve control, the Bank facilitates the formation of short- and long-term interest rates
that are considered most appropriate in light of the 2 percent price stability target. In the Bank’s
current  guideline  for  market  operations,  the  short-term  policy  interest  rate  is  set  at  minus  0.1
percent and the target level for yields on 10-year Japanese government bonds (JGBs) is set at
around 0 percent. Since the introduction of yield curve control a year ago, short- and long-term
interest rates have thus far been maintained at levels consistent with the guideline for market
operations. Meanwhile, with the shift in the Bank’s main operating target from quantity to interest
rates, I believe that the following points have been confirmed. First, the amount of the Bank’s JGB
purchases  varies  according  to  financial  market  conditions  at  the  time  and  the  progress  in  its
cumulative purchases of JGBs. And second, as a result of this, the sustainability of the Bank’s
policy framework has increased.
B. Future Conduct of Monetary Policy
At present, price developments are relatively weak, and the inflation rate is fairly distant from the
2 percent price stability target. The Bank should face this fact with sincerity. Nevertheless, as I
discussed earlier, Japan’s economy has been improving solidly and the process toward price
increases has been evolving steadily. When long-term economic growth potential is increasing
and people’s views on prices are changing, the real interest rate level that is considered to be
neutral  to  economic  activity  —  the  natural  rate  of  interest  —  will  rise  and  the  observed  real
interest rates will decrease. This, in turn, is expected to further enhance the effects of monetary
easing. Taking these points into account, I believe that it is important that the Bank, for the time
being, continues to firmly pursue powerful monetary easing under the current policy framework.
Recently, some have come to believe that the price stability target of 2 percent is too high, due in
part to improvements in economic activity. I, however, am of the opinion that the Bank should not
readily change the 2 percent price stability target, because this target was set after giving due
consideration to domestic and overseas circumstances. Let me elaborate on this point. First, the
CPI  has  a  statistical  tendency  to  assert  a  higher  inflation  rate  than  the  inflation  that  people
actually experience. Therefore, in order to ensure that people actually experience price stability,
the  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  should  be  sufficiently  positive.  Second,  the  room  for  monetary
policy responses is not symmetrical on the upside and downside, and there is relatively limited
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
scope for responding to deflation, compared with inflation, because it is difficult for the Bank to
lower interest rates to a level substantially below zero. That is why it is considered desirable,
under normal circumstances, to ensure that the inflation rate be positive, to a certain extent. And
third, targeting inflation at 2 percent is a global standard shared by major advanced economies.
Pursuing the same rate of inflation at 2 percent will contribute to the stability of foreign exchange
rates in the long run, as well as price stability.
IV. Expansion of the Economy’s Supply Capacity
I have pointed out various factors behind the delay in improvements in wages and prices. To
summarize,  I  consider  one  of  the  major  reasons  behind  the  delay  to  be  the  expansion  of  the
economy’s  supply  capacity  caused  by  an  increase  in  the  labor  supply  and  by  firms’  efforts
toward increasing productivity. I would like to elaborate on this, because it is particularly important
in considering the outlook for economic activity and prices in Japan.
Starting  with  labor  supply,  the  labor  force  participation  rate  in  Japan  rose  by  1.8  percentage
points  over  the  five  years  to August  2017.  Over  the  same  period,  the  size  of  the  labor  force
increased by 1.92 million, and this accounts for nearly 70 percent of the 2.82 million increase in
the number of employed persons. The trend in the labor force participation rate started to rise
markedly from around 2012. Indeed, the growth in labor force participation was remarkably rapid,
considering  the  downward  pressure  on  the  participation  rate  stemming  from  an  increasingly
aging  population.  This  reflects  various  structural  changes  in  the  economy  resulting  from,  for
example,  measures  to  promote  the  empowerment  of  women  and  the  elderly,  including  the
provision of child-rearing and nursing care facilities, as well as extending the retirement age or
abolishing traditional retirement systems amid the increase in life expectancy. I believe that these
structural changes have eased the upward pressure on wages and prices by providing additional
labor force to firms facing labor shortages.
Japan’s productivity has shown relatively high growth in recent years, compared with other major
advanced  countries,  as  reported  for  example  by  a  U.S.  private  institute,  although  productivity
figures should be regarded as being subject to a considerable margin of error because of their
large measurement bias. It has been said that Japan’s productivity is low, but this could also be
taken to mean merely that there is large room for improvement. As I have already mentioned,
most  firms  are  currently  trying  to  improve  productivity,  and  my  assessment  of  the  current
situation in Japan is that, due to labor shortages, productivity is growing sharply to catch up with
other countries.
Naturally, such an expansion in supply capacity raises the economy’s long-term growth potential.
Enhancing growth potential is an extremely important issue for Japan, which is facing a decline in
population. A fall in growth potential can lead, for example, to concerns about fiscal sustainability
and  to  restraints  in  firms’  and  households’  spending  due  to  anxiety  about  their  long-term
economic  outlook.  In  this  regard,  although  recent  developments  in  supply  capacity  may  exert
downward pressure on wages and prices in the short run, they will definitely bring positive effects
to the economy as a whole. I believe that the recent GDP growth — which was positive for six
consecutive quarters — is attributable not merely to cyclical factors but also to these structural
changes in the economy. The Bank, for its part, does not focus solely on raising prices. I believe
that it is essential to achieve price stability while the virtuous cycle in the economy continues to
operate and the quality of people’s lives improves. A joint statement released by the government
and the Bank in 2013 stated that they aim “to overcome deflation early and achieve sustainable
economic growth with price stability.” My assessment of recent developments in the economy is
that they are in line with such an objective.
Even if we focus on how wages and prices are affected by the increase in supply capacity, I do
not think that it necessarily exerts a negative effect in the long run. As I explained earlier, there is
a natural limit to the rise in the labor force participation rate, the streamlining of firms’ business
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
processes, and the efficient reallocation of human resources. Therefore, the downward pressure
on wages and prices resulting from such efforts will dissipate eventually. Let me also note that, in
the long run, there are mechanisms through which an expansion in supply capacity leads to an
increase in wages and prices. First, firms’ expectations of higher profits and a rise in households’
permanent  income  stimulates  the  demand  side  of  the  economy,  such  as  business  fixed
investment  and  private  consumption.  Second,  when  firms’  long-term  outlook  for  the  business
environment starts to improve, they are likely to shift their stance toward raising wages. Third,
since the rate of growth in labor productivity corresponds to the rate of increase in real wages in
the long run, a rise in productivity also exerts upward pressure on wages. And fourth, an increase
in  the  economy’s  long-term  growth  potential  leads  to  a  rise  in  the  natural  rate  of  interest,
enhancing  the  effects  of  accommodative  monetary  policy  measures.  Given  these  points,  it  is
likely that, as time passes, the long-term positive effects of an increase in supply capacity will
gradually outweigh the short-term negative effects on wages and prices. In other words, although
an expansion of the economy’s supply capacity may delay rises in wages and prices, I do not
think that it will hold them back for any protracted period.
In  my  view,  therefore,  Japan’s  economy  is  currently  experiencing  adjustments  arising  from
positive structural changes. There is no need to be unduly pessimistic simply on account of the
current low growth rates in wages and prices. Rather, I personally find the current state of the
economy  to  be  very  promising,  since  both  demand  and  supply  are  improving  in  a  balanced
manner, and developments in wages and prices are steadily making progress toward increases.
What is crucial in this situation is not to hinder these positive developments. To this end, I think
that it is important that the Bank continues to pursue powerful monetary easing under the current
framework for monetary policy. At the same time, I hope to see continued progress in the various
initiatives and efforts by the government and firms toward strengthening the economy’s growth
potential, including structural reforms.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
