Peter  Praet:  Maintaining  price  stability  with  unconventional
monetary policy measures
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
SUERF - The European Money and Finance Forum Conference "Globalisation Dynamics - EU
and US perspectives", New York City, 11 October 2017.
 *The text of this speech is broadly the same as my remarks at the MMF Monetary and Financial
Policy Conference, in London, on 2 October 2017*
The euro area continues to experience a solid, broad-based and resilient recovery. Deflationary
risks have disappeared and some measures of underlying inflation have ticked up over recent
months. But overall inflation developments, despite the solid growth, have remained subdued.
Accordingly, while we remain confident that inflation developments will eventually return to levels
below,  but  close  to,  2%,  our  medium-term  objective,  the  evidence  still  shows  insufficient
progress  towards  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  towards  those  levels.  Such
“sustained  adjustment”  is  the  principal  contingency  that  has  guided  and  will  be  guiding  the
introduction and withdrawal of our asset purchase programme (APP) and, indirectly, of all the
main components of our present policy.
In my remarks today, I would like to outline the central role monetary policy plays in underpinning
this recovery and to discuss the main mechanisms by which our measures have impacted on
the economy. I will start from a brief overview of the monetary policy toolkit that the Governing
Council has adopted over the last years, and I will sketch out the elements that are most relevant
for the Governing Council’s deliberations about the calibration of our policy measures. I will then
highlight  the  key  channels  by  which  this  toolkit  transmits  to  financial  conditions.  Finally,  I  will
focus  on  the  impact  channels  of  the  APP,  which  plays  a  central  role  among  the  policy
instruments.
The ECB’s monetary policy toolkit
Over the last three years, the Governing Council has had to take bold measures to maintain price
stability. The context in which we launched this package of measures, in June 2014, was one in
which a sustained period of disinflation could have morphed into one of outright deflation. The
Governing Council had to move beyond its conventional policy instruments and instead deploy a
set  of  unconventional  tools  that  were  tailored  to  the  specific  challenges  of  that  time.  The  first
challenge  related  to  the  effective  lower  bound  on  interest  rates.  The  leeway  to  cut  policy-
controlled short-term interest rates was insufficient to provide the degree of accommodation that
was necessary to support the economy and fight off the threats to our objective. The second
challenge related to a dysfunctional monetary transmission. Bank intermediation was significantly
impaired, which had caused the transmission of policy stimulus to the broader economy to be
too slow and uncertain.
The  unconventional  tools  were  designed  to  act  both  on  the  quasi-risk-free  yield  curve  and  on
bank lending margins. By “yield curve” I mean the term structure that we observe in the money
market for overnight indexed interest rate swaps (OIS), as well as the curves in the markets for
the  national  sovereign  debts,  which  traditionally  constitute  an  important  benchmark  for  pricing
credit to the entire economy. Due to this benchmark function, the level and shape of the yield
curve  are  crucial  determinants  of  prices  of  a  whole  range  of  longer-term  financial  assets,
including  those  most  closely  tied  to  economic  activity,  such  as  bank  lending  rates,  corporate
bonds  and  mortgages.  Our  policy  to  influence  intermediate  and  long-term  yields  has  been
instrumental in bringing the whole structure of credit conditions for households and companies to
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
the accommodative levels necessary to arrest disinflation and strengthen the recovery.
By now, the OIS curve at maturities of ten years and above is more than half a percentage point
below  the  levels  observed  before  the  initiation  of  our  measures  in  June  2014  (Chart  1).  For
sovereign yields, the drop over this period was even more pronounced, amounting to around one
percentage point for maturities at or above ten years. While financial market developments over
this time period were also impacted by a host of other factors that go beyond ECB monetary
policy,  empirical  analysis  indeed  ascribes  the  bulk  of  the  decline  in  longer-term  yields  to  our
measures.  Moreover, it indicates that the monetary impulse has transmitted not only to money-
market  and  sovereign  yield  curves,  but  also  to  an  array  of  other  market  segments,  including
financial and non-financial corporate bonds, as well as equity markets (Chart 2).
1
As  a  complement  to  the  impact  of  our  measures  on  yield  curves,  our  targeted  longer-term
refinancing operations (“TLTROs”) were specifically designed to compress bank lending rates –
a key intermediate objective of the policy toolkit, given the important role that bank credit plays in
financing  the  euro  area  economy.  Through  a  number  of  mechanisms,  the  TLTROs  have
successfully bid down the level of bank lending rates on loans to households and companies,
2
while preserving banks’ overall margins.
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
For instance, the cost of borrowing for non-financial corporations, at the euro area average, are
now more than one percentage point lower than before the first TLTROs were adopted in June
2014 (Chart 3). What is more, the introduction of the TLTROs was followed by a steep intra-euro
area convergence in bank lending rates. That is: countries in which the economic recovery had
previously been lagging behind the euro area average benefitted from particularly strong declines
in bank lending rates.
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  toolkit  has  formed  the  backbone  of  ECB  monetary  policy  for  almost  three  years,  which
initiated a pronounced expansion of our balance sheet (Chart 4). At the same time, the package
had to be adjusted at times in response to the evolving situation. In particular, such adjustments
became necessary to counteract the sequence of external shocks that, between summer 2015
and summer 2016, have created headwinds for the euro area economy, thereby slowing down
the firming of its recovery.
Moreover,  in  March  2016,  the  Governing  Council  also  reactivated  the  TLTROs  to  prevent  the
market  turmoil  that  prevailed  at  the  start  of  2016  from  undermining  the  progress  that  had
previously materialised with regard to bank intermediation. As bank lending conditions normalised
subsequently at a relatively quick pace, the planned TLTROs were let to run their course. While
credit drawn by banks under this facility will be outstanding for the next three to four years, the
facility itself is not an active instrument today.
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  a  consequence,  while  all  the  instruments  –  including  indeed  the  credit  extended  to  banks
under the previous TLTROs – interact to determine the stance prevailing today, the main source
of easing at present comes from the interaction between the APP, the moderately negative short-
term interest rate and the forward guidance on both these policy tools.
Our  forward  guidance  clarifies  the  relationship  between  our  two  main  instruments.  It  sets  the
conditionality  that  governs  them  and  the  sequencing  of  their  phasing  out.  It  also  provides
information  about  their  expected  life.  With  the  last  DFR  reduction  in  March  2016,  the  APP
became  the  margin  along  which  the  Governing  Council  can  still  ease  policy  to  a  meaningful
degree if needed. Keeping policy rates at their present level for the entire life of the APP is an
enabling condition for the purchases to exert their full impact. This is why we have coordinated
the  guidance  about  our  key  interest  rates  and  our  asset  purchases  very  carefully  and,  since
March  2016,  we  have  consistently  communicated  that  our  key  policy  rates  are  expected  “to
remain at their present levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net
asset purchases.”
The  appropriate  calibration  of  this  set  of  instruments  is  of  course  always  a  highly  complex
exercise  and  requires  a  broad  range  of  analytical  inputs  and  policy  judgement.  It  works
backward: from a desired medium term inflation outlook – one which is most consistent with the
objective and with its numerical clarification that the Governing Council announced in May 2003 –
to the broad financing conditions that can support that outlook, to the calibration of the Governing
Council’s  instruments  that  can  foster  those  financing  conditions.  Concretely,  these  exercises
start from the Governing Council’s assessment of the prospects for inflation to return to levels
that are close to 2% by a meaningful time frame and with a reasonable degree of confidence. If
the prospects for achieving that desired outcome are too weak, the Governing Council will form a
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
view on the degree of accommodation that is necessary to make that outcome less uncertain.
Working backwards, this exercise is designed to promote the level and shape of the yield curve
that, according to past regularities, can be expected to deliver the requisite amount of stimulus,
taking into account the endogenous adjustment of the whole spectrum of market conditions –
including bank lending rates, corporate bonds, mortgages, as well as the foreign exchange rate –
to the yield curve.
But the decision process is never mechanical. All along, the Governing Council combines the
indications  coming  from  models  and  past  empirical  regularities  with  its  own  judgement.  In
engaging in this layer of judgemental deliberations, our intent is to come to a firm assessment of
the  balance  between  the  likely  efficacy  of  our  measures  and  their  potential  costs  in  term  of
financial distortions.
How do our main policy instruments work?
Ensuring an appropriate interest rate environment throughout the yield curve is instrumental in
fostering the financing conditions that are most conducive to our objective. A central bank can
seek to influence the level and shape of the yield curve by acting on two components of the long-
term  interest  rates:  the  expectations  component  and  the  term  premium.  The  expectations
component  reflects  market  expectations  of  the  future  path  of  the  policy-controlled  short-term
interest rates. All else equal, a path that is lower and shallower tends to produce a lower level of
long-term yields and a flatter curve. The term premium reflects the excess return that an investor
demands  as  a  compensation  for  holding  a  bond  with  a  long,  say  ten-year,  residual  maturity
relative to rolling over a short-term bill for ten years. Locking themselves into a long-dated fixed
income investment for a period of time is not equivalent to rolling over a short-term investment for
the same period, because holding a long-dated bond exposes the investor to the risk that interest
rates may increase unexpectedly during the holding period. An unexpected increase in interest
rates  causes  a  loss  on  the  portfolio.  So,  the  term  premium  –  the  excess  return  –  is  typically
positive: it compensates investors for taking on such interest rate (or duration) risk.
How does the interplay between the APP and our short-term interest rate policy enter this simple
logic? Suppose the level and shape of the yield curve prevailing at a given point in time is judged
to be inconsistent with a set of financing conditions that are sufficiently accommodative to foster
a return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. How could the two
main instruments of current policy be deployed to change this state of affairs in an environment
in which the short-term interest rate cannot be lowered meaningfully?
Simplifying a great deal, one could say that the forward guidance on short-term interest rates –
our stated expectation that the ECB’s key interest rates will remain “at their present levels for an
extended  period  of  time”  –  should  be  calibrated  in  a  way  to  anchor  the  short-to-medium
maturities  of  the  yield  curve  –  those  portions  most  sensitive  to  short-term  interest  rate
expectations and, therefore, to forward guidance – around levels that are sufficiently steady and
low. In this respect, a mildly negative DFR has proved to be particularly powerful in controlling
and anchoring these maturities, which are key to pricing bank credit in the euro area. The notion
that  zero  was  not  the  effective  lower  bound  has  exerted  additional  flattening  pressure  on  the
short-to-intermediate maturities of the yield curve, those to which banks tend to index loans with
adjustable interest rates. This has amplified the reach-out potential of the stimulus relative to a
situation in which our policy rates had been reduced to levels no lower than zero.  Consistent
with this mechanism, the OIS forward curve underwent a striking downward shift and flattening,
once we launched our monetary policy package in mid-2014, especially in the short-to-medium
segment  of  the  curve,  which  is  arguably  most  indicative  of  investors’  short-term  rate
expectations (Chart 5).
3
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  APP  applies  further  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates  along  the  curve,  mainly  by
compressing the term premium. This is supported, for instance, by decompositions of long-term
interest rates based on term-structure models indicating that the downward impact in the run-up
to and around the announcement of APP mainly reflected a compression of term premia (Chart
6).  How  does  the APP  influence  the  term  premium?  The APP  extracts  duration  risk  from  the
market. Markets see duration risk as a potential source of portfolio losses, so they want to hedge
against it, and the compensation for hedging is precisely what we call the term premium. If this
premium is high, it makes long-term borrowing more expensive than short-term borrowing. If, at
times of disinflation and weak growth, long-term borrowing is to be made more affordable so as
to promote investment and durable consumption, then the central bank can try to absorb part of
the duration risk that otherwise would have to be held by private investors. This can be done by
purchasing long-dated bonds, as the ECB did under its APP. With less long-dated bonds to hold
in  the  aggregate,  private  investors  have  more  balance  sheet  capacity  to  hedge  against  the
amount of duration risk that remains in the market, and more risk-bearing power to re-deploy
funds to other investments, including the financing of productive capital. As a consequence, the
desired  compensation  for  hedging  decreases,  which  drives  down  the  term  premium  and  the
whole yield curve. This same mechanism spurs propagation. Duration extraction is the catalyst
for  the  portfolio  rebalancing  channel,  which  is  the  chief  mechanism  by  which  easing  through
quantitative interventions propagates through the entire economy.
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
In practice, distinguishing between the effects of the APP and of forward guidance on the two
components  of  long-term  interest  rates  is  less  straightforward.  The  credibility  of  promises  to
follow  a  certain  course  of  action  for  setting  the  policy  rates  in  the  future  is  almost  certainly
enhanced  by  the  asset  purchase  programmes  today,  as  these  purchases  are  a  concrete
demonstration  of  a  desire  to  provide  additional  stimulus.  In  other  words,  there  is  a  signalling
channel inherent in asset purchases, which reinforces the credibility of the forward guidance on
policy  rates  via  the  expectations  channel.  Conversely,  forward  guidance  may  affect  the  term
premium component of longer-term yields by reducing the uncertainty about the future path of
short-term interest rates and thereby reducing duration risk in the market. Accordingly, the net
stimulus provided by asset purchases depends in part on expectations of how policymakers will
adjust short-term interest rates in the future.
But these additional complexities do not alter, and in fact reinforce, the key insight – namely that
the different policy tools must be seen as mutually complementary elements of a package. The
sequencing between policy tools, as we have described it in our forward guidance since March
2016, with rates expected “to remain at their present levels for an extended period of time, and
well past the horizon of our net asset purchases”, is motivated by this insight.
For example: letting the expectations component of longer-term yields float upwards while, at the
same  time,  engaging  in  asset  purchases  would  be  an  inefficient  conduct  of  policy.  The
compression of yields through the asset purchases would be directly countered by an upward
drift in the expectations component. By contrast, the established sequencing helps anchor the
expectations component and thereby allows the APP to exert its full effect.
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Calibrating APP
While  fostering  the  appropriate  interest  rate  environment  is  a  critical  intermediate  condition
enabling the transmission of our policies, in the end we do not directly control the yield curve. We
can  influence  the  yield  curve  only  indirectly,  through  forward  guidance  and,  notably,  via
modulating the size and intensity of our asset purchases. This process is mediated and to some
extent difficult to forecast: we change our instruments and let markets determine the asset price
implications  of  our  actions.  But,  importantly,  this  process  preserves  the  ability  of  markets  to
express views about the creditworthiness of the financial assets that are to be priced. Indeed the
last  year  has  demonstrated  that,  despite  the  ECB’s  forward  guidance  on  short-term  interest
rates and its continuing presence in the market as a large investor, market prices have tended to
reflect investors’ evolving views about the prospective standing of sovereign issuers’ credit.
With  this  in  mind,  let  me  turn  now  to  the  challenge  of  calibrating  the  size  and  duration  of
purchases that can deliver that yield constellation and, indirectly, the set of financing conditions
consistent with our objective. For this, we rely on the current theory and empirics of quantitative
interventions  by  central  banks.  The  theory  available  today  stipulates  that  it  is  primarily  by
announcing that the central bank will withdraw a certain stock of long-term bonds at a certain
horizon, and thus a share of duration risk that otherwise would have to be borne by the market,
that an asset purchase programme can impact on the term premium and on the yield curve in
general.
It is important to emphasise that it is the amount of duration that we extract relative to the amount
of  duration  that  otherwise  would  be  in  the  market  that  produces  the  impact.  In  this  respect,
keeping the size of the APP portfolio constant at a certain nominal level does not necessarily
safeguard a given amount of accommodation. By keeping the portfolio of assets acquired under
the APP  constant  in  nominal  terms,  it  is  difficult  to  prevent  the  ageing  of  the  portfolio,  i.e.  its
gradual loss of duration as the securities held in the portfolio mature. Although re-investments of
the proceeds from principal payments of the maturing securities can, to a certain extent, offset
this  endogenous  decay  of  the  average  portfolio  duration  –  by  replacing  short-term  expiring
securities with the purchase of longer-term securities – this substitution effect is generally not
strong  enough  to  maintain  the  average  maturity  of  the  portfolio  relative  to  that  of  the  market
portfolio  at  a  level  consistent  with  a  desired  yield  curve.  In  addition,  of  course,  the  amount  of
duration that is supplied to the market by public and private issuers is not constant and indeed
typically  trends  up.  Thus,  keeping  the  central  bank  portfolio  steady  at  a  certain  nominal  level
means that, in relative terms, the fraction of duration risk that is withdrawn from the market tends
to fall. As time passes, the endogenous loss of duration in the central bank portfolio is bound to
exert increasing upward pressure on the term premium.
When  the  Governing  Council  will  eventually  judge  that  a  sustained  adjustment  is  likely  to  be
completed  within  a  medium  term  horizon  with  a  sufficiently  high  degree  of  confidence,  this
endogenous  process  will  act  as  a  self-correction  mechanism.  In  those  conditions,  the  higher
expected returns on business investment will make borrowing conditions still attractive even as
nominal borrowing costs will tend to rise. From today’s point of view, we are still some distance
away from a sustained adjustment. As we concluded at our last monetary policy meeting, a very
substantial degree of monetary accommodation is still needed for underlying inflation pressures
to gradually build up and support headline inflation developments in the medium term.
Before drawing to a close, let me address one additional issue related to the calibration of the
APP, namely the horizon for executing the purchases.
We have traditionally communicated our (re-)calibrations of the APP in terms of two parameters:
the pace of monthly purchases and an intentional end date, which is however always conditional
on a sustained adjustment. The two parameters have facilitated market participants’ calculus of
the extra stimulus implied by each of our successive rounds of (re-)calibrations: by multiplying
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
pace by the horizon, markets have been able to identify the size of the portfolio which is relevant
for pricing the term premium. What we have seen is that, if confronted with a higher monthly
pace in exchange for a shorter intentional horizon or, conversely, a lower pace in exchange for a
longer intentional horizon, the reaction in the markets has been varying through time. In more
tense market conditions, a higher purchase pace in the near term is generally seen as having a
higher  easing  potential.  Probably,  in  conditions  in  which  uncertainty  is  high,  frontloading  the
accumulation  of  a  given  stock  of  purchases  more  forcefully  signals  the  central  bank’s
commitment  to  inject  the  degree  of  accommodation  necessary  to  support  the  recovery.  By
contrast,  in  more  normal  market  conditions,  the  market’s  capacity  to  engage  in  intertemporal
arbitrage  improves.  Consequently,  investors  may  become  “more  patient”,  or,  in  other  words,
better able to evaluate the stimulus that can be expected to come from a purchase plan that is to
be executed over a more extended time interval.
Conclusion
While the euro area recovery remains solid, broad-based and resilient, the economy has yet to
make sufficient progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation to levels that are
consistent with the Governing Council’s aim. To support such sustained adjustment, the ECB
has resorted to a package of complementary policy measures and recalibrated this package at
various occasions in line with the evolving macroeconomic conditions, most notably the outlook
for  price  stability,  and  the  state  of  monetary  policy  transmission.  In  the  next  few  weeks,  the
Governing  Council  will  again  assess  how  all  these  factors  can  be  expected  to  influence  the
monetary policy stance and will re-calibrate its instruments accordingly, with a view to delivering
the monetary policy impulse that is still necessary to secure a sustained adjustment in the path
of inflation in a way that is consistent with our monetary policy aim.
1
2
3
See ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2017 – Box 3: Impact of the ECB’s non-standard measures on financing
conditions: taking stock of recent evidence.
For  additional  detail,  see my remarks at the Belgian Financial Forum colloquium on “The low interest rate
environment”, in Brussels, on 4 May 2017.
For  further  detail  on  this  mechanism,  see my speeches  at  The  ECB  and  Its  Watchers  XVIII  Conference  in
Frankfurt am Main, on 6 April 2017; as well as my remarks at the Fixed Income Market Colloquium in Rome on 4
July 2017.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
