 Speech 
   Embargo 
1 November 2017, 6.15 pm 
Credit, debt and growth 
Collegium generale, University of Berne 
 
Fritz Zurbrügg 
 
Vice Chairman of the Governing Board* 
Swiss National Bank 
Berne, 1 November 2017 
© Swiss National Bank, Berne 2017 (speech given in German) 
  * The speaker would like to thank Till Ebner, Rita Fleer and Adriel Jost for their support in drafting this speech. He is also indebted to 
Robert Bichsel for his valuable comments and the SNB Language Services for their assistance. 
   Page 1/16 
     Ladies and Gentlemen 
Returning to one’s alma mater is always a special occasion. It was 28 years ago that I 
completed my doctorate here at the University of Berne. Since then, my professional career 
has taken me to a variety of places, but there has always been one topic accompanying me on 
the way: the topic of debt. In my first job at the Federal Finance Administration at the end of 
the 1980s, I was charged with analysing the Latin American debt crisis. Then, at the end of 
the 1990s, working for the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Washington D.C., the 
emphasis was on resolving the debt crisis in Asia. Back in Switzerland, my efforts went into 
implementing the debt brake at federal level. And even switching to the Swiss National Bank 
(SNB) in 2012 was no escape. The European debt crisis had a major impact on the Swiss 
franc exchange rate and on our monetary policy. In addition, we at the SNB are very carefully 
monitoring the risk to financial stability inherent in the rise of mortgage debt in Switzerland. 
As you can see, the topic of the Collegium generale’s lecture series has played a major role 
throughout my career. I was therefore very pleased to be invited to deliver a speech today on 
credit and debt. I’m deliberately using these terms in conjunction here. Because ultimately 
they refer to the same thing. They describe an agreement between two parties. One party, the 
creditor or lender, entrusts money or other goods to the second, the debtor or borrower, who 
promises to return the money or goods at a later stage. The borrower’s financial debt 
represents an asset of the lender’s. 
And yet, although the terms refer to the same concept, the associations they generate go in 
opposite directions. In common speech, the word debt usually has a negative connotation. 
Debt sounds like something to be avoided. Whereas the word credit gives rise to positive 
associations. Credit opens up new possibilities and is a bedrock of growth. 
The different way in which the two terms are perceived is also reflected in their etymology 
(cf. slide 2). Debt comes from the Latin debitum, from the verb debere, which means to owe 
something, or to have an obligation. The word thus has a moral overtone. Credit for its part 
goes back to the Latin words credere, meaning to believe or to trust, and creditum, referring 
to something entrusted in good faith. 
So which is it? Are debt and credit – I will be using these terms to describe a single 
phenomenon in the following – something positive or negative? Over the next hour, I would 
like to pursue this question from an economist’s perspective.  
Let me save you the suspense and reveal the result of my reflections with an analogy. 
Sustainable lending is like maintaining a healthy, well-balanced diet. Food is one of the pillars 
of our life. In equal measure, lending is a pillar of a thriving economy. However, eating 
unhealthy food or eating too much produces only a short-lived sense of gratification and is 
likely to lead to health problems in the long run. These will then have to be battled with 
tedious diets or even medical treatment. In the same way, unhealthy or excessive lending can 
trigger crises. Far-reaching intervention by governments and central banks is then needed to 
bring the ensuing turmoil under control.  
  Page 2/16 
     Ladies and gentlemen, this is what awaits you in today’s speech (cf. slide 3): First, I want to 
explain why a thriving economy depends on loans just as much as we human beings depend 
on food. Next, I would like to discuss why time and again, throughout history, there have 
been cases of gluttony at the ‘credit buffet’, and why these can have far-reaching 
consequences. Finally, based on current developments on the Swiss credit market, I will show 
up ways in which such downsides can be kept in check without curtailing the advantages 
offered by the credit system. My main focus thereby will be on what central banks can and 
should do. 
Why are loans useful from an economic perspective? 
Lending is one of the cornerstones of a successful economy based on the division of labour. 
This fact has been recognised since ancient times (cf. slide 5). As much as 5,000 years ago in 
Mesopotamia, seeds for crops were made available on loan, with repayment including interest 
due after harvest. Loans were also commonly used in ancient Greece and Rome.1 
Lending in its present form dates back to the emergence of the ‘modern’ banking system in 
Europe in the late Middle Ages.2 To this day, banks fulfil key functions in brokering loans. 
Without them, efficient large-scale lending as we know it would not be possible.3 Most 
recently, alternative methods of credit provision have emerged thanks to digitalisation – P2P 
or crowd lending for example. Nevertheless, banks remain the mainstay of an effective credit 
system. 
I will now explain why growth and prosperity would be significantly lower without an 
efficient credit system. To do so, I need to clarify the two basic functions of loans (cf. slide 6). 
First, loans enable borrowers to have future income at their disposal now. And second, loans 
allow creditors to make optimal use of their available capital. 
Loans enable borrowers to have future income at their disposal now 
Let me explain this in greater detail. Regarding function number one: Without loans, 
expenditure at any given time is limited to one’s savings and one’s current income. The 
possibility of taking out a loan expands this limit by adding anticipated future income to the 
resources available for spending. Why can this be a good idea? The somewhat banal answer is 
because making certain purchases or investments before having saved up the required amount 
can have a beneficial effect. Here are a few examples to show that this holds true from the 
point of view of companies, households and governments. 
Let’s start with the example of a start-up by a university of Berne graduate. This graduate has 
come up with a brilliant idea for a new product. To develop and produce it, she needs capital. 
She herself has no savings and it would take her decades to accumulate the required amount 
  1 Cf. Graeber (2011) and Grossman (2010) and the sources they cite. 
2 Cf. Grossman (2010) and Ferguson (2009). 
3 The focus hereby is on the monitoring of borrowers and on risk management.  
  Page 3/16 
     on her own. Under these circumstances, she would probably give up on the idea. The 
possibility of obtaining credit radically changes the situation. A loan enables her to realise her 
idea within a short time and generate income with the sale of her product.4 
The example shows how loans make it possible even for firms with little capital to make 
investments that will generate income in future. In the best case scenario, such investments 
also drive technological progress. Thus, loans do not only benefit the company concerned, but 
also contribute to raising an entire economy’s productivity, growth potential and prosperity.5 
Households, too, can harness future income for present-day benefits. The obvious example is 
a mortgage to buy a house. Let’s take a specific case. A young family – we’ll call them the 
Miller family – is expecting a child and so will soon need larger living quarters. They have 
found their dream house, but the money they have saved so far is not sufficient for them to 
buy it. Thanks to the possibility of taking out a mortgage, the Millers can nonetheless 
purchase the house of their choice and move in without further delay. The family will from 
then on be using part of their income to repay the loan, thereby reaping present benefit from 
their future earnings. In other words, they are putting their income to use at a time when they 
derive the greatest advantage from it, and in doing so they enhance their prosperity.6 
Finally, borrowing can also make perfect sense for a government. Fiscal income and 
expenditure are not always in balance. During a recession, for instance, a state’s income 
declines, whereas expenditure increases due to the activation of various countercyclical 
measures such as the provision of unemployment benefit. The result is a fiscal deficit. 
Governments can cover the deficit either by temporarily raising taxes or by reducing their 
spending. Neither of these measures are helpful in a recession. On the contrary, they would 
merely aggravate the recession. Borrowing money enables the government to bridge 
temporary gaps between income and expenditure without having to resort to higher taxation 
or short-term cuts in spending. 
Lending enables creditors to make optimal use of their available capital 
As we have seen, borrowers can make optimal use of their income over time thanks to the 
credit system. From a lender’s point of view, too, providing loans generates substantial 
benefit. This brings me to the second basic function of the credit system. The possibility of 
lending enables available capital to be invested as profitably as possible, and enhances the 
  4 In reality, private investors who buy shares in the company concerned play a role in the funding of start-ups that is at least as important as 
that of loans. 
5 Loans also allow companies to use future revenue to cover current expenses. Income from their business activities is not always available 
precisely at the time they need to purchase means of production or pay salaries. Instead of always aligning production and labour demand 
to their current income, they can avoid bottlenecks by means of operating or purchase loans. In this case, loans help stabilise production. 
This improves planning reliability both for companies and for their employees, which also has a positive impact on prosperity. 
6 If a household were to draw the entire income of a lifetime in a single instance, they would probably spend it fairly evenly year by year 
(according to the ‘Life cycle theory of consumption’, cf. Friedman (1957) as well as Modigliani and Brumberg (1954)). In other words, 
their consumption level would remain more or less steady throughout. In reality, income at certain stages of life does not suffice to cover 
this hypothetical consumption level. This is true mostly in younger years and in old age. Taking out a loan enables a household to 
overcome financial bottlenecks in certain phases of life and to make use of their income at a time when they derive the greatest benefit 
from it. 
  Page 4/16 
     diversification of investment risk. For society as a whole, it means that accrued savings are 
made widely available and thus put to better use. 
Let me give you an example. An entrepreneur is faced with the question of what use to make 
of his assets. There is no major purchase to be made at the moment. Neither is there a 
profitable project at his own company in the pipeline. Do you remember our university 
graduate with her brilliant idea for a product? The entrepreneur could lend her some of his 
assets against interest and so generate a return.7 By extending a loan to the young graduate, he 
is also diversifying his investments. As the proverb has it, he is not putting all his eggs in one 
basket. 
Overall, we can conclude that an effective credit system represents an essential basis for a 
thriving economy. It allows borrowers to put their income to the best-possible use over time. 
And it give lenders the opportunity to invest their accrued assets in an optimal way. 
Individuals benefit from this mechanism, and so does the economy as a whole. As the 
examples show, the credit system can support prosperity and economic growth and enhance 
the growth potential.8 
Under what circumstances is lending detrimental to an economy? 
Given all the positive aspects, the possibilities and opportunities linked with the credit system 
– why then the negative image associated with the notion of debt? 
As mentioned at the beginning, the term ‘debt’ emphasises the borrower’s obligation to repay 
the loan in future. Each credit/debt relationship is therefore fraught with the risk that the 
borrower might incur financial difficulties and be unable to repay the loan. The cartoon here 
makes a tongue-in-cheek reference to this credit risk (cf. slide 8). 
Naturally, credit risk is also inherent in the case of our university graduate’s start-up. There is 
a rule of thumb in the start-up scene that says only one in ten start-ups succeeds. If her 
product idea fails, our University of Berne graduate will lack the funds to repay her loan and 
interest. 
And the Miller family’s mortgage loan is not exempt from credit risk, either. Payment 
difficulties could arise if, for example, a divorce or rising interest rates lead to an unexpected 
hike in current expenses, or if the family’s future income is reduced by unemployment or 
illness. 
In such cases, borrowers will of course do all they can to avoid a default and first of all try to 
lower other expenses. This may mean cutting back on non-essential consumer spending or 
postponing maintenance work or investments. A default, after all, has far-reaching 
  7 In this simplified example, no mention is made of the risk/return considerations that naturally need to be made in such a case. 
8 This is also what the empirical literature suggests. An advanced financial system and access to efficient credit provision are closely linked 
to growth and a high level of prosperity (cf. Beck (2011) and Levine (2005)). It should be kept in mind that a modern financial system 
comprises further key elements besides the credit mechanism, in particular payment systems, market places for trading shares and bonds, 
and insurance business.  
  Page 5/16 
     consequences. In the case of the start-up, it could possibly lead to insolvency. The Miller 
family for their part might be forced to sell the house in an emergency sale.  
When borrowers face payment difficulties or default on their loan, this also causes problems 
for creditors. They will have to write off anticipated interest income and may even lose the 
money lent if the loan isn’t secured by collateral. And even if the loan is secured – for 
instance by real estate – getting a good price for the collateral could prove difficult, depending 
on the circumstances. 
Credit as a burden for an entire economy 
The examples show that an actual or impending default on a loan can represent a serious 
burden for the party concerned or even a personal tragedy. To a certain extent, this explains 
the negative connotations associated with debt. However, from a macroeconomic perspective, 
default by a single borrower does not usually pose a problem. 
Unless the single borrower happens to be a massively indebted state or big bank. An 
impending default by such a player has a far-reaching impact on the economy as a whole, as 
witnessed in the recent financial crisis.  
Debt also becomes a macroeconomic problem when a large number of economic agents help 
themselves too generously at the credit buffet table. Such phases of excess on the credit 
market usually end with a large number of borrowers encountering payment difficulties. For 
the rest of my presentation, I would like to concentrate on this type of debt crisis and on the 
costs involved.  
Empirical literature indicates that recessions run particularly deep when they are connected 
with just such a debt crisis (cf. slide 9). Moreover, the subsequent economic recovery tends to 
be sluggish. This applies all the more when the debt crisis also hits the banking sector.9 
Why is this so? In a debt crisis following a credit boom, not just a few, but a large number of 
households and companies face payment difficulties and have less income and assets at their 
disposal. Accordingly, they need to scale down consumer spending and investments over a 
relatively long period of time in order to service outstanding loans and reduce their excessive 
debt burden. In addition, such an environment usually leads to greater uncertainty, which also 
impacts on economic agents that are not directly confronted by payment difficulties. Under 
such circumstances, they, too, tend to show less appetite for consumer spending, investments 
and risk.10 
Cutbacks in consumer spending and investments are even more pronounced when, at the same 
time, banks are busy cleaning up their balance sheets. They then become very restrained in 
 9 Cf. Boissay et al. (2016), Jorda et al. (2013), Reinhart and Reinhart (2010) and Taylor (2015). 
10 Cf. literature on debt overhang, e.g. Buttiglione et al. (2014) and Koo (2011). 
   Page 6/16 
     their lending.11 This can even affect fundamentally profitable investments and borrowers with 
a high credit rating.  
All this places a burden on the economy not just during the acute phase of the crisis, but over 
a prolonged period. Lower investment also results in lower growth potential. Because less 
investment means less innovation, and less innovation leads to lower productivity growth.  
To put it in a nutshell, and to come back to the analogy of food: When, during an upturn, 
economic agents have taken excessive helpings from the credit pot, they will, in the wake of a 
debt crisis, be forced on a necessary, but long and painful diet.  
Why do so many economic agents take excessive risks at the same time? 
Thus, the correction of excesses on the credit market leads not just to economic downturns but 
also often to sustained loss of growth potential. For this reason, all economic agents should 
have a strong interest in avoiding any excesses which could end in a crisis. 
Nevertheless, historical evidence shows that periods of excessive risk-taking by individuals, 
banks, companies or governments occur with quite alarming regularity. Why do we learn so 
little from experience? 
Let me say from the outset, there is no one single reason for the repeated excesses on the 
credit market. A number of closely related factors all play a role. In the following, I will be 
looking in more detail at three of these factors (cf. slide 10). First, a favourable 
macroeconomic environment drives the supply and demand of loans. Second, the rational 
reaction of individual lenders and borrowers to the favourable environment can lead to a 
build-up of systemic risks. And, third, distorted expectations of economic agents also play a 
role.12 
To illustrate these factors, I will use the example of the Swiss housing boom of the 1980s. 
Interestingly, analogous developments can be found in the lead-up to virtually every debt 
crisis.13 
Economic upturn, low interest rates and rising asset prices 
Initially then, the macroeconomic environment plays a major role. Increased lending is often 
associated with an economic upturn.14 A key variable here is the interest rate level: If current 
and anticipated rates are comparably low, loans tend to be taken out for projects which would 
not be profitable or not be financed at higher rates. Furthermore, lenders in such an 
  11 Uncertainty regarding the stability of individual banks can also result in banks no longer lending to one another, thereby mutually 
aggravating their difficulties and leading to even more restrictive lending practices. 
12 Other aspects based on rational considerations that I did not examine further here and which can also lead to excessive borrowing or 
lending are (misplaced) incentives of an institutional, regulatory and fiscal nature, and the emergence of innovative financial products. 
13 Cf. Kindleberger and Aliber (2005). 
14 Cf. Jorda et al. (2016). 
  Page 7/16 
     environment often take higher risks in order to achieve return and growth targets despite the 
low interest rates. 
Other key drivers for the increase in credit are movements in prices of assets such as shares 
and real estate. Rising prices for these assets and growing credit volume often go hand in hand 
and are mutually reinforcing. This applies to the real estate market in particular, since real 
estate is almost always part-financed by loans. 
Two mechanisms are at work here: First, rising asset prices produce ‘wealth effects’ in 
households. Households become richer and thus more creditworthy. This has a positive 
impact on household demand for loans. At the same time, rising asset prices translate into 
higher-value collateral for households to use. This enables them to borrow larger amounts, 
which in turn leads to a further increase in asset prices. 
Second, credit risk from the lender’s perspective falls with rising asset prices. During such 
periods, banks therefore tend to offer more loans and at more favourable rates. 
Developments in Switzerland in the 1980s illustrate these aspects clearly. From 1983, the 
Swiss economy recorded dynamic growth over several years. This upturn was temporarily 
challenged by the slump on the global stock markets in autumn 1987.15 Global central banks, 
including the SNB, reacted with a significant loosening of monetary policy that had a rapid 
stabilising effect. The economic upturn in Switzerland gained further momentum over the 
following quarters. The overall macroeconomic environment was therefore favourable. Real 
estate prices in this environment rose at an increasing pace between 1985 and 1990. The 
volume of outstanding mortgage loans also climbed sharply. 
Systemic risks 
Back to the theory and to the second factor for excesses on the credit market. The previously 
described reactions of individual lenders or individual banks to the favourable environment 
contribute to the build-up of systemic risks (cf. slide 11). This means that from the 
individual’s perspective, the expansion in credit demand and supply in a favourable 
environment may well make perfect sense. But, even if all parties behave rationally from their 
own point of view, there is still the risk that overall an excessive level of debt will build up 
that is unsustainable in the long term. Why is this? Individual lenders fail to take into account 
that their behaviour has an impact on the ability of other market participants to bear debt. This 
applies, for example, when investors are increasingly exposed to the same risks and invest in 
the same markets.  
For instance, let us assume that a large number of companies or households simultaneously 
take out loans to purchase real estate. This situation creates systemic risk because a negative 
surprise on the real estate market can lead to many of these investors incurring losses at the 
same time, forcing them to sell off their assets so that they can continue meeting their loan 
 15 On ‘Black Monday’, 19 October 1987, the Dow Jones index plunged by more than 20%. As a result, equity markets around the world 
came under heavy pressure. 
   Page 8/16 
     commitments. This can generate a self-reinforcing spiral of falling real estate prices, more 
borrowers who can no longer service their debts, and thus greater pressure to sell. 
Distorted expectations 
Moreover, the behaviour of economic agents during a credit boom is not always entirely 
rational. This brings us to the third factor that can contribute to excesses on the credit market 
– distorted expectations (cf. slide 12). A glance at the history of financial crises shows: The 
longer an economic upturn persists, and the higher asset prices rise at the same time, the more 
over-optimistic economic agents are about future growth. At the same time, the more they 
underestimate the risks they are taking in purchasing assets or in taking out or granting loans 
for this purpose. Alan Greenspan and Robert Shiller coined the phrase ‘irrational exuberance’ 
to describe situations when investors, in their enthusiasm, ignore the investment risks.16 
What creates these distorted expectations? 
Research in economic history and behavioural economics provides some explanations. The 
self-reinforcing dynamics between economic upturn, low interest rates, the rise in asset prices, 
and credit growth can induce market participants to feel justified in their optimism and their 
expectations of price developments. Government representatives, too, are often infected by 
this optimism. Who can predict the future? Perhaps there has indeed been a structural change 
in the economy. In other words: During an upturn, everyone finds ostensibly good reasons 
why a rise in asset prices and credit volume makes perfect sense and is fundamentally 
justified – despite historical experience to the contrary.17 
The feeling that this time really is different is something that I experienced at first hand 
myself, when I lived and worked in Washington DC from 1998 to 2006. Local real estate 
prices during this period recorded average annual growth rates of some 15%. During our stay 
there, we kept asking ourselves as a family – should we rent or buy? Our answer was always 
the same: Rent, because these annual price increases cannot be sustainable. However, this 
argument became ever weaker with each new year of sharp price rises. Towards the end of 
our stay, we too were almost ready to switch camps to the adherents of fundamentally new 
economic principles in which real estate prices go in only one direction – up. But, as you all 
know, in 2006 the massive price correction set in after all. 
As an example of the build-up of systemic risks and the excessive optimism of economic 
agents, I can again also refer back to the Swiss real estate boom in the second half of the 
1980s (cf. slide 13). Strong growth and income prospects and favourable conditions in the 
mortgage market boosted demand for property. Real estate was increasingly purchased for 
  16 Shiller (2000). 
17 Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) coined the term ‘this time is different syndrome’ for such misguided expectations during the boom phase of 
the credit or financial cycle. Minsky’s financial instability hypothesis is also based on the idea of a self-reinforcing effect between the 
prices of assets and increasing speculation on continued capital gains during an economic upturn, which is additionally driven by 
borrowing (cf., e.g. Minsky (1992)). Keynes (1936) in turn coined the expression ‘animal spirits’ as an explanation for the excessively 
‘naive’ optimism of investors. Here he described the phenomenon that a general feeling of confidence among economic agents is primarily 
caused by intuition and emotions rather than by mathematically/rationally based expectations. 
  Page 9/16 
     investment purposes since it promised high returns through value appreciation. The higher 
demand in turn led to further rises in real estate prices. Accordingly, the value of collateral 
and thus owners’ assets continued to grow, as expected. Against this background, banks for 
their part were more optimistic about credit risks as the number of loan defaults remained low 
thanks to rising property prices and favourable credit conditions. As both credit volume and 
real estate prices rose higher, economic agents felt vindicated in their optimism.  
But if such a period of excessive optimism is followed by a downturn, the impact on these 
highly indebted agents is huge. The trend on the real estate market in Switzerland reversed in 
1989 (cf. slide 14). Systemic risks materialised and considerable losses were registered. As 
investments were largely debt-financed, there was a flurry of loan defaults. Ultimately this led 
to banks in Switzerland having to write off more than 40 billion francs.18 To cut a long story 
short, the Swiss economy slid into recession at the beginning of the 1990s, unemployment 
rose sharply to 5% and the economy subsequently recovered only very slowly (cf. slide 15). 
Ladies and gentlemen, having shown you in the first part of my speech that loans are an 
essential basis for economic growth, I have now explained how excessive lending can 
seriously damage the economy. I have also outlined how a combination of rational behaviour 
and distorted expectations of borrowers and lenders can lead to harmful excesses in the credit 
market. 
What role do central banks play in the credit cycle? 
But, you might say, the behaviour of borrowers and lenders, whether rational or based on 
distorted expectations, ultimately depends on interest rates. Only if interest rates are low, can 
such a dynamic develop. Interest rates in turn are strongly influenced by central banks.  
In the last part of my speech I would like to address this argument, and discuss the question 
that has come back into focus since the financial crisis: What role do central banks play in the 
event of excesses and crises on the credit market? 
The fundamental task of central banks like the SNB is to ensure price stability, while taking 
due account of economic developments (cf. slide 17). The main instrument they use for this 
are key or reference interest rates. If, for example, the inflation rate threatens to fall too low, 
key rates are lowered. This has a positive impact on price development via various channels.19 
One of these is loans: An interest rate cut reduces borrowing costs and creates incentives for 
expanding the credit supply. This encourages investments and consumer expenditure and 
ultimately has a positive effect on price development, too. With their interest rate decisions, 
central banks therefore consciously influence lending practice. If, for price stability reasons, 
interest rates have to be kept low for a prolonged period, it is possible that over time there 
  18 SFBC (1998). 
19 The literature distinguishes different channels through which monetary policy can impact on aggregate demand and thus inflation. Besides 
the credit channel, these include, in particular, the interest rate channel, exchange rate channel and asset price channel. 
  Page 10/16 
     may be undesirable excesses in certain segments of the credit market. This poses a risk for 
financial stability. 
When using the interest rate tool in such a situation, central banks can face a conflict of 
interest between the objectives of price stability and financial stability. On the one hand, they 
have to keep interest rates at an appropriate level in order to guarantee price stability. On the 
other hand, they have to closely monitor the impact of this policy on the credit cycle and 
financial stability. In the case of the SNB, contributing to the stability of the financial system 
is part of its statutory mandate. 
Let me explain this point using the current situation in Switzerland. 
Internationally, interest rates have followed a downward trend for many years and are 
currently at low levels.20 In the case of Switzerland, this development caused the interest rate 
differential against other countries to narrow. Along with occasionally strong capital inflows 
during the financial crisis, this fall in the interest rate differential has led to substantial Swiss 
franc appreciation and a highly valued Swiss franc (cf. slide 18). 
In order to ensure price stability in Switzerland and to create appropriate monetary policy 
conditions in this environment, the SNB has had to keep interest rates low for several years 
now (cf. slide 19). A higher interest rate level domestically would result in further 
appreciation of the Swiss franc. This would cause a slowdown of economic growth and put 
the prices of goods and services under pressure. If this downward pressure on prices were to 
continue for a prolonged period, price stability would be jeopardised. The low reference rate 
maintained by the SNB is therefore necessary from a monetary policy perspective in the 
context of the low interest rate environment worldwide and the strong Swiss franc. 
At the same time, the persistently low interest rate environment presents risks to financial 
stability. This applies first and foremost to the real estate and mortgage markets. Like global 
interest rates, mortgage rates in Switzerland have been on a downward trend for some 25 
years. Consequently, significant imbalances have built up on the real estate and mortgage 
markets. 
This is evident when we look at the developments in both markets since 2000 (cf. slide 20). 
On an inflation-adjusted basis, prices for single-family houses have risen by more than 50% 
overall. The volume of outstanding mortgages has almost doubled over the same period. 
These strong rises on their own do not prove the build-up of imbalances – the increases can be 
partly explained by fundamentals such as solid population growth. Since 2000, this has 
amounted to approximately 18%. A growing population produces a demand for more housing. 
As land for building development is limited, this puts upward pressure on real estate prices. 
At the same time, demand for mortgage loans grows.21 
  20 Both structural and cyclical reasons can cause this downward trend, cf., e.g., Danthine (2013). 
21 Moreover, average real household income has risen by almost 15% since the turn of the millennium. This can also produce a rise in 
demand for more and/or better quality housing, with an associated increase in the demand for mortgage loans. 
  Page 11/16 
     However, momentum on the mortgage and real estate markets has been considerably stronger 
in recent years than can be explained by such fundamental developments. The ratio between 
the volume of outstanding mortgage loans and nominal gross domestic product (GDP) since 
2000 has risen from 110% to some 145% (cf. slide 21). Lending has thus grown significantly 
faster than income in recent years. At the same time, we can observe increasing risk appetite 
among banks in their lending business. This is because banks’ income from interest rate 
differential business is suffering due to the low interest rates. By taking higher risks – in 
particular in mortgage lending – banks are able to counter this decline in income in the short 
term. Yet, this exacerbates their susceptibility to negative developments on the real estate and 
mortgage markets or to an unexpected sharp interest rate rise. 
Given the potentially far-reaching negative effects of a debt crisis as outlined in the second 
part of this speech, it is clear why the SNB has been carefully monitoring these developments 
for some time and pointing out the associated risks.   
Should central banks use interest rates to curb excesses on the credit market? 
But what should central banks do to counter excesses on the credit market? Should they raise 
interest rates, even if this would not be appropriate from the perspective of price stability and 
economic activity (cf. slide 22)? 
There are three reasons for not doing so. 
First, we have the rule postulated by Tinbergen in the 1950s (cf. slide 23), which states that 
for each economic policy target there needs to be a separate policy instrument.22 This reduces 
potential conflicts of interest when using instruments and contributes to the efficient 
achievement of each individual target. The Tinbergen rule is also justified in our case. If 
central banks were to use the interest rate tool for the purposes of financial stability, they 
might have to accept departures from the objective of price stability. Such an approach, 
though, would call into question the credibility of the central bank’s avowed pursuit of price 
stability. In the long term this would have a negative impact on trust in the central bank and 
limit its ability to ensure the goal of price stability. 
Second, the crucial question is how effectively interest rate rises actually influence 
overheating in the credit market. I have already explained how the interest rate environment 
affects the behaviour of economic agents in the credit market. Higher interest rates, then, 
should have a dampening effect on credit growth. Yet various analyses indicate that it often 
takes a very sharp interest rate rise to significantly counteract excesses in the credit market. 
However, this would have an unwanted and severe dampening effect on the economy and lead 
to an undesirable deviation from the optimal course of inflation.23  
 22 Cf. Tinbergen (1956). 
23 Cf. Assenmacher and Gerlach (2008), Bean et al. (2010) and Svensson (2016).  
   Page 12/16 
     Third, and connected with this, it is important to remember that interest rate rises affect the 
whole economy. Meanwhile, excesses often occur only in certain segments of the credit 
market.  
For these reasons it seems more expedient to curb excesses in the credit market primarily with 
instruments other than the interest rate tool. Of course, this presupposes that effective 
alternative instruments are available.24 
Macroprudential instruments 
The focus here is on macroprudential instruments (cf. slide 24). This term describes 
instruments which are aimed at avoiding the build-up of systemic stability risks and are 
intended to make the financial system as a whole more robust to negative shocks.   
Macroprudential instruments have become more common since the global financial crisis.25 
The application of macroprudential measures in Switzerland is currently particularly 
important in view of the significant imbalances in the credit and real estate markets. 
The emphasis in Switzerland is placed on the sectoral countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) 
and on guidelines that address credit demand (cf. slide 25). 
The sectoral CCyB obliges banks to hold more equity capital when imbalances build up on 
the mortgage market. The aim is twofold: First, banks with more equity are better equipped to 
absorb losses that can arise as a result of excessive lending growth. Second, costs for 
mortgage lending rise, counteracting the build-up of imbalances in this segment. 
The buffer is called countercyclical because capital requirements increase when the mortgage 
market is on the rise. This dampens the upswing and strengthens the safety buffer of banks 
and of the financial system. The requirements are reduced in a downturn when banks have 
more capital available to absorb potential losses on loans. This mitigates the likelihood of 
systemic risk materialising and leading to a downwards spiral of emergency sales and loan 
defaults. 
Acting on proposals by the SNB, the Federal Council activated the sectoral CCyB in 2013 
and, in 2014, increased it to 2% of risk-weighted mortgage loans for residential property in 
Switzerland. 
In addition to the sectoral CCyB, there are two measures in particular which the industry 
introduced in 2012 in the form of self-regulation. These measures address the demand for 
loans: First, the obligation that mortgage borrowers have to supply a minimum amount of 
own funds. Second, the obligation that part of the loan has to be repaid within a set period if 
the loaned amount constitutes more than two-thirds of the property value.  
  24 Cf. Smets (2014). 
25 Macroprudential instruments are, for example, a component of Basel III, the post-financial crisis amendment to the global minimum 
standards in bank regulation issued by the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision of the Bank for International Settlements, cf. BCBS 
(2010). 
  Page 13/16 
     Along with the CCyB, these measures have helped to reduce momentum on the credit and real 
estate markets in the last three years (cf. slide 26).26 But it is still too early to give the all-
clear. It remains to be seen how sustainable the cooling of price momentum in the real estate 
market is overall. Imbalances remain in the real estate and mortgage markets. Price 
momentum in the residential investment property segment remains high. There are also signs 
of renewed price rises in the owner-occupied segment. At the same time, lending rates are still 
extremely favourable. As a result, the incentives for households, banks and investors to take 
excessively high risks in the mortgage and real estate markets remain strong. 
The following conclusion can therefore be drawn: Macroprudential instruments have become 
a key instrument in the toolbox of central banks and regulators – and rightly so, in my 
opinion. They facilitate the targeting of specific risks in the financial system. At the same 
time, however, it would be presumptuous to assume that these macroprudential instruments 
might be able to curb all risks to financial stability. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now wrap up. Credit is good, debt is bad – how can we explain 
this widespread public ambivalence to lending? Stephen Cecchetti sums it up as follows: 
“Debt is a two-edged sword. Used wisely and in moderation, it clearly improves welfare. But, 
when it is used imprudently and in excess, the result can be disaster” (cf. slide 27).27 I myself 
have compared lending not with a double-edged sword, but with food. A balanced diet is 
essential for survival. Excessive and unhealthy eating, however, can become a problem. 
Judicious borrowing and lending is an essential foundation of a flourishing economy. 
Excesses on the credit market, by contrast, can lead to crises and, as a result, cause extensive 
damage to the economy as a whole. It is therefore important that banks, households and 
companies always exercise sufficient caution and restraint at the ‘credit buffet’. Equally, it is 
just as important that the SNB carefully analyses developments on the credit market and 
makes optimal use of the tools at its disposal in order to mitigate any risks to financial 
stability as far as possible. 
 
   26 The overall subdued economic growth in Switzerland over the last two years and lower net immigration are also explanations for the 
recent restrained momentum on the credit and real estate markets.  
27 Cecchetti et al. (2011). The International Monetary Fund (IMF) came to a similar conclusion regarding household debt in its latest 
financial stability report: Household borrowing promotes growth in the short term. In the medium term, however, too high a level of 
household debt reduces economic growth (IMF, 2017). 
  Page 14/16 
     Bibliography 
Assenmacher-Wesche, K. and S. Gerlach (2008), Financial structure and the impact of 
monetary policy on asset prices, SNB Working Papers, 2008–16, September. 
BCBS (2010), Basel III: a global regulatory framework for more resilient banks and banking 
systems, Bank for International Settlements, December. 
Bean, C. et al. (2010), Monetary policy after the fall, presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City’s Symposium on Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming, 26–28 August. 
Beck, T. (2011), The role of finance in economic development: benefits, risks, and politics, 
CentER Discussion Paper, 2011–141. 
Boissay, F. et al. (2016), Booms and banking crises, BIS Working Papers, 545, February. 
Buttiglione, L. et al. (2014), Deleveraging? What deleveraging?, Geneva Reports on the 
World Economy, 16, International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies. 
Cecchetti, S.G. et al. (2011), The real effect of debt, BIS Working Papers, 352, September. 
Danthine, J.-P. (2013), Causes and consequences of low interest rates, Speech held at the  
Swisscanto Market Outlook 2014, Lausanne, 14 November. 
Ferguson, N. (2009), The ascent of money: a financial history of the world, Penguin Books. 
Friedman, M. (1957), The permanent income hypothesis, In: Friedman, M., A theory of the 
consumption function, Princeton University Press, pp. 20–37. 
Graeber, D. (2011), Debt: the first 5000 years, First Melville House Printing. 
Grossman, R.S. (2010), Unsettled account: the evolution of banking in the industrialized 
world since 1800, Princeton University Press. 
IMF (2017), Global Financial Stability Report, October. 
Jorda, Ò. et al. (2013), When credit bites back, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 
supplement to vol. 45/2. 
Jorda, Ò. et al. (2016), Macrofinancial history and the new business cycle facts, NBER 
Working Paper, 22743, October. 
Keynes, John M. (1936), The general theory of employment, interest and money, Macmillan. 
Kindleberger, C.P. and R.Z. Aliber (2005), Manias, panics, and crashes: a history of 
financial crises, 5th edition, Basingstoke: John Wiley & Sons. 
Koo, R.C. (2011), The world in balance sheet recession: causes, cure and politics, Real-
world Economics Review, 58. 
Levine, R. (2005), Finance and growth: theory and evidence, Handbook of Economic 
Growth, 1A, Elsevier, pp. 865–934. 
  Page 15/16 
     Minsky, H.P. (1992), The financial instability hypothesis, The Jerome Levy Economics 
Institute of Bard College, Working Paper, 74, May. 
Modigliani, F. and R.H. Brumberg (1954), Utility analysis and the consumption function: an 
interpretation of cross-section data, In: Kurihara, K.K. (ed.), Post-Keynesian Economics, 
Rutgers University Press, pp. 388–436. 
Reinhart, C.M. and V.R. Reinhart (2010), After the fall, presented at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City’s on Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming, 26–28 August. 
Reinhart, C.M. and K.S. Rogoff (2009), The aftermath of financial crises, The American 
Economic Review, 99/2, Papers and Proceedings, pp. 466–472. 
SFBC (1998), Annual Report 1997. 
Shiller, R.J. (2000), Irrational exuberance, Princeton University Press. 
Smets, F. (2014), Financial stability and monetary policy: how closely interlinked?, 
International Journal of Central Banking, 10/2, pp. 263–300. 
Svensson, L.E.O. (2016), Cost-benefit analysis of leaning against the wind: are costs larger 
also with less effective macroprudential policy?, IMF Working Paper, 16/3, January. 
Taylor, A. (2015), Credit, financial stability, and the macroeconomy, NBER Working Paper, 
21039, March. 
Tinbergen, J. (1956), Economic policy: principles and design, North-Holland. 
 
  Page 16/16 
 Credit, debt and growth
Fritz Zurbrügg
Vice Chairman of the Governing Board
Swiss National Bank
Collegium generale
Berne, 1 November 2017
Debt vs. credit
Debt:
debere = to owe
Credit: 
credere = to believe, trust
creditum = that which is entrusted in good faith
2
1 November 2017 Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Contents
Part 1: Why are loans useful from an economic perspective?
Part 2: Under what circumstances is lending detrimental to an 
economy?
Part 3: What role do central banks play in the credit cycle?
3
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Part 1: Why are loans useful from 
an economic perspective?
Loans: Commonplace since ancient times
A Mesopotamian clay tablet with debt details from around 3000 BCE
 5
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
 e
c
r
u
o
S
t
n
e
p
o
w
w
w
 m
o
c
.
i
e
n
z
a
g
a
m
e
h
Loans fulfil two basic functions
Borrowers: 
Loans enable borrowers to have future 
income at their disposal now
Example: Start-up company
Example: Buying a house
Example: Government debt
Creditors:
Loans allow creditors to make optimal use of their 
available capital
Example: Investments of an entrepreneur
6
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Part 2: Under what circumstances is 
lending detrimental to an economy?
Credit risk
8
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Credit as a burden for an entire economy
Excesses on the 
credit market
Debt crisis
c
Greater 
uncertainty
Restricted credit 
supply
Less investment
Less innovation
Loss of income 
and financial 
assets
Less consumer 
spending
Long and deep 
recession
Weak recovery
9
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Credit as a burden for an entire economy –
excessive risk-taking
Macroeconomic 
environment
Upturn
Low interest rates
Asset prices
Systemic risks
Distorted expectations
10
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Credit as a burden for an entire economy –
excessive risk-taking
Macroeconomic 
environment
Upturn
Low interest rates
Asset prices
Systemic risks
Distorted expectations
11
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Credit as a burden for an entire economy –
excessive risk-taking
Macroeconomic 
environment
Upturn
Low interest rates
Asset prices
Systemic risks
Distorted expectations
12
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Credit as a burden for an entire economy –
excessive risk-taking
Macroeconomic 
environment
Upturn
Low interest rates
Asset prices
Systemic risks
Distorted expectations
13
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Credit as a burden for an entire economy 
Macroeconomic 
environment
Upturn
Low interest rates
Asset prices
Systemic risks
Distorted expectations
14
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Credit as a burden for an entire economy
Macroeconomic 
environment
Upturn
Low interest rates
Asset prices
Systemic risks
Distorted expectations
15
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Part 3: What role do central banks 
play in the credit cycle?
Price stability vs. financial stability
NATIONAL BANK ACT
Article 5: Tasks
1 The National Bank shall pursue a monetary policy serving the interests of 
the country as a whole. It shall ensure price stability. In so doing, it shall 
take due account of economic developments.
Interest rate 
reduction
Credit growth
More investment & 
consumption
2 Within this framework, it shall have the following tasks:
…
e.
It shall contribute to the stability of the financial system.
17
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Price stability vs. financial stability
Current situation in Switzerland
18
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Price stability vs. financial stability
Current situation in Switzerland
Low reference rate remains 
necessary
19
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Price stability vs. financial stability
Current situation in Switzerland
Low reference rate remains 
necessary
20
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Price stability vs. financial stability
Current situation in Switzerland
Low interest rate environment 
promotes ...
Low reference rate remains 
necessary
 ... a build-up of imbalances: 
2000:Mortgageloanvolume
2017: Mortgageloanvolume
GDP
GDP
* 100 = 110%
* 100 = 145%
 ... risk appetite among banks
21
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Should the interest rate tool be used to curb 
excesses on the credit market?
NATIONAL BANK ACT
Article 5: Tasks
1 The National Bank shall pursue a monetary policy serving the interests of 
the country as a whole. It shall ensure price stability. In so doing, it shall 
take due account of economic developments.
Interest rate tool
2 Within this framework, it shall have the following tasks:
…
e.
It shall contribute to the stability of the financial system.
22
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Should the interest rate tool be used to curb 
excesses on the credit market?
Tinbergen rule:
1 target = 1 instrument
Unwelcome strong 
side-effects
Excesses only in certain 
segments
1 The National Bank shall pursue a monetary policy serving the interests of 
the country as a whole. It shall ensure Price stability. In so doing, it shall 
take due account of economic developments.
Interest rate tool
2 Within this framework, it shall have the following tasks:
…
d.
It shall contribute to the Stability of the financial system.
23
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Macroprudential instruments as a target-oriented 
alternative to the interest rate tool
Tinbergen rule:
Unwelcome strong 
Excesses only in certain 
1 target = 1 instrument
Article 5: Tasks
1 The National Bank shall pursue a monetary policy serving the interests of 
the country as a whole. It shall ensure Price stability. In so doing, it shall 
take due account of economic developments.
side-effects
segments
Interest rate tool
2 Within this framework, it shall have the following tasks:
Macroprudential 
instruments
…
d.
It shall contribute to the Stability of the financial system.
24
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Macroprudential instruments
Revision of self-
regulation: 
minimum 
amount of own 
funds and 
amortisation 
obligation
Activation of
sectoral CCyB
at 1% from 
the end of 
September 2013 
Increase in
sectoral CCyB
to 2% from the 
end of June 
2014 
Further revision 
of self-
regulation: 
shortened 
amortisation 
period
Jul 2012
Feb 2013
Jan 2014
Sep 2015
25
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
CCyB = Countercyclical capital buffer
Macroprudential instruments
Slower momentum on the Swiss mortgage and real estate markets
26
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
Conclusion
“Debt is a two-edged sword. Used wisely and in moderation, 
it clearly improves welfare. But, when it is used imprudently 
and in excess, the result can be disaster.”
Cecchetti et al. (2011).
27
1 November 2017
Collegium generale | Fritz Zurbrügg |  © Swiss National Bank
