Monetary policy: achievements and challenges 
Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland. 
Monetary policy meeting of the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, 
held at Gamla Bíó in Reykjavík on 16 November 2017  
Madame Chairman, honoured guests, 
Once again,  we gather here at  the  Iceland Chamber of Commerce’s monetary 
policy  meeting,  which  for  years  has  been  held  after  the  Central  Bank  has 
published  its  autumn  forecast  and,  in  latter  years,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee’s  interest  rate  decision.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Chamber  of 
Commerce  for  continuing  this  tradition  and  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to 
talk to you about monetary policy.  
In my speech at this same meeting last year, I noted that the Icelandic economy 
had  seldom  been  stronger,  as  we  were  experiencing  the  combined  effects  of 
robust  GDP  growth,  full  employment,  large  rises  in  real  wages,  below-target 
inflation, a current account surplus, a strong international investment position, 
and lower private sector debt than had been seen in years. At that time, we had 
also  achieved  a  historical  milestone  in  bringing  inflation  expectations  back  to 
target by most measures. The outlook was positive as well, with the prospect of 
continued  strong  GDP  growth,  a  current  account  surplus,  and  target-level 
inflation throughout the forecast horizon.  
But there were concerns, too: the potential for overheating, the possible over-
valuation of the króna, and the uncertainty about what would happen after the 
general liberalisation of the capital controls. 
Now,  one  year  later,  the  economy  is  still  very  strong,  yet  some  important 
changes  have  taken  place  –  changes  that  in  some  respects  have  reduced  the 
potential risks to price stability and financial stability.  
First of all, the vast majority of the capital controls have been lifted, and these 
risks  have  not  materialised.  Short-term  exchange  rate  volatility  did  indeed 
increase,  but  this  was  expected,  and  it  was  not  pronounced  enough  to  cause 
financial instability, as  I will discuss further in  a moment.  And exchange rate 
volatility has subsided this autumn.  
Second,  the  historical  achievement  of  monetary  policy,  which  was  on  the 
horizon  last  year,  has  now  been  confirmed  much  more  convincingly.  The 
credibility  of  monetary  policy  has  increased,  as  can  be  seen  perhaps  most 
clearly in inflation expectations, which are now much more firmly anchored to 
1 
the  target.  It  is  not  least  this  that  made  it  possible  to  lower  the  Bank’s  key 
interest  rate  by  a  full  percentage  point  in  this  one  year,  even  though  demand 
pressures  in  the  economy  were  growing  until  recently  and  interest  rates  were 
already low in historical context in 2016, after adjusting for the business cycle 
position. I explained this in detail in my speech last year.  
 
Third,  GDP  growth  appears  to  be  approaching  its  long-term  trend  rate  more 
rapidly than previously anticipated, and indications that the positive output gap 
has  already  peaked  have  grown  stronger.  As  a  result,  the  likelihood  of 
overheating  has  receded,  although  economic  policy  mistakes  and  decisions 
made in the labour market could certainly increase that likelihood once again.  
 
As  was  the  case  in  2016,  the  economic  outlook  is  positive,  according  to  the 
Central  Bank’s  baseline  forecast,  published  yesterday.  GDP  growth  will  slow 
over the next three years, but this is both desirable and inevitable. The current 
account  surplus  will  be  smaller  than  previous  forecast,  but  a  surplus  will 
remain. There will be full employment,  an real  wages will rise more over the 
entire period than can be expected in the long run. Inflation will converge with 
the  target  in  mid-2018  and  remain  close  to  target  for  the  rest  of  the  forecast 
horizon.  This  is  one  of  the  best  inflation  forecasts  I  have  seen  in  my  entire 
career. But it is a baseline forecast, and unforeseen external shocks, economic 
policy,  and  decisions  made  in  the  labour  market  could  easily  change  the 
situation significantly.  
 
Current situation and outlook 
 
Let  us  now  take  a  closer  look  at  several  aspects  of  the  current  economic 
situation and outlook.  
 
Chart 1 shows how export growth has slowed this year from its 2016 peak yet 
remains  robust.  The  combination  of  weaker  export  growth  and  increased 
imports  explains  the  year-on-year  slowdown  in  GDP  growth.  It  also  explains 
the narrower current account surplus, although a deterioration in terms of trade 
is also a factor. The current account surplus is projected at 2% of GDP by the 
end  of  the  forecast  horizon  and  could  easily  be  eroded  by  a  surge  in  demand 
and/or lower export revenues.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
Chart 1 
 As Chart 2 shows, both private consumption growth and rising house prices are 
due  mainly  to  increased  real  incomes  and  households’  improved  financial 
position.  This  differs  greatly  from  the  situation  in  pre-crisis  Iceland,  where 
increased  household  leverage  played  a  leading  role,  but  as  can  be  seen  in  the 
chart on the right, lending to households has not  increased in real terms since 
2012. 
 
Chart 2 
  
The fact that inflation has been low in recent years despite steep rises in wages 
and  house  prices  stems  primarily  from  two  things:  on  the  one  hand,  positive 
supply shocks in the form of strong export growth and improved terms of trade, 
which  have  pushed  the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  upwards,  and  on  the  other 
hand, price deflation in international goods trade. Import prices have therefore 
fallen steeply in krónur terms, as can be seen at the left in Chart 3. What would 
happen  when  this  imported  deflation  turned  around  was  always  a  source  of 
concern. Such a development now appears to be on the horizon, as can be seen 
in  the  chart.  But  fortunately,  the  rise  in  unit  labour  costs  seems  to  be  losing 
pace, as can be seen in the chart at the centre, and house prices appear to have 
 3 
peaked.  The  inflation  outlook  is  therefore  favourable,  as  can  be  seen  in  the 
chart  at  the  right,  which  looks  past  the  changes  in  value-added  tax  that  could 
possibly be implemented in the near future.  
 
Chart 3 
   
 “Missing” inflation 
 
Headline  inflation  has  been  below  the  Central  Bank’s  target  for  nearly  four 
years,  even  though  the  negative  output  gap  closed  and  then  turned  positive 
some time ago and wages have risen well in excess of what, in an average year, 
would be deemed consistent with the inflation target.  
 
This is not a unique case, however. In international circles, there is widespread 
discussion of “missing” inflation, which generally  refers to  the fact  that  wage 
rises  are  astoundingly  small  given  the  business  cycle  position  in  the  country 
concerned.  For  example,  countries  as  dissimilar  as  the  US  and  Sweden  are 
considered  to  be  at  full  employment,  yet  wage  increases  are  smaller  than  is 
consistent with the inflation target. In some countries, such as the US, this may 
be  partly  because  the  slack  in  the  labour  market  is  actually  larger  than 
conventional  measurements  indicate,  as  the  labour  participation  rate  is 
historically  rather  low.  But  this  does  not  tell  the  whole  tale,  and  in  some 
countries  it  is  not  a  very  robust  explanation.  Given  how  widespread  this 
phenomenon is, and given that it is in some respects independent of domestic 
conditions  and economic policy, there are a number of indications that global 
factors such as increased cross-border mobility of labour and other production 
factors,  international  value  chains,  and  the  existence  of  a  large  excess  labour 
force in some emerging market economies play an important role in it.  
 
An underestimated slack in  the labour market  is hardly  a factor in  Iceland, as 
the  labour  participation  rate  is  at  a  historical  high  and  wage  rises  are 
substantial.  Labour  importation  and  indirect  pressures  from  an  unutilised 
lower-income  labour  force  in  other  countries  have  clearly  had  a  dampening 
effect  on  wage  increases,  however.  Even  so,  inflation  is  low.  This  is  true  of 
 4 
other economies as well. But it is less of a puzzle than wage developments in 
industrialised countries overall: global trends have been favourable to them, as 
can  be  seen  in  improved  terms  of  trade  and  rising  exchange  rates.  It  is  well 
known  that  this  can  create  conditions  where  strong  GDP  growth  and  sizeable 
pay  rises  can  coincide  for  a  time  with  low  inflation.  And  one  difference 
between  Iceland  and  many  other  industrialised  economies  is  that  in  other 
countries  there  have  been  concerns  that  inflation  expectations  would  fall  too 
steeply and become anchored below target.  
 
In  order  to  place  Iceland  in  this  context,  let  us  look  at  Chart  4,  which  gives 
some  relevant  metrics  for  several  small  and  medium-sized  inflation-targeting 
countries.  
 
Chart 4 
    5 
 In this context, some of the discussion has centred on the extent to which low 
inflation is a problem if it is paired with robust GDP growth and full capacity 
utilisation,  particularly  if  these  are  a  result  of  positive  supply  shocks.  In  that 
case,  perhaps  the  problem  lies  in  how  the  inflation  target  is  presented  and 
understood.  This  will  call  for  more  flexibility  and  a  longer  horizon  for  the 
target,  which  was  one  of  the  proposals  explored  in  the  Central  Bank’s  2010 
report on monetary policy in post-capital controls Iceland.1 
 
 
Monetary policy milestones 
 
I  mentioned  earlier  the  success  we  have  had  with  monetary  policy  –  success 
that  was  visible  a  year  ago  and  is  even  more  obvious  now.  This  past 
September,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  issued  a  Special  Publication  entitled 
Monetary policy based on inflation targeting: experience since 2001 and post-
crisis changes.2 In addition to discussing the topics in the title, the report maps 
out  this  success  with  monetary  policy.  Chart  5  shows  what  that  entails: 
inflation  expectations  are  at  target,  unexpected  changes  in  inflation  that 
strongly  affected  short-  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  past  no 
longer do so, and movements in the exchange rate of the króna function much 
more  as  shock  absorbers  and  less  as  sources  of  shocks  than  they  used  to.  In 
short, monetary policy  with  a flexible exchange rate is  much more successful 
now than it had been before 2012, when the Bank published its report entitled 
Iceland’s currency and exchange rate policy options.3 
 
Chart 5 
 
                                                  
1 Special Publication no. 4, Monetary Policy in Iceland after capital controls. Report from the 
Central Bank of Iceland to the Minister of Economic Affairs, December 2010: 
https://www.sedlabanki.is/library/Skraarsafn/Serrit/Peningastefnan_eftir_hoft.pdf  
2 Special Publication no. 11. Monetary policy based on inflation targeting: experience since 
2001 and post-crisis changes, September 2017: 
https://www.sedlabanki.is/library/Skraarsafn/Serrit/Serrit_nr_%2011.pdf 
3 Special Publication no. 7. Iceland’s currency and exchange rate policy options, September 
2012: https://www.sedlabanki.is/library/Skraarsafn/EMU-
skýrsla/Valkostir%20Íslands%20í%20gjaldmiðils-%20og%20gengismálum.pdf 
 6 
 
Capital flow management tool  
 
There  have  been  proposals  in  the  media  recently  to  the  effect  that  the  special 
reserve  requirement  on  foreign  capital  inflows  for  investment  in  the  bond 
market  and  in  high-yielding  deposits  be  immediately  reduced  or  even 
eliminated.  In  a  Box  in  the  newly  published  Monetary  Bulletin,  the  Bank 
discusses  this  special  reserve  requirement.  It  does  not  agree  with  these 
proposals.  
 
The  special  reserve  requirement  has  functioned  as  intended,  and  monetary 
policy  transmission  along  the  interest  rate  channel  has  improved,  as  can  be 
seen  at  the  right  in  Chart  6.  Without  it,  monetary  policy  transmission  would 
have been shifted in greater measure to the exchange rate channel, leading to a 
stronger  appreciation  and increased  exchange  rate volatility,  which would not 
have been terribly popular under current conditions. Although the goal is to lift 
the  special  reserve  requirement,  conditions  do  not  warrant  it  as  yet.  It  will 
probably be necessary to scale it back in increments as demand pressures in the 
domestic economy recede and growth in trading partner countries gathers more 
momentum. Current forecasts indicate that this will happen, as can  be seen at 
the  right  in  the  chart.  Long-term  interest  rates  will  reflect  this,  and  the  long-
term interest rate differential will narrow.  
 
Chart 6 
  
Another  important  factor  is  that  it  is  unclear  what  benefit  the  investments 
affected by the capital flow management measure have for Iceland at present. 
The  Treasury’s  borrowing  need  is  limited  in  historical  context,  and  strictly 
speaking,  the  Treasury  does  not  need  the  funds  generated  by  the  bonds  in 
question. If the special reserve requirement were not in effect, the Central Bank 
would probably have to hold larger foreign exchange reserves so as to mitigate 
the risk associated with carry trade-related inflows and the potential for sudden 
outflows.  This  would  be  quite  costly,  as  the  global  market  returns  on  the 
reserves are unusually low at present. At the same time, foreign investors can 
expect attractive returns on Icelandic Treasury bonds, and the more stable the 
króna, the greater the risk-adjusted interest rate differential. In order to reduce 
 7 
that  differential,  the  Central  Bank  would  therefore  need  to  allow  increased 
exchange  rate  fluctuations,  which  would  also  exacerbate  the  risk  faced  by 
residents. Under current conditions, it can even be argued that for the Icelandic 
economy, the net benefit from such inflows is negative.  
 
Nevertheless,  the  aim  is  to  lift  the  special  reserve  requirement  as  soon  as 
conditions  warrant  it  and  that  it  will  not,  as  a  general  rule,  be  used  under 
normal conditions. Even so, the Central Bank has considered it important to be 
able to activate it if the need arises. The special reserve requirement would then 
be a third line of defence, to support conventional economic policy and micro- 
and macroprudential tools.  
 
In order for this to be possible after the capital controls have been lifted in full, 
a  new  statutory  foundation  (other  than  the  Foreign  Exchange  Act)  must  be 
found  for  the  special  reserve  requirement,  which  is  primarily  a  monetary  and 
macroprudential  policy  instrument.  Furthermore,  the  efficacy  of  the  special 
reserve  requirement  must  be  ensured  once  speculative  derivatives  trading  in 
krónur has been re-authorised, as full liberalisation implies. The Central Bank 
is  currently  reviewing  the  technical  foundations  for  the  special  reserve 
requirement and preparing proposals for statutory amendments pertaining to its 
application. 
 
 
Exchange rate fluctuations 
 
The  new  issue  of  Monetary  Bulletin  contains  a  Box  on  fluctuations  in  the 
exchange rate of the króna in international context. That article presents several 
points that should be borne in mind in any discussion of monetary policy and 
possible modifications to the monetary policy framework, including exchange 
rate policy. They are as follows:  
 
  Short-term exchange rate volatility increased just after the capital controls 
were  lifted,  as  had  been  expected  and  as  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
had pointed out in advance in its statements. This volatility has subsided in 
recent months (see the right side of Chart 7).  
If  we  look  beyond  the  aftermath  of  the  pegged  exchange  rate  regime,  the 
financial  crisis,  and  the  capital  controls  regime,  it  cannot  be  seen  that  the 
short-term fluctuations of the Icelandic króna have been vastly larger than 
other  Nordic  krónur  that  have  flexible  exchange  rates,  or  commodity-
exporters’ currencies. These currencies also have periods of peak volatility.  
  Long  real  exchange  rate  cycles  are  a  well-known  phenomenon,  also  in 
 countries with a fixed nominal exchange rate (Chart 8).  
  As  has  previously  been  noted,  exchange  rate  movements  have  been  more 
effective  as  shock  absorbers  in  recent  years  than  they  were  previously. 
Although more effective and more credible monetary policy plays a part in 
this, what is probably more important is that the capital controls – and now, 
 8 
the  capital  flow  management  measure  –  have  mitigated  volatile  capital 
flows, which can undermine economic stability, as experience has shown.  
 
Chart 7 
 
Chart 8 
  
Review  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  and  currency  and  exchange 
rate policy options 
 
In closing, I would like to focus on the ongoing review of Iceland’s monetary 
policy framework and currency and exchange rate policy options. 
  
In  the  recent  past,  I  have  emphasised  how  important  it  is  that  this  discussion 
should take into account what monetary policy can and cannot do. In the long 
run, monetary policy can deliver price stability, and in the short run it can also 
mitigate  the  effects  of  shocks  and  reduce  fluctuations  in  output  and 
employment. But monetary policy cannot have a long-term impact on the real 
exchange  rate.  As  such,  it  can  do  little  to  mitigate  the  crowding-out  effect  of 
strong  growth  in  a  new  export  sector.  If  it  tried  to,  the  effect  would  be  only 
temporary, and it would come at the expense of sacrificing the objectives with 
which  monetary  policy  has  been  entrusted  –  objectives  that  it  can  achieve. 
Industrial  and  fiscal  policies  can  have  such  a  real  impact  over  the  long  term, 
however, and it is to them that concerned parties should turn.  
 9 
  
But  it  is  possible  to  choose  from  among  various  options  on  the  spectrum 
between  a  rigid  peg  and  a  free-floating  exchange  rate.  And  it  is  possible  to 
adopt  another  currency,  either  unilaterally  or  in  bilateral  or  multilateral 
cooperation.  
 
These  were  the  options  explored  in  the  Central  Bank’s  2012  report.4  The 
conclusion  was  that  a  unilateral  peg  with  unrestricted  capital  flows  could  run 
aground,  as  it  did  in  so  many  economies  after  capital  movements  were 
liberalised  further  in  the  1980s  and  1990s.  A  firmer  peg  such  as  a  currency 
board could pose risks to financial stability, and the same was considered true 
of  unilateral  adoption  of  another  currency.  It  was  deemed  highly  uncertain  – 
and actually unlikely – that bilateral adoption of another currency would be on 
offer anywhere.  
 
That  left  two  possibilities:  joining  the  eurozone  after  a  negotiated  agreement 
and  continuing  with  a  flexible  exchange  rate  and  an  inflation  target.  The 
problem  was  that  there  were  drawbacks  to  both.  The  financial  crisis  had 
uncovered  flaws  in  the  design  of  the  eurozone,  and  it  also  came  to  light  that 
political support for eurozone membership was lacking. Independent monetary 
policy and a flexible exchange rate had not been very successful.  
 
Has  something  changed?  The  euro  area  is  still  putting  in  place  the  reforms 
deemed necessary for it to function smoothly, and it does not seem to me that 
political  support  for  membership  has  increased  significantly  since  the  Bank’s 
report  was  issued.  But  various  reforms  have  been  made  to  monetary  policy 
conduct  in  Iceland,  and  financial  stability  policy  has  been  vastly  improved. 
Much  of  what  I  have  called  inflation  targeting  plus  has  already  been  put  in 
place.  And  in  the  past  few  years,  we  have  seen  that  independent  monetary 
policy  can  work  effectively,  also  in  Iceland.  This  is  where  we  are  now.  That 
need not mean that we will be here for the indefinite future. There is no eternal 
monetary solution, and various options develop over time.  
 
 
                                                 
4 See reference in Footnote 3. 
 10 
