Sabine  Lautenschläger:  European  banks  -  the  quest  for  the  best
business model
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the ECB Forum
on Banking Supervision, Frankfurt am Main, 7 November 2017.
 The banking sector is going through tough times. Having emerged from a major crisis, it faces
challenges  and  change.  But  one  thing  has  not  changed,  and  it  never  will.  A  bank  needs  a
sustainable business model. It has to earn revenues; it has to keep its costs in check; and it has
to keep its risks under control. How all this is done has changed, however. Many things that still
worked a couple of years ago no longer work today.
Let me quickly highlight a few points.
Profitability is low for many banks.
First, for a long time, economic growth was low. Together with low interest rates, that has put a
brake  on  a  traditional  source  of  revenue.  Banks,  in  particular  those  that  have  not  found  a
profitable  market  niche,  need  to  diversify  their  sources  of  revenue.  Digitalisation  might  offer  a
solution, but it is certainly not the only one.
Second,  some  national  banking  markets  in  Europe  are  overbanked  and  therefore  overly
competitive. So there is a need for consolidation – consolidation which leads to stronger banks
with viable business models.
Third, many banks still have high costs, partly because of their large branch networks. But how
large do these networks actually need to be in this age of digital banking?
Fourth, some banks are still weighed down by impaired balance sheets. They need to get rid of
legacy assets such as non-performing loans.
Fifth, some banks could improve the way they handle risks. They need to establish a strong risk
culture, set up adequate risk governance and integrate it into their overall structure.
And finally, all banks have to adapt to more stringent rules. It is true that they come at a cost, but
in  the  long  run,  their  benefits  are  greater.  Society  benefits  in  any  case,  but  so  do  the  banks.
Strong rules help to win people’s trust, and that is an important asset for banks.
A few banks still have some way to go – they still need to adapt their business models; they need
to find their competitive advantage. Those banks which want to prosper in the future need to act
now.
And it is indeed possible to prosper, even in tough times. Across the euro area, we see about two
dozen  large  banks  which  constantly  outperform  their  peers.  They  are  based  in  different
countries, they are of different sizes, and they have different business models.
So it is not about a single successful business model. It is about the whole set-up of how to do
banking today. And, as these banks show, it is possible to succeed – that is encouraging, for us
and for the banks.
These are challenging times for banks; there is no doubt about that. One thing is clear, though:
tomorrow’s business models will look different from today’s.
But hasn’t that always been true?
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
