Sharon  Donnery:  Central  bank  risk  management  in  a  changing
institutional and regulatory environment
Speech  by  Ms  Sharon  Donnery,  Deputy  Governor  (Central  Banking)  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland,  at  the  Joint  Bank  of  Portugal  and  European  Central  Bank  Conference  on  "Risk
Management for Central Banks", Lisbon, 26 September 2017.
Introduction
 1
 As  central  bankers,
Robert F. Kennedy once  said  “like  it  or  not  we  live  in  interesting  times”.
supervisors, or market participants alike, those working in financial markets have certainly come
through some extraordinarily interesting times in recent years.
For central banks, risk management is at the intersection of both central banking and supervisory
structures, and the financial market. It is, therefore, a pleasure to speak to some of the issues
which  are  emerging  in  this  space,  particularly  in  the  context  of  the  changing  European
institutional architecture and regulatory environment.
During recent years, fragile, and indeed unstable, economic and market conditions have required
central  banks  to  assume  potentially  substantial  financial  risks.  These  were  taken  with  the
objective  of  maintaining  the  appropriate  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission
mechanism and restoring price stability. This fundamental shift in the risk profile of central banks’
response is an integral part to performing our role and to fulfilling our mandate of bringing inflation
below but close to 2 per cent over the medium term.
In parallel, following the financial crisis, regulatory reform has focussed on better safeguarding
the  stability  and  efficiency  of  an  increasingly  globalised  financial  system  and,  importantly,
mitigating the impact of future market failures. These changes have brought a whole array of new
regulatory policies.
While most of the  policy  reforms  are  directed  at  commercial  financial  institutions,  all  financial
market participants, including central banks are affected – not least by the important structural
changes with the advent of Banking Union.
For the purposes of today’s discussion, the focus of my remarks is on the implications for central
bank risk management. The implications, however, differ, depending on which part of a central
bank’s  mandate  one  focusses.  It  is  possible  to  discern  different  implications  of  the  recent
developments in regulatory frameworks for risk management policies and practices, depending
on whether we focus on monetary policy, financial stability, supervision, reserves management,
or payments and settlements. Moreover, some of the implications of regulatory developments
are not yet fully understood given many are still at an early stage of implementation.
Today,  I  would  like  to  briefly  discuss  three  aspects  of  recent  developments  in  regulatory
frameworks for risk management in central banks:
1.  The  impact  of  regulation  on  central  bank  counterparties,  and  hence  collateral  for  central
banks;
2.  The prudent management of central bank balance sheets; and
3.  Risk management and the co-ordination of supervisory and monetary policy mandates.
Impact of regulatory developments on central bank counterparties
The central bank sits at the heart of the financial system by providing liquidity to (and absorbing
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
liquidity from) eligible counterparties.
Like market participants, central bank’s risk management practices must evolve if they are to
continue  to  contribute  to  providing  an  effective  policy  response.  This  includes  evolving  in
2
response to how changes in financial regulations affect counterparties.
By  design,  the  intention  of  such  regulations  is  to  alter  the  incentives  and  behaviours  of  credit
institutions and market participants.
For central banks, however, our role is to ensure that the consequences of these changes do not
unduly interfere with the Eurosystem’s implementation of monetary policy, and our price stability
objective.    To  achieve  this  objective  it  is  important  that  we  respond  appropriately  to  changing
counterparty behaviour, changing collateral composition and availability, and ensure the central
bank balance sheet is sufficiently protected.
While difficult to predict with certainty, some characteristics of the Basel III Liquidity Coverage
Ratio  (LCR)  or  the  introduction  of  collateral  requirements  under  the  European  Market
Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR),  for  example,  may  have  consequences  for  monetary  policy
operations  and  therefore,  for  central  bank  risk  control  frameworks.   For  example,  because
central bank funding is treated as High Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA) with a 100 per cent roll over
rate,  under  the  new  regulatory  framework,  banks  may  be  incentivised  to  pledge  non-HQLA
collateral (such as credit claims or some Asset Backed Securities) for funding, while keeping
4
their HQLA unencumbered and available for other purposes.
3
It should be noted that our counterparties, for the most part, hold excess liquidity and can access
as much funding as required from the Eurosystem, subject to holding sufficient eligible collateral.
Therefore, the intended, or unintended impact of financial regulation on central bank operational
frameworks  may  only  become  fully  apparent  once  there  is  a  change  in  the  monetary  policy
stance.  The real incentives created by regulatory developments will then no longer be hidden by
the excess liquidity.
Protection is key and it must be emphasised that accepting a different set of collateral does not
necessarily imply that a central bank accepts more risk. Nonetheless, central banks need to be
conscious of and need to plan for what these types of developments may mean for existing risk
control  frameworks.  This  may  include  enhancing  risk  measurement  capabilities,  such  as
frameworks  to  carry  out  internal  assessments  of  collateral  credit  quality,  and  determining
satisfactory haircut methodologies.
Central bank balance sheet risk management
Turning more directly to the prudent management of central bank balance sheets, in addition to
the examples of Basel  III  and  EMIR,  regulatory  developments  have  ushered  in  a  considerable
increase in financial reporting and financial risk assessment requirements, following the financial
crisis.
These  regulatory  reporting  developments  necessitate  that  central  banks  hold  a  mirror  up  to
themselves  on  aspects  of  their  own  practices,  such  as  implementing  broadly  equivalent
enhancements  for  effective  risk  management  of  our  balance  sheets.  These  include  more
sophisticated stress-testing or reflecting changes in accounting standards, such as IFRS 9 for
example, to incorporate more forward looking elements in the measurement of risk exposures.
Notwithstanding that our mandate is different and implies that some risks and scenarios are an
unavoidable  consequence  of  the  policy  stance,  central  banks  should  aim  for  the  highest
standards of both governance and risk management. And central banks are indeed increasingly
performing  more  forward-looking  risk  assessments  in  response  to  the  increased  risk  profile,
since the financial crisis.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
At  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  for  example,  our  2016  year-end  risk  assessment  identified  an
additional material risk, which relates to the potential for future interest rate mismatches on the
Central Bank’s balance sheet. This forward-looking assessment necessitated an additional risk
provision,  in  this  regard,  arising  from  the  actions  taken  by  the  Central  Bank  as  part  of  the
Eurosystem’s ongoing non-standard monetary policy measures.  Incorporating such a provision
was  also  enabled  by  a  move  to  follow  all  aspects  of  the  relevant  ECB Accounting  Guideline,
6
including those categorised as non-mandatory.
5
The  impact  of  regulatory  developments  on  central  bank  risk  management  is  not  confined  to
financial risks. A notable feature of recent regulatory reforms is far greater emphasis on rigorous
standards of corporate governance within firms. Many of these standards are equally applicable
to central banks. It is imperative that in the context of expanding central bank mandates, and in
some cases large organisational change, we endeavour to meet and sometimes exceed these
standards in certain areas.
Implications of changed supervisory approach and structures
Turning  to  more  structural  changes,  Banking  Union  and  particularly  the  establishment  of  the
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) has implications for how central banks share information
and manage risks.
Deeper institutional integration has led to a changed landscape that may have implications for
central  banks  performing  their  risk  management  mandate.  Risk  managers  in  the  Eurosystem
now engage with supervisors who perform their mandate as part of ECB Banking Supervision.
One potential challenge for national central banks may arise given risk management decisions
relating to counterparties are taken independently. Supervisors may at the same time be taking
similar decisions but with different priorities. If those assessments differ, for example in the case
of  counterparty  solvency  for  Emergency  Liquidity Assistance  (ELA),  potential  communication
challenges will have to be overcome, given the new institutional structure.
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  learned  during  the  crisis  about  the  difficulties  with  a  separate
approach to supervision and central banking. Supervisory functions had been divested to the Irish
Financial  Services  Regulatory  Authority  (IFSRA).  However,  they  remained  housed  with  the
Central Bank, under the umbrella of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland
(CBFSAI).
Subsequent  reviews  of  the  performance  of  the  structure  in  the  lead  up  to,  and  during,  the
financial crisis identified inadequate channels of communication between the two entities as part
of the underlying factors behind the development of the risks that manifested in the Irish banking
7
sector.
The  central  banking  and  supervisory  entities  have  since  re-merged  into  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland. To avoid such problems of the past, the Central Bank actively promotes a ‘One Bank’
philosophy to foster communication and collaboration across the different functions.
Other  important  elements  of  Banking  Union  also  have  implications  for  risk  management  in
central  banks.  Resolvability  assessments  and  resolution  plans  are  key  parts  of  the  new
regulatory framework of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). Furthermore, the
Single Resolution Board (SRB) provides a similar overarching institutional structure with potential
similar challenges as outlined earlier for the SSM.
We  must  continually  focus  on  the  efficient  and  effective  cooperation  of  respective  functions
across our new multi-layered institutional structure, not least for periods of stress.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
To conclude, the effects of accommodative monetary policy and the legacy of the financial crisis
still weigh on banks’ balance sheets and the full effects and incentives of regulatory measures
are perhaps not yet observable. For central banks, in particular, the achievement of our price
stability  mandate  has  necessitated  the  expansion  of  our  balance  sheets  with  the  resulting
change in our risk profile.
Risk managers must always ask themselves whether they are adequately prepared for sudden
changes in current circumstances. Risk managers must also look ahead in consideration of the
impact of future longer-term developments and how they will affect the risk profile of central bank
exposures and of the operation of central banks themselves.
In this regard, in my remarks today I have tried to address three aspects: counterparties and
collateral; the management of balance sheets; as well as some institutional considerations to
shine a light on potential emerging issues. To some extent, these issues only touch the surface.
All in all, I think it’s fair to say whilst the crisis may have abated, we still live in interesting times.
Thank you for your attention, I look forward to the discussion.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I would like to thank Rosanna Lynch, David Doran, Glenn Calverley and Mícheál O’Keeffe for their contribution to
my remarks. See Robert F. Kennedy, Day of Affirmation Address, University of Capetown, Capetown, South
Africa, June 6, 1966.
See for example Poloz, Stephen S., ‘Models and the Art and Science of Making Monetary Policy’ Remarks by
Governor of the Bank of Canada, 31 January 2017.
See “Some Implications of New Regulatory Measures for Euro Area Money Markets”, Doran, D., et al, Central
Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin, 1, 2014.
EMIR is expected to result in increased high quality asset encumbrance for market participants due to certain
stricter collateral requirements. In a similar manner to the potential effect of the introduction of the LCR, this may
also lead to a decrease in the overall quality of collateral that is available to be pledged by banks with the
Eurosystem, as market participants may hoard highly liquid collateral for repo postings.
See “Non-standard monetary policy measures and the balance sheets of Eurosystem central banks”, Donnery,
Doran, Gleeson, and Carroll (2017), Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin, 3, July.
Guideline (EU) 2016/2249 of the ECB of 3 November 2016 on the legal framework for accounting and financial
reporting in the European System of Central Banks (ECB/2016/34).
See Honohan Patrick (2010), “The Irish Banking Crisis Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy 2003–2008: A
Report to the Minister for Finance by the Governor of the Central Bank”.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
