Yves  Mersch:  Digital  transformation  of  the  retail  payments
ecosystem
Introductory speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the Joint ECB and Bank of Italy conference, Rome, 30 November 2017.
 Efficient and safe retail payments systems are a precondition for the functioning of any modern
economy. They allow for everyday transactions to take place, thus providing the foundation for
commerce and trade.
Central banks through cash and banks have traditionally offered these services. And they were
successful in creating a secure and trusted payment ecosystem for consumers.
However  over  time  the  banking ecosystem has developed inefficiencies.  It  has  lost  some
ability to innovate and adapt to the changing needs of the end-user.
In  Europe  technological  disruptions,  competition  from  non-banks  and  regulatory  pressure  has
forced banks to re-examine how they provide retail payment services.
The  ability  to  provide  real-time  services  will  be  essential  if  banks  want  to  retain  and  gain
customers. The strategic importance of instant payments cannot be overstated.
The  move  towards  a  real-time  world  with  the  provision  of  real-time  services  cannot  happen
without  pan-European  instant  payments.  They  will  provide  a new framework for innovative
and efficient retail payments in Europe.
My talk today will focus on instant payments but I will also briefly discuss the alleged innovation
brought by private virtual currency schemes without an identifiable issuer.
The foundations of instant payments and ensuring stakeholder involvement
The  Single  Euro  Payments Area  (SEPA)  was  the  origin  of  today’s  digital  landscape  for  retail
payments in Europe. It is a key ingredient of Europe’s single currency and was necessary to
bring  the  full  benefits  of  the  euro  closer  to  all  citizens.  This  integration  of  electronic  retail
payments  in  Europe  was  full  of  challenges  and  was  only  completed  12  years  after  the
introduction of euro notes and coins. One of the most prominent issues that faced SEPA was the
lack of full stakeholder involvement.
Initially, SEPA was considered an “IT” project to be implemented by banks. It was not seen in the
overall context of a project that could transform payments in Europe. The project did not engage
enough with Europe’s consumers and businesses.
Support from all stakeholders is thus crucial to the success of any such undertaking. To facilitate
such  support,  the  ECB  established  the Euro  Retail  Payments  Board  (ERPB).  The  ERPB
brings together both sides of the market, the supply and the demand side, the banks and the end
users in order to further the development of an integrated, innovative and competitive market for
euro retail payments in the EU. This co-operation has led to new synergies. It gave a voice to
those who felt excluded from the process of innovation in retail payments.
Recently  we  have  gone  further  to  enhance  European  cooperation  and  have  established,  in
conjunction with the European Commission, the European Forum for Innovation in Payments
(EFIP). This body brings  together  the  national  payments  committees  with  the  ERPB  to  foster
integration and innovation for retail payments in Europe.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  ERPB  was  instrumental  in  bringing  the  vision  of  real-time  payments  to  Europe  with  the
inception of instant payments. The European Payments Council, acting on guidance from the
ERPB, created the SEPA credit transfer instant scheme. I am pleased that this scheme was
successfully launched last week and let me congratulate the following eight countries who signed
up  as  of  today  to  the  service.  The  tech  savvy  nations  are: Austria,  Estonia,  Germany,  Latvia,
Lithuania,  the  Netherlands,  Italy,  and  Spain.  Now,  European  end-users  whose  banks  have
already  joined  and  implemented  the  scheme  can  send  and  receive  instant  payments  across
Europe in less than 10 seconds.
A positive end-user experience will ultimately determine the success of instant payments. The
ERPB is supporting the work of the industry and other stakeholders to facilitate the initiation of an
instant  payment  using  the  recipient’s  mobile  telephone  number  as  a  proxy  for  their  IBAN,  no
matter where they are located in the EU. The ERPB expects that a pan-European mobile proxy
lookup service will be ready by the end of 2018 at the latest and I urge all stakeholders to ensure
that this deadline is met.
However,  to  facilitate  the  full  roll-out  of  instant  payments  we  have  to  enable  reachability  of  all
banks in Europe. To enable full reachability the Eurosystem has decided to launch an instant
payments settlement system in central bank money, the Target Instant  Payment  Settlement
(TIPS) Service. TIPS is scheduled to go live in November 2018.
Appropriate regulatory framework
SEPA and instant payments did not happen in isolation. An appropriate legislative framework that
supports  digitisation,  innovation  and  competition  is  also  needed.  In  Europe  we  realise  this
importance. The revised Payment Service Directive (PSD2) will provide the necessary legislative
framework  to  allow  for  innovation.  It  will  enhance  payment  account  access  for  regulated  and
authorised third party providers. It will facilitate the participation of new actors in the payments
market. These actors will provide new innovative services, reduce costs and give consumers
more choice.
However  this  can  only  happen  if  standardised  access  to  the  payment  account  is  provided.  I
would therefore call upon stakeholders such as banks, standard setting organisations and, third
party  providers  to  work  together  to  ensure  a single  standard  is  developed  for  payment
account access.
The  competition  introduced  by  the  revised  Payment  Service  Directive  can  also  provide  an
opportunity for incumbent banks but only if they act urgently to implement instant payments. It
is crucial that banks invest to upgrade their legacy batch systems to enable real-time processing
and  offer  end-user  solutions  for  instant  payments.  These  solutions  can  provide  them  with  a
strong tool to face the upcoming competition.
The recent experience with contactless payments shows that banks, in cooperation with other
stakeholders,  are  well  capable  to  roll  out  payment  innovations  that  can  quickly  take  off  and
improve end-users’ payment experience.
Virtual currencies
It  is  my  view  that  future  innovations  in  retail  payments  will  be  based  on  instants  payments  in
combination with account access provided by the PSD2. I would like stress this point especially
in view of the ongoing public debate around the alleged innovation brought by private virtual
currency schemes or tokens.
While we have seen a substantial increase, albeit from low levels, in the value of some of the
virtual currencies lately, we should not forget that their usage as a settlement asset is marginal
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and the overall user acceptance as a means of payment is negligible.
In  fact,  retail  payment  traffic  in  Europe  alone  is  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  the  global
transaction volume of virtual currencies. In view of the speculative market environment for virtual
currencies and for other types of virtual financial assets, one should bear in mind that these are
by definition virtual: they do not constitute a claim on an issuer and do not formally qualify as
currency.
Their  purchasing  power  fluctuates  wildly  and  depends  solely  on  the  market  activity  of
speculators.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  these  virtual  currencies  can  be  considered  as  a
payment alternative for consumers – except in extreme case like in failed states- and to what
extent they can compete with the solutions market players will be able to develop in the safer
and more efficient European retail payments market.
The  ECB  continues  to  monitor  these  developments,  not  only  from  a  market  infrastructure
perspective, but also as regards monetary policy, financial stability, and prudential supervision.
And while we continue to fully meet the increasing demand for safe and efficient banknotes we
shall also experiment with cash on different digital technologies. Other adventurous applications
of a more disruptive nature are simply not robust enough from a legal, operational, governance
point of view to name but a few shortcomings which make these assets unfit for recognition from
the point of view of our mandate of efficient payments systems.
Conclusion
To  conclude,  the  benefits  of  digital  transformation  and  innovation  for  citizens  can  only  be
achieved by means of full stakeholder cooperation and an appropriate regulatory framework that
fosters innovation.
Banks  need  to  implement  instant  payments  as  soon  as  possible  and  provide  an  alternate
narrative  to  the  ongoing  public  debate  on  the  alleged  innovation  brought  by  virtual  currency
schemes.
Instant  payments  in  conjunction  with  the  building  blocks  provided  by  the  PSD2  can  offer  new
business opportunities for banks and third party providers and provide citizens with a real-time
safe payment experience.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
