Norman T L Chan: A new era of smart banking
Opening keynote speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary
Authority, at HKIB (The Hong Kong Institute of Bankers) Annual Banking Conference 2017, Hong
Kong, 29 September 2017.
 Dr Patrick Fung, Ms Carrie Leung, Vice President Pan Guangwei, distinguished guests, ladies
and gentlemen, good morning to all of you!
The theme of my speech is “A New Era of Smart Banking”, “智慧銀行新紀元
智慧銀行新紀元” in Chinese.  In the
last few years, we have frequently come across two comments amongst the fintech community. 
The  first  comment  is  that  Hong  Kong  is  very  backward  in  fintech,  quoting  mobile  payment
developments  in  Mainland  China  as  the  evidence.    The  second  is  that  fintech  will  disrupt  or
displace traditional banking.  I must say I don’t agree with these two comments for two main
reasons.
First,  Hong  Kong  has  not  been  slow  in  developing  and  adopting  fintech.    It  is  not  entirely
appropriate  to  use  mobile  payment  as  the  only  benchmark  for  measuring  the  state  of
development in fintech.  There are many other important aspects of developments that define the
maturity  of  fintech  developments,  such  as  the  use  of  digital  or  internet  banking  and  the
robustness of cybersecurity.  Even in the field of mobile payments, we should appreciate that
Hong Kong already has a well-developed electronic payment ecosystem.  In 2015, each Hong
Kong  citizen  had  on  average  2.6  credit  cards,  compared  to  0.3  credit  cards  per  person  in
Mainland China.  And there are now some 1.7 million credit card transactions involving HK$1.7
billion every day.  It is also noteworthy that for a small city of just over seven million people, Hong
Kong  has  around  34  million  Octopus  cards  in  circulation,  with  an  average  of  14  million
transactions  per  day.    This  means  on  average  each  person  in  Hong  Kong  makes  two
transactions by Octopus cards daily.  Anyway, there are many new developments in the mobile
payment  market  since  we  granted  13  stored  value  facility  (SVF)  licences  in  2016.    Second,  I
believe it unlikely that fintech firms will displace or replace traditional banks because, in addition
to speed and convenience, customers also need protection of their life savings or investments.
I have previously stated my view on the future landscape of banking and finance.  I’ll say it again
here.  On the one hand, we will see more and more tech companies venturing into finance by
riding on the highly successful and popular e-commerce, payment or social media platforms that
they  have  developed.    The  paradigm  of  these  newly  emerged  platforms  is  that  it  is  highly
“customer-centric”, meaning they design everything to provide what the customers want, taking
care of many practical and life-style needs of customers.  However, when it comes to finance,
tech companies need to realise and accept that they have to earn the trust and confidence of
customers if they wish to handle their savings and investments.  On the other hand, banks need
to  appreciate  and  accept  that  they  must  revamp  the  way  they  offer  financial  services  to  their
customers.  It is true that, compared with unregulated entities, there is a high degree of public
trust  in  banks,  but  customers  now  demand  much  faster  and  convenient  services,  not  just  in
payments  but  also  over  a  wide  range  of  financial  services,  many  of  which  are  now  made
possible by the advancement in technology.  Banks must become more “customer-centric” by
offering  highly  personalised  services  to  meet  what  the  customers  actually  want  rather  than
pushing out products or services that the firms think the customers should have.
So what does it mean on the ground?  I believe that in a couple of years’ time, there will be a high
degree of convergence in the way in which banks and tech firms conduct their businesses and
compete  in  the  arena  of  finance.    This  means  that  the  landscape  of  banking  and  finance  will
undergo  a  profound  change  during  this  process  of  convergence  between  banking  and
technology.  So how does Hong Kong move from here to there and what role will the HKMA, as
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
bank supervisor, play in preparing the banking sector for the change?
First of all, let’s take stock of where we stand at present on electronic or digital banking.  Hong
Kong is the premier international financial centre in Asia, and has been at the forefront of smart
banking in terms of digital or internet banking.  We now have 12 million internet bank accounts
and over HK$7 trillion worth of banking transactions are conducted on the internet each month. 
By and large, banks in Hong Kong are offering safe and efficient banking services to customers,
both through the conventional branches and through digital or internet banking.  However, in view
of the explosive advancement in technology in the last few years, we believe that conditions now
exist  for  banking  in  Hong  Kong  to  rise  to  the  next  higher  level.    I  would  highlight  a  couple  of
technological developments that form the building blocks for the new era of Smart Banking:
         
(a)
First is the substantial increase in mobile bandwidth and data speed.  Mobile data speed
has grown over 50 times since 2010, allowing massive volume of data transmission from
the  handheld  devices  to  take  place  at  high  speed  and  low  cost  that  were  unthinkable
previously.
         
(b)
Next comes the unprecedented growth in computing speed and storage capacity.  This
allows financial transactions to take place, be processed and stored in the digital form,
again at very high speed and low cost.
         
(c)
The  third  development  is  the  breakthrough  in  customer  authentication  and  telecom
security.  New authentication technologies such as fingerprint, voice, and facial recognition
have significantly increased the robustness and reliability in remote digital banking using
smartphones or handheld devices.
         
(d)
And fourthly, there is the Open Application Programming Interface (API).  The adoption of
Open API has facilitated very rapid innovations that help provide personalised services and
much better customer experience.
Recognising  these  technological  innovations  and  rising  aspirations  of  customers  for  more
personalised and integrated services, Hong Kong must proactively embrace the trend and seize
the  opportunity  to  upgrade  our  banking  system.    To  prepare  us  to  move  to  the  new  Smart
Banking era, I am pleased to announce that the HKMA will take the lead and launch the following
seven initiatives:
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
          
(a)
         
(b)
         
(c)
full connectivity of digital retail payments through the Faster Payment System;
upgrading of our existing Fintech Supervisory Sandbox 1.0 to Version 2.0;
facilitating the introduction of virtual banking in Hong Kong;
         
(d)
a new Banking Made Easy initiative to reduce regulatory frictions and improve customer
experience;
         
(e)
         
(f)
         
(g)
development of an Open API framework;
stepping up cross-border cooperation in fintech; and
enhancing research and talent development.
I will now explain these seven initiatives in turn.
(A)      Full Connectivity of Digital Retail Payments through Faster Payment System
The centerpiece of an efficient retail payment system will be our Faster Payment System (FPS),
scheduled for implementation in September 2018.  FPS will provide the necessary infrastructure
for full person-to-person and person-to-business connectivity not only amongst retail customers
but also between businesses and between banks and non-bank payment service providers. 
FPS operates 24 x 7, which means that users can initiate or receive a payment or fund transfer
any time throughout the year.  It will be very user-friendly as mobile phone numbers or email
addresses can be used for receiving HKD or RMB funds.
Settlement between banks is real-time, and Hong Kong is one of the few jurisdictions achieving
real-time settlement in a retail payment infrastructure.  Both banks and SVFs can participate in
FPS.  This creates a retail payment ecosystem that facilitates money transfers among users of
banks and SVFs.  The full interconnectivity of all payment participants is, again, likely to be one of
first in the world.
In  addition  to  FPS,  the  HKMA  is  leading  a  working  group  to  work  on  a  common  QR  code
standard for retail payments.  A common QR code standard will facilitate merchants, especially
SMEs, in using one single QR code to accept different payment schemes.  This would certainly
help promote the wider use of mobile retail payments in Hong Kong. 
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
(B)       Supervisory Sandbox 2.0 
The HKMA will upgrade the existing Fintech Supervisory Sandbox to Sandbox 2.0.  There will be
three  new  features  in  this  enhanced  version.    First,  we  will  set  up  a  Fintech  Supervisory
Chatroom that would engage the stakeholders at a much earlier stage of project development. 
The  Chatroom  will  be  manned  by  experts  from  our  Fintech  Facilitation  Office  and  Banking
Supervision  Department.    The  Chatroom  will  provide  speedy  and  timely  feedback  when  new
technology or solution is being contemplated, thereby reducing the risk of abortive work by the
parties concerned and expediting the rollout of new fintech applications.
Second,  tech  firms  may  have  direct  access  to  the  Sandbox.    Tech  firms  may  test  out  their
innovation by seeking feedback from the Chatroom without necessarily going through a bank.
Third,  we  understand  that  our  fellow  regulators  in  Hong  Kong,  the  Securities  and  Futures
Commission  (SFC)  and  the  Insurance  Authority  (IA),  will  shortly  be  launching  their  own
sandboxes.  Following discussion among the HKMA, SFC and IA, we have agreed to link up the
three sandboxes through a common interface so that there can be a single point of access by
the stakeholders for fintech solutions covering more than one sector.
(C)      Facilitating Virtual Banking
We believe that the time is ripe for Hong Kong to try out virtual banks.  In some jurisdictions, it
has proved to be technically feasible and commercially viable for virtual or branchless banks to
operate.  A virtual bank operates on a different model of service delivery and may help promote
financial inclusion as they normally target small customers, be they individuals or SMEs.  Our
view is that the emergence of virtual banks in Hong Kong would also provide additional impetus
to the application of fintech in Hong Kong and offer a new kind of customer experience in mobile
and digital banking.  Given the recent developments in fintech and the evolution of digital banking,
we will shortly be consulting the industry and the fintech community on whether and if so how the
Guide  to Authorization  of  Virtual  Banks  promulgated  in  2000  should  be  amended  to  suit  the
present day circumstances.
(D)      Banking Made Easy
Another component of the new Smart Banking era is our “Banking Made Easy” initiative.  We will
set  up  a  new  task  force  within  the  HKMA  and  work  with  the  banking  industry  to  identify  and,
where appropriate, modify or streamline those regulatory requirements or processes that may
hinder technological innovations.  We will seek to clarify regulatory expectations, review our own
guidance and rules to make them more user friendly, thereby facilitating innovations in products
and services for better customer experience.  Remote onboarding of customers and account
maintenance are two such examples in which the use of new technology may lower operating
costs and improve customer experience.  We will also initiate legislative changes in our anti-
money  laundering  laws  and  regulations  so  that  a  more  risk-sensitive  approach  to  remote
customer onboarding can be undertaken.  We and the Hong Kong Association of Banks are now
studying  how  to  use  know-your-customer  (KYC)  utility  to  conduct  customer  due  diligence
processes more efficiently.  The HKMA is also considering the introduction of multiple tiers of
bank  accounts  so  that  the  process  required  for  opening  accounts  for  the  low  risk  banking
services  can  be  simplified.    In  addition  to  customer  onboarding  and  account  maintenance,
Banking Made Easy would seek to facilitate the use of technology in the areas of online finance,
online wealth management and robo advisers.
(E)       Open API 
The HKMA is currently consulting the banking industry to formulate a framework for facilitating the
development of Open API.  In the context of banks, Open API refers to a set of publicly available
coding that enables recognised third-party service providers, with the consent of the customers
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
concerned where appropriate, to connect to, and conduct data exchange with, the IT systems of
the  banks.    Open API  can  serve  many  purposes.    For  example,  it  may  allow  users  of  online
discussion forums and social media platforms to obtain information about products and services
of banks for comparison and analysis.  Many lifestyle websites and mobile apps may make use
of  Open API  to  integrate  banks’  foreign  exchange  and  payment  services  to  offer  end-to-end
holiday or health-care packages.  A bank customer may benefit from Open API by using third-
party  applications  to  consolidate  for  analysis  purposes  his  cash  flow  and  investments  kept  in
several bank accounts.  However, the key benefits of Open API can be reaped only if it is widely
adopted in the banking sector.  And this is precisely the reason why some jurisdictions are taking
steps to encourage or, in the case of the EU including the UK, even mandate through legislation
financial institutions to subscribe to Open API.  We aim to finalise our policy on Open API for the
banking sector around the end of the year.  We believe that the wide adoption of an Open API
framework  would  promote  collaboration  between  banks  and  tech  firms,  a  crucial  element  for
stimulating innovations and improved services for customers in Hong Kong.  
(F)        Cross-border Collaboration in Fintech
As an international banking and funding centre, Hong Kong must promote the use of fintech in
managing cross border financial flows.  The HKMA is in close dialogue with several authorities in
other jurisdictions to collaborate in this area.  As the first step of strengthening our cooperation
within the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Bay Area, we are partnering with Shenzhen to promote
fintech and talent developments.  We are also discussing with other centres in the Bay Area to
strengthen collaboration in fintech.  More details will be announced later.
Separately,  the  HKMA  is  working  with  the  banking  industry  to  develop  a  Distributed  Ledger
Technology (DLT) platform for digital trade finance.  We also hope to be able to announce soon
the details of our collaboration with Singapore in linking up our respective trade platforms.  This
DLT  initiative,  if  implemented,  should  bring  significant  benefits  to  financiers,  importers  and
exporters  by  enhancing  the  transparency  of  cross-border  trade  finance  processes,  improving
operational efficiency and reducing the risk of frauds.
(G)      Enhancing Research and Talent Development
The  HKMA,  together  with  our  anchor  partners,  Hong  Kong  Applied  Science  and  Technology
Research Institute, Science Park and Cyberport, will step up our already close collaboration in
research  and  talent  development.  Of  course,  we  will  also  make  good  use  of  our  cooperation
frameworks with authorities and partners in other jurisdictions to achieve a win-win outcome in
this area.
Ladies and Gentlemen, the upgrading of our banking system to a new and higher level of Smart
Banking is not just something nice to have.  It is a must!  To meet the rising aspirations and
demands of customers, banking and technology must converge sooner rather than later.  Unlike
the social media world, which deals with messages and life style amenities, it is not enough for
tech firms just to offer speed and convenience when it comes to banking and finance.  Tech
firms wishing to venture into finance must recognise and accept the need for regulation, which is
essential in the provision of appropriate protection to consumers and investors.  The element of
trust  cannot  be  earned  by  speed  and  convenience  alone.    For  the  banking  industry,  it  is  not
realistic or sustainable to rest on the laurels of public trust they presently enjoy and refuse to
adopt new technologies that can offer more efficient and personalised services demanded by the
customers.  In the new era of Smart Banking, the industry, the fintech community and the HKMA
must  work  together  to  transform  the  financial  ecosystem  of  Hong  Kong.    Smart  Banking  is  a
platform  that  offers  full  interconnectivity  amongst  retail  and  corporate  customers  and  allows
more  personalised  financial  services  and  transactions  to  be  undertaken  with  great  mobility,
speed, ease and safety!  At the same time, under our risk-based supervisory regime, the right
balance  will  need  to  be  struck  between  promoting  financial  innovations  on  the  one  hand  and
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
according appropriate customer and investor protection on the other.
In conclusion, it is not a question of whether the tech firms will disrupt the banks or the banks can
resist the intrusion of tech firms.  It is a question of whether we make the best out of banking and
technology by marrying the two.  The answer to this question is crystal clear to me.  We must
move into the new era of Smart Banking by embracing technology and safe banking.  Indeed it is
most encouraging to see many banks in Hong Kong are already taking the initiative to ride on the
wave and making impressive progress in this direction.  Ladies and gentlemen, I feel very excited
by  the  prospects  that  lie  ahead  because  Hong  Kong,  by  virtue  of  its  status  as  an  IFC  and
technology hub in Asia, is uniquely well positioned to advance and excel. 
Thank you very much.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
