Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Of perception, sentiment and reality
Opening remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Persatuan  Pasaran  Kewangan  (PPKM)  Annual  Dinner  &quot;Of
Perception, Sentiment and Reality&quot;, Kuala Lumpur, 17 November 2017.
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  address  the  members  of  the  financial  market  industry  at  this
Financial Market Association of Malaysia’s (FMAM) annual dinner. l always look forward to this
event as it provides the central bank with the platform to share our thoughts and expectations for
the industry.
We are operating in a very dynamic environment. Last year, I stood here and explained in detail
why it was a challenging year. This year is no different.  As the operating climate changes rapidly
around us, we need to adapt.
The theme of my speech will be a bit different this year. Titled “Of Perception, Sentiment and
Reality”, it will be a bit longer than usual. I shall cover four parts; financial market review, factors
that drive the level of the exchange rate, comments on ringgit exchange rate and interventions,
and initiatives to build resiliency and liquidity for our market.
Part I – Financial market review
It  has  been  an  eventful  year  and  our  financial  market  industry  has  gone  through  significant
changes  and  developments.  The  ringgit,  for  one,  has  seen  significant  developments.  Last
November, it was one of the most volatile currencies. A year later, it has not only strengthened
but has greatly stabilised. The implied volatility has declined from a peak of 9.7% to about 3.7%
currently. The influence of offshore market activities and its damaging spill-overs to the ringgit
exchange rate have subsided, consistent with the significant decline in transaction volume in the
NDF  market.  On  the  other  hand,  foreign  exchange  (FX)  transaction  volume  in  the  onshore
market has been sustained with improving transaction costs, facilitating business transactions
for all market participants.
The domestic bond market has also been more stable and the risks of significant sell-offs from
non-residents  and  other  major  outflows  have  reduced.  Non-residents  now  hold  a  more
manageable level of 26.4% of total government bonds outstanding, down from the high of 34.7%.
During the early part of 2017, a period of significant capital outflows, the spike in bond yields was
short-lived  while  the  ringgit  exchange  rate  remained  well  supported.  This  was  due  to  the  net
export proceeds conversion rule that helped to balance the flows. Short-term positions by non-
resident investors exited the market, and the majority of non-resident holdings now comprised of
longer term investors, providing stability and depth to the domestic bond market.
All these were made possible with the measures introduced by the Financial Market Committee
(FMC)  and  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  (BNM).  It  was  part  of  an  overall  strategy  to  deepen  and
broaden  the  financial  market.  The  measures  removed  the  external  destabilising  influence  of
offshore to the onshore market, while at the same time creating a conducive environment for the
domestic financial market to develop.
With the influence of external factors squashed, the ringgit is now priced more efficiently and
increasingly more reflective of Malaysia’s strong fundamentals.
Nevertheless,  questions  remain  as  to  why  the  ringgit  is  far  from  reflecting  its  fair  value.
Numerous  research  pieces  by  analysts  based  on  real  effective  exchange  rates,  have  in  fact,
indicated that the ringgit is one of the most undervalued emerging market currencies. Despite
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
strong  GDP  data  for  the  first  three  quarters  and  better-than-expected  exports  performance  in
2017, the ringgit exchange rate movements have remained lethargic, with flows and sentiments
still driven by external factors and foreign players.
At times it appears as if domestic traders were playing second fiddle in own their market. It is
time  for  our  traders  to  price  the  ringgit  accordingly,  and  play  their  rightful  role  in  their  home
market. The ringgit should reflect economic fundamentals and emerging data. It is time for our
local traders to be brave, stand up and be counted. This reminds me of a saying by Abraham
Lincoln ‘Whatever you are, be a good one’.
Part II – What drives the level of the exchange rate?
Granted, the ringgit does, to some extent, reflect Malaysia’s economic fundamentals. The fact
that the ringgit’s recent recovery coincided with strong domestic data releases suggests that.
Nevertheless, in a global financial market that is driven by short-term developments, the ringgit
exchange  rate  can  veer  in  unexpected  directions  and  reach  levels  that  are  far  from  reflecting
economic  realities.  Unfortunately,  most  of  these  movements  are  not  driven  by  facts,  but
perceptions. In ringgit’s case, I would call it misperceptions.
Perception is the thinking we make based on the information that we receive. Everyone thinks. It
is our nature to do so. In fact, many of us in this room not only have to think, but we are tasked
and compensated to think, decide and act upon our thoughts. It is said that an adult supposedly
have to make an average of 35,000 decisions per day. This necessitates us to think fast and
decide quickly. But studies have also shown that thinking forces the brain to consume a lot of
oxygen, so much so that the process of thinking is tiring for our brain. Such decision fatigue can
be paralysing.
To  ease  the  decision  fatigue,  most  of  us  begin  looking  for  mental  short-cuts,  heuristics  and
simple rules-of-thumb to ease the cognitive load and cut decision-making time. But as we rely on
simple rules-of-thumb to form judgments and make decisions, we leave ourselves vulnerable to
errors, manipulations and cognitive biases. Most of the time, this is not done deliberately. The
large  body  of  research  in  neuroscience  seems  to  suggest  that  these  cognitive  biases  are
neurologically hard-wired, afflicting us all either consciously or unconsciously. Let me touch on
three instances where our perception and actions have been influenced by these biases.
First, take some of the psychological thresholds for example, loan-to-deposit ratio of 90%, ringgit
level at RM4.00, and reserves level below USD100 billion is considered as vulnerable. Most of
these are not statistically based, but rather convenient rules-of-thumb that ended up shaping our
perception and driving sentiments. Unfortunately, in this information age, these perceptions and
negative sentiments can be perpetuated rapidly and become self-fulfilling. 
The  widespread  negative  coverage  in  the  mainstream  media  feeds  on  our  confirmation  bias,
where  we  seek  out  information  that  confirms  rather  than  contradicts  our  preconceptions. And
when such information becomes widely available, we risk falling into a self-reinforcing process
known as the ‘availability cascade’, whereby a simple idea, whether it be right or wrong, gains
traction  given  repetition  and  inherent  simplicity. As  the  saying  goes,  “Repeat  something  often
enough and it will become true.”
Second,  we  tend  to,  in  some  other  instances,  base  our  perception  on  prior  evidence  and
situations that we are familiar with, rather than update our views with new information. For many
economists and analysts, Malaysia is an oil-dependent economy. When the oil price goes south,
the Malaysian economy suffers. While this was true many years ago, these simple relationships
are  continuously  assumed  to  be  fixed  and  hold  to  perpetuity.  Despite  the  many  structural
changes  leading  to  a  more  diversified  Malaysian  economy  and  reduced  reliance  on  oil,  this
perception  has  persisted.  For  the  uninitiated,  the  percentage  of  oil  revenues  to  government
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
revenues was 41.3% in 2009 compared to only 14.6% in 2016. This fact seems to elude many
analysts.
Third, and this is the trickiest of the three, is when individuals consciously tap on these cognitive
biases  to  their  own  advantage.  The  rise  of  the  asset  management  industry  is  one  example,
where asset managers’ herd behaviour may be looked at as perfectly rational. An IMF researcher
referred to such situations as “rational bubble-riding”, whereby financial benchmarking and the
short-term  nature  of  performance  appraisals  imposed  on  asset  managers,  lead  them  to
consciously ride on bubbles, despite believing that the prices are unjustified by fundamentals.
Investors  may  be  incentivised  to  herd,  preferring  to  succeed  or  fail  together  to  prevent
reputational damage. As John Maynard Keynes famously said, “It is better for reputation to fail
conventionally, than to succeed unconventionally”.
Whether these cognitive biases are unconsciously wired in us or consciously being tapped on,
we  ought  to  recognise  the  power  of  perception.  Edward  de  Bono  aptly  pointed  out  that
“perception  is  real,  even  if  it  is  not  reality.”  In  reality,  a  few  of  these  misperceptions  result  in
tangible consequences that influence the ringgit exchange rate level.
Let me cite five instances of misperceptions that have been making its rounds in the market:
First, the perception that the ringgit is driven by oil prices. This was derived from fact that
Malaysia is one of South East Asia’s net exporters of oil and gas. Petronas is also one of the
world’s largest producers of LNG. Consequently, lower oil price reduces foreign exchange
earnings of the country and government’s revenue from the oil industry; 
Second,  there  is  this  perception,  even  among  FX  dealers  and  traders,  that  the  offshore
market  knows  how  to  correctly  price  or  is  better  at  valuing  the  ringgit.  Despite  its
opaqueness  and  suspicious  pricing,  the  offshore  market  is  perceived  to  be  better,  bigger
and deeper than the onshore market, and that its price discovery process is more robust in
indicating the direction of the ringgit. As a result, the onshore market is looking offshore for
guidance on the direction and pricing of the ringgit.
Third, there is also the perception that the onshore market lacks the necessary liquidity, and
with the decline of the offshore market, this negative perception has been driving the ringgit
exchange rate weaker.
The lack of liquidity has been attributed to the inability for our forward FX volume in the onshore
market to replicate the offshore market;
Fourth,  the  significant  non-resident  participation  in  the  onshore  bond  market  is  the  main
reason for the market’s liquidity. Consequently, the market perceived that the reversal of NR
holdings will have negative bearing on the ringgit and market liquidity;
And last but not least, the gross misperception on the adequacy of the reserves. There is
this perception that reserves of less than USD100 billion is not sufficient to provide comfort
to  investors. Accordingly,  market  pessimism  reaches  new  levels  when  it  falls  below  the
threshold.
The Role of Sentiment
Other  than  perception,  the  ringgit  is  also  driven  by  sentiments,  mostly  adverse.  These  are
commonly cited through the various sentiment indices, for example as measured by MasterCard
or the Financial Times.
Sentiments  are  shaped  over  time  by  analysts  and  interestingly,  there  are  three  factors  that
consistently drive market sentiment.
One  of  these  is  the  high  level  of  external  debt,  frequently  cited  by  international  rating
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
agencies and analysts alike. The discussion on external debt has driven market sentiment
negatively as it is being touted as a source of vulnerability. The fact is that some of these
analysis ignore the evidence of more granular data and worse, only skim the surface without
the discipline to deep dive into the available data; 
Market sentiments also play out based on the government financial position and the issue of
governance. Sentiments can be easily affected if new issues or indicators are published on
the Government’s financial position. This is further exacerbated by the perceived governance
challenges that give rise to further negativity;
Market sentiment is also affected by a string of negative news headlines. While there were a
number of news headlines on ringgit this year, about 30% of the articles by foreign and local
media were written in a negative light or perspective.
This make it difficult to ensure a realistic view of the country and hence on the ringgit.
Realities and Facts
Let’s examine these perceptions, or rather misperceptions.
A  little  bit  of  work  and  use  of  data,  often  point  to  these  perceptions  as  misleading,  with  little
reflection  of  reality.  What  is  worrying  is  that,  such  perceptions  and  sentiments,  if  left
unaddressed, would end up shaping reality.
For one, a look at the correlation between oil prices and ringgit tells a completely different
story as the correlation has been low in recent years. This is not surprising given that the
relationship between oil and ringgit has been declining as Malaysia has come a long way in
diversifying its economy. The country is no longer reliant on oil and gas for economic growth.
Our growth is now driven largely by domestic consumption. On the fiscal side, efforts were
taken  to  diversify  revenues  with  the  introduction  of  the  goods  and  services  tax  and
rationalisation of subsidies; 
Similarly, for the offshore ringgit pricing, the reality is that, it is driven by speculation and non
transparent price discovery. Ringgit is not an internationalised currency and therefore any
offshore trading and pricing should have no fundamental basis.
In fact, it is illegal. The sizeable speculative activities and herd-behaviours that take place in the
offshore  market  have  considerable  influence  over  offshore  ringgit  pricing.  Consequently,  the
offshore market significantly misprices the ringgit. On the other hand, onshore pricing is based
on real demand and supply that reflects real economic activities.
Despite  what  market  had  perceived,  the  domestic  market  volume  has  increased.  It
continues to record robust activities in the financial market, reaching daily volume as high as
USD16.1 billion compared to USD14.1 billion recorded in 2016, The onshore market volume
on forwards and swaps alone has surpassed the observed offshore forward market volume
which now records an average of USD1.0 billion a day. In addition, there is a narrowing of
bid-offer  spreads  that  would  indicate  an  improvement  in  liquidity.  Anecdotal  evidence
suggests that market participants, including corporates, continue to access the market to
meet their business needs;
Risk  exposure  from  high  non-resident  participation  in  the  onshore  market  has  effectively
reduced.  Risks  from  high  non-residents  holding  have  significantly  subsided  as  footloose
short term positions have exited the market in the early part of the year. The non-resident
investors that remain in the domestic market comprise mostly of long term investors. They
are less affected by short-term market dynamics. Their investments tend to remain stable
and at times act counter cyclically to short-term investors, providing stability to the overall
bond market;
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
On reserves, our level is sufficient to meet our needs. A point often overlooked, is that the
central bank’s international reserves is not the only source to meet external liabilities. The
availability of external assets and also currency denomination of the external liabilities are
alternative sources of funding. In fact, BNM holds only 25 percent of the system’s foreign
currency  reserves.  The  rest  is  with  the  financial  system  itself.  Furthermore,  while  the
reserves are expected to intermediate capital flows in the short run, we must not forget that
the floating exchange rate framework is an important adjustment mechanism that can buffer
volatile capital flows.
Lastly, Malaysia’s external debt cannot be judged based on the aggregate level alone. One-
third is denominated in ringgit and is not subjected to valuation changes from exchange rate
movements,  limiting  the  risk  of  currency  mismatches.  The  remainder  are  subject  to
prudential  management  and  hedging  requirements.  What  is  more  important  is  that  more
than half of the total external debt is skewed towards medium- to long-term debt, while short-
term  debt  poses  limited  claims  on  reserves.  Taking  all  these  factors  into  consideration,
Malaysia’s external debt remains manageable.
As we can see, the reality is far different from the perception. It is important that conclusions are
made based on facts rather than perceptions and sentiments. Without us delving into the details
and without the availability of critical information, the probability is high that our perception and
sentiment would be inaccurate. Because of this ‘reality gap’, the central bank needs to show its
presence in the market when it is needed.
Part III – Ringgit Exchange Rate and Interventions
For  this  reason,  interventions  by  central  banks  on  the  odd  occasion  becomes  necessary.
Interventions  can  take  different  forms.  Many  of  you  may  focus  on  market  or  operational
interventions. Indeed, this is important to ensure the market has sufficient liquidity in stressed
conditions.  But  it  must  be  recognised  that  these  interventions  are  not  to  manage  the  level  of
exchange rate, as the ringgit remains a floating currency. Demand and supply forces must be
allowed to determine the level of the exchange rate. But at the same time, we cannot be oblivious
to  the  aberrations  in  demand  and  supply,  originating  from  large  speculative  positions.  Large
swings in the exchange rate are detrimental to our country. It is highly risky for an open economy
like Malaysia that relies on international trade activities and exchange rate as a price mechanism.
Through experience and practice, we have generally accepted that in a floating rate regime, the
market should be left to its devices in determining exchange rate levels. 
However,  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  markets  mechanisms  often  go  through  bouts  of
distortion. This is not at all surprising. It is proven time and again. The latest Nobel Prize recipient
for  economics,  Professor  Richard  Thaler’s  work  have  centred  on  the  essence  that  economic
agents are humans. And humans are irrational. This is the opposite of conventional economics
that rely on the central assumption that all economic agents behave rationally. This irrationality is
the main catalyst for speculative activities in the FX market. 
When speculative activities are large, they can swing towards extremes. Under these situations,
and from the central bank’s perspective, intervention is then necessary to rebalance the supply
and demand forces, and to manage the volatility caused by violent swings in the exchange rate.
Intervention in a floating rate regime is not new. Monetary authorities have been intervening in the
exchange rate market from time to time ‘to calm the situation’. This is well noted in research
work going as far back as 1975 , that it is unrealistic to envisage a perfectly free floating regime.
1
BNM’s motivation in intervention operations is to smooth out the erratic swings in exchange rate
that cause disorderly market conditions. Our principles remain that the market will continue to
determine the exchange rate levels. Indeed, given our sizeable FX market, any intervention to
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
determine a certain level is an exercise in futility, and would lead to costly distortions. In the final
analysis, market forces should dictate exchange rate levels. But as a central bank, it is our duty
to ensure that these forces are better balanced, and that the price mechanism is not distortionary
or disorderly.
Part IV – Initiatives to Build Resiliency and Liquidity
It  is  also  the  central  bank’s  duty  to  continuously  be  at  the  forefront  in  developing  the  financial
market. In September 2017, to facilitate greater access by non-residents to the onshore financial
market and subject to registration, BNM had introduced flexibilities for non-residents to manage
ringgit  exposures  arising  from  ringgit-denominated  crude  palm  oil  (CPO)  contracts  traded  on
Bursa  Malaysia.  To  date,  the  flexibility  has  managed  to  attract  a  number  of  non-residents
including major CPO players with projected hedging volume of RM20 billion per year. This will
deepen the onshore financial market.
On this note, and continuing the good work of the FMC, I would like to announce the third series
of initiatives which will be effective immediately.
The  first  initiative  will  be  to  extend  the  short-selling  framework  to  Malaysian  Government
Investment Issue (MGII) by both conventional and Islamic banks. This will increase liquidity
and boost trading activities for MGII in the secondary market as well as tighten the pricing
gaps and yield differences between Malaysian Government Securities (MGS) and MGII.
Islamic  banks  may  execute  the  short-selling  transactions  based  on  bilateral  binding  promise
(“muwa`adah mulzimah”) concept;
The second initiative is to expand the eligible collateral for liquidity operations with BNM to
include Bankers Acceptances (BAs) and Negotiable Instruments of Deposits (NIDs) issued
by AAA-rated onshore licensed banks. Banks will now be able to obtain liquidity under BNM’s
Standing Facilities by pledging these money market instruments. The expansion of eligible
collateral is expected to provide an impetus to the trading activities of NIDs and BAs and
improve pricing. This is in line with BNM’s expectations for interbank players to take on a
greater role in intermediating and pricing of liquidity.
The third initiative is the introduction of Bank Negara Interbank Bills (BNIBs) in ringgit and
foreign  currency.  This  interbank  instrument  will  be  available  to  onshore  banks  to  better
manage their ringgit and foreign currency liquidity and interest rate exposures and hence the
capacity to provide competitive pricing on FX for all tenors.
I  should  highlight  that  these  instruments  are  only  available  and  tradable  between  the  onshore
banks and will not replace Bank Negara Monetary Notes (BNMNs). BNM interbank bills will be
recognised as a high-quality liquid asset (HQLA) under Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio.
Before I conclude my remarks, let me raise two more points that involve all of you here.
First,  an  issue  on  competition  for  deposits.  Towards  every  end  of  the  year,  banks  rush  and
compete for deposits in an effort to show a good loan-to-deposit (LDR) ratio. This is disruptive
behaviour.  In  particular,  corporates,  through  their  short-term  deposit  shifting,  pushes  up  rates
and create significant distortions. This is damaging to all. Borrowing costs will rise. All will be
impacted.  Corporates  will  also  suffer  in  the  end,  through  higher  longer  term  borrowing  costs
because of these unnecessary biddings.
From another perspective, time and again, we have explained that banks should not be fixated on
the LDR ratio. It is a simplistic indicator. It cannot provide an accurate representation of evolving
bank balance sheets and funding strategies.
We need to rely on other important indicators. As we start to transition into Net Stable Funding
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ratio  (NSFR),  this  ratio  together  with  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR),  are  the  more  reflective
indicators of banks’ funding profile and liquidity positions.
Banks will be given sufficient time to adjust before implementation of the NSFR. We therefore like
to suggest to the banking community to plan wisely and avoid rushing to comply or exceed the
NSFR requirement, as this will create the same disruptive cycle caused by LDR-fixation. Nobody
gains from any disruption. It does not bode well for our financial market. Therefore, we need to
behave accordingly and contribute in creating orderly market conditions.
Second, as an advanced and resilient financial market, we require our human capital to keep
abreast  of  latest  knowledge,  skills  and  practices  to  enable  us  to  remain  professional  and
relevant. On this front, I am delighted that the Continuing Professional Development program will
start from next year, and will become mandatory for all FMAM’s members.
I  am  encouraged  to  hear  that  the  association  is  working  with  the Asian  Institute  of  Chartered
Bankers  to  identify  and  formulate  the  necessary  modules  for  treasury  and  financial  market
professionals.  The  modules  are  intended  to  equip  association  members  with  the  relevant
expertise and knowledge to serve the financial market with integrity and professionalism.
Closing
Before I end my speech, I would like to give in advance, my congratulations to the leading FX and
FX  derivative  banks  which  will  be  announced  later.  Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the
association for organising this year’s dinner and I wish you all a prosperous year ahead.
1
Ethier, W and Bloomfield, A (1975): “Managing the Managed Float”,  Princeton University, Essay in International
Finance, No 112
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
