Philip  R  Lane:  Tracker  mortgage  related  issues,  motor  insurance
market reform, and Brexit
Introductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Joint
Committee  on  Finance,  Public  Expenditure  and  Reform,  and  Taoiseach,  Dublin,  19  October
2017.
 Chairman, Committee members, I welcome the opportunity to appear before you today. In my
introductory  statement,  I  will  focus  on  how  our  mission  to  safeguard  stability  and  protect
consumers is demonstrated through our work on: the Tracker Mortgage Examination; Brexit; the
banking sector; the insurance sector; and the macroprudential mortgage measures.
I am joined by: Sharon Donnery, the Deputy Governor for Central Banking; Ed Sibley, the Deputy
Governor  for  Prudential  Regulation;  and  Derville  Rowland,  the  Director  General  for  Financial
Conduct.  Ed  and  Derville  were  appointed  to  these  positions  in  recent  weeks  following  the
reorganisation of the Bank’s financial regulation functions into prudential regulation and financial
conduct pillars.
Ed is now responsible for the supervision of credit institutions, banks and credit unions, insurers
and the asset management industry. He represents the Central Bank at the Supervisory Board of
the European Central Bank under the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the Boards of
the European Banking Authority (EBA) and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions
Authority (EIOPA). Overseeing the financial conduct pillar, Derville is responsible for the financial
conduct  of  firms  in  relation  to  their  customers  and  clients.  This  encompasses  consumer
protection,  securities  and  markets  supervision  and  enforcement.  Derville  is  a  member  of  the
Board of Supervisors of the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA).
This reorganisation of our financial regulation structures is in response to the expansion of our
mandate  in  recent  years  and  the  evolution  of  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision
(ESFS),  including  the  centralisation  of  prudential  supervision  of  systemically-important  banks
under  the  SSM  of  the  ECB.  It  also  implements  a  dual  regulatory  approach  that  ensures  the
Central Bank is set up to deliver its mandate in relation to both prudential regulation and financial
conduct regulation.
***
The Central Bank and Consumer Protection
The  Central  Bank’s  vision  is  for  a  well-functioning,  well-managed  and  well-regulated  financial
services system that safeguards stability and protects consumers. This can be best delivered by
a strong culture of compliance, with firms and individuals within firms acting in the best interests
of  customers.  However,  this  needs  to  be  reinforced  by  comprehensive  and  enforceable
legislation,  intrusive  risk-based  supervision,  a  credible  threat  of  enforcement  and  powers  of
redress when consumers have suffered detriment.  
As  harshly  illustrated  by  the  financial  crisis,  a  fundamental  protection  for  consumers  lies  in
ensuring  that  the  financial  system  is  stable  and  that  individual  financial  firms  are  subject  to
prudential regulations that require firms to be sound and solvent – that is, to maintain substantial
capital  and  liquidity  buffers  to  guard  against  risks.  Our  oversight  of  the  system  includes  the
authorisation of firms, a fitness and probity regime and other governance-related requirements. It
also includes a regime to manage the resolution or closure of firms in the event of failure.  Finally,
our  macroprudential  measures  seek  to  build  resilience  across  the  financial  system.    For
instance, our macroprudential mortgage measures set limits on mortgage loans to guard against
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
over-lending and over-borrowing.
The  Central  Bank  works  with  other  state  bodies  –  including  the  Competition  and  Consumer
Protection Commission (CCPC) and the Financial Services Ombudsman (FSO) – to form the
national consumer protection framework, and participates actively in European and international
bodies that also work to safeguard the interests of consumers.
Our role as the national resolution authority also contributes to both our stability and consumer
protection mandates. The Central Bank is responsible for the orderly resolution of failing credit
institutions, credit unions and certain investment firms.  In that respect, members will be aware
of  the  recent  appointment  of  provisional  liquidators  to  Charleville  Credit  Union.    We  took  this
action  to  protect  the  savings  of  members,  which  are  underpinned  by  the  Deposit  Guarantee
Scheme. The Central Bank is conscious that there is a demand for the services of a credit union
in  the  local  area  and  is  committed  to  ensuring  credit  union  services  are  available  in  the
community.
The Tracker Examination
I will now turn to the Tracker Examination. 
This  Examination  is  focused  on  ensuring  that  lenders  provide  fair  outcomes  for  all  borrowers
damaged  by  unacceptable  failings  in  the  handling  of  tracker  mortgages,  which  has  caused
considerable suffering for many of those affected.
It  is  clear  that  all  lenders  did  not  sufficiently  recognise  or  address  the  scale  of  those
unacceptable  failings  until  Central  Bank  intervention.  We  have  had  to  repeatedly  challenge
certain lenders and push to the limits of our powers in order to drive them to identify and remedy
affected customers in an appropriate manner.
This  is  a  principal  reason  why  the  Examination  has  required  significant  time  to  progress.  If
certain lenders had conducted their reviews in line with the requirements of the Framework and
offered better initial proposals in respect of redress and compensation, the Examination would be
at a more advanced stage.   
We recognise the hurt and damage the actions of lenders have caused for many borrowers. This
is evident in the calls we receive to our helpline and the powerful testimony from the individual
borrowers that appeared before this Committee last week. As I will outline, we are pushing the
limits of our powers to ensure affected customers are remedied appropriately.
The  Examination  is  the  largest,  most  complex  and  significant  conduct  review  that  we  have
undertaken  to  date  in  the  context  of  our  consumer  protection  mandate.    Unusually  for  a  live
supervisory  investigation,  we  publish  regular  updates  on  the  Examination  as  our  work
progresses,  precisely  because  we  realise  affected  customers  need  information.  Earlier  this
week, we published the latest such update, which was provided to the Committee.
We  have  also  set  out  principles  for  lenders  to  pay  appropriate  redress  and  compensation  to
affected  customers,  commensurate  with  the  consumer  detriment.  Among  other  important
aspects, the principles provide for an up-front payment to enable borrowers to take independent
advice  regarding  the  redress  and  compensation  offers  made  to  them.  The  appeals  process
ensures  that  customers  have  the  option  to  challenge  any  aspect  of  the  redress  and
compensation. Customers can accept the redress and compensation offered and still make an
appeal,  since  their  offer  cannot  be  reduced  by  virtue  of  lodging  such  an  appeal.  In  addition,
customers have the option of bringing a complaint to the FSO or initiating court proceedings.
The Examination is being conducted in phases. Phase 2 required lenders to conduct a review of
their mortgage loan books, identify affected customers, as well as those deemed to have been
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
in-scope  but  not  impacted,  and  submit  a  report  of  their  findings.  All  relevant  lenders  have
provided Phase 2 Reports to the Central Bank. 
As  our  latest  update  shows,  by  the  end  of  September,  lenders  had  identified  approximately
13,000  affected  accounts.  Approximately  60  percent  of  these  cases  arise  as  a  result  of
customers not receiving a tracker product, and the balance relates to customers not receiving
the correct tracker margin. As of end-September, lenders have rectified the interest rates applied
to approximately 7,700 affected accounts. This represents 98 percent of customers identified by
lenders as requiring rate rectification.
Lenders  are  required  to  categorise  affected  customers  by  reference  to  the  type  and  level  of
detriment  suffered.  The  types  of  loss  identified  range  from  overcharging  as  a  result  of  the
application of incorrect interest rates up to loss of ownership of mortgaged properties. Where
home or property loss has occurred, a lender is further required to conduct a causation analysis
to determine whether loss of ownership resulted from its failings.
To date, lenders have reported that as a result of their failings, loss of ownership has occurred in
respect of 23 homes and 79 buy to let properties. As these analyses by lenders continue, we
anticipate that more such cases of home and property loss will be identified.
Similarly, as the overall reviews by lenders are subject to ongoing assurance work and challenge
by  the  Central  Bank,  it  is  possible  that  more  accounts  may  be  identified  as  the  Examination
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
progresses. We will publish a further update in early 2018.
Our assurance work involves challenging the findings of the reviews by each lender through on-
site inspections, reviewing materials and meeting with the directors of these banks.  We also
receive  information  from  customers  which  has  informed  our  approach  and  focus  in  particular
institutions. 
While assurance work is ongoing in a number of lenders, the Central Bank is concerned from the
assurance work completed to date that two lenders may have failed to identify populations of
impacted  customers  or  failed  to  recognise  that  certain  groups  of  their  customers  have  been
affected by their failures. We are of the view that some of these customers have in fact been
affected and, accordingly, are entitled to redress and compensation. We have challenged the two
lenders on these issues and they will report back to us by end-October.
As the Central Bank progresses this work, other lenders will be similarly challenged. Where we
believe there are customers who may have been wrongly excluded by lenders, we will require the
lenders  to  inform  these  customers  of  their  decision  and  customers’  recourse  options,  using
statutory powers as appropriate.
The Framework has been designed so that the phases of the Examination can run concurrently
within  a  lender  and  at  different  times  across  lenders,  meaning  that  Phases  3  and  4  (the
calculation  and  payment,  respectively,  of  redress  and  compensation)  can  commence  while
assurance work continues.
Tracker Redress and Compensation
While  the  Central  Bank  does  not  have  the  statutory  power  to  compel  lenders  to  implement
redress and compensation in respect of failures that occurred prior to 1 August 2013, we have
made  our  expectations  very  clear  to  lenders  and  published  “Principles  for  Redress”  so  that
people are aware of what is expected of their lender.   
However,  initial  proposals  from  certain  lenders  fell  materially  short  of  the  Central  Bank’s
expectations. Examples of material deficiencies included:
Failing to offer compensation for certain impacted cohorts of customers;
Unacceptably low offers of compensation;
Unacceptably low payments for independent advice; and
Failing to acknowledge certain types of detriment sustained by customers, for compensation
purposes, including customers that switched lenders as a result of being on the incorrect
interest rate.
As  a  result  of  our  repeated  challenges,  lenders  have  significantly  improved  their  redress  and
compensation proposals and their appeals processes.
To end September 2017, €120 million has been paid in redress and compensation under the
Examination.  This  is  in  addition  to  redress  and  compensation  provided  by  permanent  tsb  plc
(€36.8  million)  and  Springboard  Mortgages  Limited  (€6.2  million)  pursuant  to  their  Mortgage
Redress Programme (MRP) which was required by the Central Bank and which predated the
Examination.
We expect all relevant lenders to have commenced redress and compensation by the end of
2017.  In  the  meantime,  our  work  continues.  We  are  also  liaising  with  other  state  agencies,
including the CCPC, the FSO, and an Garda Síochána.
Finally, we have two enforcement cases open, two more are in train, and I expect more to follow. 
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
We will continue to provide updates to the public on our Examination and enforcement actions as
this work continues. 
***
Macroeconomic Outlook
I will now turn to some of the other matters you wish to discuss with us today, beginning with the
overall economic outlook.
The Irish economy continues to expand at a solid pace with underlying growth in a range of 4 to 5
percent  supported  by  strong  activity  in  the  domestic  economy  and  a  pronounced  pick-up  in
external markets, particularly in the Euro area.
Broad-based growth in employment has underpinned the recovery, which has helped incomes
recover and supported solid growth in consumer spending, while domestic investment has also
gained traction.
Looking ahead, the outlook is favourable, although external uncertainty persists. In terms of the
downside risks, Ireland is especially exposed as a small, highly open economy to international
shocks. In addition, the legacy of high public and private debt means that Ireland is vulnerable to
shifts in funding conditions. Disorderly versions of Brexit and changes to global trading conditions
would disproportionately affect Ireland relative to other European economies. 
From  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  the  weaker  Sterling  exchange  rate  has  affected  the
consumer price level in Ireland, reflecting the heavy concentration of UK-sourced goods in the
goods component of the Irish consumption basket. Since the Brexit vote, the value of the euro
has  risen  by  almost  17  per  cent  against  Sterling,  and  Sterling  weakness  has  mapped  into  a
substantial downward shift in the prices of consumer goods in Ireland.
While  Sterling  depreciation  also  adversely  affects  the  earnings  of  exporters  to  the  UK,  export
volumes to the UK remain robust, including for the food sector.
Brexit:  Regulated Firms
Ensuring that all firms with UK exposures are planning effectively for Brexit risk remains a key
continuing focus for the Central Bank. In this regard, it is important to note that we are now just
18 months away from the end of the Article 50 period. We expect regulated financial firms with
UK-related business to have well-developed plans in place for dealing with all possible outcomes,
including the risks of a hard Brexit. This should include a clear focus on any implications for their
customers and clients.
The relocation of the EU activities of UK-based firms continues to be a focus for the Central Bank
and we are committed to providing transparent, consistent and predictable regulatory decisions.
The importance of European regulatory convergence in handling Brexit means that the Central
Bank has been proactively engaged in the work of the European authorities via the European
System of Financial Supervision. The ECB, ESMA, EIOPA and the EBA have all issued important
guidance or opinions. This is consistent with our overall approach of operating in line with, and
influencing, European standards. 
As  I  have  said  before,  the  Brexit-driven  relocation  decisions  of  firms  should  not  be  driven  by
regulatory  differences  but  by  non-regulatory  factors  which  differ  across  the  various  candidate
locations.
Update on the Banking Sector
In  relation  to  the  banking  sector,  we  observe  no  Brexit-related  deterioration  in  asset  quality
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
among  the  Irish  retail  banks  now  prudentially  supervised  by  the  SSM  of  the  ECB.  These
institutions have made satisfactory progress with respect to assessing their exposures and have
implemented processes within their frameworks to ensure that Brexit-related risks are factored
into assessments and inform decisions.
A well-functioning banking system is important to ensure it can support the economy, consumers
and  businesses.  The  continuing  growth  of  the  economy  has  provided  a  positive  operating
environment for the Irish retail banking sector, a prerequisite for competitive and effective banking
services.  Broadly,  the  recovery  in  the  sector  is  continuing  as  banks  continue  to  repair  their
balance  sheets.  The  sustainability  of  bank  business  models,  however,  remains  the  main
strategic risk for some institutions and a focus of supervisory work. Balance sheets continued to
decline during the first half of 2017 and cost challenges remain a significant concern for bank
operating  models.  Yields  on  the  bonds  issued  by  Irish  banks  have  declined  but  remain  at
elevated levels compared with EU peers.
At end-June 2017, the non-performing loans (NPLs) of Irish retail banks stood at €35.8 billion,
equivalent  to  an  NPL  ratio  of  16.1  percent.  NPLs,  however,  have  declined  for  fourteen
consecutive quarters, representing a 58 percent reduction from the Q4 2013 peak, or a decrease
of €50 billion in  gross  exposures.  Looking  ahead,  more  NPL  reductions  are  expected  through
further restructuring, recoveries, and loan portfolio disposals.
From a policy perspective, the recently published SSM public consultation for the minimum level
of prudential provisions for NPLs is an example of the European-wide action in this critical area.
Put simply, where new NPLs arise in the future, banks will have to provision fully for them over a
set period, subject to a comply-or-explain mechanism.
NPLs  cause  considerable  distress  for  borrowers  but  also  require  strategies  from  banks  to
manage  these  with  their  borrowers.  Our  focus  remains  the  execution  of  an  effective  and
sustainable NPL reduction strategy for each bank that ensures fair treatment of consumers and
SME borrowers. The Code of Conduct for Mortgage Arrears (CCMA) sets out how lenders must
treat  borrowers  in  (or  facing)  mortgage  arrears,  with  the  objective  at  all  times  of  providing
sustainable solutions that assist the borrower to meet mortgage obligations.
The number of mortgage accounts for principal dwelling houses (PDH) in arrears fell further in
the second quarter of 2017, the sixteenth consecutive quarter of decline. The number of PDH
mortgage accounts classified as restructured at end-June was 120,398. Of these restructured
accounts,  87  per  cent  were  deemed  to  be  meeting  the  terms  of  their  current  restructure
arrangement. Similarly, regulations on SME lending have been strengthened to provide greater
protections to firms in financial difficulties.
Concerns have arisen about sales of loans to international funds and non-banking entities. It is
important to recognise that the CCMA applies to the entities which service the loans, so when
loans are sold from a bank to a non-bank financial institution, the protection of the CCMA still
applies. This also means that a borrower who has an individual complaint can access the FSO
and that the Central Bank has oversight of the conduct of these firms in relation to distressed
mortgage holders.
Turning  to  interest  rates  charged,  for  outstanding  Primary  Dwelling  Home  (PDH)  loans,  the
average interest rates on variable rate (aggregating across standard and LTV-adjusted variable
rates)  and  tracker  loans  were  3.78  percent  and  1.04  percent  respectively  in  Q2  2017.  These
rates were 13 points lower and 3 basis points higher respectively compared with one year earlier.
The  average  standard  or  LTV  variable  rate  for  new  PDH  lending  stood  at  3.34  percent  in  Q2
2017, while the average rate on fixed rate loans of 1 to 3 years stood at 3.24 percent. These
rates were 23 and 30 basis points lower respectively from one year earlier. First time buyers
(FTBs) continue to account for roughly half of all approvals and drawdowns.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Within  those  averages,  there  is  evidence  that  competition  amongst  domestic  banks  in  the
mortgage market is increasing. Certain lenders are now providing interest rates below 3 percent
under  particular  terms  and  conditions,  such  as  qualifying  loan-to-value  ratio.  To  further  assist
consumers,  the  Central  Bank  has  published  a  consultation  proposing  additional  measures  to
facilitate mortgage switching. The consultation period is open until 1 November.
***
Insurance Sector
Turning  to  insurance,  the  Central  Bank  also  has  a  dual  mandate  regarding  the  insurance
industry.  It  is  responsible  for  the  prudential  supervision  of  Irish  authorised  insurance
undertakings; and for the supervision of conduct of business for all insurers operating in Ireland,
including those doing so on the basis of an authorisation in another EU Member State.  Both
aspects of our mandate are fundamental to the protection of consumers.
Prudential supervision seeks to ensure that insurance undertakings remain solvent and are able
to pay claims as they fall due. The solvency requirements that insurers must meet in order to
ensure  they  can  meet  their  obligations  to  policyholders  are  enshrined  in  the  EU  regulatory
framework  for  insurance,  the  Solvency  II  Directive.  Where  insurance  undertakings  are
subsidiaries  of  an  EU  or  international  group,  prudential  supervision  is  carried  out  where  the
subsidiary  is  located  with  co-operation  through  colleges  of  supervisors  each  chaired  by  the
supervisory  authority  of  the  group.  Where  an  insurer  authorised  in  another  Member  State
operates  in  Ireland  through  a  branch  or  under  the  freedom  to  provide  services  provisions,
commonly  referred  to  as  “passporting",  prudential  supervision  is  the  responsibility  of  the
supervisory  authority  of  the  Member  State  which  authorised  the  insurer.    However,  where  an
insurer offers its products to Irish consumers, it is subject to the consumer protection regulatory
framework in Ireland
Cost of Insurance
Recognising that there are many factors influencing the price and availability of insurance, the
Department of Finance is leading a wide-ranging “Insurance Policy Review", the first phase of
which concluded with a report which issued in January this year.  This report complements the
Finance Committee’s own report on the issue. 
The Central Bank is a member of the Cost of Insurance Working Group, which is carrying out
this ongoing review. Concerning the recommendations on the cost of motor insurance, we are
currently  working  to  implement  the  recommendations  that  fall  within  our  remit.    Legislation  is
being  prepared  to  establish  a  National  Claims  Information  Database  to  be  run  by  the  Central
Bank. We are assisting the Department of Finance in its development of this legislation. We will
also be issuing a public consultation shortly on the extension of notice periods and information
which must be provided by insurers to policy holders regarding renewal of policies.  We remain
committed  to  implementing  the  recommendations  in  the  Report,  working  with  stakeholders  in
keeping with our mandate.
It should be noted that in the area of the pricing of insurance, the Central Bank, in common with
other EU supervisors, does not have a role in setting or capping premiums or renewal rates and
is prohibited from doing so by EU law, specifically Article 181 of the Solvency II Directive.
***
Macroprudential Measures
Finally, the Central Bank’s role as Ireland’s national macroprudential authority provides a further
example of where our financial stability, prudential and consumer protection mandates intersect.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Macroprudential policies are directed at limiting systemic financial risks, both through additional
capital buffers for banks and borrower-based measures.
We  view  our  mortgage  measures  that  put  ceilings  on  loan-to-income  (LTI)  and  loan-to-value
(LTV) ratios as essential to enhance the resilience of both borrowers and banks.  The LTI rule is
intended  to  ensure  that  mortgage  debt  is  not  too  high  relative  to  a  household’s  income  level,
reducing the risks associated with excessive debt burdens. The LTV rule provides a buffer in the
event of a future downturn in house prices.
Our commitment to an annual review process ensures that a rigorous evaluation of the mortgage
measures is conducted each year. Our review is under way and the outcome will be published in
November.
Conclusion
In closing, let me assure the Committee that the Central Bank is fully committed to all elements
of our mandate as legislated for by the Oireachtas.
In relation to those who are affected by the tracker mortgage issue, we continue to work to the
limits of our powers and with other agencies to ensure that lenders treat their customers fairly in
resolving these issues and all avenues for redress and compensation are utilised.
We welcome your questions.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
