Ed  Sibley:  Transforming  banking  for  customers -  a  regulatory
perspective
Speech by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Banking & 
Payments Federation Ireland (BPFI) National Conference, Dublin, 20 October 2017.
 With  thanks  to  Míchéal  O’Keeffe,  John  Rowe,  Andrew  Campbell,  David  Manning  and  Sean
O’Sullivan for their assistance in drafting.
Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here today, and I am grateful to the BPFI for the invitation to
speak to you all.
The overall theme of ‘Transforming Banking for Customers’ is a very important one, as is the
topic  for  this  particular  discussion  –  drivers  of  transformation:  regulation,  policy  and  data
analytics.
In my remarks today, I will cover:
the need for transformation
the  interaction  of  prudential  and  conduct  regulation  and  the  Central  Bank’s  vision  for  the
banking sector
drivers of change
regulatory change and complexity
culture
The need for transformation
While there have been material changes in banking in recent years, there is a clear necessity for
the sector to undergo further transformation.
As Benjamin Franklin apparently once said, ‘those who are finished changing are finished’. There
are a multitude of examples of firms and industries that have proven the wisdom of these words,
and it is clear that the pace of and pressures to change are accelerating. Obsolescence is an
existential threat.
Moreover, it is evident that, in numerous ways, the banking industry has consistently failed its
customers  over  the  last  decade.  This  is  evident  both  in  Ireland  and  internationally  and  is  not
sustainable.
One of the fundamental expectations of banks is that they can be trusted. Trusted with the funds
that they hold, trusted that they will be there in the morning, and trusted to respect the primacy of
their customers’ needs.
The  events  of  the  past  decade  have  severely  damaged  this  trust.  Firstly,  the  trust  in  the
soundness  and  prudence  of  the  banking  system  was  shown  to  be  entirely  misplaced.
Subsequently, the succession of conduct scandals, such as: LIBOR rigging; mis-selling of PPI;
setting up of false accounts to overcharge customers; and, closer to home; the tracker mortgage
issue; and many more besides, has eroded customers’ trust in their banks.
While  much  of  the  discussion  today  focuses  on  the  necessary  digital  and  innovation  driven
change, which I will come to, cultural change is also required to repair and restore trust. 
1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Restoration of this trust is necessary for the delivery of the Central Bank’s vision for financial
services as a whole, including banking – specifically, that it functions well, is well-managed and
well-regulated and it serves the needs of the economy and its customers over the long term.
Undoubtedly, rebuilding trust is in all of our interests.
Prudential and conduct regulation
Effective regulation has a part to play in this restoration of trust. To this end, the Central Bank has
recently restructured it financial regulation function into two distinct pillars: prudential regulation
and financial conduct.
The  restructuring  reflects  the  critical  and  equal  importance  of  both  our  financial  stability  and
financial  conduct  mandate,  the  ongoing  evolution  and  increasing  complexity  of  Ireland  as  a
financial services centre, and a strengthening of our approach to conduct supervision, over and
above our longstanding work on, and commitment to, consumer protection.
The two pillars are working as equal partners to drive delivery of our mandate of safeguarding
stability and protecting consumers; and that vision of a financial services sector that serves the
needs of the economy and its customers over the long term.
The  new  structural  arrangements  are  designed  to  enhance  how  we  operate  as  one  Bank,
recognising the interlinkages, dependencies and need to challenge each other across financial
stability, prudential regulation and financial conduct disciplines.
Drivers of change
I will turn now to the drivers of change in the banking sector. There are many, but in the interests
of time, I will limit myself to three: macro-financial; technology and regulation.
1) Macro-financial dynamics of change
There  are  two  key  macro-financial  dynamics  driving  business  model  transformation  in  the
banking sector across the euro area:
firstly, there is a cyclical aspect driving change affecting business model development; and
secondly, structural factors, such as the state and make-up of the market, are also relevant
drivers of change.
From a European perspective, the protracted low interest rate environment means new lending
and investments are yielding lower income. This has led to profitability pressures. Such cyclical
dynamics have also led to a faster transition towards more market-based finance . The resulting
increased substitutability of finance and hence more competitive environment can make it difficult
to accumulate capital over the longer term.
1
The  IMF,  ECB,  and  indeed  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  have  been  highlighting  many  of  these
2
aspects as a major concern for some time now  .
From a global perspective, European banks still underperform versus their US counterparts with
3
respect to profitability and forecasted Return on Equity (RoE) . 
As you all know, improved profitability will typically lead to improved market perception for debt
and  equity.  This  in  turn  will  lead  to  reduced  funding  costs  and  lower  cost  of  equity.
Fundamentally,  this  facilitates  capital  accretion,  which  in  turn  puts  institutions  in  a  stronger
position  to  meet  regulatory  requirements.  Ultimately,  this  ‘virtuous  circle’  should  ensure  the
supply of reasonably priced credit to the consumer and economy more broadly.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In some cases and in the short term, volume growth can offset these pressures. Furthermore,
improvements in impairments in some countries with high non-performing loan (NPL) stocks is
also helping drive a recovery in profitability.
However,  it  is  clear  that  macro-financial  dynamics  have  had,  and  will  continue  to  have,  a
considerable impact on profitability.
Turning  now  to  structural  factors  –  features  of  national  systems  such  as  legal  frameworks,
impediments  to  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisitions,  and  government  policies  challenge
financial performance, and hence business models . In several euro area countries over-banking
5
is a problem and further consolidation is required .
4
The legacy of NPLs coupled with lower growth in some countries could lead to some banks that
lent at higher rates to forbear, or possibly relax credit standards. This is compounded by other
structural  factors  such  as  legal,  judicial  and  extra  judicial  frameworks,  which  impede  NPL
6
workout, for example .
Notwithstanding  the  challenge  to  business  models,  monetary  policy  has  provided  a  blanket  of
stability  for  the  financial  system  in  recent  years  –  although  creating  different  financial  stability
risks in turn. A change in euro area monetary policy, and / or increase in market based funding
costs, would present new and different risks and prompts questions such as:
Is  your  firm  effectively  managing  this  complexity,  and  identifying  and  managing  the
associated risks?
How  is  your  firm  transforming  its  business  model  accordingly  to  deliver  sustainable
outcomes for its customers, for the stability of the financial system and for the economy as
a whole? and
In line with a theme at this year’s Annual IMF meetings, while there is a broad based global
recovery, there are significant risks to growth – has your firm taken the opportunity to fix the
roof, before new storm clouds arrive?
2) Technology as a driver of change
For  the  financial  system,  technology-driven  innovation  will  be  increasingly  transformative.  The
Payments Services Directive 2 (PSD2), for example, will come into force in the EU in January
2018. Under PSD2, banks will be obliged to share their customer information with third parties;
such as payments firms.
This  will  result  in  increased  competition  in  the  financial  sector  with  banks  no  longer  just
competing  with  other  banks  but  also  with  non-banks  and  financial  technology  (‘fintech’)  firms,
which will have easier access to the market.
A failure by banks to develop strategies enabling them to realise commercial opportunities arising
from PSD2 could be a risk to long-term viability, particularly with net interest margin, and risk
weight  pressures  incentivising  banks  to  try  to  generate  more  fee  income,  including  from  this
aspect of their business.
Fintech is blurring boundaries and changing barriers to entry . New business models, products
and  services  are  emerging,  driving  competition  and  changing  the  way  users  interact  with  the
system. Opportunities for innovation are abundant as, fundamentally, the sector revolves around
recording, analysing and interpreting transactions and managing associated information flows.
With  no  physical  products 
to
improvements via digital technologies.
these  processes  readily 
to  manage, 
themselves 
lend 
7
Fintech presents an opportunity for the financial sector to become more efficient and generate
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
value for its customers. This requires business model adaptation. For example, for retail banks,
this may result in a further reduction in the branch network in banks across the euro area.
I would ask:
How are your firms developing technology to truly transform banking for customers?
How  are  your  firms  adapting  their  business  models  to  this  innovative  and-ever  changing
landscape?
3) Regulatory drivers of change
The crisis and the  monetary,  financial  and  indeed  regulatory  response,  has,  and  continues  to
have, a profound effect on banks.
From a regulatory perspective a veritable ‘alphabet soup’ of regulations, implementing technical
standards, accounting and supervisory policies have come down the tracks in recent years. The
list  of  acronyms  is  long  and  confusing  –  CRD/  CRR,  BRRD,  MiFID  II,  EMIR,  IFRS9,  GDPR,
8
TRIM, PSD2, etc.
Managing and embedding such regulatory change is, I recognise extremely difficult. Managing the
complexity  is,  in  itself,  challenging,  and  analysing  emerging  risks  across  a  broad  and  ever-
changing financial system is no small task either.
9
Some have suggested the pendulum has swung too far, others not far enough.
My own view is that given the scale of the financial crisis, radical and far-reaching reform has
been required, but not everything has been calibrated perfectly and further evolution is required.
In  the  same  way  that  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  its  component  parts  continues  to
change, so the regulatory regime needs to adapt and evolve. However, significant easing should
be resisted.
‘Complexity theory’ may provide a useful metaphor in this regard . The essence of complexity
theory is that rather than view the system as in equilibrium, it views the economy as a complex
adaptive system perpetually constructing itself.
10
And in this context, it is worth asking why have we got to this circumstance, and how the system
will continue to reconstruct itself, either by accident or design? If we look back to the ‘light touch’
regulation of yesteryear, while there was an extensive rulebook, there was a catastrophic over
reliance on banks, their management and the market as whole to act in a certain way that would
avoid the build-up of undue risk. As an aside, one could argue about whether banks’ behaviour
was actually rational or not, given the implicit taxpayer support. Roll forward 10 years and there is
now a very heavy reliance on rules, thousands upon thousands of pages of rules.
The construction of today’s system has, therefore, clearly been driven by the lessons of these
last 10 years. Regulation has been successful in improving the safety and soundness of banks,
governance and risk management arrangements, and reducing (but not yet removing) contingent
taxpayer  liabilities  connected  with  failure.  Regulation  has  also  driven  greater  transparency,
disclosure  and  consistency  in  product  design  and  literature,  and  some  enhancements  in
suitability assessments.
Moreover,  these  drivers  should  not  be  viewed  in  isolation.  For  example,  the  current  macro-
financial  environment  outlined  above,  masks  how  certain  regulatory  changes  will  really  alter
firms’ incentives over the medium term.
Our ability to fully assess the resilience and effectiveness of Basel III developments such as the
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) and High Quality Liquid Assets
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
(HQLA)  for  example,  or  indeed  liquidity  risk  in  the  non-bank  sector,  will  really  only  become
apparent when there is a normalisation in the monetary environment.
Culture
11
Nonetheless,  I  would  strongly  argue  that  the  enhanced  regulatory  environment  has  made  the
banking  system  safer,  particularly  from  a  prudential  strength  perspective.  However,  there  is  a
common failure at both ends of this spectrum. Neither has delivered an appropriate culture.
Leading up to the onset of the crisis, the prevailing culture in the banking system resulted in a
collective groupthink failure, an excessive build-up of heavily correlated risks, and a disregard for
customers. While I do not want to tar all with the same brush, in too many banks today, I see an
overly legalistic approach, that focuses too much on whether something is legal or not and not
sufficiently on the outcomes – either for the long-term safety and soundness of the bank or the
interests of the customer.
I have seen too many examples where firms (in fairness not only banks) are having to be pushed
too hard by the regulator to address failings and remediate issues, where the focus is on the
letter of the law and not the desirable outcome.
There are numerous examples, where if problems were recognised and accepted at the time
they were first raised, the outcome and costs to both the firm and its customers could have been
materially lower, through earlier acceptance of the problem and prevention or earlier fixing of the
problem. In the very recent past, this incalcitrant attitude has led directly to firm failures. It was,
and still is in cases, prevalent in the approach to addressing non-performing loans (a European
and  not  just  an  Irish  experience).  It  has  led  to  catastrophic  failings  in  dealing  with  customers
impacted  by  the  tracker  mortgage  scandal,  which  has  done  further  lasting  damage  to  the
reputation of the Irish banking sector. I could go on.
So,  the  policy  and  supervisory  response  has  been  to  develop  tighter  regulations  to  force
regulated firms down the requisite route. This undoubtedly increases regulatory costs – both in
terms  of  undertaking  business  and  in  the  regulatory  levies  needed  to  pay  for  the  supervisory
intensity required.
To  this  end,  my  energies  are  focused  on  ensuring  that  the  Central  Bank  has  a  robust,  fit  for
purpose regulatory framework, and is delivering an effective, intrusive, analytical and outcomes-
focused approach to supervision, which remembers the lessons of the past, anticipates future
risks, and continuously improves.
12
For those who complain about the pendulum swinging too far, and of over prescriptive regulation,
I would ask, what have you done to restore trust in the system? What have you done to drive
permanent and robust change in the culture of the banking system, so that it can be trusted not
to fail, to hold sufficient capital, to manage risk effectively, and to put your customers first?
To truly transform the banking industry for your customers, radical cultural change is needed.
Having mission statements and strategies that espouse being customer centric, is meaningless
if they are not supported by the underlying culture. In other words, the questions that should be
most  prominent  in  banks  are  not  ones  relating  to  compliance  with  regulatory  requirements
(important as they are), but rather:
Is this sustainable?
Is it in the long-term interests of our customers?
Does this fit with our espoused values?
Is this right?
How are my staff incentivised to act?
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
I will conclude here.
We live in complex and undoubtedly interesting times. As none of us can predict the future with
any  degree  of  certainty,  we  all  need  to  embrace  this  complexity,  and  be  as  adaptive  as  the
financial services system that we work in is.
Environmental, cyclical, structural, technological, and regulatory change pressures will continue
to  drive  the  transformation  of  the  banking  sector.  The  pressure  for  cultural  change  is  also
sizeable. It is arguably the most important. It is definitively the one that is most in your control. I
urge you to act.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to the discussion.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
See ESRB, 2016, ‘Macroprudential policy issues arising from low interest rates and structural changes in the
EU financial system’ November 2016. Joint Task Force of ESRB Advisory Technical Committee (ATC), ESRB
Advisory Scientific Committee (ASC), and ECB Financial Stability Committee (FSC). Available here.
See, for example, the IMF GFSR: IMF Global Financial Stability Report, (2014), “Moving from Liquidity- to Growth-
Driven Markets”, April 2014 International Monetary Fund. Available here. Also, ECB, (2014) Financial Stability
Review, November 2014, European Central Bank. Available here. Also, Central Bank of Ireland, (2014), Macro
Financial Review 2014: II, November 2014. Available here.
See  IMF,  2017,  Global  Financial  Stability  Report:  Is  growth  a  risk? April  2017,  International  Monetary  Fund
Available here. Looking at RoE (2016 Underlying, 2019 Consensus Forecasts, and Management Medium-Term
Target)  of  US  versus  EU  G-SIB,  Figure  1.8  shows  most  US  G-SIBs  should  reach  profitability  targets,  but
European and G-SIBs face significant gaps.
See  IMF,  2017,  ‘European  Banking  Systems: Addressing  Structural  Challenges’,  Global  Financial  Stability
Report: Getting the Policy Mix Right, October 2017, International Monetary Fund. Available here. Also see ECB,
2015, Financial Stability Review, Special Feature ‘Bank profitability challenges in euro area banks: the role of
cyclical and structural factors’, available here, for a broader discussion and empirical investigation of cyclical
and  structural  factors  affect  bank  business  models.  See  ECB  Financial  Integration  Report,  2017,  ‘Special
feature: Cross-border bank consolidation in the euro area’, May 2017, European Central Bank Available here.
Also see Nouy, Danièle, 2017, ‘Too much of a good thing? The need for consolidation in the European banking
sector’, speech at the VIII Financial Forum, Madrid, 27 September 2017. Available here.
See  for  example  ESRB,  (2014),  ‘Is  Europe  Overbanked?,  Reports  of  the  Advisory  Scientific  Committee,
European Systemic Risk Board, No. 4/June 2014. Available here.
See  for  example  ECB  (2017),  ‘Stocktake  of  national  supervisory  practices  and  legal  frameworks  related  to
NPLs’, June 2017, European Central Bank Available here.
See  Dong  He,  Ross  Leckow,  Vikram  Haksar,  Tommaso  Mancini-Griffoli,  Nigel  Jenkinson,  Mikari  Kashima,
Tanai  Khiaonarong,  Céline  Rochon,  and  Hervé  Tourpe,  (2017),  Fintech  and  Financial  Services:  Initial
Considerations, IMF Staff Discussion Note, June 2017 SDN/17/05. Available here.
The Capital Requirements Regulation (EU) No. 575/2013 (CRR) and Directive 2013/36/EU (CRD IV) came into
effect  on  1  January  2014.  The  CRR  is  directly  applicable  to  all  Member  States  while  CRD  IV  has  been
transposed into Irish national law via Statutory Instruments 158/2014 & 159/2014 [European Union (Capital
Requirements)  (No.2)  Regulations  2014].  Further  information  available here.  The  Bank  Recovery  and
Resolution Directive (BRRD) provides national resolution authorities with comprehensive and effective powers
for dealing with failing banks. This framework and related legislation enhances both the resilience and the
resolvability of EU institutions and in-scope investment firms, which will be better prepared to deal with, and
recover from, a crisis situation. Moreover, in the event that an institution does fail, the impact associated with that
failure should be minimised. See here. MiFID II contains new EU-wide rules governing investment firms, credit
institutions, trading venues and market structures, as well as third-country firms providing investment services
or activities in the EU. It significantly broadens the scope of MiFID by bringing new activities and firms into scope,
removing or narrowing exemptions and covering new financial instruments and products. See here. Regulation
648/2012 on OTC Derivatives, Central Counterparties and Trade Repositories (“EMIR”) implements increased
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
transparency in respect of derivatives by imposing requirements concerning reporting of all derivative contracts
(including exchange traded derivatives) to Trade Repositories (TRs); clearing those OTC derivatives subject to
the mandatory clearing obligation; risk mitigation techniques for non–centrally cleared derivatives, and setting
out  requirements  for  both  Central  Counterparties  (CCPs)  and  TRs.  See here.  IFRS  9  is  a  new  accounting
standard that will be effective from 1 January 2018. It introduces an expected credit losses model (ECL) which
may lead to higher impairment provisions and more volatile impairment charges with a consequent impact on
capital ratios. The SSM has committed to undertake a targeted review of internal models (TRIM) for banking
groups. See here. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is the first major reform of European data
protection legislation in 20 years, comes into force on 25 May 2018. All companies who collect and process
personal data in the EU will need to work out what data they hold on their customers, where they hold it, if they
have permission to do so, whether it is stored safely, and how they can extract it in an easily “portable “ form or
delete it if requested. The Payments Services Directive 2 (PSD2) will come into force in the EU in January 2018.
Banks will be obligated to share their customer information with third parties; such as payments firms. See
here.
9
10
11
12
See for example Lautenschläger, Sabine, 2017, ‘Walled off? Banking regulation after the crisis’, speech at the
Institute of International and European Affairs, Dublin, 13 March 2017.
See for example, Battiston, Stefano, Farmer, J. Doyne, Flache, Andreas, Garlaschelli, Diego, Haldane, Andrew
G., Heesterbeek, Hans Hommes, Cars, Jaeger, Carlo. May, Robert, and Scheffer Marten, (2016), ‘Complexity
theory  and  financial  regulation’,  INSIGHTS  |  PERSPECTIVES,  February  2016,  Vol.  351,  issue  6275.
Available here. Also  see  for  example, Arthur,  W.  Brian,  (2014),  From  Complexity  and  the  Economy,  Oxford
University  Press,  2014.  Also  see  Kirman,  Alan  P.  (2010),  Complex  Economics:  Individual  and  Collective
Rationality.  Routledge:  Abingdon.  Available  here. Also  see  OECD,  (2016),  ‘New Approaches  to  Economics
Challenges: Insights into Complexity and Policy’. 29–30 September 2016. Available here. Also see Haldane,
Andrew G. and Robert M. May, 2011, ‘Systemic risk in banking ecosystems’, Nature, Vol. 469 p351, 20 January
2011. Available here.
See  Donnery,  Sharon  (2017),  ‘Central  bank  risk  management  in  a  changing  institutional  and  regulatory
environment’,  speech  at  the  joint  Banco  de  Portugal  –  European  Central  Bank  Conference  on  Risk
Management, Portugal, 26 September 2017. Available here.
See Sibley, Ed, (2017), ‘The Irish Financial Services sector: a Prudential Regulation Perspective’, speech at the
Financial Centres Summit, Dublin here.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
