Sabine  Lautenschläger:  State  of  play  in  the  European  banking
sector
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the IIF Annual
Meeting, Washington DC, 13 October 2017.
 It is quite difficult to present my views on the state of the euro area banking sector in such a short
statement  –  there  are  more  than  100  large  and  medium-sized  banks  in  19  countries,  with
substantial differences between them.
But  what  I  can  say  is  that  the  banks  are  in  a  better  position  than  they  were.  They  are  better
capitalised  and  have  improved  their  liquidity  situation  and  their  governance.  They  are  making
slow but steady progress in tackling all the well-known challenges and adapting their business
models.
Still, supervisors are paid to demand more. So we want quite a few banks to adapt more quickly
to the new environment.
Digital technology is rapidly gaining traction in the banking world. It brings new opportunities
but also new competitors for each and every bank. And we are seeing more and more banks
incorporating a digital dimension into their strategies. However, they are doing so at varying
speeds  and  we  are  not  always  satisfied  with  their  progress. All  banks  need  to  focus  on
transforming their services more quickly.
Interest rates are still low, weighing on the profits of many banks. This situation makes it
imperative for them to adjust their business models. Some banks still need to diversify their
sources of income, manage their costs more diligently and become more efficient.
Legacy assets, such as non-performing loans, are still high in some parts of the banking
sector in Europe. They depress banks’ profits and curb their ability to finance the economy.
The good news is that we are seeing some progress here. The proportion of non-performing
loans in the euro area fell from more than 7% in the second quarter of 2015 to below 6% at
the beginning of 2017. Still, I think the banks need to be more ambitious. We are not satisfied
with the strategy of each and every bank. Some need to act more decisively – and we will
push them to do so.
And finally, Brexit is on the horizon, and will have a major impact on the banking sector. Most
of all, it will affect those banks which access the European market from the United Kingdom
and vice versa. They have to prepare themselves for other forms of market access – and
quickly.
All  this  is  happening  at  a  time  when  the  banking  sectors  of  some  countries  still  need  to
consolidate.
Let’s turn to Europe’s banking union. It now rests on two pillars: alongside banking supervision,
there is a mechanism that allows us to resolve banks without disrupting the financial system.
Banks  can  fail,  and  they  will  fail.  That  became  clear  earlier  this  year  when  the  new  system
passed its first test.
What  is  still  missing,  though,  is  the  third  pillar  of  the  banking  union:  a  joint  deposit  insurance
scheme. But the first two pillars alone ensure that the most critical aspects are covered. Banks,
their owners and their creditors not only have to comply with stricter rules and more intrusive
supervision; they are also subject to greater market discipline as it has become clear that they
can be allowed to fail.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is up to each bank to endeavour not only to survive but also to prosper in these circumstances.
And the good news is that it is possible to do so. Our analyses have revealed that there are a
number of banks which consistently outperform their peers. So there is progress and hope, but
only for those who understand this new world, accept it, and act accordingly.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
