Øystein Olsen: The purpose and scope of monetary policy
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Centre
for Monetary Economics (CME) / BI Norwegian Business School, Oslo, 26 October 2017.
Accompanying slides
 1
On  23  June  this  year,  the  Central  Bank  Law  Commission  submitted  its  proposal  for  a  new
central bank act and for the future organisation of Norges Bank and the Government Pension
Fund Global.  I want to commend the Commission, headed by my predecessor Svein Gjedrem,
on its thorough work. Important issues have been thoroughly examined and deliberated. Norges
Bank has carefully scrutinised the Commission’s proposals before submitting its response to the
consultation  document. As  our  response  was  published  today,  this  speech  provides  a  good
opportunity  to  elaborate  on  Norges  Bank’s  views  on  some  of  the  key  aspects  of  the
Commission’s recommendation.
I will primarily focus on the Commission’s proposal for an objects clause in the new central bank
act and in particular on one of the core functions of the central bank – monetary policy. What is
the  main  objective  of  monetary  policy,  and  what  scope  is  available  to  monetary  policy  for
pursuing other goals? Towards the end of my speech, I will also discuss the future organisation
of the central bank and the Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG).
Norges Bank’s main functions
The  current  Norges  Bank  Act  establishes  that  Norges  Bank  is  Norway’s  central  bank  and
describes the Bank’s functions and its role as executive and advisory body for monetary, credit
and foreign exchange policy. The functions described are in line with the customary functions of
a central bank and follow from the Bank’s key role in financial markets. But there is little in the
current Act  to  indicate  which  long-term  objectives  the  Bank  should  pursue.  The  Commission
wants  to  change  this.  The  Commission  proposes  the  introduction  of  an  objects  clause  that
clearly defines the Bank’s purpose.
Norges  Bank  supports  this  proposal. At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  would  emphasise  that  the
interpretation of the objects clause must reflect the central bank’s different degree of influence
over the various objectives. The central bank’s toolbox is limited, and for some objectives, the
instruments available to other institutions may be more important for the result.
Chart: Section 1-2 Norges Bank’s purpose – the Commission’s proposal
The proposed objects clause contains two paragraphs. The first paragraph reads: “the purpose
of Norges Bank is to maintain monetary stability and promote the stability of the financial system
and an efficient and secure payment system”, while the second paragraph reads: “the Bank shall
otherwise contribute to high and stable output and employment”.
A well-functioning monetary system is a fundamental prerequisite for the efficient functioning of
an economy. Norges Bank plays a key role in this context. It naturally follows that the objectives
set out in the first paragraph of the objects clause are primary objectives for the Bank and fully in
line with the principles on which the Bank already bases its activities.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Trust  in  the  stability  of  the  value  of  money  is  the  very  foundation  of  the  monetary  system.  In
addition, households and businesses must be confident that the payment system will allow them
to  conduct  transactions  securely  at  all  times. An  efficient  and  stable  interbank  payment  and
settlement system also provides a necessary basis for the stability of the financial system. With
financial  system  stability,  investors  can  channel  available  capital  to  investments  offering  the
highest return.
Norges Bank also has a key role in the management of crises in the financial system. In a crisis,
the Bank can supply liquidity both to influence market interest rates and to stabilise the financial
system.
Flexible inflation targeting
The purpose of “maintaining monetary stability” sets a long-term objective for monetary policy.
The day-to-day conduct of monetary policy requires a more operational target. Most countries set
this target in the form of a regulation or a more time-limited mandate issued by the government.
The operational target is set to meet the primary objective, but is also a means of holding the
central bank accountable.
Chart: Emergence of inflation targeting
The objective of monetary stability is compatible with a range of operational targets. In the past,
central banks were expected to ensure that money would keep its value in precious metal. Later,
this was replaced by a fixed exchange rate regime whereby the currency was pegged to other
currencies. Various forms of fixed exchange rate regimes are still in use in many countries, but
since New Zealand introduced inflation targeting as a framework for monetary policy in 1990, an
increasing  number  of  countries  have  chosen  to  link  monetary  stability  to  a  numerical  inflation
target. Today, more than 30 countries have adopted some form of inflation targeting.
International experience with inflation targeting has been predominantly positive. Both during and
after  the  global  financial  crisis,  economic  growth  performance  has  been  better  in  inflation-
targeting countries. One important reason may be that a floating exchange rate with a credible
anchor for inflation has had a stabilising effect on the economy.
Chart: Low and stable inflation
Inflation targeting has also worked well for Norway. After decreasing in the early 1990s, inflation
has since been low and stable. We can now look back on a quarter of a century of price stability.
At the same time, employment has shown less variation since 2001 than in previous periods, in
spite of the substantial shocks that have hit the Norwegian economy.
In some countries, particularly in emerging economies, exchange rate movements have at times
been a source of instability. This is less of a challenge in Norway. The Norwegian household,
banking  and  corporate  sectors  as  a  whole  take  on  exchange  rate  risk  to  a  limited  extent.
Furthermore, government finances are solid and are not affected to any great extent by short-
term  exchange  rate  movements,  allowing  the  exchange  rate  to  play  an  important  role  in
absorbing shocks to the economy. Particularly in periods of falling oil prices, a weaker krone has
had a stabilising effect on the business cycle. With confidence in the inflation target, monetary
policy has been able to underpin such movements.
At the same time, in a world of high capital mobility and extensive trade, monetary policy’s room
for manoeuvre is constrained by the exchange rate channel. In a small open economy with a
floating exchange rate, the domestic interest rate can differ from interest rates abroad. However,
an  interest  rate  differential  that  becomes  too  wide  can  lead  to  considerable  exchange  rate
volatility, which will in turn feed through to inflation, output and employment. Thus, the domestic
interest  rate  cannot  be  set  without  regard  to  the  level  of  external  interest  rates.  The  room  for
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
manoeuvre in monetary policy is further constrained in periods when external interest rates are
close to or below zero.
Under an inflation-targeting regime, a numerical target is set for the inflation rate, either in the
form of a point target or a target range. In its conduct of monetary policy, the central bank aims to
keep inflation close to the point target or the midpoint of the target range over time. 
Inflation can impose costs on society if it is too high and if it is too low. High inflation is often
variable, making economic planning difficult. The real economic costs of bringing high and rising
inflation  under  control  have  also  proved  to  be  substantial.  But  inflation  should  not  be  too  low
either. Some degree of inflation can oil the wheels of the economy and at the same time increase
the  monetary  policy  room  for  manoeuvre.  The  lower  inflation  is,  the  shorter  the  distance  is
between the nominal interest rate and its effective lower bound in a normal situation. If inflation
moves into negative territory, the costs can be considerable. Deflation – a persistent fall in prices
– can amplify a downturn.
In  the  early  years  of  inflation  targeting,  policymakers  had  high  ambitions  of  micromanaging
inflation to meet the target and of achieving this goal within a clearly defined time horizon. But
with experience, useful lessons were learned and these ambitions were gradually toned down. In
the  face  of  various  kinds  of  shocks,  small  open  economies  in  particular  found  that  bringing
inflation rapidly back to target could have undesirable consequences for the real economy. It was
essential  to  practise  flexibility  in  inflation  targeting  to  address  these  shocks.  The  horizon  for
achieving the target was lengthened. This has also been the case in Norway. 
In Norway, inflation has over time been close to, albeit somewhat below, the target. Inflation has
at times deviated from 2.5 percent, undershooting or overshooting the target. However, inflation
has remained within a range where there is little evidence to suggest that deviations from the
target  have  involved  appreciable  costs  to  society.  This  is  reflected  in  the  Bank’s  conduct  of
monetary  policy.  We  have  been  able  to  take  time  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target,  which  has
provided  more  leeway  for  giving  weight  to  developments  in  output  and  employment  in  the
monetary policy trade-offs.
Even though there may be a range of “optimal” inflation rates, there may nonetheless be good
reasons  to  aim  for  a  specific  target  rate,  whether  the  inflation  target  is  formulated  as  a  point
target  or  as  a  target  range.  A  clear  target  for  inflation  can  contribute  to  anchoring  inflation
expectations more firmly.
The  Bank’s  response  pattern  with  regard  to  deviations  from  the  inflation  target  is  state-
dependent. First, the Bank’s response will be based on a trade-off between the consideration of
low and stable inflation and the consideration of stable developments in output and employment.
If inflation is somewhat below target while the outlook for output and employment is favourable,
the  Bank  will  be  less  concerned  about  inflation  than  if  output  and  employment  prospects  are
weak. Second, the Bank’s response will be affected by the size of the inflationary gap. If inflation
deviates considerably from the target, the costs over time can be substantial. There is also a risk
that the anchor for inflation expectations will then slip. In such situations, the Bank will therefore
give considerable weight in its conduct of monetary policy to bringing inflation back to target.
In the Bank’s latest monetary policy report, inflation was projected to remain somewhat below
target in the years ahead, against the background of prospects for moderate wage growth in the
wake of the fall in oil prices and the need for economic restructuring, among other things. Rather
than operating a strict inflation targeting regime and lowering the key policy rate, Norges Bank
has  chosen  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target  more  slowly,  in  the  light  of  firming  growth  in  the
Norwegian economy and decreasing unemployment. Higher capacity utilisation  and  prospects
for  increased  inflation  abroad  imply  that  the  risk  of  too-low  inflation  is  small.  The  Bank  gives
weight to the expectation that inflation will pick up gradually from today’s level.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Real economic considerations in the conduct of monetary policy
Since 2001, Norges Bank has gradually given more weight in its conduct of monetary policy to a
reasonable trade-off between the path for inflation and the path for output and employment. Over
this period, monetary policy has gone from “underpinning fiscal policy” to being the first line of
defence in stabilising the economy.
Norges Bank’s role in stabilising the economy is clearly defined in the draft objects clause, which
reads “the Bank shall otherwise contribute to high and stable output and employment”.
This formulation differs somewhat from the usual wording in other central bank acts. In most
central  bank  legislation,  the  central  bank’s  primary  purpose  is  limited  to  the  responsibility  for
maintaining price stability and for performing tasks relating to financial stability, in some cases
supplemented by a more general objective, such as underpinning the government’s economic
policy.
In some central bank acts, however, high employment is included as one of the central bank’s
primary objectives, as is the case in the US. A so-called dual mandate was established for the
Federal Reserve, where the objectives of full employment and price stability are put on an equal
footing.
In practice, monetary policy conducted by a central bank with a dual mandate will not necessarily
differ from that of a central bank operating a flexible inflation-targeting regime. A central bank with
a flexible inflation-targeting regime will also be concerned with the level of employment.
In the draft of the new central bank act, maintaining monetary stability is the primary objective.
The proposal does not provide for a dual mandate for monetary policy. This is a wise choice.
Even though the difference between inflation targeting and a dual mandate is probably small in
practice,  there  are  good  arguments  for  keeping  price  stability  as  the  primary  objective  of
monetary policy. This will clearly define the main role of monetary policy. In the practical conduct
of  monetary  policy,  the  central  bank  will  always  be  faced  with  a  trade-off  between  different
considerations.  The  order  of  priority  for  these  considerations  does  not  dictate  the  weight  the
central bank can give to stable output and employment in the short term.
Norges  Bank  does  not  interpret  “high  and  stable  output  and  employment”  to  mean  that  the
Commission is advocating that monetary policy should have greater responsibility for stabilising
the economy than it does today. Monetary policy cannot have primary responsibility for the level
of output and employment. There is broad consensus among economists that monetary policy
cannot influence the long-term growth potential of the economy.
The level of economic activity, and thereby employment, is a result of overall economic policy,
particularly with regard to more structural factors such as wage and income formation, the tax
and social security system and the functioning of the labour market. Monetary policy is only one
piece of this picture.
But monetary policy can make important contributions to stabilising the economy. First, the policy
rate can be rapidly adjusted in response to shocks to the economy, as for example in 2008 and
2014. Second, the policy rate has a direct and pronounced impact on many segments of the real
economy.  This  means  that  as  long  as  there  is  no  conflict  with  the  inflation  outlook,  monetary
policy can be oriented to influence average output and employment over time.
Many countries, including Norway, have experienced that employment losses in connection with
an economic downturn are not fully reversed following a turnaround; for example, unemployment
may become entrenched at a high level or the labour force may be reduced. In the literature, this
is referred to as hysteresis. Research indicates that the costs of a downturn may be far higher
than the immediate output loss.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
With a sufficiently flexible inflation targeting regime, it is possible to prevent a long-term reduction
in  employment  following  a  sharp  fall  in  the  level  of  activity.  At  the  same  time,  this  means
accepting  that  inflation  will  temporarily  overshoot  the  target  while  labour  market  conditions
normalise. The benefit is somewhat higher average employment than under less flexible inflation
targeting.
But if the policy rate is kept lower than the level necessary to stabilise inflation for a considerable
period of time, there is a risk that inflation will accelerate. A monetary policy objective of achieving
the  highest  possible  level  of  employment  can  therefore  come  into  conflict  with  the  primary
objective  of  “monetary  stability”.  If  that  were  to  happen,  the  Bank  will  give  precedence  to  its
primary  objective  –  low  and  stable  inflation.  Delivering  low  and  stable  inflation  is  the  best
contribution monetary policy can make to favourable and stable developments in the economy
over time.
Financial stability considerations
Monetary policy can also contribute to high and stable output and employment by giving weight to
preventing a build-up of financial imbalances. Experience shows that the likelihood of a severe
economic  downturn  increases  when  financial  imbalances  have  built  up.  Economic  downturns
caused by financial crises tend to be both deeper and longer than other downturns. If monetary
policy  helps  to  restrain  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances,  this  may  also  mitigate  the  risk  of
severe economic downturns further ahead.
The extent to which explicit weight should be placed on financial stability in interest rate setting is
state-dependent and must be based on an overall assessment of the outlook for inflation, output
and  employment.  In  many  situations,  financial  stability  considerations  will  pull  in  the  same
direction  as  the  objectives  of  price  stability  and  real  economic  stability.  If  the  economy  is
booming,  with  prospects  for  high  inflation  and  a  risk  of  a  build-up  of  financial  imbalances,
monetary policy tightening will accommodate all the considerations above. Likewise, lowering the
key policy rate in response to a severe downturn with increased bank losses will contribute to
sustaining activity and limiting bank losses.
In  other  situations,  the  different  considerations  will  pull  in  opposite  directions.  If  there  are
prospects that inflation will be too low amid rising debt and house prices, it may be appropriate to
give  weight  to  real  economic  stability  considerations  and  bring  inflation  back  to  the  target
somewhat more slowly.
In recent years, Norges Bank has kept its key policy rate somewhat higher than implied by a
short-term goal of inflation and output stability would in isolation suggest. This has occurred in an
environment  of  low  global  interest  rates  and  where  a  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  has
increased the likelihood of inflation, output and employment volatility further out. This does not
mean  that  asset  prices  or  debt  have  been  given  independent  roles  as  target  variables  of
monetary policy. The decisive factor has been the consideration of economic stability over time.
A monetary policy that “leans against the wind” can entail costs in the form of lower demand and
inflation  in  the  short  run.  In  the  practical  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  these  costs  must  be
weighed  against  the  benefits.  The  main  responsibility  for  counteracting  financial  imbalances
cannot lie with monetary policy. If monetary policy seeks to pursue goals beyond its reach, the
credibility  of  monetary  policy  will  gradually  weaken.  Regulation  and  oversight  of  financial
institutions must therefore continue to be the first line of defence against shocks to the financial
system.
In  the  proposal  on  a  new  central  bank  act,  Norges  Bank  is  given  a  clear  responsibility  for
promoting financial stability. Norges Bank interprets the proposal to mean that the responsibility
the Bank already has for promoting financial stability in a broad sense will be formalised. The
Bank’s  responsibility  and  work  in  this  field  have  evolved  over  time,  but  the  work  on  financial
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
stability has gained importance particularly after the financial crisis, as it has for other central
banks.
As  noted  in  the  Commission’s  report,  Norges  Bank  cannot  alone  ensure  the  “stability  of  the
financial system”. The main responsibility for financial stability rests with the Government, while
the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Financial  Supervisory Authority  of  Norway  and  Norges  Bank  are
responsible for the use of the various instruments delegated to them. Norges Bank is among
other things lender of last resort and operates the interbank settlement system.
The overriding responsibility for macroprudential policy rests with the Ministry of Finance. Norges
Bank holds the view that a clearer framework for setting and using macroprudential instruments
is needed in Norway. Time-varying macroprudential instruments could to advantage be delegated
to an independent authority. Delegating instruments to an independent authority could facilitate
implementation  and  enhance  predictability  over  time.  It  could  also  ensure  that  the  decision  is
taken in the interests of financial stability.
Today  Norges  Bank  draws  up  the  decision  basis  for  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  and
advises  the  Ministry  of  Finance  on  the  level  of  the  buffer.  The  Commission  proposes  that
decision-making responsibility for the level of the countercyclical capital buffer be delegated to
Norges Bank. Norges Bank supports this proposal.
The  Commission  also  suggests  that  it  may  be  appropriate  for  Norges  Bank  to  assume
responsibility  for  other  instruments  to  mitigate  systemic  risk  in  the  financial  sector.  The
Commission  refers  in  particular  to  the  residential  mortgage  lending  regulation.  This  regulation
also  serves  other  purposes  in  addition  to  the  mitigation  of  systemic  risk.  Norges  Bank  will
contribute  with  advice  on  the  design  of  regulations  in  this  area,  but  the  Bank  should  not  be
formally  responsible  for  regulations  that  include  provisions  on  banks’  business  practices  and
consumer protection. This should be the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance.
Organisation of the GPFG and central banking functions
Chart: Number of employees in Norges Bank
The organisation of Norges Bank has changed considerably over time, particularly over the past
20  years.  While  central  banking  activities  have  been  concentrated  on  core  functions,  Norges
Bank has built up an investment management organisation that is responsible for managing the
equity, bond and real estate portfolios of the GPFG.
The Central Bank Law Commission proposes to remove the GPFG from the aegis of Norges
Bank. The Commission recognises that the Bank has managed the GPFG and performed its
central banking functions in a satisfactory manner. At the same time, the Commission points out
that  the  GPFG  would  stand  to  gain  from  being  placed  under  the  management  of  a  separate
organisation with a board whose sole area of responsibility is investment management.
In  recent  years,  the  investment  mandate  has  been  changed  to  give  the  Bank  greater
responsibility for determining the GPFG’s investment strategy. Investment management has also
become  more  demanding  in  terms  of  resources  for  both  the  Executive  Board  and  the
organisation.  In  addition,  the  Bank  has  been  given  responsibility  for  decisions  to  exclude
companies or place them under observation for ethical reasons. The Bank has been able to take
on  these  tasks  by  further  developing  the  governance  structure  and  the  organisation.  If
responsibility for the management of the GPFG remains with the Bank, the existing investment
mandate could serve as a basis for the future development of the GPFG. Norges Bank is well
equipped to continue to carry out this task.
The  future  organisation  of  the  GPFG  should  be  assessed  in  conjunction  with  the  future
development  of  the  investment  strategy. As  noted  by  the  Commission,  a  number  of  strategic
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
decisions can be left to the manager while at the same time expanding the investment strategy to
include new unlisted asset classes. Prospective developments along these lines could suggest
that the management of the GPFG should not be organised within the central bank.
In addition to proposing that the management of the GPFG should be placed in a statutory entity
separate  from  the  Bank,  the  Commission  also  proposes  substantial  changes  to  the  Bank’s
governance structure. These changes include the establishment of a committee for monetary
policy and financial stability that would be responsible for the use of instruments in these areas
and would be chaired by the Governor of Norges Bank. Moreover, the Commission proposes the
establishment of a board of Norges Bank solely comprising external members. The Commission
proposes that this board should be responsible for central banking matters that do not fall within
the remit of the committee and for operational, budgetary and administrative matters.
The  arguments  for  establishing  a  committee  for  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  are
weaker,  in  Norges  Bank’s  view,  if  the  GPFG  is  separated  from  Norges  Bank.  Without
responsibility for the GPFG, the Board’s range of responsibilities will be substantially reduced.
In addition, dividing responsibility for central banking matters between the two bodies will pose
challenges, particularly with regard to the division of work and reporting. The central bank’s core
functions  are  closely  intertwined  and  must  be  viewed  as  a  whole,  as  experienced  during  the
financial  crisis.  A  solution  where  responsibility  must  be  transferred  from  the  board  to  the
committee  in  critical  situations,  as  proposed  by  the  Commission,  could  give  rise  to  a  lack  of
clarity  and  conflicts  of  competence.  An  important  point  in  this  context  is  that  in  the
implementation of the committee’s tasks, the Governor will not be responsible to the board, but
will report directly to the Ministry of Finance on central banking matters.
If the management of the GPFG is removed from the aegis of Norges Bank, the Bank’s function
will be to exercise authority with regard to monetary policy, financial stability and the payment
system. A  board  with  broadly  the  same  composition  as  at  present  would  then  function  well.
Combining responsibility for central banking matters and administrative matters in this board will
place responsibility with the same body in both normal and crisis times. The consideration of
central bank independence also points towards this solution.
If the GPFG remains under the aegis of the Bank, Norges Bank acknowledges that there are
arguments in favour of establishing a committee for monetary policy and financial stability. Such
a committee would take over the board’s central banking matters, allowing the composition of the
board to be more closely tailored to tasks specifically related to investment management. If this
solution is chosen, the Executive Board is in favour of a model based on today’s governance
structure for Norges Bank.
Conclusion
Norges Bank has been an important public institution, acting in the national interest, for over 200
years.  Important  core  functions  have  been  performed  by  the  Bank  from  the  very  beginning.
Norges  Bank  is  responsible  for  safeguarding  the  value  of  money  and  promoting  economic
stability. At the same time, the Bank’s mandate and the society in which the Bank operates have
changed over time. Some functions have been eliminated altogether over the years: there is no
longer any need for the Bank to follow up the strict credit and exchange rate regulation of the
past, and the manufacture of banknotes and coins has been outsourced. Other functions have
been added, one of which is the management of the GPFG.
Norges  Bank  is  used  to  change.  With  200  years  of  history  behind  us,  the  Bank  has  the
professional  capacity  and  experience  to  perform  its  tasks  efficiently,  even  when  the  Bank’s
functions  and  the  external  environment  change.  No  matter  how  the  Commission’s  concrete
proposals are followed up, I am confident that Norges Bank will continue to be a useful public
institution.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
Official Norwegian Reports 2017:13. New central bank act. Organisation of Norges Bank and the Government
Pension Fund Global.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
