Benoît Cœuré: Monetary policy, exchange rates and capital flows
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  18th  Jacques  Polak  Annual  Research  Conference,  hosted  by  the  International  Monetary
Fund, Washington DC, 3 November 2017.
 I would like to thank T. Kostka, A. Mehl, I. Van Robays and J. Gräb for their contributions to this
speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.
Central bank asset purchase programmes are often catalysts for significant cross-border capital
flows.   By  compressing  the  (excess)  return  on  domestic  bonds,  they  encourage  investors  to
rebalance  their  portfolios  towards  foreign,  higher  yielding  assets.   Such  capital  flows  have
reached historical dimensions in the case of the ECB’s asset purchase programme (APP), with
both  resident  and  non-resident  investors  moving  out  of  euro-denominated  securities  and  into
bonds issued predominantly by the safest non-euro area sovereigns. I examined these flows in
2
detail in a recent speech at the ECB’s Foreign Exchange Contact Group meeting.
1
One intriguing observation I made in this speech was that there was no evidence of a causal link
between  such  capital  flows  and  exchange  rate  movements.  Findings  based  on  event  studies
instead suggest that, around the time of central bank asset purchase announcements, investors
price  the  exchange  rate  mainly  on  the  basis  of  the  information  these  programmes  provide  to
markets about the expected future path of short-term interest rates. In this sense, the effect of
asset  purchases  on  exchange  rates  is  not  fundamentally  different  from  that  of  conventional
interest rate policy.
Today  I  would  like  to  build  on  this  previous  contribution  and  provide  further  insights  into  the
channels  through  which  central  bank  asset  purchase  programmes  are  likely  to  affect  the
exchange  rate.  I  will  provide  suggestive  evidence  that  challenges  the  widely  held  view  in  the
event-study  literature  that  policy-induced  portfolio  rebalancing  does  not  affect  the  exchange
rate.  My remarks therefore confirm that portfolio rebalancing is a major transmission channel of
central  bank  asset  purchase  programmes  and  provide  some  tentative  support  to  theories  of
exchange rate determination in imperfect financial markets, which give a first-order role to capital
4
flows.
3
Unlike private portfolio rebalancing, however, central bank asset purchase programmes can be
anticipated by investors. This means that exchange rates should adjust in a way that clears the
expected  future  supply  of  and  demand  for  currency  resulting  from  anticipated  cross-border
capital flows. The implication is that asset purchase programmes may, at times, break the link
between future expected short-term rates and the exchange rate.
Before  developing  this  argument  in  more  detail,  allow  me  to  reiterate  at  this  point  that  the
exchange rate is not a policy target for the ECB. It is one channel of transmission through which
our monetary policy actions achieve price stability in the medium term, in both conventional and
unconventional  times.  It  is  therefore  important  that  practitioners  and  academics  alike  better
understand how this channel propagates policy stimulus through financial markets, within and
across economies.
The zero lower bound, forward guidance and exchange rates
Let me start by briefly recalling the two main propositions I made in my earlier remarks in July.
One  was  that  there  is  compelling  empirical  evidence  that  central  bank  asset  purchase
programmes  are  often  associated  with  substantial  cross-border  capital  flows.  My  first  slide
illustrates this point quite clearly for the euro area.
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second proposition was that asset purchases affect the exchange rate in broadly the same
way as conventional monetary policy – that is, through expectations of interest rate differentials.
To  date,  there  is  very  little  evidence  to  suggest  that  currency  movements  are  a  direct
consequence of the impact on the supply of and demand for currency when investors rebalance
their portfolios across borders.
It is this second proposition that I would like to examine today in greater detail.
In doing so, it is helpful to start by recalling the basic relationship between exchange rates and
interest rate movements. I do this on the second slide. On the left-hand side you can see that, in
the  past,  there  has  often  been  an  intimate  relationship  between  short-term  interest  rate
differentials – measured here using bonds with a maturity of two years – and movements in the
exchange rate, at least for the euro and US dollar pair. The correlation between the two series
was a remarkable 0.85 during the period 2005 to 2011.
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Admittedly, academics typically take this correlation much less seriously than practitioners. It is a
good  habit  of  academics  to  dismiss  contemporaneous  correlations  between  two  variables  as
spurious. If anything, standard theory – also known as uncovered interest parity (UIP) – predicts
a correlation between today’s interest rate differentials and tomorrow’s exchange rate changes,
thereby discrediting any perceived contemporaneous causality.
Other  approaches  are  less  dismissive,  however.  The  “asset  market  approach”  to  exchange
rates, for example – which, in essence, is an alternative representation of the UIP – posits that,
as an asset price, exchange rates should fully reflect today’s expectations about the future, just
as  equity  prices  reflect  the  expected  discounted  stream  of  future  earnings  and  other  relevant
5
information.
The implication is that the current level of the exchange rate should be a function of the average
of  current  and  future  expected  short-term  interest  rates. And  because  monetary  policy,  away
from the zero lower bound, predominantly sends signals about the current level of central bank
interest rates, and because the term premium – the additional return that investors demand for
the  risks  incurred  by  not  simply  rolling  over  a  series  of  short-term  bonds  –  was  typically
contained at shorter horizons, it is not surprising to see a strong correlation between short-term
interest rates and the exchange rate.
Long-term interest rate differentials, by contrast, have usually carried less informational content
to explain exchange rate movements. You can see this on the right-hand side of this slide. There
was a connection, but it was looser, around 0.65, likely reflecting the growing role of term premia
6
along the term structure of interest rates.
So,  prima  facie,  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  monetary  policy,  by  influencing  short-term
interest  rate  differentials,  could  directly  affect  the  exchange  rate  and,  hence,  real  activity  and
prices. A natural question to ask, then, is whether monetary policy may have lost some of its
potency once interest rates reached the zero lower bound. That is, policy might have become
less effective once it started working its way mainly through long-term, rather than short-term,
interest rates, via, for example, sovereign bond purchases.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Simple visual inspection of the chart on the left suggests it has indeed. As two-year interest rates
approached the zero lower bound – around end-2011 – their correlation with the exchange rate
effectively broke down. Long-term rates, at least initially, also seem to have provided little to no
information as to where the exchange rate was heading, as the chart on the right suggests.
This interpretation warrants closer inspection, however, as this period coincided with the growing
use of unconventional monetary policy measures by central banks worldwide. Indeed, I will argue
that in order to understand how unconventional policy affects the exchange rate at, or close to,
the lower bound, it is useful to break down long-term yields into their two main components – the
expectations component and the term premium.
Slide 3 shows the insights that can be gained from this breakdown. Here I focus on the period
2012 to 2014. During this period, short-term rates barely moved, as you saw on the previous
slide, while the long-term interest rate differential was by and large disconnected from exchange
rate movements – you can see this clearly again on the left-hand side.
But now consider the right-hand chart. Here I plot the exchange rate against the differential of the
expectations  component  of  ten-year  interest  rates  as  extracted  from  dynamic  term  structure
models.   Put  simply,  it  is  the  same  ten-year  rate  differential  as  on  the  left-hand  chart,  only
corrected for the term premium estimate.
7
The correlation during 2012 and 2013 is compelling, at around 0.75. Shortly before the crisis, in
2005 and 2006, the correlation was less than 0.4. Incidentally, the close relationship coincides
with  a  considerable  strengthening  of  central  banks’  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates.  The
Federal Reserve, for example, introduced date-based forward guidance in mid-2011 and adopted
state-contingent guidance in late 2012. The ECB, for its part, introduced rate forward guidance
for the first time in July 2013, one year before it announced its credit easing programme.
So,  what  could  have  happened  is  that  market  participants,  trusting  central  banks’  forward
guidance that policy rates would stay at very low levels for an extended period, were increasingly
pricing exchange rates on the basis of information about how policy would evolve in the more
distant future. That is, with short-term rates broadly stable, the weight investors attached to the
 4 / 11
8
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
expected future path mechanically increased – just as theory would predict.
Term structure models can therefore provide compelling evidence that exchange rates remain
deeply connected to monetary policy also when interest rates are at, or close to, the effective
lower  bound,  even  if  interest  rate  differentials per  se  suggest  a  structural  break  in  the
relationship.
Asset purchases and exchange rates
But the right-hand chart also suggests that this is not the full story. A clear break emerged in late
2013. And that break is likely related to the second policy instrument I mentioned before, namely
asset  purchases. Although  asset  purchases,  by  removing  duration  risk  from  the  market,  act
primarily on the term premium, they also entail a strong signalling channel, in particular at, or
close to, turning points.
For example, the Federal Reserve’s decision to start tapering in December 2013 triggered an
appreciable increase in future expected short-term rates. You can see on the right-hand side that
the ten-year expectations component differential vis-à-vis the euro area widened by more than 50
basis points in just a few months. This should have caused the US dollar to appreciate, at least
on the basis of past behaviour.
The dollar defied upward pressure, however. It continued to depreciate persistently, despite the
marked widening in future expected interest rates. One reason why this might have been the
case is that the signalling and the portfolio rebalancing channels of asset purchases might have
worked  in  opposite  directions.  In  imperfect  markets,  investors  may  give  different  weights  to
conflicting information.
What I mean by this is that, despite expectations of a significant increase in policy rates, the
Federal  Reserve’s  very  gradual  slowdown  of  its  pace  of  Treasury  and  mortgage-backed
securities purchases – which caught many investors on the wrong foot after the “taper tantrum”
–  possibly  fuelled  expectations  that  long-term  rates,  and  hence  also  foreign  demand  for  US-
denominated interest-bearing assets, would remain contained for a considerable period.
This interpretation is consistent with at least four observations: first, term premia on US bonds
fell notably after the Federal Reserve started tapering in December 2013, pointing to a correction
of the sharp uptick in term premia after the “taper tantrum”.  Second, investors did not expect the
US  dollar  to  appreciate.  CFTC  data  show  that  they  continued  to  hold  net  short  speculative
positions in the US dollar well into 2014. Third, capital inflows into the US Treasury market did
indeed  decelerate  somewhat  during  the  first  half  of  2014,  validating  earlier  expectations. And,
fourth, the dollar started to appreciate only once expectations about asset purchases in the euro
area gained a strong tailwind during the second half of 2014.
9
Here  the  temporal  coincidence  is  striking.  The  moment  the  ECB  announced  its  credit  easing
programme in June 2014, which many observers considered to be a harbinger of sovereign bond
purchases, and moved rates into negative territory, the dollar started to appreciate significantly
against the euro.
In less than two and a half months, the euro lost nearly 10% in value. Net euro short positions
jumped to close to record highs in the space of a few weeks. In other words, only the prospect of
sovereign bond purchases by the ECB seems to have led to a reappraisal by market participants
of future domestic and foreign demand for US Treasuries.
10
Empirical analysis on the direction of international spillovers in bond markets corroborates this
view. On slide 4 you can see that ECB researchers, using the Diebold-Yilmaz methodology, find
that spillovers from the euro area to the United States spiked sharply in mid-2014.
 According to
11
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
this  methodology,  euro  area  spillovers  accounted  for  more  than  half  of  the  variance  in  US
Treasuries in the second half of 2014.
Put differently, in the presence of asset purchase programmes, the portfolio rebalancing channel,
rather  than  the  signalling  channel,  might  ultimately  rise  to  become  the  dominant  driver  of
exchange rates, at least temporarily. Expectations of compressed term premia, either through
central  bank  actions  directly,  or  through  cross-border  capital  flows  associated  with  such
programmes, or both, can offset, or mitigate, the impact of changes in the expectations about
future short-term rates on exchange rates.
Disconnects may also be the result of market segmentation, much in line with the view that the
financial  market  comprises  a  heterogeneous  set  of  actors  with  very  different  beliefs  and
expectations. Indeed, the same chart suggests that spillovers from the euro area to the US bond
market had already accelerated sharply in the first half of 2014. So, a good part of the decline in
US term premia during this period – you can see this on the right-hand side – might in fact have
reflected expectations about monetary easing in the euro area, paired with a reappraisal of the
Federal Reserve’s policies.
In other words, during this period participants in the bond market might have held, on average, a
different view on the prospects of global monetary policy from that of their counterparts in the
foreign exchange market, which maintained sizeable net long positions in the euro. Christopher
Sim’s “rational inattention” comes to mind.
12
13
This can also be seen on the next slide. Here I show a breakdown of the historical drivers of the
euro and US dollar exchange rate based on a Bayesian VAR developed by researchers at the
ECB.
 The shocks are identified using standard sign restrictions. The breakdown suggests that,
by contrast with the spillovers we saw in the previous chart, monetary policy shocks seem to
have contributed comparatively little to exchange rate movements in the first half of 2014.
14
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Instead, an exogenous shock, which can be interpreted in the context of this discussion as a
time-varying risk premium shock, appears to have put mainly downward pressure on the dollar.
To  the  extent  that  risk  premium  and  bond  term  premium  shocks  are  driven  by  the  same
fundamentals, this would be consistent with the view that the signalling and portfolio rebalancing
channels were sending conflicting signals.
This train of thought is in fact very similar to the view put forward by Charles Engel and Kenneth
West  on  the  relationship  between  risk  premia  and  the  exchange  rate.
  They  saw  the  dollar
depreciation  in  2007  as  evidence  of  investors  thinking  “this  is  a  US  crisis”. And  they  saw  the
dollar appreciation in 2008 as a change in this thinking to “well, this is actually more of a global
crisis”.
15
As with the events of 2007–08, what ultimately caused the initial resilience of the dollar and the
sharp  fall  in  term  premia  in  2014  will  remain  a  matter  of  speculation.  Factors  other  than  the
actions  of  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  ECB  are  likely  to  have  contributed  to  these
developments. But that is not my point. My point is rather that it is not surprising that central bank
asset purchases may break with some of the regularities we have become used to.
The  reason  is  that  asset  purchases  are  monetary  policy  actions  that  can  be  anticipated  by
market participants, just like changes in key policy rates. Unlike conventional monetary policy,
however, they have direct implications for the expected supply of and demand for internationally
traded bonds and, hence, for the level of the exchange rate that, all other things being equal,
clears the resulting capital flows.
This may, at times, break the link between future expected rates and the exchange rate. This is
clearly  visible  when  we  look  at  slide  6.  The  chart  is  based  on  the  same  methodology  as  the
spillover chart on slide 4, but it illustrates how much, on average, of the variance in long-term
bond yields in one country can be explained by the other country’s term premium and expected
short-term rates respectively.
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
You  can  see  that  the  moment  short-term  yields  hit  the  zero  lower  bound,  spillovers  in  bond
markets by and large reflected term premia movements – in both directions. These spillovers
may pull the exchange rate away from the path implied by expectations about the future short-
term  rate.  The  extent  of  the  decoupling,  in  turn,  will  depend  on  the  expected  direction,
persistence and degree of international spillovers – something that is inherently difficult to project
and price.
In this sense, the implications are very similar to those described by Xavier Gabaix and Matteo
Maggiori in their 2015 Quarterly Journal of Economics article, which states that the risk-bearing
capacity  of  financial  intermediaries  provides  a  role  for  capital  flows  to  affect  the  exchange
rate.
 The difference is only that if asset purchases are understood by investors to be part of the
reaction  function  of  central  banks,  then  the  exchange  rate  can  be  expected  to  adjust  before
capital flows take place. This is certainly what we have seen in the euro area.
16
This also means that we should treat more carefully findings in the event-study literature that
assign  most  of  the  observed  exchange  rate  change  around  central  bank  asset  purchase
announcements  to  the  signalling  channel.
  Given  that  intermediaries  are  forward-looking  but
constrained  by  their  balance  sheets,  policy-induced  exchange  rate  changes  can  also  be
expected to reflect expectations of future cross-border capital flows and their associated impact
on the future supply of and demand for currency.
17
In  this  sense,  the  debate  also  shares  some  similarities  with  a  related  strand  of  the  literature,
namely  the  transmission  channels  of  sterilised  foreign  exchange  interventions.  The  view  that
such  interventions  are  effective  mainly  by  signalling  future  policy  intentions  is  frequently
challenged by empirical evidence suggesting that portfolio rebalancing may have economically
relevant effects.
18
Of course, this does not mean that understanding the potential spillovers of central bank asset
purchase programmes is enough to explain exchange rate movements. Changes in relative term
premia are far more difficult to interpret than changes in the expected path of future short-term
interest rates. The latter can be clearly associated with changes in monetary policy expectations.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Changes in term premia, by contrast, often reflect a combination of shocks, including monetary
policy shocks as well as shocks to demand, risk aversion and other variables, which will drive
term premia in the same or in opposite directions.
The most recent disconnect between the euro and US dollar exchange rate and the expected
future short-term interest rate differential is a case in point. On the left-hand side of slide 7 you
can see that a significant gap between the two series re-emerged in the spring of this year, and
continues to persist.
It is tempting to link recent developments once more to portfolio rebalancing considerations. After
all,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  now  actively  reducing  its  balance  sheet,  while  the  ECB  last  week
decided  to  extend  its  asset  purchase  programme  by  nine  months,  or  more,  if  needed,  while
reducing the monthly pace to €30 billion. This might have caused some investors to expect a
gradual  rebalancing  of  portfolios  away  from  US  dollar-denominated  assets  and  towards  euro-
denominated assets, which would support the euro.
19
But many other factors may drive interest and exchange rates, with likely different implications for
the real economy.
 Indeed, geopolitical and policy uncertainties may also contribute to swings in
bond term premia. So it is difficult to establish unequivocal links. But, if we look at the right-hand
side of this slide, it is intriguing to see such a close relationship between the exchange rate and
relative bond term premia differential as that observed during the course of this year.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Deciphering exchange rate movements, and giving them a structural interpretation, remains a
topic  that  requires  the  dedication  and  passion  of  many  researchers.  Much  has  already  been
learned, but much still remains to be understood. The introduction of unconventional monetary
policy  measures  forces  us  to  think  more  deeply  about  the  channels  through  which  such
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
measures affect the exchange rate, with regard to their impact both on the expected future path
of short-term interest rates and on risk premia.
An important aspect in this endeavour is to gain a better understanding of the role of portfolio
rebalancing. Evidence is growing, and my remarks today are intended to add to this, that portfolio
rebalancing is a major transmission channel of central bank asset purchases. At the same time,
the  signalling  and  portfolio  rebalancing  channels  of  central  bank  asset  purchase  programmes
might, at times, work in opposite directions, with unclear implications for the exchange rate.
Moreover, in an integrated global financial system, unconventional policy measures have been
shown to often trigger large cross-border capital flows. To the extent that such policies can be
anticipated  by  market  participants,  financial  intermediaries  could  be  expected  to  price  in  the
resulting shift in the relative supply of and demand for currency before capital flows take place.
As  a  consequence,  international  portfolio  rebalancing  considerations  may,  at  times,  drive  a
wedge between expected future short-term rates and the exchange rate.
My remarks today are by no means conclusive and they are based on tentative evidence. But I
hope that they provide impetus to further, more systematic research on a topic that is not only
intriguing  from  an  intellectual  perspective,  but  also  of  significant  relevance  to  policymakers  in
their  efforts  to  improve  the  understanding  of  the  transmission  channels  of  non-standard
monetary policy measures.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
See e.g. Fratzscher, M., M. Lo Duca and R. Straub (2016), “ECB Unconventional Monetary Policy: Market Impact
and International Spillovers”, IMF Economic Review, 64(1), pp. 36-74; Georgiadis, G. and J. Gräb (2016), “Global
Financial Market Impact of the Announcement of the ECB’s Asset Purchase Programme”, Journal of Financial
Stability, 26, pp. 257-265; Rajan, R. (2014), “Competitive monetary easing: is it yesterday once more?”, remarks
at the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., April 10; and Bernanke, B.S. (2015), “Federal Reserve Policy in an
International Context”, paper presented at the 16th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference hosted by the
International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., 5 and 6 November.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “The international dimension of the ECB’s asset purchase programme”, speech at the
ECB’s Foreign Exchange Contact Group meeting, Frankfurt am Main, 11 July.
See e.g. Fratzscher et al. (2016, op.cit.) and Georgiadis, G. and J. Gräb (2016, op.cit.).
See e.g. Gabaix, X. and M. Maggiori (2015), “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics,  130(3),  pp.  1369-1420;  and  Hau,  H.  and  H.  Rey  (2004),  “Can  Portfolio  Rebalancing
Explain the Dynamics of Equity Returns, Equity Flows, and Exchange Rates?”, American Economic Review, 94,
pp. 126-133.
See e.g. Engel, C. and K.D. West (2005), “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals”, Journal of Political Economy,
vol.  113(3),  pp.  485-517;  Froot,  K.A.  and  T.  Ramadorai  (2005),  “Currency  Returns,  Intrinsic  Value,  and
Institutional-Investor Flows”, Journal of Finance, 60, pp. 1535-1566; and Engel, C. and K. West (2010), “Global
Interest Rates, Currency Returns, and the Real Value of the Dollar”, American Economic Review, 100, pp. 562-
567.
A second explanation could be that exogenous monetary policy shocks may have less impact on long-term
interest  rates  (see  e.g.  Evans,  C.L.  and  D.A.  Marshall  (1998),  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Term  Structure  of
Nominal Interest Rates: Evidence and Theory”, Carnegie Rochester Series on Public Policy, 49, 1998, pp. 53–
111).
For more details on estimates of US term premia, see e.g. Adrian, T., R. Crump and E. Moench (2013), “Pricing
the Term Structure with Linear Regressions”, Journal of Financial Economics, 110, pp. 110-138. For the euro
area term premia, the breakdown is based on an affine term structure model fitted to the euro area OIS curve
using the method described in Joslin, S., K. Singleton and H. Zhu (2011), “A New Perspective on Gaussian
Dynamic Term Structure Models”, Review of Financial Studies, 24, pp. 926-970.
The evidence presented here seems at odds with the predictions made in Galí, J. (2017), “Forward Guidance
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
and the Exchange Rate”, mimeo.
This  happened  despite  US  medium-term  inflation  expectations  as  well  as  crude  oil  prices  moving  mostly
sideward during this period, with a stable world economic outlook as depicted by the IMF.
Many market commentaries also considered that the speech by ECB President Mario Draghi in August 2014 in
Jackson Hole provided signals that the ECB was considering purchases of sovereign bonds in response to a
destabilisation of medium-term inflation expectations. See Draghi, M. (2014), “Unemployment in the euro area”,
speech at the annual central bank symposium in Jackson Hole, 22 August.
For more details about the methodology, see Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2012), “Better to Give than to Receive:
Predictive Directional Measurement of Volatility Spillovers”, International Journal of Forecasting, 28, pp. 57-66.
See Sims, C. (2003), “Implications of Rational Inattention”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50 (3), pp. 665–90.
The  ability  of  the  foreign  exchange  markets  to  process  all  relevant  information  has  been  subject  to  close
scrutiny,  see  e.g.  Froot,  K.A.  and  R.H.  Thaler  (1990),  “Anomalies:  Foreign  Exchange”, Journal  of  Economic
Perspectives, 4 (3), pp. 179–92.
See also Cœuré, B. (2017), “The transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy in standard and non-standard
times”, speech at the workshop “Monetary policy in non-standard times”, Frankfurt am Main, 11 September.
This is apparent when the first two quarters of 2014 are put together in the chart on slide 5.
See Engel, C. and K. West (2010, op.cit.).
See Gabaix, X. and M. Maggiori (2015, op.cit.).
See e.g. Rogers, J., C. Scotti and J. Wright (2014), “Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary
Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison”, International Finance Discussion Papers 1101, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System; Fratzscher et al. (2016, op.cit.); and Georgiadis, G. and J. Gräb (2016, op.cit.).
See Sarno, L. and M. Taylor (2001), “Official Intervention in the Foreign Exchange Market: Is It Effective and, If So,
How Does It Work?”, Journal of Economic Literature; and Blanchard, O., G. Adler and I. de Carvalho Filho (2015),
“Can Foreign Exchange Intervention Stem Exchange Rate Pressures from Global Capital Flow Shocks?”, NBER
Working Paper21427. Non-sterilised interventions, which in spirit are closest to central bank asset purchase
programmes, are widely considered to be effective through both channels (see e.g. Chinn, M. (2017), "The Once
and Future Global Imbalances? Interpreting the Post-Crisis Record", paper presented at the annual central
bank symposium in Jackson Hole, August).
19
See Cœuré, B. (2017, op.cit.).
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
