Gent  Sejko:  Intensifying  mutual  cooperation  between Albania  and
Turkey
Speech by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the signing of the Memorandum of
Cooperation between the Bank of Albania and the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Tirana,
6 November 2017.
Honourable Governor Çetinkaya,
Your Excellency Ambassador Bayraktar,
 Dear members of the delegation from the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey,
Dear guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I have the pleasure to have the Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Mr Murat
Çetinkaya, as our guest on a one-day visit to the Bank of Albania, on the occasion of the signing
of a Memorandum of Cooperation.
This memorandum is an expression of our common will and desire to continue and intensify the
mutual cooperation that has been already in place for years.
Opening addresses are supposed to be brief and I would rather not break with such tradition.
However, I find it appropriate to share with you some thoughts on: (i) the international context
surrounding  the  signing  of  this  memorandum;  (ii)  the  current  level  of  the  bilateral  relations
between Albania and Turkey; and, (iii) the main aspects of future cooperation.
1. International context
Our  institutions  –  the  respective  central  banks  –  play  a  significant  role  in  promoting  and
guaranteeing  monetary  and  financial  stability,  supporting  the  sustainable  development  of  our
countries  and  the  welfare  of  our  citizens.  The  central  banks  draft,  implement,  monitor  and
assess  their  monetary,  micro  and  macro-prudential  policies  against  the  backdrop  of  a  highly
integrated and interdependent global economy.
On the one hand, integration bolsters economic growth, enabling a more efficient distribution
of  labour  and  capital,  thus  facilitating  the  transfer  of  knowledge  and  of  technology,  and
promotes the adoption of best practices in economic and financial management.
On  the  other  hand,  experience  has  shown  that  globalisation  may  spill  over  and  amplify
negative  shocks  among  the  countries,  hence  creating  risks  to  financial  stability,  which
interfere with central bank mandates.
The  experience  of  Albania  during  the  transition  period  and  onward  perfectly  illustrates  these
aspects.  The Albanian  economy  has  benefited  from  integration  with  the  global  economy;  but,
recently, we have also been under the pressure from consequences that some of our trading
partners experienced due to the financial crisis.
Therefore, our response functions have become increasingly complex, relating not only to the
adjustment of the domestic product, labour and capital markets to external shocks, but also to
the performance of international markets. This reality requires us to be heedful of international
developments, and seek common solutions for the challenges we are facing.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The cooperation, coordination of policies and strengthening of effective dialogue between central
banks is an indispensable requisite for drawing advantages from the opportunities arising from
economic,  financial  and  technological  integration,  and  enhancing  the  immunity  against  the
relevant challenges.
2. Economic and financial integration among our countries
Our countries have many things in common – these elements are more than sufficient to build
and  consolidate  bridges  of  cooperation.  Turkey  is  an  important  market  for  Albania  and  its
economy.
To illustrate my point:
·Turkey is Albania’s fourth trading partner and its sixth investment partner.
In the services sector, Turkey is an important destination for Albanian tourists; on average
around 80 thousand Albanians travel to Turkey, whereas Albania has welcomed around 69
thousand Turkish travellers in 2016 and 38 thousand travellers over the first six months of
2017.
At  present,  429  joint-venture  companies  operate  in Albania  and  Turkish  investors  have  a
great interest in Albania. The stock of foreign direct investments from Turkey amounts to
around EUR 481 million, or around 4.3% of the Gross Domestic Product at the end of the
first half of the current year. These investments are mainly concentrated in areas such as:
energy, metal processing, telecommunications and finance.
The  presence  of  the  Turkish  capital  in  the  banking  and  financial  sector.  One  of  the  main
banks  in  our  banking  system  has  Turkish  capital.  Recently,  in  addition  to  the  classical
banking  activity,  the  Turkish  capital  has  expanded  to  non-bank  financial  institutions,  thus
helping deepen and develop alternative financial markets.
Both our countries have great economic and financial potential, which should not be limited within
their geographic territories. The Bank of Albania is an active supporter of financial and economic
integration,  considering  it  as  one  of  the  most  important  pillars  to  release  the  potential  of  the
economy and boost its resilience to shocks.
3. On the Memorandum
All the above, underlines the great importance of our economic and financial cooperation with
Turkey. This cooperation imposes even us – the policy makers – to intensify the exchange of
information  and  opinions,  and  seek  to  promote  the  finding  of  common  solutions  to  common
challenges.
In this spirit, the Bank of Albania and the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey are signing today
this Memorandum of Cooperation, which may be well considered as the coronation of the insofar
cooperation, as well as of our efforts to continue with drafting the relevant institutional framework
for clarifying the operational cooperation protocols, in a series of central bank fields.
This  memorandum  elevates  the  relations  between  our  two  countries  to  a  new  dimension.  It
confirms  the  will  to  elevate  the  level  of  cooperation  and  consolidate  the  ties  between  the  two
countries,  providing  for  both  institutions  the  necessary  space  for  the  intensification  of  mutual
exchange of information and expertise in various fields of central banking, such as: supervision,
financial  stability,  research,  and  financial  education,  and  the  regular  dialogue  at  technical  and
political level. It is an important step for obtaining maximum benefits from the positive effects of
integration and minimising the negative ones.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  make  maximum  efforts  for  the
cooperation in the framework of this agreement to be concrete and have a direct impact.
Concluding, on behalf of the Bank of Albania, allow me to thank once again the Central Bank of
the  Republic  of  Turkey  for  the  continuous  fruitful  cooperation;  I  would  also  like  to  thank,  in
particular, Governor Çetinkaya, who has honoured us today with his presence at the ceremony of
signing the Common Memorandum.
Thank You!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
