Vítor Constâncio: The evolving risk landscape in the euro area
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Bank of
Portugal Conference on Financial Stability, Lisbon, 17 October 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I  am  grateful  for  the  opportunity  to  address  you  today  at  this  relevant  conference  on  financial
stability  and  macroprudential  policy  and  particularly  pleased  for  doing  it  at  a  place  I  consider
my alma mater of central banking.
The world economy is going through a period of sustained moderate growth. In particular, the
cyclical recovery in the euro area is now stronger and broad-based, driven by a virtuous circle of
employment creation and private consumption. All member countries are experiencing economic
growth, the significant current account deficits at the beginning of the crisis in various countries
have turned into surpluses, and in public finance most countries previously under stress are now
showing  positive  primary  surpluses.  Since  mid-2013,  almost  seven  million  jobs  have  been
created, offsetting the losses during the peak of the crisis and unemployment is at its lowest level
since 2008, albeit still quite high. Business confidence is the highest in a decade suggesting that
we can expect a continued and resilient recovery in the coming quarters. These developments
were  and  are  still  strongly  supported  by  the  ECB’s  expansionary  monetary  policy  after  the
second recession in 2012-2013.
Notwithstanding these developments, there are concerns regarding possible financial instability
stemming from international market developments that could lead to price corrections. Signs of
general  overvaluation  in  asset  prices  are  however  not  present  in  the  euro  area.  There  are
localised  asset  price  pressures  in  a  few  national  housing  markets  and,  in  particular,  in  the
commercial  property  market.  As  a  result,  several  countries  have  adopted  macroprudential
policies and are dealing successfully with those tensions.
The overall financial stability situation in the euro area is therefore positive and well underpinned
by the improved fundamentals of our economies. Improvements indicate that the euro area is
now much more resilient and better prepared to cope with potential financial shocks that may
very well happen in the near future.
The more significant risk in the horizon is a possible reversal of risk assessment in international
financial markets with the consequent asset price downward corrections. The ensuing capital
losses  incurred  by  asset  holders,  including  many  financial  institutions,  would  have  negative
wealth  and  demand  effects.  The  increase  in  bond  yields  would  put  pressure  on  the  more
indebted economic agents. Part of the possible price corrections are however associated with
the  improved  economic  situation  that  will  eventually  lead  to  higher  nominal  growth,  thus
contributing to debt sustainability.
One of the suggested triggers of market corrections is the recalibration of monetary policies that
is gradually starting to take place in different degrees across important jurisdictions. There are
two points worthwhile making in this respect. The first is that, in spite of being widely predicted in
market  commentary,  very  little  is  happening  in  financial  markets  to  anticipate  it.  Market
participants who are supposed to be forward looking, do not seem to anticipate material changes
in asset prices. The second is that this disconnect between market commentary and concrete
market decisions, could indicate that the simple recalibration of monetary policies is expected to
be  smoothly  absorbed  without  generating  undue  turbulence.  Naturally,  for  this  to  be  possible,
monetary policy recalibration must be quite gradual. That will be the case of the ECB as we have
already  said  that  anyhow  “monetary  policy  will  continue  to  be  very  accommodative”  until  we
achieve our goals. If central banks adopt cautious strategies, then presumably only a significant
 1 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
geo-political  event  could  trigger  more  material  changes  in  financial  and  economic  conditions.
Nevertheless,  one  knows  that  markets  are  unpredictable  and  can  overshoot,  especially  in
situations like the present one with many risks and a protracted period of very low volatility in
asset prices.
In the remainder of my remarks today, I will address the evolution of the pricing of risk in the
equity and bond markets during the crisis and its aftermath. This will provide the rationale for the
drivers of the possible incoming changes. I will then reflect on the consequences for the different
asset markets and their respective impact on the various economic agents. I will end with a brief
analysis of what macroprudential policies can do and are doing to safeguard financial stability in
the euro area.
Behaviour towards risk
As expected, the crisis led to a significant rise in risk aversion and a generalised preference for
safety.  The  depth  of  the  crisis  has  left  behind  profound  scars  not  only  in  the  economies’
productive capacity but also in the minds and behaviour of economic agents concerning risk. The
memory of the unexpected materialisation of tail risks lingers. The preference for safety is partly
responsible for the excess demand for safe assets, for the increase of the equity risk premium,
for  the  reluctance  to  invest  in  real  productive  assets  and  for  the  persistent  sluggishness  of
wages.  The  elasticities  of  wage  response  to  the  economic  slack  and  of  consumption  and
investment reaction to the cost of finance have both declined. As a result, the wage Phillips curve
became  flatter  and  the  Investment-Saving  (IS)  curve  has  become  steeper.  Several  factors
contributed,  of  course,  to  this  development,  in  particular,  increased  inequality  contributes  to
explain higher savings and lower consumption while shrinking investment opportunities linked to
secular stagnation explains lower investment.
According to the general risk return trade-off, it was to be expected that investors would demand
higher  returns  to  hold  riskier  assets.  This  can  be  illustrated  by  examining  the  evolution  of  the
Equity Risk Premium (ERP) – the excess return that investing in the stock market provides over
a risk-free rate – in advanced economies (Figure 1)  which implied an increase in the cost of
equity
1
 2 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
The upward trend in the ERP began already in 2000 in the wake of the Dot-com stock crash
(Figure1, left-hand side (LHS)). The ex-ante ERP is the difference between the required stock
returns  and  the  risk  free  rate.  By  depicting  the  two  components,  it  becomes  clear  that  the
increased ERP resulted both from an increase in the Earnings Yield (EY) and a sharp decline in
the risk free rate (Figure 1, right-hand side (RHS)). Note however the more recent EY decrease
(which corresponds to the inverse of the Price-Earnings (P/E) ratio). This is already reflected in
the recent decrease of the ERP in the U.S. (Figure 2) .2
 3 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
3
The two relevant factors contributing to the decline of the risk free rate were the “savings glut” of
the early 2000s, identified by Bernanke (2005)  and the scarcity of “safe assets” underlined by
Caballero and Farhi (2014)  after the crisis. Furthermore, expansionary monetary policies were
also responsible for the decline in nominal interest rates and for the impact on yields and risky
asset prices via rebalancing effects, resulting from Quantitative Easing (QE). As expansionary
monetary policy attempted to reduce the output gap it also helped to fill the risk gap. In order to
successfully avoid a big depression, monetary policy had to lower interest rates until the zero
lower  bound  was  attained.  The  changes  in  the  IS  and  Phillips  curves  have  rendered  the  task
more difficult along the way and put pressure on monetary policy to adopt more unconventional
measures.
More structural elements – related to the persuasive views on secular stagnation and the effects
of globalisation on inflation – helped to consolidate the notion that the advanced economies are
facing  a  protracted  period  of  low  growth  and  low  inflation  that  central  banks  are  failing  to
normalise but have to continue to address. Consequently, search for yield and trust in a sort of
“central banks’ put” was the prevalent narrative until last year. Markets are becoming increasingly
aware that central banks will not ensure such a put and are thus starting to recalibrate policy, not
least as a result of the strong recovery now ongoing.
The U.S. elections of last November had already temporarily interrupted the market’s belief of the
previous  narrative.  At  the  turn  of  the  year,  the  perception  was  formed  that  tax  cuts  and
deregulation  would  spur  U.S.  growth,  which  would  increase  earnings’  yields,  subsequently
leading  to  higher  inflation  and  higher  bond  yields.  Consequently,  we  saw  the  beginning  of  a
rotation from bonds to stocks with a consequent increase in stock prices and a drop in bond
prices (Figure 3).
 4 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
Asset price developments
This  narrative  about  a  new  reflation  phase  in  the  world  economy  petered  out  last  spring,
particularly in what regards bonds whose prices have slightly increased since. However, stock
prices continued to increase, generating fears and warnings about a possible correction (Figure
3) especially in the U.S. where, contrary to the euro area, the cyclical adjusted price earnings is
well  above  historical  averages  (Figure  4,  LHS).  There  are  already  signs  that  markets  are
reflecting concerns with possible downward movements: the probability of a 10% correction in
stock prices extracted from option pricing has recently increased albeit remaining quite low (see
Figure 4, RHS) and the price of shortening the VIX has recently sharply increased.
 5 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Nevertheless, we should ponder that equity market corrections are often not very consequential
as the examples of 1987 or 2000 seem to indicate. In general, it is interest rates and fixed rate
debt instruments that exert a wider financial and economic impact. As I mentioned before, there
are  no  signs  of  significant  changes  in  yields  despite  wide  expectations  of  monetary  policy
recalibration around the globe. This presumably bodes well for future central banks’ decisions.
Figure  5  shows  the  slow  and  smooth  market  expectations  extracted  from  the  OIS  curve,  for
future EONIA for the euro area. The EONIA is expected to go above zero only in 2019 and reach
2% in ten years-time. On the other hand, market expectations of ten years German and Spanish
sovereign bonds yields five years from now are respectively 1.5 and 3.3 and only move to 1.76
and 3.9 when assessed ten years from now (Figure 5, RHS). Indeed, markets expect 10 year
bond rates to remain much lower than in the past for a long period of time.
 6 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
Yield and spreads of euro area countries’ sovereign debt have remained stable or even dropped
with no signs of turbulence (Figure 6).
 While these developments are supported by the ECB’s expansionary monetary policy, they also
 7 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
result from the deep adjustment undergone by the countries that were under stress during the
crisis. The change in policies and the structural reforms implemented contributed to a notable
reduction both in their external and fiscal imbalances. This has enhanced the overall resilience of
the  euro  area  against  possible  economic  and  financial  shocks.  Thanks  to  significant  fiscal
consolidation efforts, fiscal deficits across euro area countries have been reduced (Figure 7).
The European Commission expects deficits below 3% of GDP and positive primary surpluses in
almost all euro area countries in 2018.
 The increased robustness of the euro area economy is also reflected in the gradual unwinding of
the large current account deficits accumulated by several countries before the crisis. Practically
all those countries are now showing a surplus and the adjustment was mostly of a structural
nature  (see  the  blue  bars,  Figure  8,  LHS).  This  turnaround  was  achieved  because  the  initial
dramatic increases in the real exchange rates have largely been corrected (see Figure 8, RHS).
In most former programme countries relative unit labour costs are now below their respective
level in 1999. All these positive adjustments have certainly contributed to underpin the evolution of
sovereign bonds.
 8 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
Likewise, corporate bond yields have continued to decline in the euro area (Figure 9 LHS, Figure
10 LHS for high yielders). Spreads for the debt of both euro area banks and non-financial firms
relative  to  risk-free  benchmarks  have  decreased  significantly  since  the  beginning  of  the  year.
Similarly  to  the  U.S.,  this  has  reflected  exceptionally  low  bond  term  premia  (Figure  9,  RHS).
Compressed or even negative term premia may however point to potential significant corrections
if events trigger a change in investors’ assessment of risk. Particularly, a revision concerning
future inflation, no matter how unlikely, could lead to significant increases in term premia and
higher yields.
 9 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
Nevertheless,  taking  into  account  the  present  market  configuration  and  modelling  fair  value
valuations, excess corporate bond premia in the euro area cannot be detected (Figure 10, RHS).
The excess bond premium is given by the deviation of the corporate credit spreads relative to the
measured default risk of the issuer and the duration risk of the bond. The estimates show that
‘excess premia’ have declined since end-2015 and are currently negative, implying that investors
require no premium to hedge against adverse economic scenarios.
 10 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
Looking  now  to  another  asset  class,  our  analysis  indicates  that  on  the  aggregate,  residential
property  prices  are  broadly  in  line  with  the  fundamentals,  using  various  different  methods  to
assess whether there are overvaluations in the market (see Figure 11). The situation is different
in the case of commercial real estate. In specific areas and large cities, housing prices have
however  increased  at  a  faster  pace  than  households’  incomes  and  may  show  signs  of
overvaluation.
 11 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the other hand, property prices and transaction volumes have grown strongly in recent years
and have already reached historical highs in many euro area countries (see Figure 12). Nominal
growth of residential property prices accelerated to around 4% y-o-y in Q1 2017 but remained
below  its  historical  average  growth  rate  and  well  below  pre-crisis  values.  In  real  terms,  price
increases moderated due to inflation picking up. Residential property prices are demand-driven
and increasingly supported by the recovery in personal income which is expected to continue.
 12 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
Potential impact of asset price shocks
The analysis of the situation in different asset markets illustrates that generalised overvaluation
does not exist in the euro area. Tensions in some real estate markets are being dealt with by
macroprudential instruments in many countries.
To assess possible financial stability risks we should however try to gauge the possible impact of
the  materialisation  of  an  interest  rate  or  yields  correction.  In  the  following  paragraphs,  I  will
explore the effects of such a shock calibrated at 100 basis points. Estimates suggest that the
impact of this sizable increase on the non-financial private sector is relatively small, in particular
for euro area households (see Figure 13, LHS). One reason lies in the interest rate fixation period
of loans. Loans with floating rates or rates with rather short fixation periods are more widespread
for euro area non-financial corporations. In contrast, the majority of newly demanded loans by
households have longer interest rate fixation periods, making them more resilient against interest
rate increases (see Figure 13, RHS). The estimates indicate that three years after the interest
rate shock, the impact would represent a burden of 0.5% of household disposable income and
about 2.5% of the gross revenues of non-financial firms, amounts that could be absorbed in the
context of the ongoing recovery.
 13 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
A sudden repricing in fixed income markets could lead to substantial capital losses for investors
with large holdings of bonds. In the euro area, the impact would be felt in particular by the non-
bank financial sector. For insurers and pension funds, bonds account for almost 40% of their
portfolios.  For  banks,  this  share  is  only  around  15%  (see  Figure  14  RHS).  In  addition,  bond
portfolio valuations have become more sensitive to changes in interest rates in recent years as
duration has continued to increase (see Figure 14, LHS). Currently, a 100 basis point increase in
interest rates would lower the value of outstanding securities by 7%, compared to 5% before the
financial  crisis.  However,  these  simple  metrics  neither  take  into  account  any  hedging
arrangements  nor  the  impact  of  any  repricing  on  the  value  and  cost  of  financial  institutions’
liabilities.
 14 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regarding the overall impact on the significant euro area banks that are directly supervised by
the ECB, Figure 15 updates estimates published in the ECB Financial Stability Review in May
2017. The estimates embody a whole range of effects: the capital losses on securities holdings
(without considering any hedging), the increase in credit risk resulting from the estimated impact
on probabilities of default of exposures, the corresponding effects on interest revenues and the
broad  impact  on  net  interest  income  stemming  from  the  increase  in  credit  rates  and  funding
costs of banks (deposits and wholesale funding).
 15 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
The estimates are made for two scenarios. The global repricing scenario features, among other
assumptions,  an  international  increase  in  bond  yields  of  120  basis  points  and  a  30%  drop  in
stock  prices.  The  European  repricing  scenario,  induced  purely  by  European  developments,
includes  an  average  increase  in  bond  yields  of  75  basis  points  unevenly  distributed  across
countries (no increase for Germany and more than 200 for some more vulnerable countries),
accompanied by an average drop of 10% in equities. The outcome of the two scenarios indicates
a negative impact on banks’ Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital hovering around 200 basis
points in terms of deviation from the baseline scenario. This impact has to be considered against
the comfortable present average CET1 ratio of 14% enjoyed by the euro area banks.
It is also important to recall that market sentiment towards euro area banks has continued to
improve, despite some gyrations that broadly reflect developments in interest rate expectations
(Figure  16,  LHS).  While  contagion  from  the  recent  events  of  bank  resolution  and  liquidation
remained contained, these events have also highlighted the important challenges regarding the
resolvability of weak banks. Notwithstanding some recent progress in non-performing loan (NPL)
disposals,  the  large  stock  of  NPLs  remains  a  key  structural  concern  in  several  countries.  In
addition,  overcapacity  and  cost  inefficiencies  continue  to  weigh  on  bank  profitability  in  certain
banking markets.
 16 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
The economic recovery, the expected steepening of the yield curve and even the progress being
made in reducing the NPL level from the average peak of 8% in 2013 to the more recent average
of 5.5%, have improved the market assessment of future banks’ profitability. Analysts’ earnings
forecasts for 2017 and 2018 have been revised upwards since the U.S. elections, even if net
interest  income  expectations  have  changed  only  marginally,  despite  improving  economic
conditions  (volume  effect)  and  (prospective)  higher  long-term  interest  rates  (price  effect).
Analysts revised their earnings forecasts between October 2016 and January 2016 (see Figure
16 black dot in left bar) and between August 2017 and November 2016 (black dot in right bar)
with the respective contributing factors. While forecasted net interest income was a drag on net
income  in  the  first  period  it  contributed  positively  in  the  second  period.  Forecasted  loan  loss
provisions contributed positively in the second period because they became less negative over
the period November 2016 – August 2017 while forecasted operating expenses increased.
Macroprudential policy
Let me now turn to the role of macroprudential policy in this risk environment.
The objective of macroprudential policy is to prevent and mitigate systemic risk by strengthening
the resilience of the financial system and by smoothening the financial cycle.
Since  November  2014,  when  the  ECB  was  granted  macroprudential  responsibilities  and
competence to top-up the measures taken by national authorities, more than 100 decisions on
macroprudential  measures  have  been  taken  (see  Figure  17).  As  regards  capital  buffers  to
counter  the  “too-big-to-fail”  problem,  the  decisions  relate  to  eight  globally  important  banks  (in
France,  Germany,  Italy,  the  Netherlands,  and  Spain)  and  overall,  109  domestic  systemically
important financial institutions in all euro area countries.
 17 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
Decisions also led to calibrations of the systemic risk buffer in four countries (Austria, Estonia,
the Netherlands and Slovakia) and to the activation and the future increase of the countercyclical
5
capital buffer to 1.25% in 2018 in Slovakia.
6
In  addition,  to  address  real  estate  risks,  authorities  raised  risk  weights  for  real  estate
exposure   and  decided  the  use  of  Loan-To-Value  (LTV)  and  Debt-To-Income  (DTI)  type  of
measures.  Indeed,  overall  nine  countries   have  currently  activated  these  borrower-type
measures based on their national legislation (see Figure 18).
7
 18 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
These measures influence the provision of credit and raise resilience by curtailing the tails of risk
exposure. Given their effectiveness in curbing excessive credit flows, in December last year the
ECB  Governing  Council  called  upon  governments  to  implement  the  legislative  basis  for
borrower-based measures in all euro area countries.
In addition, the ongoing review of the macroprudential framework in the EU provides an excellent
opportunity  to  make  these  tools  available  to  macroprudential  authorities  on  a  common  legal
basis.  The  review  also  needs  to  promote  a  clear  allocation  of  tools  between  the  macro-  and
micro-prudential supervisors to ensure a timely activation of the instruments. This implies that
the macroprudential use of Pillar 2 should be abandoned and the procedures for Article 458 CRR
8
should be strongly streamlined for an effective use of macroprudential policy.
The  capital-  and  borrower-based  macroprudential  instruments  I  just  mentioned  are  targeting
risks among the banking sector and the real economy. But given the structure of our financial
system, they are not sufficient. In fact, a growing fraction of credit intermediation is conducted by
non-bank  financial  institutions.  Their  risks  are  essentially  related  to  maturity  mismatch  or
leverage.  However,  the  current  European  macroprudential  toolkit  grants  regulatory  authorities
limited possibilities to act on these risks in the non-banking sector. Europe should thus expand
the toolkit to cover these risk areas.
As regards liquidity mismatches, this year’s policy recommendations by the Financial Stability
Board (FSB) to address structural vulnerabilities from asset management activities  have been
an  important  step  in  the  right  direction.  The  recommendations  permit  authorities  to  indicate
adequate liquidity risk management tools in extraordinary circumstances to open-ended funds.
This also includes the suspension of redemptions in times of stress.
9
The  FSB  policy  recommendations  also  address  issues  of  measurement  and  monitoring  of
leverage within investment funds, including data collection for calculating synthetic leverage. Both
recommendations  are  important  because  of  the  links  between  leverage  and  liquidity  risk.  For
instance,  recent  research  based  on  European  alternative  investment  funds  has  shown  that
 19 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
leveraged funds experience greater investor outflows after bad performance than unleveraged
funds.
  By  limiting  leverage  we  would  be  able  to  reduce  these  propagation  mechanisms  in
times of stress.
10
On the other hand, I see the application of further regulation to Securities Finance Transactions
(SFT) as most pressing for macroprudential policy beyond banking. Authorities should be able to
make macroprudential use of margins and haircuts in securities markets to control the build-up
of  excessive  leverage.
  Importantly,  these  tools  reach  beyond  the  banking  system  and  can
thereby address risks in the rapidly growing parts of the financial system. To safeguard financial
stability in the euro area in the future, it is therefore essential that macroprudential authorities,
particularly central banks, are provided by European legislators with an expanded toolkit.
11
Let me conclude.
Financial stability in the euro area has improved, accompanying the ongoing economic recovery.
Compared to last year, the euro area financial system is more resilient today. Bank profitability
has  recovered  somewhat  and  steps  have  been  taken  to  address  some  of  the  structural
challenges faced by the banking system, although clearly a lot more needs to be done. Monetary
policy, even when recalibrated, will continue to keep a very accommodative stance in order to
attain  the  price  stability  objective  in  a  self-sustained  way.  This  implies  that,  in  the  present
configuration  of  risks,  Europe  and  all  other  advanced  economies  will  have 
take
macroprudential policy much more seriously or they will face the risk of other financial crises that
monetary policy cannot prevent.
to 
Thank you for your attention.
 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Daly, K., (2016), “A Secular Increase in the Equity Risk Premium”, International Finance 19:2, pp. 179–200.
Caballero,  R.  and A.  Simsek,  (2017),  “A  Risk-centric  Model  of  Demand  Recessions  and  Macroprudential
Policy”, NBER Working Paper No. 23614.
Bernanke, B., (2005), “The global savings glut and the US current account deficit”, Sandridge Lecture, Virginia
Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, Federal Reserve Board.
Caballero, R. and E. Farhi, (2014), “The safety trap”, NBER Working Paper No 19927.
See “Macroprudential measures in countries subject to ECB Banking Supervision and notified to the ECB”, ECB.
Belgium, Finland and Luxembourg.
Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, The Netherlands, Slovenia and Slovakia.
See “ECB contribution to the European Commission’s consultation on the review of the EU macroprudential
policy framework”, ECB.
See “Policy Recommendations to Address Structural Vulnerabilities from Asset Management Activities ”, FSB, 12
January 2017.
See van der Veer, K., A. Levels, C. Lambert, L. Molestina Vivar, C. Weistroffer, R. Chaudron and R. de Sousa van
Stralen, (2017), “Developing macroprudential policy for alternative investment funds, towards a framework for
macroprudential  leverage  limits  in  Europe:  an  application  for  the  Netherlands”;  ECB  and  DNB  Occasional
Paper, forthcoming October 2017.
See “Margins and haircuts as a macroprudential tool”, remarks by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB,
at the ESRB international conference on the macroprudential use of margins and haircuts, Frankfurt am Main, 6
June 2016.
 20 / 20
BIS central bankers' speeches
