Ed  Sibley:  The  Irish  financial  services  sector  -  a  prudential
regulation perspective
Speech by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the FSI (Finance
Services Ireland) Financial Services Summit, Dublin, 17 October 2017.
 Good  morning  ladies  and  gentlemen.    I  would  like  to  thank  Finance  Services  Ireland  for  the
invitation to speak to you all today.
There is a very broad agenda for this session, which aims to cover Global Stability, Finance,
Brexit, the UK, the EU27 and Ireland.  It is certainly ambitious for a 55-minute discussion!
As this is my first domestic speech since my appointment as Deputy Governor, I will take the
opportunity  to  cover  a  broad  range  of  related  topics  in  my  remarks  –  considering  financial
stability, prudential regulation, perspectives on the Irish financial sector and Brexit. 
Firstly, I think it is important to outline the recent organisational changes in the Central Bank, and
the rationale for them.
Prudential regulation and financial conduct
The  Central  Bank  has  restructured  financial  regulation  functions  into  two  distinct  pillars:
prudential regulation and financial conduct.  I am responsible for the prudential regulation pillar,
leading nearly 500 highly committed and expert staff in the supervision and regulation of credit
institutions, insurance firms and the asset management industry. Recognising the importance of
operating  as  part  of  a  European  regulatory  system,  I  represent  the  Central  Bank  on  the
Supervisory Board of the SSM , and on the Boards of the European Banking Authority (EBA) and
the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA).
1
My  colleague,  Derville  Rowland,  leads  the  financial  conduct  pillar  and  is  responsible  for
consumer  protection,  enforcement,  securities  and  markets  supervision  and  representing  the
Bank at the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA).  
Collectively, we are responsible for the development and evolution of supervisory and regulatory
policy  within  the  Central  Bank  and  our  contribution  to  this  development  at  a  European  and
international level. 
The  restructuring  reflects  the  considerable  growth  in  the  Central  Bank’s  mandate.  More
fundamentally, the change reflects the critical importance of our financial conduct mandate, the
ongoing  evolution  and  increasing  complexity  of  Ireland  as  a  financial  services  centre,  and  a
strengthening of our approach to conduct supervision, over and above our longstanding work on,
and commitment to, consumer protection.
As the two pillars forge their identities, I hope that you will see them working as equal partners
driving delivery of:
1.  Our mandate of safeguarding stability and protecting consumers; and
2.  The Central Bank’s vision of a well-managed and well-regulated financial services system
that serves the needs of the economy and its customers over the long term.
Poor conduct outcomes are invariably associated with serious prudential issues and vice versa.
Moreover,  macroprudential  rules  are  designed  to  protect  both  lenders  and  borrowers  alike
against over-lending and over-borrowing.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Therefore, the new structural arrangements are designed to enhance how we operate as one
Bank,  recognising  the  interlinkages,  dependencies  and  need  to  challenge  each  other  across
financial stability, prudential regulation and financial conduct. 
Approach to Prudential Regulation
Delivery of this vision of financial services in Ireland requires that regulated firms:
1.  Have sufficient financial resources, including under a plausible but severe stress;
2.  Have capitally accretive business models;
3.  Are  well  governed,  with  effective  risk  management  and  control  arrangements  in  place,
commensurate with their size, scale and complexity; and
4.  Can recover if they get into difficulty, and if they cannot, are resolvable in an orderly manner
without significant externalities or taxpayer costs.
As  one  of  my  predecessors  described,  delivery  of  these  outcomes  requires “assertive,  risk-
based supervision underpinned by the credible threat of enforcement .” The continued work and
enhancement of prudential regulation is a continuum of the step changes made in supervision in
Ireland and internationally since the onset of the global financial crisis. 
2
3
To this end, my number one priority is to ensure that my teams deliver an effective, intrusive,
analytical and outcomes-focused approach to supervision.  In other words, that we do our job
and  that  we  do  it  well.    Our  approach  will  continue  to  be  risk-based  and  anchored  by  our
PRISM  supervisory methodology, and, yes, underpinned by the credible threat of enforcement. 
We will remember the lessons of the past, and the associated human and economic costs, as
well as being forward-looking – seeking to anticipate and mitigate future risks – and continuously
improving.
The Irish financial services sector
The Irish Financial Services sector operates in an international context, and within a European
regulatory system.   Multiple factors contribute to its success. One factor is the strength and
credibility  of  the  regulatory  framework.    A  robust  and  effective  approach  to  supervision  will
underpin our aim of enhancing the standing and reputation of the Central Bank (such that it is
trusted  by  the  pubic  and  respected  by  our  peers),  and  the  wider  reputation  and  long-term
attractiveness  of  Ireland  as  a  financial  services  centre.    Moreover,  as  the  supervisor  of  an
internationally  active  sector,  we  have  an  obligation  to  be  safeguarding  stability  beyond  our
borders.
The sector has developed and changed at pace over the last few years.  The funds industry is of
international and growing significance.  The domestic banking industry continues to recover and
is starting to transition from a period of sustained retrenchment towards modest growth.  The
international  banking  and  investment  firms  sectors  are  growing  again  and  increasing  in
complexity  –  in  large  part  due  to  Brexit.    There  are  similar  trends  in  insurance  –  both  in  the
domestic  market  and  for  the  internationally  active  firms. All  of  which  is  taking  place  during  a
welcome period of continued recovery and economic growth.  
This  does  change  the  supervisory  dynamic,  with  changing  risk  appetites  in  firms,  increased
confidence and a desire to move on from legacy issues.  This is perfectly understandable, but in
many sectors, serious legacy issues do remain. System and firm resilience is much improved
from pre and during the crisis, but vulnerabilities are still significant.   
In  its  latest  Global  Financial  Stability  report ,  the  IMF  stated  that “Financial  stability  risks  are
shifting  from  the  banking  system  toward  non-bank  and  market  sectors  of  the  financial
system……,” the financial system is on a stronger footing largely because of “…extraordinary
4
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy support, regulatory enhancements, and the cyclical upturn in growth.”
In my direct bailiwick, while the sectors and businesses may be different, there is similarity in
many  of  the  issues  they  face.    Business  model  vulnerabilities  remain  across  sectors.
Governance issues remain prominent and there is strong evidence (none starker than in some
banks and their approach to the tracker issue) that cultural change is still necessary.  In other
words, across all sectors, there is still much work needed to meet regulatory and supervisory
expectations.
Moreover,  risk  velocity  has  increased  as  the  pace  of  change  and  interconnectedness  has
increased. Nowhere is this more evident than in IT risk.  Each week we read of cybersecurity and
resilience  incidents.  The  sophistication  and  potential  impact  of  these  incidents  grows.    It  is  a
question of when, not if, for all of us.  But, at the same time, business model pressures require
quicker, more automated, more accessible systems, which in turn increase the probability and
impact of resilience and security issues crystallising.  Mitigating this risk requires incurring costs.
It also requires effective, agile governance, robust risk management and control frameworks, and
strong detection and crisis response mechanisms.  
The  evidence  from  our  increasingly  intrusive  IT  risk  supervision  indicates  that  neither  the
spending nor the governance and control arrangements are adequate to satisfactorily mitigate
these risks.
Each of these topics, business model development, governance, risk management and culture
could form the basis of a speech in their own right, and I will expand on each of these topics in
future  speeches.    More  importantly,  they  will  strongly  feature  in  our  work  plans  for  2018  and
beyond.  
Regulatory developments
In the 10 years since the onset of the financial crisis, multiple reforms have sought to address
the  root  causes  of  the  crisis  and  other  issues.    Indeed,  there  continues  to  be  reforms  of  the
reforms.  We are embedding recent changes (such as Solvency II), and implementing further
6
changes,  notably  MiFID  II   and  PSD  II .  It  is  both  clear  and  unsurprising  that  there  is  some
regulatory change fatigue in the system.
5
Moreover, memories are beginning to fade, even while we continue to address the legacy issues
that  remain  from  the  crisis.      Consequently,  the  clamour  regarding  the  costs  and  restrictions
associated with this regulatory reform has started to grow.   I would strongly caution against the
pendulum swinging back, undoing the work of the past decade. 
As Andy Haldane, the Bank of England’s Chief Economist recently remarked: “History is replete
with examples of regulatory standards being diluted or dismantled in the name of enhancing the
dynamism of the financial system and the economy. To follow this course unthinkingly would risk
7
repeating regulatory mistakes from the past .”
It is obvious that given the scale of the financial crisis, radical and far-reaching reform has been
required.    It  is  also  unsurprising  that,  given  the  scale  of  reform,  not  everything  has  been
calibrated perfectly and further evolution is required.  Indeed, in the same way that the financial
system  as  a  whole  and  its  component  parts  continues  to  change,  so  the  regulatory  regime
needs  to  adapt  and  evolve.    But  while  this  continued  evolution  is  required,  significant  easing
should  be  resisted.      The  economic  and  social  costs  of  ineffective  regulation  are  well
demonstrated and far outweigh the costs of regulation today. 
The  more  important  task  for  us  now  is  to  continue  to  drive  for  greater  convergence  and
consistency across jurisdictions – and in doing so (with apologies for the mixed metaphor) to
seek the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow that is in the level playing field. I will return to this
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
topic shortly when considering Brexit.
European Regulatory Developments, including Capital Markets Union (CMU)
I will turn now to the regulatory developments that are most relevant to today’s agenda.
CMU is an important response to the challenge of achieving more diversified sources of funding
of  the  European  economy,  wider  opportunities  for  investors,  and  broader  risk  sharing.  The
objective  to  diversify  the  funding  mix,  reducing  reliance  on  traditional  funding  models,  is  a
valuable one.
The recently proposed revision of the ESA’s  framework is also noteworthy. The Central Bank is
examining  the  package  of  proposed  changes  with  a  view  to  providing  advice  and  technical
support to the Government as it engages in the legislative negotiations, considering, inter alia:
8
1.  how it addresses problems in the functioning of Europe’s capital markets;
2.  whether it will improve the position of potential investors and those seeking to obtain funding;
and
3.  its consistency in the allocation of powers on the one hand and accountabilities on the other.
Negotiations are continuing under the Estonian Presidency on the European Commission’s Risk
Reduction Measures package . This package constitutes the EU’s completion of the Basel III and
FSB reform agenda and revises parts of the CRD / CRR  and BRRD  frameworks.
10
11
9
The Central Bank strongly supports these and other aspects of the proposals as necessary to
further  the  completion  of  the  package  of  post-crisis  regulatory  reforms.      For  example,  the
proposal for the SSM to take on responsibility for the supervision of large investment firms is
eminently sensible.  However, I do have concerns about certain other aspects of the proposed
package. For example, I do not think the proposal for capital waivers for subsidiaries within the
Banking Union is appropriate at this time, given the current realities in the case of bank failure,
which retain a significant national dimension. 
MiFID II
MiFID  II  represents  the  most  substantial  overhaul  of  EU  legislation  for  markets  in  financial
instruments  in  more  than  a  decade.  Both  MiFiD  II  and  MiFIR   seek  to  achieve  more  stable,
transparent financial markets to protect investors and to improve client outcomes. It will have a
sizeable impact on the asset management industry, which must be ready to adapt. The ‘go live’
date of 3 January 2018 is fast approaching and we expect firms to be ready.
12
MiFID  II  contains  new  EU-wide  rules  governing  investment  firms,  credit  institutions,  trading
venues and market structures, as well as third-country firms providing investment services or
activities in the EU. It significantly broadens the scope of MiFID by bringing new activities and
firms into scope, removing or narrowing exemptions and covering new financial instruments and
products.
MiFIR also calls for the reporting of additional transaction data. The amount of data received by
the Central Bank is set to quadruple. Thus, firms will require enhanced systems to be able to
generate  and  submit  accurate  transaction  reports.    Technology,  compliance  and  risk
management costs are set to increase.
But there are clear benefits to this significant regulatory change. Enhanced conduct of business
rules  will  strengthen  investor  protection,  formalise  requirements  in  relation  to  product
governance, create new requirements around inducements and increase firms’ obligations with
regard to suitability and appropriateness testing.  
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Brexit
Finally, to turn to Brexit.  I look at Brexit through three lenses:
1.  Firstly,  there  is  a  direct  and  negative  impact  on  the  Irish  economy.This  impact  will  have
knock on effects on the Irish financial services system. Even in a best-case scenario, new
frictions  and  duplications,  with  associated  costs,  will  emerge  in  the  European  financial
services system.The loss of the UK voice from the European system of financial regulation
is also negative, particularly for Ireland.
2.  Secondly,  there  are  direct  impacts  on  the  existing  financial  services  firms  operating  in
Ireland  today,  including  those  who  have  direct  exposure  to  the  UK.  Firms  operating  to  or
from the UK are the most immediately impacted.It is entirely plausible that there will be a
‘hard’ Brexit, with no transition period.Much more work needs to be done to prepare for this
plausible scenario, particularly in the insurance sector.
3.  Thirdly, there is the potential for material business changes and new authorisations for firms
relocating business from the UK to Ireland.
I  referred  earlier  to  the  need  for  greater  convergence  and  consistency  across  jurisdictions.
Relocation  decisions  should  not  be  based  on  the  potential  for  regulatory  arbitrage.  Indeed,
beyond some early isolated examples, I am confident this is the case.  
At the Central Bank, we seek to both operate to and influence European norms of supervision.  
We have engaged effectively within the SSM and with the ESAs and have been influential in the
decisions being taken on supervisory stances for the many thorny issues that Brexit is causing.
We have dedicated our most senior and experienced supervisory and regulatory experts to work
on  Brexit  –  as  befits  one  of  our  highest  priorities.  We  have  approved  an  expansion  in  the
regulatory  staff  in  the  Central  Bank  to  ensure  we  have  the  resources  to  both  authorise  and
supervise new entrants or changes to existing firms.
We  have  put  in  processes  that  are  transparent,  predictable  and  consistent.  Firms  that  are
engaging with us will find us open, engaged and pragmatic.  But they will not find that we are
willing  to  compromise  on  the  need  for  governance  and  control  arrangements  to  be
commensurate with the size, scale and complexity of operations.
The long term strength, reputation and functioning of Ireland as a financial services centre would
be poorly served by the Central Bank engaging in a competitive race to the bottom by allowing
‘shell’ or ‘briefcase’ firms to relocate here.  
Conclusion
I will conclude here.  I will leave you with three key messages:
1.  I  recognise  the  challenges  and  costs  associated  with  the  ongoing  regulatory  change
agenda.I also understand the need for industry participants to seek to influence this ongoing
evolution, and it is right that they should do so.However, seeking to weaken or roll back the
post crisis regulatory changes is a fool’s errand, which, if successful, could have long-term
negative consequences.
2.  It is welcome that there is more positivity and growth in the Irish financial services sector.
However, we must still deal with the legacy issues that remain from the financial crisis –
which are particularly acute in, but not limited to, banking. While we do need to be forward-
looking, we cannot forget the lessons of our recent past and how quickly problems build up.
As I remarked at the recent ESRB Annual Conference , the most catastrophic and costly
aspects of the crisis arose from actions and excesses from the last couple of years pre
crisis,  but  the  damage  and  costs  are  still  with  us  10  years  hence.  We  must  all  remain
13
14
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
vigilant and remember that this time is not different
14
.
Finally,  my  role  is  deeply  connected  with  these  two  points.  My  energies  are  focused  on
ensuring that the Central Bank:
has a robust, fit for purpose regulatory framework, and
is  delivering  an  effective, 
to
supervision,  that  remembers  the  lessons  of  the  past,  anticipates  future  risks,  and
continuously improves.
intrusive,  analytical  and  outcomes-focused  approach 
Through this, we will play our part in ensuring that the Irish Financial sector functions well, is well-
managed and well-regulated and it serves the needs of the economy and its customers over the
long term.
This is in all our interests.
I thank you for your attention. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Single Supervisory Mechanism - The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) refers to the system of banking
supervision in Europe. It comprises the ECB and the national supervisory authorities 
See, for example, Elderfield, Matthew Address to the Irish Insurance Federation
The  Probability  Risk  and  Impact  SysteMTM  (PRISMTM)  is  the  Central  Bank’s  risk-based  framework  for  the
supervision of regulated firms.   It supports our challenging firms, judging the risks they pose to the economy
and 
unacceptable.
See www.centralbank.ie/regulation/how-we-regulate/supervision/prism
and  mitigating 
risks  we 
consumer 
those 
judge 
the 
be 
to 
www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/Issues/2017/09/27/global-financial-stability-report-october-2017
Markets in Financial Instruments Directive - See  "MiFID II – Are you Ready?” Address by Denise Murray Head of
Asset Management: Authorisations and Inspections, June 2017.
Payment Services Directive
Rethinking Financial Stability, 12 October 2017
On 20 September 2017, the European Commission put forward a series of proposed changes to the mandates,
governance, and funding of the three ESAs, see europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-17-3308_en.htm
See, for example, europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-17-3721_en.htm
Capital Requirements Directive and Regulation
Bank Recovery and Resolutions Directive
Markets in Financial Instruments Regulation  
Sibley, Ed. Non-Performing Loans: The Irish perspective on a European problem
This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, by Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
