December  6,  2017
Bank  of  Japan
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Hyogo 
Takako Masai 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
I. Developments in Economic Activity and Prices 
I would like to start my speech with a look at developments in economic activity and prices. 
 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  October  30  and  31,  2017,  the  Bank  of  Japan 
published  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  or  the  Outlook  Report.  In  this 
report, the Bank presented its projections for Japan's economic activity and prices through 
fiscal 2019.   
 
I will explain developments in economic activity and prices by presenting the main content 
of the Outlook Report. 
 
A. Overseas Economies 
Let me first touch on developments in overseas economies. The Bank's assessment is that 
overseas economies have continued to grow at a moderate pace on the whole. 
 
In terms of the outlook, advanced economies are projected to continue growing steadily, and 
a recovery in emerging economies is likely to take hold on the back of the steady growth in 
advanced economies and the effects of policy measures taken by emerging economies. A 
similar  view  was  presented  in  the  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  released  in  October 
2017 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). In recent years, the IMF has often revised 
downward the projections for global growth, but from early fiscal 2017, it has revised them 
upward. 
 
Looking  at  developments  by  major  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  continued  to  recover, 
mainly  in  household  spending,  owing  to  a  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and 
income  situation.  As  for  the  outlook,  the  economy  is  expected  to  continue  to  see  firm 
growth driven by domestic private demand. 
 
The European economy also has continued to recover steadily and it will likely  follow a 
moderate recovery trend. 
 
1 
The  Chinese  economy  will  likely  continue  to  broadly  follow  a  stable  growth  path  as  the 
authorities conduct fiscal and monetary policy in a timely manner. 
 
Other  emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting  economies  have  picked  up  on  the 
whole, particularly reflecting an increase in exports, the past bottoming out of commodity 
prices, and the effects of economic stimulus measures in those economies. The growth rates 
of these economies are likely to increase gradually, due mainly to the spread of the effects 
of steady growth in advanced economies.   
 
In my view, the downside risks to the global economy have been diminishing on the whole, 
partly because concerns over the financial sector in Europe have abated. In this situation, I 
am  paying  particular  attention  to  firm  international  commodity  prices;  namely,  crude  oil 
prices. While uncertainties regarding the global economic outlook have been easing, it is 
likely that commodity-related fixed investment, which has been curtailed over the last few 
years, will start increasing. I expect there to be a strong possibility of the global economy 
continuing its steady growth through fiscal 2018. 
 
B. Japan's Economy and Price Developments 
1. Current situation 
Now I would like to discuss developments in economic activity and prices in Japan. 
 
The  Bank's  assessment  is  that  Japan's  economy  is  expanding  moderately,  with  a  virtuous 
cycle from income to spending operating. In fiscal 2017 to date, the Bank has revised up its 
economic  assessment  twice.  Industrial  production  has  been  on  an  increasing  trend, 
reflecting the increases in demand both at home and abroad, and labor market conditions 
have  continued  to  tighten  steadily.  As  a  result,  the  output  gap  --  which  captures  the 
utilization of labor and capital -- has improved steadily. 
 
On the domestic demand side, business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing 
trend with corporate profits and business sentiment improving. According to the September 
2017  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  business  fixed 
investment plans for fiscal 2017, especially those of large enterprises, showed firms' solid 
2 
stance. This is evidenced by, for example, the fact that fixed investment on a basis close to 
GDP definition saw a year-on-year increase of 6.9 percent -- a level clearly exceeding the 
past average of 4.9 percent for the September Tankan surveys during the period of fiscal 
2004-2016.  Private  consumption  has  increased  its  resilience  against  the  background  of 
steady improvement in the employment and income situation, and housing investment has 
been more or less flat. Exports have been on an increasing trend on the back of the growth 
in overseas economies that I mentioned earlier. 
 
One  of  the  features  of  the  ongoing  expansionary  phase  is  that  the  economy  has  been 
growing across a wide range of regions, firm sizes, and industries in comparison with past 
expansions.  In  the  latest  September  2017  Tankan,  the  diffusion  index  for  business 
conditions  in  small  firms  reached  its  highest  level  in  almost  26  years.  In  the  Regional 
Economic Report, many regions have revised their economic assessments upward in 2017. 
Indeed, the Kinki region, which includes Hyogo Prefecture, has revised up its assessment in 
the two previous reports released in July and October. 
 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
items less fresh food is in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent. 
 
2. Outlook 
I  will  now  look  at  the  outlook  for  Japan's  economy  during  the  projection  period,  which 
covers from fiscal 2017 through fiscal 2019. The economy is likely to continue its moderate 
expansion.  Domestic  demand  is  likely  to  follow  an  uptrend  on  the  back  of  highly 
accommodative  financial  conditions  and  fiscal  spending  through  the  government's 
large-scale stimulus measures. Exports are expected to continue their moderate increasing 
trend  along  with  the  growth  in  overseas  economies.  Reflecting  this  outlook,  Japan's 
economy  is  likely  to  maintain  growth  during  this  projection  period  at  a  pace  above  its 
potential, mainly through fiscal 2018. In fiscal 2019, it is expected to continue expanding, 
although the growth pace is projected to decelerate due to a cyclical slowdown in business 
fixed investment and the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled in October 2019. 
Looking  at  the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members'  forecasts  in  the  October  2017 
Outlook Report, the real GDP growth rate is projected to be 1.9 percent for fiscal 2017, 1.4 
3 
percent for fiscal 2018, and 0.7 percent for fiscal 2019. 
Let me explain the outlook in detail by major component. First, business fixed investment is 
likely  to  continue  increasing  moderately.  This  is  because,  in  a  situation  where  extremely 
stimulative financial conditions are maintained, fixed investment will be positively affected 
by (1) an improvement in corporate profits, (2) the materialization of the effects of projects 
conducted under the Fiscal Investment and Loan Program, and (3) moderate improvement 
in  growth  expectations.  Specifically,  an  increase  is  likely  to  be  seen  in  investment, 
particularly (1) that related to the 2020 Olympic Games and urban redevelopment projects, 
(2) that  aiming  at  improving  efficiency  and  saving  labor  in  order  to  deal  with  the  labor 
shortage,  and  (3)  in  research  and  development  for  growth  areas.  Private  consumption  is 
expected  to  follow  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  due  mainly  to  an  increase  in  employee 
income  as  well  as  replacement  demand  for  durable  goods,  and  housing  investment  is 
expected to remain more or less flat. Exports are likely to be firm as a trend for the time 
being, underpinned by those of IT-related goods and capital goods, in which Japan has a 
comparative advantage. Thereafter, they are expected to continue their moderate increasing 
trend,  due  mainly  to  the  improvement  in  overseas  economies.  Industrial  production  will 
likely continue to increase firmly for the time being, and thereafter is projected to continue 
on a moderate increasing trend.   
 
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to increase 
toward  around  2  percent.  This  is  because,  although  upward  pressure  of  energy  prices  is 
likely to wane gradually, firms are likely to gradually shift their stance toward raising wages 
and prices with an improvement in the output gap, and inflation expectations are expected 
to accelerate moderately. In the short run, the rate of increase in prices of food products and 
goods  related  to  daily  necessities  in  particular  is  expected  to  accelerate  gradually  with  a 
moderate increase in private consumption, and moves to pass on the increase in labor costs 
to prices of general services, including dining-out and housework-related services, are likely 
to prevail. Looking at the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts in the October 
2017 Outlook Report, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) 
is projected to be 0.8 percent for fiscal 2017, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2018, and -- on a basis 
excluding the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike -- 1.8 percent for fiscal 2019. 
4 
I  believe  that  there  are  the  following  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  outlook.  Risks  to 
Japan's  economic  activity  are  developments  in  overseas  economies,  such  as  the  U.S. 
economic  policies  and  geopolitical  risks,  firms'  and  households'  medium-  to  long-term 
growth expectations, as well as fiscal sustainability in the medium to long term. Risks to 
prices  are  developments  in  firms'  and  households'  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations, the fact that there are items for which prices are not particularly responsive to 
the  output  gap,  as  well  as  developments  in  foreign  exchange  rates  and  international 
commodity  prices  going  forward.  I  hold  the  view  that,  while  downside  risks  to  Japan's 
economic activity are limited, those to prices are fairly significant. This is particularly so 
because  of  the  considerable  uncertainty  as  to  how  far  firms  will  adopt  a  shared  attitude 
toward raising prices. 
 
II. The Bank's Monetary Policy 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  the  Bank's  monetary  policy.  With  a  view  to  achieving  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent, the Bank has been maintaining highly accommodative financial 
conditions by pursuing strong monetary easing. 
 
A. Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control 
The  framework  of  QQE with  Yield Curve  Control  the  Bank  has  adopted  consists  of  two 
major components. 
 
The  first  is an "inflation-overshooting  commitment"  in  which  the  Bank  commits  itself  to 
continuing  to  expand  the  monetary  base  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
observed CPI exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a 
stable  manner.  It  aims  at  raising  inflation  expectations  by  demonstrating  the  Bank's 
unwavering determination. I will come back to this point again later. 
 
The second component is "yield curve control," in which the Bank controls short-term and 
long-term interest rates. In the current framework, it sets the short-term policy interest rate 
and the target level of the 10-year Japanese government bond (JGB) yields as its operating 
targets. At present, in the guideline for market operations, the Bank sets the short-term rate 
at minus 0.1 percent and the target level at around 0 percent, and conducts JGB purchases 
5 
so as to achieve this target level. 
B. The Aim of Strong Monetary Easing 
Since the introduction of QQE in April 2013, the basic mechanism of monetary easing itself 
has  not  changed;  that  is,  (1)  pushing  down  the  entire  yield  curve  through  the  Bank's 
large-scale  purchases  of  JGBs  and  (2)  raising  inflation  expectations  through  the  Bank's 
strong commitment to the 2 percent price stability target. These factors lead to a reduction 
in real interest rates. 
 
Now, why does the Bank think that it is necessary to reduce interest rates to extremely low 
levels?  The  basic  mechanism  of  monetary  easing  consists  of  driving  real  interest  rates 
below the interest rate neutral to economic activity and prices; that is, the natural rate of 
interest. Japan's natural rate of interest has followed a downward trend, mainly reflecting 
the deceleration in the potential growth rate.1  The estimation results obtained by the Bank's 
staff suggest that the natural rate of interest has been at around 0 percent recently. Given 
that estimates of the rate differ depending on the methodologies employed, they should be 
regarded as being subject to a considerable margin of error; however, the results show that 
the rate has been at an extremely low level. Therefore, in order to realize accommodative 
financial conditions with such a low level of the natural rate of interest, it is necessary to 
bring interest rates down further. I consider that the current highly accommodative financial 
conditions  --  created  by  the  yield  curve  control  in  this  way  --  have  strongly  supported 
Japan's economic activity from the financial side. 
 
C. Toward Changing the Norm for Prices 
Japan's economy has suffered from deflation for more than 15 years, since the late 1990s, 
with the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI being about zero or slightly negative. One 
likely  reason  why  it  has  been  taking  time  for  the deflationary  mindset  to  be  dispelled  in 
Japan  is  that  households  and  firms  have  been  adaptive  to  the  deflationary  environment. 
Despite the strong monetary easing being pursued for almost five years, the 2 percent price 
stability target has not been achieved. This confirms that the deflationary mindset was more 
                                                   
1  Such a downward trend in the natural rate of interest is not unique to Japan, but rather is a global 
phenomenon. This is one element behind the fact that, since the global financial crisis, interest rates 
in Japan, the United States, and Europe have declined to lower levels than ever before. 
6 
persistent than initially had been assumed, although there were external factors such as the 
substantial decline in crude oil prices. Having said that, it is still necessary to pursue strong 
monetary  easing;  that  is,  to  drive  real  interest  rates  sufficiently  below  the  natural  rate  of 
interest. Meanwhile, almost five years have passed since the Bank introduced QQE, and I 
believe  that  the  positive  effects  and  side  effects  of  QQE  continue  to  warrant  careful 
examination.   
 
Recently, price increases around the world have been relatively weak, and many have been 
pointing out that the factors behind this are the deepening of globalization and digitalization. 
As research on these factors is still in progress, the empirical evidence has not yet yielded 
conclusive  results.2  I  consider  it  important  to  fully  take  into  account  the  effects  of  such 
changes in the economic structure on prices. However, even if the effects stemming from 
globalization and digitalization have been pushing down prices in advanced economies to 
some extent, I think price developments in Japan are quite different from those in the United 
States and Europe. This is because inflation expectations seem to be anchored at around 2 
percent in the United States and Europe, with the price indexes showing that the underlying 
trend has been at around 1.5 percent, despite the past experience of the substantial decline in 
crude oil prices. On this point, in Japan, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items 
less fresh food) remains in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent -- as I mentioned earlier -- and that 
in the CPI (less fresh food and energy) is still in the range of 0.0-0.5 percent. 
 
In order to achieve the 2 percent price stability target in Japan, it is necessary that (1) the 
deflationary mindset be dispelled, and (2) the perception that prices of goods and services as 
well  as  wages  are  supposed  to  go  up  every  year  by  around  2  percent  becomes  firmly 
entrenched in society as a whole -- or, in other words, the 2 percent inflation takes hold as a 
                                                   
2  The  well-known  argument  that  a  global  approach  should  be  taken  into  account  in  the  basic 
determinants  of  inflation  is  one  made  by  Claudio  Borio,  Head  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic 
Department of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). For the recent empirical analysis, see 
the following: Auer, Raphael, Claudio Borio, and Andrew Filardo. "The globalisation of inflation: 
the  growing  importance  of  global  value  chains."  BIS  Working  Papers  no.  602  (January  2017). 
https://www.bis.org/publ/work602.pdf. Meanwhile, there has been no confirmation of any noticeable, 
direct  influence  of  global  slack  on  domestic  inflation,  according  to  the  analysis  conducted  by 
economists from the Federal Reserve Board. For details, see the following: Ihrig, Jane, Steven B. 
Kamin,  Deborah  Lindner,  and  Jaime  Marquez.  "Some  Simple  Tests  of  the  Globalization  and 
Inflation  Hypothesis."  International  Finance  vol.  13,  issue  3  (December  2010):  343-375.  Federal 
Reserve  Board  staff  have  updated  the  latter  analysis  using  data  through  early  2017,  and  have 
confirmed that their argument remains valid. 
7 
norm for prices. In this regard, it is essential that the Bank be committed in its conduct of 
monetary  policy  so  as  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target,  as  I  mentioned  earlier.  In  the 
meantime, maintaining effective communication between the Bank and the government is 
crucial. Furthermore, nationwide changes are needed in the overall behavior and awareness 
toward prices. Of firms that have raised prices of their products and services recently, many 
have done so for the first time in more than two decades, and at present, firms themselves 
have  limited  experience  in  terms  of  raising  prices.  Moreover,  consumers  are  not  yet 
accustomed to an environment where both wages and prices increase at a certain pace. Thus, 
a  change  in  the  norm  does  indeed  mean  changes  in  various  aspects  of  society.  Financial 
literacy -- the next topic I will touch upon -- may seem unrelated to economic activity and 
prices  or  monetary  policy  at  first,  but  I  believe  it  does  in  fact  have  a  connection  with 
changing the norm I just described. 
 
III. Initiatives to Improve Financial Literacy 
A. Global Awareness of the Importance of Financial Education 
The importance of financial education has been reaffirmed worldwide in the wake of the 
global  financial  crisis.  In  2012,  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development  (OECD)  developed  the  High-Level  Principles  on  National  Strategies  for 
Financial Education, which was then endorsed by the G-20 at their summit in Los Cabos 
later that year. According to the OECD, financial education is not merely the dissemination 
of financial knowledge, but "the process by which financial consumers/investors improve 
their  understanding  of  financial  products,  concepts  and  risks  and,  through  information, 
instruction  and/or  objective  advice,  develop  the  skills  and  confidence  to  become  more 
aware of financial risks and opportunities, to make informed choices, to know where to go 
for help, and to take other effective actions to improve their financial well-being."3  There 
has  been  widespread  progress  in  initiatives  to  improve  financial  education,  based  on  the 
principles  endorsed  by  the  G-20  leaders.  It  has  been  reported  that  the  number  of 
governments that have adopted national strategies for financial education has increased to 
almost 60. 
 
                                                   
3   OECD,  "Recommendation  on  Principles  and  Good  Practices  for  Financial  Education  and 
Awareness" (2005). http://www.oecd.org/finance/financial-education/35108560.pdf. 
8 
B. Importance of Improving Financial Literacy in Japan 
As  part  of  this  global  movement,  Japan's  Financial  Services  Agency  (FSA)  and  Central 
Council  for  Financial  Services  Information  (CCFSI)  established  the  Committee  for  the 
Promotion of Financial Education in 2013, and have been strengthening their initiatives to 
promote financial and economic education.4,5  Let me also mention the government's growth 
strategy,  the  Investments  for  the  Future  Strategy  2017,  approved  by  the  Cabinet  in  June 
2017.  The  strategy  refers  to  the  Nippon  Individual  Savings  Account  (NISA),  a  tax-free 
small-lot  investment  program  introduced  in  2014.  It  states  that,  in  order  to  promote 
households' stable formation of assets, the government will further disseminate and promote 
the NISA system, including the introduction in January 2018 of the installment-type NISA, 
and  enhance  the  financial  and  investment  education  that  leads  to  improved  practical 
knowledge of investment among households. I believe that it is crucial to improve financial 
literacy given the situation where many people feel somewhat uncertain about the future. 
Moreover,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Bank  of  Japan  aims  to  achieve  the 2  percent  price 
stability target, and in a society where wages and prices rise in a stable manner, financial 
literacy becomes even more important. Therefore, I believe that the promotion of financial 
education in Japan is now particularly significant.   
 
A number of surveys on financial literacy have been conducted in Japan, with their results 
revealing many challenges. One such survey is the Financial Literacy Survey conducted in 
2016 by the CCFSI. In international comparisons, Japan ranked 24th out of 31 countries and 
economies  in  terms  of  the  percentage  of  correct  answers  given  to  common  financial 
questions.6  According  to  another  survey,  the  percentage  of  correct  answers  given  to  a 
                                                   
4  Since  1950,  efforts  to  encourage  voluntary  and  proactive  savings,  with  the  aim  of  realizing 
economic autonomy, were led by the Local Councils for Savings Promotion. The Central Council for 
Savings  Promotion  was  established  in  1952  as  the  focus  for  private  organizations  related  to  this 
movement. This was then reorganized as the Central Council for Savings Information to concentrate 
on public relations activities providing accurate knowledge and information regarding the economy, 
finance, and currency. The council was then renamed as the CCFSI (Secretariat: Public Relations 
Department, Bank of Japan) in 2001. 
5  As suggested by the April 2013 report of the Study Group on Financial Education under the FSA, 
the  Committee  for  the  Promotion  of  Financial  Education  (Secretariat:  CCFSI)  was  established  to 
address challenges facing the promotion of financial and economic education. 
6  The  Financial  Literacy  Survey  is  Japan's  first  large-scale  survey  covering  25,000  individuals 
chosen in proportion to Japan's demographic structure. The comparison with overseas was done in 
9 
question about the meaning of deflation was slightly above 20 percent.7  Obviously, it is no 
wonder that we face many challenges in financial education, as is the case with education in 
general. My concern, however, is the possibility that there is not sufficient recognition in 
Japan of the necessity for financial education in the first place. For example, in a survey of 
adults conducted in 2016 by the FSA, about 70 percent of respondents answered that they 
"have not participated in investment education," and about two-thirds of these respondents 
stated that they "do not wish to acquire financial or investment knowledge." This means that 
nearly half of all respondents in the survey indicated such unwillingness. My impression is 
that investment, in particular, is still perceived as something that wealthy people do.8  While 
this may be partly due to the prolonged period of deflation, I believe it is important that the 
necessity  of  financial  education  gain  more  recognition  in  Japanese  society.  I  feel  that  an 
increase in such awareness is similar to a rise in public acceptance of a certain degree of 
increase in prices. It seems to me that both are indicative of a social norm where it is taken 
for granted that wages and prices rise in a stable manner. 
                                                                                                                                                     
terms of the simple average for the percentage of correct answers given to six common questions in 
the OECD survey, which was conducted in 30 countries and economies in 2016. 
7  The  multiple-choice  question  asked:  "Which  of  the  statements  is  correct  in  times  of  deflation, 
where prices continue to decline?" There were three answer choices: (1) "Borrowing is profitable 
because the value of money increases"; (2) "Borrowing is unprofitable because the value of money 
increases";  or  (3)  "Borrowing  is  unprofitable  because  the  value  of  money  decreases."  The  survey 
covered  men  and  women  living  in  Japan, aged  from  20  to  69,  with  1,000 people providing  valid 
responses to the questions. The results were published in The Nikkei on September 2, 2017. 
8  According  to  the  National  Survey  on  Securities  Investment  conducted  in  2015  by  the  Japan 
Securities Dealers Association, about 30 percent of respondents answered that securities investment 
was "something that wealthy people do." The survey was conducted on 7,000 men and women living 
in Japan who were at least 20 years of age. 
10 
