Benoît Cœuré: The known unknowns of financial regulation
Panel contribution by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank,  at  the  "Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy  IV"  Conference,  Peterson  Institute  for
International Economics, Washington DC, 12 October 2017.
 Financial intermediation is at a crossroads. Arguably, never before in history have banks faced
as  many  significant  challenges  as  they  do  today.  Exceptionally  low  interest  rates  and  more
rigorous post-crisis regulation are weighing on banks’ earnings and limiting, at times, their ability
to make full use of their balance sheets. Technological change too is threatening incumbents in
many ways. Although technological progress has often probed the adaptability and flexibility of
financial intermediaries in the past, the speed and scope of current innovations has the potential
to change more radically the way financial services are provided to households and firms.
These  circumstances  naturally  also  create  challenges  for  regulators,  central  banks  and  other
policymakers. Ten years after the start of the crisis, it is time to take stock of the impact of the
wealth of rules and regulations that have been adopted since then. The Financial Stability Board
(FSB)  has  initiated  important  work  in  this  direction  and  is  expected  to  conduct  a  thorough
evaluation of the effects of the G20 financial regulatory reforms.
1
The paper presented by Andy Haldane and co-authors at this conference is a powerful guide to
these evaluations.  They conclude, correctly in my view, that the loudly voiced concerns about
higher  capital  requirements  leading  to  lower  lending  do  not  seem  to  have  materialised,  giving
some credit to the claims that capital requirements could have been calibrated at a higher level,
even though the combined impact of the total loss absorption capacity and capital requirements
remains 
the
complementary  nature  of  the  existing  rules  and  provide  empirical  evidence  in  defence  of  the
current  “multipolar”  (that  is,  silo-based)  regulatory  regime.  Their  work  further  strengthens  the
case for any review of the new regulatory framework to err on the side of conservatism, and to
withstand pressure from vested interest groups.
fully  understood.   Moreover,  Haldane  and  colleagues  emphasise 
to  be 
2
In my remarks today I cannot pay justice to all dimensions of Andy’s paper but I plan to do two
things.  First,  I  will  expand  on  one  of  the  paper’s  key  aspects,  namely  the  potential  trade-offs
involved in multipolar regulation. And, second, I will touch on one issue that has arguably received
less attention so far – the effects of financial regulation on financial structures, in particular at
times of fast technological change.
Allow me to explain these two observations in more detail.
A holistic view on regulatory trade-offs
Over the past ten years, the financial market landscape has changed significantly, both in terms
of how risk is being transformed and how it is being pooled and managed. On the intermediation
side, the non-bank financial sector has substantially increased its share of the market, from 43%
in  2008  to  55%  in  early  2017.  On  the  risk  management  side,  central  clearing  houses  have
emerged  following  the  introduction  of  mandatory  central  clearing  for  standardised  over-the-
counter (OTC) derivatives – as agreed by the G20 at its Pittsburgh summit in 2009.
These changes have also impacted the nature and scope of financial regulation. For example,
the FSB has progressed towards tighter regulation of market-based finance, while CPMI-IOSCO
and  other  international  bodies  have  worked  tirelessly  since  2012  to  establish  a  regulatory
framework  that  makes  central  clearing  counterparties  (CCPs)  more  resilient  and  easier  to
3
resolve.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
A more diverse financial sector, however, also means that regulatory spillovers have become
both  more  likely  and  more  difficult  to  identify.  Let  me  take  the  example  of  CCPs  and  their
interactions with the Basel  III  leverage  ratio.  Because  clearing  services  require  clients  to  post
collateral, the non-recognition of such collateral in the leverage ratio framework may cause banks
to scale back their clearing services, potentially leading to an unhealthy concentration of clearing
services.
In other words, there is a risk that the leverage ratio could potentially make our markets more, not
less, risky. Some have publicly concluded on this issue, asking the Basel Committee to consider
how it could be amended. Others are still reviewing these dynamics, including an FSB-led review
of incentives to centrally clear, the Derivatives Assessment Team (DAT).
So,  different  from  regulation  for  one  category  of  financial  players,  such  as  banks,  where
overlapping  rules  may  be  desirable  for  the  reasons  explained  by  Andy  and  colleagues  (the
“Tinbergen”  and  “Brainard”  rules  applied  to  financial  regulation ),  regulatory  spillovers  across
financial players may be more a source of concern.
4
Ideally, quantitative models would support policymakers in characterising and overcoming such
trade-offs. This approach, however, faces two high hurdles. The first is that policymakers would
need  to  specify  better  their  loss  function,  giving  clear  weights  to  different,  and  potentially
conflicting,  objectives.  This  is  a  highly  delicate  endeavour,  however. And,  second,  even  if  we
could spell out our objective function, the way our quantitative models depict the financial sector
lacks the granularity needed to quantify trade-offs in a sufficiently precise manner. So, at the end,
I  generally  agree  with Andy’s  conclusion  that  we  will  likely  keep  shooting  in  the  dark,  which
means shooting many arrows at the same target.
Ultimately, however, potential adverse spillovers cannot be an excuse to undo what has been
achieved  since  2009.  But  when  adverse  spillovers  are  obvious,  such  as  in  the  case  of  the
leverage ratio and central clearing, then we should not hesitate to correct them. This also relates
to  the  undesired  consequences  of  a  lack  of  international  cooperation  in  some  pockets  of  the
regulatory  domain.  Consider  again  CCP  oversight  and  supervision.  Some  CCPs  are  clearly
global  in  nature  in  view  of  the  range  of  clearing  members  they  serve  or  the  markets  and
currencies they clear.
It  would  therefore  be  important  for  all  jurisdictions  to  recognise  the  need  for  non-domestic
supervisors  and  central  banks  to  be  involved  in  the  oversight  of  such  global  CCPs,  and  in
establishing  cooperative  oversight  arrangements  where  relevant. A  supervisory  approach  that
recognises  the  legitimate  interests  of  non-domestic  authorities  is  vital  for  tackling  the  global
repercussions of a potential CCP failure, including its recovery and resolution.
The European Commission proposal to amend the EMIR regulation is a case in point. After the
UK’s  decision  to  leave  the  EU,  and  with  UK  CCPs  clearing  approximately  90%  of  the  euro-
denominated interest rate swaps of euro area banks, there would be clear risks in allowing the
current EU arrangements for the supervision of third country CCPs to continue as they are. The
proposal  provides  EU  supervisors  and  the  relevant  central  banks  of  issue  with  the  tools  they
5
need in order to monitor and address risks to the EU’s financial system.
So more, not less, international cooperation is crucial to safeguard financial stability. This is a
point  worth  emphasising,  particularly  at  times  where  a  push-back  from  internationally  agreed
standards is being discussed openly. In an integrated global economy, financial regulation has to
rely  on  internationally  agreed  standards.  Turning  back  the  clock  on  international  financial
regulation would revive distrust, create financial fragmentation, and risk regulatory arbitrage and a
race to the bottom.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Effects of financial regulation on financial structures
6
Let me now turn to another challenge the regulatory community faces in my view, namely the
impact  –  whether  desired  or  not  –  of  regulation  on 
financial  structure  of  our
economies.  There are two broad ways in which the regulatory framework is likely to affect the
funding  mix  of  firms  and  households.  The  first  one  works  through  some  forms  of  financing
receiving  preferential  treatment.  The  second  works  through  protecting  incumbents  from  new
competitors. Both channels can be intended or unintended by regulators, and both can ultimately
steer  an  economy  towards  adopting  a  financial  structure  that  may  look  different  to  the  one  it
would have adopted were market forces left to their own devices.
the 
Despite these allocative effects, regulation is rarely based on first principles. In fact, regulators
are caught between a rock and a hard place. Ignoring the effects of regulation on our economies’
financial structures is likely to be naïve and delusional – we may not know the speed and scope
of the impact, but we can be relatively certain that the effect will not be neutral. At the same time,
internalising the effects would make it increasingly difficult to distinguish between prudential and
industry objectives. This could create misplaced incentives and can run the risk of failing to fulfil
the financial stability mandate.
The good news is that academic research has long been suggesting that even if financial rules
were to distort the first-best allocation, the impact on growth and society in general would likely
be  immaterial.   The  assertion  is  that  both  bank  and  market-based  finance  tends  to  support
8
economic development and living standards in similar ways.
7
More  recent  research,  however,  challenges  these  findings.  Evidence  is  growing  that  large
banking  systems  are  associated  with  more  systemic  risk  and  lower  economic  growth,  in
particular as countries grow richer.   Other  research  suggests  that  deeper  equity  markets  are
more effective in bringing economies closer to the technological frontier.
10
9
On  balance,  therefore,  empirical  research  is  increasingly  probing  the  role  and  importance  of
banks  in  developed  economies,  both  in  terms  of  their  marginal  contribution  to  growth  and  as
shock absorbers. This is also reflected in the political discussion. The European push towards a
capital  markets  union  reflects  not  only  the  need  for  increased  cross-border  risk-sharing  in  a
currency union, but also the understanding that a more balanced funding mix is better at helping
to  absorb  economic  shocks,  much 
tyre”
 There is also the hope that deeper and better integrated equity markets will support
hypothesis.
innovation and productivity growth in the European Union.
line  with  Alan  Greenspan’s 
“spare 
in 
11
In  addition,  we  can  see  that  banks  are  increasingly  challenged  by  technological  shifts.  New
competitors are emerging rapidly and threaten to conquer banks’ market shares in some of their
core  income-generating  areas.  Crowd  funding  or  peer-to-peer  lending,  for  example,  has  the
potential  to  affect  bank  lending  services.  E-trading  or  robo-advisory,  meanwhile,  may  crowd
banks out of typical investment management or advisory functions. Other areas of competition
involve the provision of payment services.
This, of course, does not mean that banks have become redundant or a drag on society. Banks
play a key social role of pooling savings and engaging in maturity and risk transformation, and
they should continue doing so. But it does raise two important questions: first, are we at a tipping
point  where  the  future  of  banks  is  challenged? And  second,  should  regulators  care?  That  is,
should  we  protect  banks  from  recent  technological  shifts  and  the  emergence  of  new
competitors? Should regulators have a preconceived idea of which financial structure is best for
society, bearing in mind the trade-off I mentioned before?
So  far,  the  regulatory  approach  has  generally  been  built  on  the  assumption  that  opening  up
market access to new fintech companies will increase social surplus and spur innovation, similar
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
to what we have seen in other network industries. At the same time, rules are still in place that
protect  incumbents.  For  example,  fintech  firms  lack  access  to  the  customer  transaction  data
they would need to provide a broader range of financial services – data that banks can use to
cross-sell financial services at a price that might be higher than if information-sharing was less
restricted.
As  an  example,  the  revision  of  Europe’s  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD2),  due  to  be
implemented by EU Member States in January 2018, is designed to introduce more competition
by requiring banks to share account information. With access to such data, fintech companies
could increasingly shake up the banking sector.
In this regulatory landscape, I see two broad scenarios for the future. In the first one, incumbents
rise to the challenge. They join forces with start-ups, embrace new technologies, cut costs and
gain  new  sources  of  revenue.  Some  of  these  partnerships  are  happening  as  we  speak.  The
outcome under this scenario is generally benign as, first, new technologies are likely to spread
more rapidly through banks’ existing networks, fostering productivity and growth, and, second, as
current  prudential  regulation  is  already  geared  towards  banks,  thereby  preserving  financial
stability.
However,  I  can  already  see  one  challenge  for  regulators,  which  is  to  let  banks  reap  the
economies  of  scale  inherent  to  digital  technologies  while  not  recreating  risks  of  too-big-to-fail.
This scenario also crucially assumes that banks are profitable enough to carry out the necessary
investments, which in Europe involves reducing costs and addressing forcefully non-performing
loans.
In the second scenario banks remain more defensive or, as they would probably like to argue,
stifled  by  regulation  and  the  low  interest  rate  environment. As  a  result,  they  increasingly  risk
failing to meet the changing demands of customers, who, in a digitalised world, expect financial
services to be available in real time, anywhere and at any time. This scenario could be a real
threat to incumbents, in particular if digital giants, who already have access to large amounts of
customer data, were to start targeting parts of the banking value chain, which would limit banks’
ability to cross-sell and, ultimately, crowd banks out of a large swathe of financial services.
For society as a whole, would this scenario be worse? Firms and households could benefit from
a  growing  number  of  financial  products  and  services,  lower  prices  and  faster  provision.  The
problem,  however,  would  be  that  banking  services  would  likely  migrate  towards  the  less-
regulated  parts  of  the  financial  system  where  many  fintechs  –  as  non-deposit  takers  –  still
operate.
  of  financial
regulation.  In  this  case,  to  avoid  regulators  once  again  being  “bloodhounds  in  pursuit  of
greyhounds”
,  current  regulatory  loopholes  would  need  to  be  closed  to  ensure  that  financial
intermediation outside the banking sector remains safe and sound.
  This  is  what  Charles  Goodhart  coined  the  “boundary  problem”
12
13
14
Here is where normative questions might arise, however. The reason is that financial regulation
may affect the direction and rate of change at which financial structures evolve. On the one hand,
pre-emptively  drawing  in  the  reins  in  the  name  of  financial  stability  could  stifle  innovation  and
prevent  fintechs  from  growing  important  economies  of  scale.  So  it  could  also  put  small
businesses  and  households  at  a  disadvantage  as  they  would  potentially  benefit  from  faster
technological  progress,  provided  it  remained  safe.  On  the  other  hand,  allowing  risks  to
accumulate in the unregulated sector could lead to over-exuberance, recreate risks to financial
stability, and forego the benefits of past regulatory efforts.
Finding  the  right  balance  and  identifying  the  risks  in  real  time  is  an  inherently  difficult  task,  of
course. I have no quick or easy solutions to offer. But what we should do, in my view, is to more
systematically encourage more research on these important matters.
Central  banks  are  not  innocent  bystanders  in  this  process.  We  have  to  be  mindful  about  the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
impact of our own decisions on the future of financial structures. Digital currencies, for example,
could  undermine  commercial  banks’  monopoly  on  creating  inside  money.
  Negative  interest
rates,  meanwhile,  can  have  adverse  consequences  for  banks’  profitability  over  time  despite
being extremely effective in complementing other non-conventional monetary policy instruments
and  helping  central  banks  overcome  the  zero  lower  bound  constraint.  So  far,  the  general
equilibrium effects of negative rates have clearly dominated. More generally, it is hard to believe
that central banks keeping very large balance sheets for a considerable amount of time will not
have an impact on financial intermediation.
15
Looking  forward,  low  productivity  and  ageing  societies  may  mean  that  our  economies  have
gravitated towards a low growth, low interest rate environment that may weigh more permanently
on banks’ profits and, hence, financial stability. Monetary policy, in turn, may have to resort more
often to non-standard measures to meet its price stability mandate. In these circumstances, we
need to be mindful of risks to financial stability. A too protracted period of asset purchases, for
example, may cause financial imbalances to build up with potentially adverse consequences for
price stability.
Conclusion
Let me close.
Preserving financial stability has become a much more complex and intertwined endeavour than
it  was  10  or  20  years  ago.  These  interconnections  can  profoundly  change  the  balance  of
regulatory  trade-offs  across  major  financial  market  participants.  What  is  more,  the  financial
system  is  evolving  quickly.  Intra-temporal  trade-offs  are  made  worse  by  appreciable  inter-
temporal  trade-offs,  where  policymakers  need  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  on  the  allocative
repercussions of their regulatory decisions.
In this environment, there are no quick fixes or easy solutions. But there are two principles on
which we should continue to build. The first is cooperation among regulators, both within and
across borders. Only by joining forces will we be able to break up remaining silos and identify
common  solutions  to  the  challenging  trade-offs  we  face.  The  second  is  cooperation  across
policymakers.  Conferences  like  this  one  bring  together  policymakers  from  different  fora  –
monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and  financial  stability.  They  force  us  to  think  beyond  our  usual
boundaries and have the potential to raise awareness and sensitivities.
I  would  therefore  like  to  thank  Olivier  Blanchard  and  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International
Economics wholeheartedly.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
See Aikman, D., A.G. Haldane, M. Hinterschweiger and S. Kapadia (2017), “Rethinking Financial Stability”, Bank
of England, mimeo, October.
See Admati, A. and M. Hellwig (2014), “The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong with Banking and What to Do
about  It:  with  a  new  preface  by  the  authors,”  Princeton  University  Press;  and  Kashkari,  N.  (2016),  “The
Minneapolis Plan to End Too Big to Fail”, speech at the event “Too Big to Fail at the Economic Club of New York”,
Economic Club of New York, 16 November.
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2017),  “Central  clearing:  Reaping  the  benefits,  controlling  the  risks”,  Banque  de  France,
Financial Stability Review, No. 21, April. On market-based finance, see, e.g., the Financial Stability Board’s 2017
policy recommendations to address structural vulnerabilities from asset management activities
The Tinbergen rule states that different policy objectives call for different policy instruments, while the Brainard
rule states that the choice of instruments depends on the type of uncertainty surrounding their effects, see
Aikman et al. (2017, op. cit.).
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
See ECB Opinion on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending
Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 and Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 with regard to the procedures and authorities
involved  for  the  authorisation  of  central  counterparties.  In  June  the  ECB  Governing  Council  unanimously
adopted a recommendation to amend Article 22 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB)
and of the ECB to provide the ECB with a regulatory competence in the area of central clearing.
On financial structures, see Claessens, S. (2016), “Regulation and structural change in financial systems”, ECB
Forum on Central Banking, June.
For an excellent review of this topic, see Popov, A. (2017), “Evidence on finance and economic growth”, in Beck,
T. and R. Levine (eds.), Handbook on Finance and Development, forthcoming.
This conclusion is supported by both micro and macroeconomic evidence and is robust across a wide set of
economies and sectors (see, e.g., Arestis, P., P. Demetriades and K.B. Luintel (2001), “Financial development
and economic growth: The role of stock markets”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 33, 16–41; Beck, T.
and R. Levine (2002), “Industry growth and capital allocation: Does having a market- or bank-based system
matter?”, Journal of Financial Economics 64, 147–180; and Beck, T. and R. Levine (2004), “Stock markets,
banks, and growth: Panel evidence”, Journal of Banking and Finance, 423–442.)
See Langfield, S. and M. Pagano (2016), “Bank bias in Europe: Effects on systemic risk and growth”, Economic
Policy, 31(85), 51–106; and Demirgüç-Kunt, A., E. Feyen and R. Levine (2013), “The evolving importance of
banks and securities markets”, World Bank Economic Review, 27(3), 476–490.
See Hsu, P., X. Tian and Y. Xu (2014), “Financial development and innovation: Cross-country evidence”,  Journal
of Financial Economics, 112(1), 116–135.
See Greenspan, A. (1999), “Do efficient financial markets mitigate financial crises?”, speech before the 1999
Financial Markets Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Sea Island, Georgia, 19 October.
Depending on the type of activity they carry out, many fintech companies are already subject to one or more
pieces of EU sectoral financial services legislation.
See Goodhart, C. (2008), “The Boundary Problem in Financial Regulation”, National Institute Economic Review,
206, 48–55.
See Eichengreen, B. (2009), “The financial crisis and global policy reforms”, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Asia Economic Policy Conference, 18–20 October, quoted by Aikman, D. et al. (2017, op.cit).
See, e.g., He et al. (2017), “Fintech and Financial Services: Initial Considerations”, IMF Staff Discussion Notes
No. 17/05.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
