Bank of France reports industrial  output  continued  to  make  progress  in
June 1997   BANK OF FRANCE, MONTHLY BUSINESS REVIEW, June 1997.
According  to  the  business  leaders  surveyed  by  the  Banque  de  France,
industrial  output  continued  to  make  progress  in  June.  Output  of  consumer  and  intermediate
goods  advanced  significantly,  with  a  more  moderate  increase  for  capital  goods,  whereas  it
levelled out in the food-processing industry and slightly dipped in the automobile industry.
Capacity utilization rates recovered.
Overall demand  strengthened  both  in  France  and  abroad.  Export  sales  grew
considerably, in particular to Great Britain, Italy and the United States. Domestic demand rose,
stimulated to some extent by inventory replenishment.
Order  books  seem  generally  satisfactory.  While  they  have  emptied  out
somewhat  in  the  food  processing  industry,  they  remain  on  the  full  side  in  the  capital  goods
sector. Inventories are only just above desired levels, despite an increase in the consumer goods
sector, and above all in the automobile and food processing industries.
In the coming months, activity is likely to intensify across the board, except
for the automobile sector which is expected to stabilize.
Overall, raw material and finished goods prices  changed  little.  The  cost  of
supplies climbed in certain branches of the intermediate goods sector, mainly due to the rise in
the dollar, although these increases were not passed on to sales prices.
Business  managers  continued  to  take  a  cautious  stance  on  investment.  The
little  capital  expenditure  there  was  primarily  concerned  the  modernisation  of  equipment  and
bringing it into line with standards.
Retail  activity,  which  was  buoyant  in  May,  fell  back  in  June  partly  due  to
poor weather conditions. In aggregate, activity was up over the last two months.
The  construction  and  civil  engineering  sector1  recovered  in  the  second
quarter of 1997 primarily as a result of seasonal factors.
Employment levels held steady in industry, except for the automobile sector,
where  there  was  a  further  contraction,  and  the  building,  retail  and  market  services  sectors.
Wherever possible, companies sought  to  enhance  workforce  flexibility  via  temporary  staff  and
overtime,  in  order  to  cope  with  fluctuating  demand  and  organize  themselves  for  the  summer
vacation period.
 1
Unadjusted data.
BIS Review 70/1997
