Mr.  Greenspan  offers  some  considerations  as  a  guide  for  government
decisions  on  regulating  the  financial  markets    Remarks  by  Chairman  of  the  Board  of
Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,  at  the  Financial  Markets
I  am  pleased  to  participate  once  again  in  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta’s
annual Financial Markets Conference. As in previous years, the Reserve Bank has developed a
conference program that is quite timely. Changes in technology have permitted the development
in  recent  years  of  increasingly  diverse  financial  instruments  and  intensely  competitive  market
structures.  The  rapid  evolution  of  products  and  markets  has  led  many  to  conclude  that  market
regulatory  structures,  many  of  which  were  established  in  the  1920s  and  1930s,  have  become
increasingly  outdated.  Some  see  new  products  and  markets  not  covered  by  government
regulation and fear the consequences of so-called “regulatory gaps.” Others see old government
regulations  applied  to  new  instruments  and  markets  and  fear  the  unintended  consequences  of
what seems unnecessary and burdensome regulation.
Nowhere have these tensions been more evident than in the ongoing debate over
the  appropriate  government  regulation  of  derivative  contracts,  a  debate  which  has  varied  in
intensity  but  has  never  fully  subsided  for  at  least  ten  years.  Recent  efforts  by  members  of  the
Senate  Agriculture  Committee  to  clarify  and  rationalize  the  regulation  of  derivative  contracts
under  the  Commodity  Exchange  Act  have  once  again  placed  these  contentious  issues  on  the
front burner. In my remarks today I shall proffer a set of considerations that I find quite valuable
as  a  guide  to  decisions  about  the  need  for  government  regulation  of  financial  markets.  I  shall
then  review  the  history  of  government  regulation  of  derivative  contracts  and  markets  in  the
United  States  and  consider  the  current  regulatory  structure  for  those  products  and  markets  in
light of these considerations.
Market Regulation
I  would  argue  that  the  first  imperative  when  evaluating  market  regulation  is  to
enunciate clearly the public policy objectives that government regulation  would  be  intended  to
promote. What market characteristics do policymakers seek to encourage? Efficiency? Fair and
open access? What phenomena do we wish to discourage or eliminate? Fraud, manipulation, or
other  unfair  practices?  Systemic  instability?  Without  explicit  answers  to  these  questions,
government  regulation  is  unlikely  to  be  effective.  More  likely,  it  will  prove  unnecessary,
burdensome, and perhaps even contrary to what more careful consideration would reveal  to  be
the underlying objectives.
A  second  imperative,  once  public  policy  objectives  are  clearly  specified,  is  to
evaluate  whether  government  regulation  is  necessary  for  those  purposes.  In  making  such
evaluations, it is critically important to recognize that no market is ever truly unregulated. The
self-interest of market participants generates private market regulation. Thus, the real question is
not  whether  a  market  should  be  regulated.  Rather,  the  real  question  is  whether  government
intervention  strengthens  or  weakens  private  regulation.  If  incentives  for  private  market
regulation  are  weak  or  if  market  participants  lack  the  capabilities  to  pursue  their  interests
effectively,  then  the  introduction  of  government  regulation  may  improve  regulation.  But  if
private  market  regulation  is  effective,  then  government  regulation  is  at  best  unnecessary.  At
worst,  the  introduction  of  government  regulation  may  actually  weaken  the  effectiveness  of
regulation  if  government  regulation  is  itself  ineffective  or  undermines  incentives  for  private
market  regulation.  We  must  be  aware  that  government  regulation  unavoidably  involves  some
BIS Review   19/1997
- 2 -
element of moral hazard -- if private  market  participants  believe  that  government  is  protecting
their interests, their own efforts to protect their interests will diminish to some degree.
Whether  government  regulation  is  needed,  and  if  so,  what  form  of  government
regulation  is  optimal,  depends  critically  on  a  market’s  characteristics.  A  “one-size-fits-all”
approach  to  financial  market  regulation  is  almost  never  appropriate.  The  degree  and  type  of
government regulation needed, if any, depends on the types of instruments traded, the types of
market participants, and the nature of the relationships among  market  participants.  To  cite  just
one example, a government regulatory framework designed to protect retail investors from fraud
or insolvency of brokers is unlikely to be necessary -- and is almost sure to be suboptimal -- if
applied to a market in which large institutions transact on a principal-to-principal basis.
Recognizing  that  a  one-size-fits-all  approach  is  seldom  appropriate,  it  may  be
useful  to  offer  transactors  a  choice  between  seeking  the  benefits  and  accepting  the  burdens  of
government regulation, or forgoing those benefits and avoiding those burdens by transacting in
financial markets that are only privately regulated. In such circumstances, the privately regulated
markets in effect provide a market test of the net benefits of government regulation. Migration
of  activity  from  government-regulated  to  privately  regulated  markets  sends  a  signal  to
government regulators that many transactors believe the costs of regulation exceed the benefits.
When  such  migration  occurs,  government  regulators  should  consider  carefully  whether  less
regulation  or  different  regulation  would  provide  a  better  cost-benefit  tradeoff  without
compromising public policy objectives.
Historical Development of U.S. Government Regulation of Derivative Markets
Before  evaluating  the  current  regulation  of  derivatives  in  light  of  these
considerations, it is quite useful to know something of the history of these instruments and their
regulation.  Derivative  contracts  (forward  contracts  and  options)  appear  to  have  been  utilized
throughout American history. Indeed, it will probably come as a surprise even to this audience
that  15  to  25  percent  of  trades  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  in  its  early  years  were  time
bargains,  that  is,  forward  contracts,  rather  than  transactions  for  cash  settlement  (in  those  days,
same-day  settlement)  or  regular-way  settlement  (next-day  settlement).  In  the  case  of
commodities,  forward  contracts  for  corn,  wheat,  and  other  grains  came  into  common  use  by
1850  in  Chicago,  where  they  were  known  as  “to  arrive”  contracts.  The  first  organized  futures
exchange  in  the  United  States,  the  Chicago  Board  of  Trade,  evolved  through  the  progressive
standardization  of  the  terms  of  “to  arrive”  contracts,  including  lot  sizes,  grades  of  grain,  and
delivery  periods.  Trading  apparently  was  centralized  on  the  Board  of  Trade  by  1859,  and  in
1865 it set out detailed rules for the trading of highly standardized contracts quite similar to the
grain futures contracts traded today.
The  first  recorded  instance  of  federal  government  regulation  of  derivatives  was
the  Anti-Gold  Futures  Act  of  1864,  which  prohibited  the  trading  of  gold  futures.  The
government had been unhappy that its fiat currency issues, the infamous greenbacks, were at that
time  trading  at  a  substantial  discount  to  gold.  Unwilling  to  accept  this  result  as  evidence  of
failure  of  the  government’s  monetary  policies,  Congress  concluded  that  it  was  evidence  of  a
serious failure of private market regulation. In  the  event,  Congress’s  action  was  followed  by  a
further sharp drop in the value of the greenbacks. Although it took the government many years
to restore monetary policy to a sound footing, it took Congress only two weeks to conclude that
its prohibition of gold futures was having unintended consequences and to repeal the act.
BIS Review   19/1997
- 3 -
It has been the trading of agricultural futures, however, that from its inception has
produced calls for government intervention. Throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, farmers were often opposed to futures trading, particularly during periods when prices
of  their  products  were  low  or  declining.  They  presumed  that  dreaded  speculators  were
depressing their prices. The states were the first to respond to calls for government regulation of
futures.  For  the  most  part,  state  legislation  on  futures  was  limited  to  prohibitions  on  bucket
shops, that is, operations that purport to act as brokers of exchange-traded futures but “bucket”
rather than execute their clients’ trades. An Illinois statute of 1874 signaled early concerns about
market integrity. The statute criminalized the spreading of false rumors to influence commodity
prices and attempts to corner commodity markets.
After  its  misadventure  with  futures  regulation  during  the  Civil  War,  the  federal
government  appears  not  to  have  given  further  consideration  to  regulating  futures  trading  until
1883,  when  a  bill  was  introduced  in  Congress  to  prohibit  use  of  the  mails  to  market  futures.
Thereafter, repeated efforts were made to regulate or prohibit trading of futures and options on
agricultural products. When the Agriculture Department reviewed the  Congressional  Record  in
1920,  it  found  that  164  measures  of  this  sort  had  previously  been  introduced.  These  efforts
culminated  in  passage  of  the  Futures  Trading  Act  of  1921.  That  act  was  promptly  declared
unconstitutional  by  the  Supreme  Court,  on  the  grounds  that  it  was  a  regulatory  measure
masquerading as a tax measure. But in 1922 Congress restated the purpose of the 1921 act as “an
act  for  the  prevention  and  removal  of  obstructions  and  burdens  upon  interstate  commerce  in
grain, by regulating transactions on grain futures exchanges,” and renamed it the Grain Futures
Act of 1922. As an explicitly regulatory measure, it was later upheld by the Court.
The  objective  of  the  Grain  Futures  Act  was  to  reduce  or  eliminate  “sudden  or
unreasonable  fluctuations”  in  the  prices  of  grain  on  futures  exchanges.  The  framers  of  the  act
believed  that  such  sudden  or  unreasonable  fluctuations  of  grain  futures  prices  reflected  their
susceptibility  to  “speculation,  manipulation,  or  control.”  Moreover,  such  fluctuations  in  price
were  seen  to  have  broad  ramifications  that  affected  the  national  public  interest.  Grain  futures
contracts  were  widely  used  by  producers  and  distributors  of  grain  to  hedge  the  risks  of  price
fluctuations.  Futures  prices  also  were  widely  disseminated  and  widely  used  as  the  basis  for
pricing  grain  transactions  off  the  futures  exchanges.  Indeed,  given  the  relative  size  of  the
agricultural sector of the time, fluctuations in futures prices no doubt had the potential to affect
the economy as a whole.
It is not entirely clear that the view that futures trading was exacerbating volatility
in agricultural prices was  well-founded.  To  be  sure,  evidence  abounds  that  market  participants
talked  incessantly  about  corners  and  bear  raids.  Moreover,  the  design  of  the  contracts  may,
indeed,  have  made  such  contracts  susceptible  to  manipulation.  However,  empirical  studies  of
more  recent  experience  cast  doubt  on  whether  the  use  of  derivatives  adds  to  price  volatility.
And, while charges of market manipulation are heard to this day, they typically are difficult, if
not impossible, to prove. Professional speculators were easy to blame for fluctuations in market
prices  that  actually  reflected  fundamental  shifts  in  supply  or  demand,  as  they  are  today.  The
market  clearing  process  is  a  very  abstract  concept.  It  is  sometimes  far  easier  to  envisage  price
changes as the consequence  of  individual  manipulators.  Indeed,  for  a  lot  of  nineteenth-century
ring  traders,  it  was  some  measure  of  manhood  (women  were  few)  that  they  could  squeeze  or
corner a market. The evidence suggests that this was largely Walter Middy-type fantasy.
In any event, the Grain Futures Act of 1922 established many of the key elements
of our current regulatory framework for derivatives. In general, the act was designed to confine
futures  trading  to  regulated  futures  exchanges.  The  act  made  it  unlawful  to  trade  futures  on
BIS Review   19/1997
- 4 -
exchanges other than those designated as contract markets by the Secretary of Agriculture. The
Secretary was permitted to so designate an exchange only if certain conditions were met. These
included the establishment of procedures for recordkeeping and reporting of futures transactions,
for  prevention  of  dissemination  of  false  or  misleading  crop  or  market  information,  and  for
prevention of price manipulation or cornering of markets. Finally, the act recognized the need to
permit  bona  fide  derivatives  transactions  to  be  executed  off  of  the  regulated  exchanges;  it
explicitly  excluded  forward  contracts  for  the  delivery  of  grain  from  the  exchange-trading
requirement. Forward contracts were essentially defined as contracts for future delivery to which
farmers or farm interests were counterparties or in which the seller, if not a farmer, owned the
grain at the time of making the contract.
The  next  major  piece  of  federal  legislation  affecting  futures  regulation  was  the
Commodity Exchange Act (CEA) of 1936. As in the case of the Grain Futures Act, an important
objective  of  the  CEA  was  to  discourage  forms  of  speculation  that  were  seen  as  exacerbating
price volatility. In addition, the CEA introduced provisions designed primarily to protect small
investors  in  commodity  futures,  whose  participation  had  been  increasing  and  was  viewed  as
beneficial.  These  provisions  included  requirements  for  the  registration  of  futures  commission
merchants (FCMs), that is, futures brokers, and for the segregation of customer funds from FCM
funds. The CEA also expanded the coverage of futures regulation to cover contracts for cotton,
rice,  and  certain  other  specifically  enumerated  commodities  traded  on  futures  exchanges,  and
prohibited the trading of options on commodities traded on futures exchanges.
The federal regulatory framework for derivatives market regulation then remained
substantially  unchanged  until  1974,  when  Congress  enacted  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading
Commission Act. The act did not make any fundamental changes in the objectives of derivatives
regulation.  However,  it  expanded  the  scope  of  the  CEA  quite  significantly.  In  addition  to
creating  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  (CFTC)  as  an  independent  agency  and
giving  the  CFTC  exclusive  jurisdiction  over  commodity  futures  and  options,  the  1974
amendments  expanded  the  CEA’s  definition  of  “commodity”  beyond  a  specific  list  of
agricultural  commodities  to  include  “all  other  goods  and  articles,  except  onions,  .  .  .  and  all
services, rights, and interests in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future
dealt in.” In one respect, this was sweeping deregulation, in that it explicitly allowed the trading
on  futures  exchanges  of  contracts  on  virtually  any  underlying  assets,  including  financial
instruments.  Only  onion  futures,  banned  in  1958  as  the  presumed  favorite  plaything  of
manipulators,  remained  beyond  the  pale.  In  another  respect,  however,  this  was  a  sweeping
extension  of  regulation.  Given  this  broad  definition  of  a  commodity  and  an  equally  broad
interpretation of what constitutes a futures contract, this change brought a tremendous range of
off-exchange  transactions  potentially  within  the  scope  of  the  CEA.  In  particular,  it  could  be
interpreted  to  extend  the  broad  prohibition  on  off-exchange  trading  of  futures  to  an  immense
volume of diverse transactions that never had been traded on exchanges.
The  potential  for  the  legality  of  a  wider  range  of  transactions  to  be  called  into
question  did  not  go  unnoticed  during  debate  on  the  1974  act.  In  particular,  the  Treasury
Department  proposed  language  excluding  off-exchange  derivative  transactions  in  foreign
currency,  government  securities,  and  certain  other  financial  instruments  from  the  newly
expanded  CEA.  This  proposal  was  adopted  by  Congress  and  is  known  as  the  Treasury
Amendment.  In  proposing  the  amendment,  Treasury  was  primarily  concerned  with  protecting
foreign  exchange  markets  from  what  it  considered  unnecessary  and  potentially  harmful
regulation.  The  foreign  exchange  markets  clearly  have  quite  different  characteristics  from
markets  for  agricultural  futures  --  the  markets  for  the  major  currencies  are  deep  and,  as  some
central  banks  have  learned  the  hard  way,  they  are  extremely  difficult  to  manipulate.
BIS Review   19/1997
- 5 -
Furthermore, participants in those markets, primarily banks and other financial institutions, and
large corporations, would not seem to need, and certainly are not seeking, the protection of the
CEA. Thus, there was, and is, no reason to presume that the regulatory framework of the CEA
needs to be applied to the foreign exchange markets to achieve the public policy objectives that
motivated  the  CEA.  Indeed,  the  wholesale  foreign  exchange  markets  provide  a  clear  and
compelling  example  of  how  private  parties  can  regulate  markets  quite  effectively  without
government assistance.
BIS Review   19/1997
