Mr. Greenspan presents the views of the Federal Reserve in its semi-annual
report  on  monetary  policy      Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the
Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,  before  the  Senate  Banking  Committee  on
26/2/97.
I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  this  Committee  to  present  the
Federal Reserve’s semiannual report on monetary policy.
The  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy  over  the  past  year  has  been  quite
favorable.  Real GDP growth has picked up to more than three percent over the four quarters of
1996,  as  the  economy  progressed  through  its  sixth  year  of  expansion.  Employers  added  more
than  two-and-a-half  million  workers  to  their  payrolls  in  1996,  and  the  unemployment  rate  fell
further.  Nominal  wages  and  salaries  have  increased  faster  than  prices,  meaning  workers  have
gained ground in real terms, reflecting the benefits of rising productivity. Outside the food and
energy  sectors,  increases  in  consumer  prices  actually  have  continued  to  edge  lower,  with  core
CPI inflation only 2½ percent over the past twelve months.
Low inflation last year was both a symptom and a cause of the good economy. It
was symptomatic of the balance and solidity of the expansion and the evident absence of major
strains  on  resources.  At  the  same  time,  continued  low  levels  of  inflation  and  inflation
expectations have been  a  key  support  for  healthy  economic  performance.  They  have  helped  to
create  a  financial  and  economic  environment  conducive  to  strong  capital  spending  and
longer-range  planning  generally,  and  so  to  sustained  economic  expansion.  Consequently,  the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) believes it is crucial to keep inflation contained in the
near term and ultimately to move toward price stability.
Looking ahead, the members of the FOMC expect inflation to remain low and the
economy  to  grow  appreciably  further.  However,  as  I  shall  be  discussing,  the  unusually  good
inflation performance of recent years seems to owe in large part to some temporary factors, of
uncertain longevity. Thus, the FOMC continues to see the distribution of inflation risks skewed
to  the  upside  and  must  remain  especially  alert  to  the  possible  emergence  of  imbalances  in
financial  and  product  markets  that  ultimately  could  endanger  the  maintenance  of  the
low-inflation environment. Sustainable economic expansion for 1997 and beyond depends on it.
For some, the benign inflation outcome of 1996  might  be  considered  surprising,
as  resource  utilization  rates  --  particularly  of  labor  --  were  in  the  neighborhood  of  those  that
historically have been associated with building inflation pressures. To be sure, an acceleration in
nominal labor compensation, especially its wage component, became evident over the past year.
But  the  rate  of  pay  increase  still  was  markedly  less  than  historical  relationships  with  labor
market conditions would have predicted. A typical restraint on compensation increases has been
evident  for  a  few  years  now  and  appears  to  be  mainly  the  consequence  of  greater  worker
insecurity.  In  1991,  at  the  bottom  of  the  recession,  a  survey  of  workers  at  large  firms  by
International  Survey  Research  Corporation  indicated  that  25  percent  feared  being  laid  off.  In
1996, despite the sharply lower unemployment rate and the tighter labor market, the same survey
organization found that 46 percent were fearful of a job layoff.
The  reluctance  of  workers  to  leave  their  jobs  to  seek  other  employment  as  the
labor  market  tightened  has  provided  further  evidence  of  such  concern,  as  has  the  tendency
toward  longer  labor  union  contracts.  For  many  decades,  contracts  rarely  exceeded  three  years.
Today, one can point to five- and six-year contracts -- contracts that are commonly characterized
BIS Review   22/1997
- 2 -
by an emphasis on job security and that involve only modest wage increases. The low level of
work stoppages of recent years also attests to concern about job security.
Thus, the willingness of workers in recent years to trade off smaller increases in
wages  for  greater  job  security  seems  to  be  reasonably  well  documented.  The  unanswered
question  is  why  this  insecurity  persisted  even  as  the  labor  market,  by  all  objective  measures,
tightened considerably. One possibility may lie in the rapid evolution of technologies in use in
the  work  place.  Technological  change  almost  surely  has  been  an  important  impetus  behind
corporate restructuring and downsizing. Also, it contributes to the concern of workers that their
job skills may become inadequate. No longer can one expect to obtain all of one’s lifetime job
skills  with  a  high-school  or  college  diploma.  Indeed,  continuing  education  is  perceived  to  be
increasingly necessary to retain a job. The more pressing need to update job skills is  doubtless
also  a  factor  in  the  marked  expansion  of  on-the-job  training  programs,  especially  in  technical
areas, in many of the nation’s corporations.
Certainly, other factors have contributed to  the  softness  in  compensation  growth
in the past few years. The sharp deceleration in health care costs, of course, is cited frequently.
Another  is  the  heightened  pressure  on  firms  and  their  workers  in  industries  that  compete
internationally.  Domestic  deregulation  has  had  similar  effects  on  the  intensity  of  competitive
forces in some industries. In any event, although I do not doubt that all these factors are relevant,
I would be surprised if they were nearly as important as job insecurity.
If heightened job insecurity is the most significant explanation of the break with
the past in recent years, then it is  important  to  recognize  that,  as  I  indicated  in  last  February’s
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, suppressed wage cost growth as a consequence of job insecurity
can be carried only so far. At some point, the tradeoff of subdued wage growth for job security
has to come to an end. In other words, the relatively modest wage gains we have experienced are
a temporary rather than a lasting phenomenon because there is a limit to the value of additional
job  security  people  are  willing  to  acquire  in  exchange  for  lesser  increases  in  living  standards.
Even  if  real  wages  were  to  remain  permanently  on  a  lower  upward  track  than  otherwise  as  a
result of the greater sense of insecurity, the rate of change of wages would revert at some point
to a normal relationship with inflation. The unknown is when this transition period will end.
Indeed,  some  recent  evidence  suggests  that  the  labor  markets  bear  especially
careful watching for signs that the return to more normal patterns may be in process. The Bureau
of  Labor  Statistics  reports  that  people  were  somewhat  more  willing  to  quit  their  jobs  to  seek
other  employment  in  January  than  previously.  The  possibility  that  this  reflects  greater
confidence by workers accords with a recent further rise in the percent of households responding
to a Conference Board survey who perceive that job availability is plentiful. Of course, the job
market has continued to be quite good recently; employment in January registered robust growth
and initial claims for unemployment insurance have been at a relatively low level of late. Wages
rose faster in 1996 than in 1995 by most measures, perhaps also raising questions about whether
the transitional period of unusually slow wage gains may be drawing to a close.
To be sure, the pickup in wage gains has not shown through to underlying price
inflation. Increases in the core CPI, as well as in several broader measures of prices, have stayed
subdued or even  edged  off  further  in  recent  months.  As  best  we  can  judge,  faster  productivity
growth  last  year  meant  that  rising  compensation  gains  did  not  cause  labor  costs  per  unit  of
output  to  increase  any  more  rapidly.  Non-labor  costs,  which  are  roughly  a  quarter  of  total
consolidated costs of the nonfinancial corporate sector, were little changed in 1996.
BIS Review   22/1997
- 3 -
Owing in part to this subdued behavior of unit costs, profits and rates of return on
capital have risen to high  levels.  As  a  consequence,  businesses  believe  that,  were  they  to  raise
prices to boost profits further, competitors with already ample profit margins would not follow
suit;  instead,  they  would  use  the  occasion  to  capture  a  greater  market  share.  This  interplay  is
doubtless a significant factor in the evident loss of pricing power in American business.
Intensifying  global  competition  also  may  be  further  restraining  domestic  firms’
ability to hike prices as well as wages. Clearly, the appreciation of the dollar on balance over the
past  eighteen  months  or  so,  together  with  low  inflation  in  many  of  our  trading  partners,  has
resulted in a marked decline in non-oil import prices that has helped to damp domestic inflation
pressures.  Yet  it  is  important  to  emphasize  that  these  influences,  too,  would  be  holding  down
inflation only temporarily; they represent a transition to a lower price level than would otherwise
prevail, not to a permanently lower rate of inflation.
Against the background of all these considerations, the FOMC has recognized the
need  to  remain  vigilant  for  signs  of  potentially  inflationary  imbalances  that  might,  if  not
corrected promptly, undermine our economic expansion. The FOMC in fact has signaled a state
of heightened alert for possible policy tightening since last July in its policy directives. But, we
have  also  taken  care  not  to  act  prematurely.  The  FOMC  refrained  from  changing  policy  last
summer,  despite  expectations  of  a  near-term  policy  firming  by  many  financial  market
participants.  In  light  of  the  developments  I’ve  just  discussed  affecting  wages  and  prices,  we
thought  inflation  might  well  remain  damped,  and  in  any  case  was  unlikely  to  pick  up  very
rapidly, in part  because  the  economic  expansion  appeared  likely  to  slow  to  a  more  sustainable
pace. In the event, inflation has remained quiescent since then.
Given  the  lags  with  which  monetary  policy  affects  the  economy,  however,  we
cannot  rule  out  a  situation  in  which  a  preemptive  policy  tightening  may  become  appropriate
before any sign of actual higher inflation becomes evident. If the FOMC were to implement such
an  action,  it  would  be  judging  that  the  risks  to  the  economic  expansion  of  waiting  longer  had
increased  unduly  and  had  begun  to  outweigh  the  advantages  of  waiting  for  uncertainties  to  be
reduced by the accumulation of more information about economic trends. Indeed, the hallmark
of a successful policy to foster sustainable economic growth is that inflation does not rise. I find
it  ironic  that  our  actions  in  1994-95  were  criticized  by  some  because  inflation  did  not  turn
upward.  That  outcome,  of  course,  was  the  intent  of  the  tightening,  and  I  am  satisfied  that  our
actions  then  were  both  necessary  and  effective,  and  helped  to  foster  the  continued  economic
expansion.
To  be  sure,  1997  is  not  1994.  The  real  federal  funds  rate  today  is  significantly
higher than it was three years ago. Then we had just completed an extended period of monetary
ease which addressed the  credit  stringencies  of  the  early  1990s,  and  with  the  abatement  of  the
credit  crunch,  the  low  real  funds  rate  of  early  1994  was  clearly  incompatible  with  containing
inflation and sustaining  growth  going  forward.  In  February  1997,  in  contrast,  our  concern  is  a
matter of relative risks  rather  than  of  expected  outcomes.  The  real  funds  rate,  judging  by  core
inflation, is only slightly below its early 1995 peak for this cycle and might be at a level that will
promote  continued  non-inflationary  growth,  especially  considering  the  recent  rise  in  the
exchange value of the dollar. Nonetheless, we cannot be sure. And the risks of being wrong are
clearly tilted to the upside.
I  wish  it  were  possible  to  lay  out  in  advance  exactly  what  conditions  have  to
prevail  to  portend  a  buildup  of  inflation  pressures  or  inflationary  psychology.  However,  the
circumstances that have been associated with increasing inflation in the past have not followed a
BIS Review   22/1997
- 4 -
single pattern. The processes have differed from cycle to cycle, and what may have been a useful
leading indicator in one instance has given off misleading signals in another.
I have already discussed the key role of labor market developments in restraining
inflation  in  the  current  cycle  and  our  careful  monitoring  of  signs  that  the  transition  phase  of
trading off lower real wages for greater job security might be coming to a close. As always, with
resource utilization rates high, we would need to watch closely a situation in which demand was
clearly  unsustainable  because  it  was  producing  escalating  pressures  on  resources,  which  could
destabilize the economy. And we would need to be watchful that the progress we have made in
keeping  inflation  expectations  damped  was  not  eroding.  In  general,  though,  our  analysis  will
need  to  encompass  all  potentially  relevant  information,  from  financial  markets  as  well  as  the
economy, especially when some signals, like those in the labor market, have not been following
their established patterns.
The ongoing economic expansion to date has reinforced our conviction about the
importance  of  low  inflation  --  and  the  public’s  confidence  in  continued  low  inflation.  The
economic  expansion  almost  surely  would  not  have  lasted  nearly  so  long  had  monetary  policy
supported  an  unsustainable  acceleration  of  spending  that  induced  a  buildup  of  inflationary
imbalances. The Federal Reserve must not acquiesce in an upcreep in inflation, for acceding to
higher  inflation  would  countenance  an  insidious  weakening  of  our  chances  for  sustaining
long-run  economic  growth.  Inflation  interferes  with  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources  by
confusing price signals, undercutting a focus on the longer run, and distorting incentives.
This year overall inflation is  anticipated  to  stay  restrained.  The  central  tendency
of the forecasts made by the Board members and Reserve Bank presidents has the increase in the
total CPI slipping back into a range of 2¾ to 3 percent over the four quarters of the year. This
slight falloff from last year’s pace is expected to owe in part to a slower rise in food  prices  as
some of last year’s supply  limitations  ease.  More  importantly,  world  oil  supplies  are  projected
by most analysts to increase relative to world oil demand, and futures markets project a further
decline in prices, at least in the near term. The recent and prospective declines in crude oil prices
not  only  should  affect  retail  gasoline  and  home  heating  oil  prices  but  also  should  relieve
inflation pressures through lower prices for other petroleum products, which are imbedded in the
economy’s underlying cost structure. Nonetheless, the trend in inflation rates in the core CPI and
in  broader  price  measures  may  be  somewhat  less  favorable  than  in  recent  years.  A  continued
tight labor market, whose influence on costs would be augmented by the scheduled increase in
the  minimum  wage  later  in  the  year  and  perhaps  by  higher  growth  of  benefits  now  that
considerable health-care savings already have been realized, could put upward pressure on core
inflation. Moreover,  the  effects  of  the  sharp  rise  in  the  dollar  over  the  last  eighteen  months  in
pushing down import prices are likely to ebb over coming quarters.
The  unemployment  rate,  according  to  Board  members  and  Bank  presidents,
should stay around 5¼ to 5½ percent through the fourth quarter, consistent with their projections
of  measured  real  GDP  growth  of  2  to  2¼  percent  over  the  four  quarters  of  the  year.  Such  a
growth rate would represent some downshifting in output expansion from that of last year. The
projected  moderation  of  growth  likely  would  reflect  several  influences:  (1)  declines  in  real
federal  government  purchases  should  be  exerting  a  modest  degree  of  restraint  on  overall
demand;  (2)  the  lagged  effects  of  the  increase  in  the  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  in  recent
months likely will damp U.S. net exports somewhat this year; and (3) residential construction is
unlikely to repeat the gains of 1996. On the other hand, we do not see evidence of widespread
imbalances either in business inventories or in stocks of equipment and consumer durables that
would  lead  to  a  substantial  cutback  in  spending.  And  financial  conditions  overall  remain
BIS Review   22/1997
- 5 -
supportive; real interest rates are not high by historical standards and credit is readily available
from intermediaries and in the market.
The  usual  uncertainties  in  the  overall  outlook  are  especially  focused  on  the
behavior  of  consumers.  Consumption  should  rise  roughly  in  line  with  the  projected  moderate
expansion of disposable income, but both upside and downside  risks  are  present.  According  to
various surveys, sentiment is decidedly upbeat. Consumers  have  enjoyed  healthy  gains  in  their
real incomes along with the extraordinary stock-market driven rise in their financial wealth over
the last couple of years. Indeed, econometric models suggest that the more than $4 trillion rise in
equity values since late 1994 should have had a larger positive influence on consumer spending
than seems to have actually occurred.
It  is  possible,  however,  that  households  have  been  reluctant  to  spend  much  of
their added wealth because they see a greater need to keep it to support spending in retirement.
Many  households  have  expressed  heightened  concern  about  their  financial  security  in  old  age,
which reportedly has led to increased provision for retirement. The results of a survey conducted
annually by the Roper Organization, which asks individuals about their confidence in the Social
Security system, shows that between 1992 and 1996 the percent of respondents expressing little
or no confidence in the system jumped from about 45 percent to more than 60 percent.
Moreover,  consumer  debt  burdens  are  near  historical  highs,  while  credit  card
delinquencies  and  personal  bankruptcies  have  risen  sharply  over  the  past  year.  These
circumstances may make both borrowers and lenders a bit more cautious, damping spending. In
fact, we may be seeing both wealth and debt effects already at work for different segments of the
population, to an approximately offsetting extent. Saving out of current income by households in
the  upper  income  quintile,  who  own  nearly  three-fourths  of  all  non-pension  equities  held  by
households,  evidently  has  declined  in  recent  years.  At  the  same  time,  the  use  of  credit  for
purchases appears to have leveled off after a  sharp  runup  from  1993  to  1996,  perhaps  because
some households are becoming debt constrained and, as a result, are curtailing their spending.
The  Federal  Reserve  will  be  weighing  these  influences  as  it  endeavors  to  help
extend the current period of sustained growth. Participants in financial markets seem to believe
that  in  the  current  benign  environment  the  FOMC  will  succeed  indefinitely.  There  is  no
evidence, however, that the business cycle has been repealed. Another  recession  will  doubtless
occur  some  day  owing  to  circumstances  that  could  not  be,  or  at  least  were  not,  perceived  by
policymakers  and  financial  market  participants  alike.  History  demonstrates  that  participants  in
financial  markets  are  susceptible  to  waves  of  optimism,  which  can  in  turn  foster  a  general
process  of  asset-price  inflation  that  can  feed  through  into  markets  for  goods  and  services.
Excessive  optimism  sows  the  seeds  of  its  own  reversal  in  the  form  of  imbalances  that  tend  to
grow  over  time.  When  unwarranted  expectations  ultimately  are  not  realized,  the  unwinding  of
these financial excesses can act to amplify a downturn  in  economic  activity,  much  as  they  can
amplify the upswing. As you know, last December I put the question this way: “...how  do  we
know when irrational exuberance has unduly escalated asset values, which then become subject
to unexpected and prolonged contractions ...?”
We have not been able, as yet, to provide a satisfying answer to this question, but
there  are  reasons  in  the  current  environment  to  keep  this  question  on  the  table.  Clearly,  when
people are exposed to long periods of relative economic tranquility, they seem inevitably prone
to complacency about the future. This is understandable. We have had fifteen years of economic
expansion  interrupted  by  only  one  recession  --  and  that  was  six  years  ago.  As  the  memory  of
such  past  events  fades,  it  naturally  seems  ever  less  sensible  to  keep  up  one’s  guard  against  an
BIS Review   22/1997
- 6 -
adverse event in the future. Thus, it should come as no surprise that, after such a long period of
balanced  expansion,  risk  premiums  for  advancing  funds  to  businesses  in  virtually  all  financial
markets have declined to near-record lows.
Is it possible that there is something fundamentally new about this current period
that  would  warrant  such  complacency?  Yes,  it  is  possible.  Markets  may  have  become  more
efficient,  competition  is  more  global,  and  information  technology  has  doubtless  enhanced  the
stability  of  business  operations.  But,  regrettably,  history  is  strewn  with  visions  of  such  “new
eras” that, in the end, have proven to be a mirage. In short, history counsels caution.
Such  caution  seems  especially  warranted  with  regard  to  the  sharp  rise  in  equity
prices during the past two years. These gains have obviously raised questions of sustainability.
Analytically,  current  stock-price  valuations  at  prevailing  long-term  interest  rates  could  be
justified by very strong earnings growth expectations. In fact, the long-term earnings projections
of financial analysts have been marked up noticeably over the last year and seem to imply very
high  earnings  growth  and  continued  rising  profit  margins,  at  a  time  when  such  margins  are
already  up  appreciably  from  their  depressed  levels  of  five  years  ago.  It  could  be  argued  that,
although margins are the highest in a generation, they are still below those that prevailed in the
1960s.  Nonetheless,  further  increases  in  these  margins  would  evidently  require  continued
restraint  on  costs:  labor  compensation  continuing  to  grow  at  its  current  pace  and  productivity
growth  picking  up.  Neither,  of  course,  can  be  ruled  out.  But  we  should  keep  in  mind  that,  at
these  relatively  low  long-term  interest  rates,  small  changes  in  long-term  earnings  expectations
could have outsized impacts on equity prices.
Caution  also  seems  warranted  by  the  narrow  yield  spreads  that  suggest
perceptions  of  low  risk,  possibly  unrealistically  low  risk.  Considerable  optimism  about  the
ability  of  businesses  to  sustain  this  current  healthy  financial  condition  seems,  as  I  indicated
earlier,  to  be  influencing  the  setting  of  risk  premiums,  not  just  in  the  stock  market  but
throughout the financial system. This optimistic attitude has become especially evident in quality
spreads on high-yield corporate bonds -- what we used to call “junk bonds.” In addition, banks
have  continued  to  ease  terms  and  standards  on  business  loans,  and  margins  on  many  of  these
loans are now quite thin. Many banks are pulling back a little from consumer credit card lending
as  losses  exceed  expectations.  Nonetheless,  some  bank  and  nonbank  lenders  have  been
expanding aggressively into the home equity loan market and so-called “subprime” auto lending,
although recent problems in the latter may already be introducing a sense of caution.
Why  should  the  central  bank  be  concerned  about  the  possibility  that  financial
markets may be overestimating returns or mispricing risk? It is not that we have a firm view that
equity prices are necessarily excessive right now or risk spreads patently too low. Our goal is to
contribute as best we can to the highest possible growth of income and wealth over time, and we
would be pleased if the favorable economic environment projected in markets actually comes to
pass. Rather, the FOMC has to be sensitive  to  indications  of  even  slowly  building  imbalances,
whatever their source, that, by fostering the emergence of inflation pressures, would ultimately
threaten healthy economic expansion.
Unfortunately,  because  the  monetary  aggregates  were  subject  to  an  episode  of
aberrant  behavioral  patterns  in  the  early  1990s,  they  are  likely  to  be  of  only  limited  help  in
making this judgment. For three decades starting in the early 1960s, the public’s demand for the
broader  monetary  aggregates,  especially  M2,  was  reasonably  predictable.  In  the  intermediate
term, M2 velocity -- nominal income divided by the stock of M2 -- tended to vary directly with
the  difference  between  money  market  yields  and  the  return  on  M2  assets  --  that  is,  with  its
BIS Review   22/1997
- 7 -
short-term  opportunity  cost.  In  the  long  run,  as  adjustments  in  deposit  rates  caused  the
opportunity cost to revert to an equilibrium, M2 velocity also tended to return to an associated
stable equilibrium level. For several years in the early 1990s, however, the velocities of M2 and
M3 exhibited persisting upward shifts that departed markedly from these historical patterns.
In  the  last  two  to  three  years,  velocity  patterns  seem  to  have  returned  to  those
historical  relationships,  after  allowing  for  a  presumed  permanent  upward  shift  in  the  levels  of
velocity. Even so, given the abnormal velocity behavior during the early 1990s, FOMC members
continue to see considerable uncertainty in the relationship of broad money to opportunity costs
and  nominal  income.  Concern  about  the  possibility  of  aberrant  behavior  has  made  the  FOMC
hesitant to upgrade the role of these measures in monetary policy.
Against  this  background,  at  its  February  meeting,  the  FOMC  reaffirmed  the
provisional ranges set last July for money and debt growth this year: 1 to 5 percent for M2, 2 to
6 percent for M3, and 3 to 7 percent for the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors. The M2 and
M3 ranges again are designed to be consistent with the FOMC’s long-run goal of price stability:
For, if the velocities of the broader monetary aggregates were to continue behaving as they did
before 1990, then money growth around the middle portions of the ranges would be consistent
with  noninflationary,  sustainable  economic  expansion.  But,  even  with  such  velocity  behavior
this  year,  when  inflation  is  expected  to  still  be  higher  than  is  consistent  with  our  long-run
objective of reasonable price stability, the broader aggregates could well grow around the upper
bounds of these ranges. The debt aggregate probably will expand around the middle of its range
this year.
I  will  conclude  on  the  same  upbeat  note  about  the  U.S.  economy  with  which  I
began.  Although  a  central  banker’s  occupational  responsibility  is  to  stay  on  the  lookout  for
trouble,  even  I  must  admit  that  our  economic  prospects  in  general  are  quite  favorable.  The
flexibility of our market system and the vibrancy of our private sector remain examples for the
whole world to emulate. The Federal Reserve will endeavor to do its part by continuing to foster
a monetary framework under which our citizens can prosper to the fullest possible extent.
BIS Review   22/1997
