Bank of Japan’s August review of monetary and economic trends in Japan
BANK OF JAPAN, MONTHLY ECONOMIC REVIEW, 26/8/97.
Japan’s  economy  continues  on  a  moderate  recovery  trend.    Production  and
income  are  showing  firmness  although  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  remain.    With
respect  to  final  demand,  public-sector  investment  has  been  on  a  decreasing  trend,  and  housing
investment has declined.  Meanwhile, net exports have recently been on an increasing trend, and
business  fixed  investment  has  been  rising  steadily.    Despite  the  continued  influence  of  the
consumption tax hike, the recovery trend of personal consumption does not seem to have been
hindered  given  the  improvement  in  labor  market  conditions  and  income  formation.  Industrial
production has been firm.  Meanwhile, prices have remained stable on the whole, and the growth
of monetary aggregates has continued at around 3.0 per cent year to year.
With  regard  to  personal  consumption,  outlays  for  travel  have  continued  to
increase  moderately.    However,  passenger-car  sales  marked  the  fourth  month  of  consecutive
decline year to year from April and sales of electrical appliances are also negative year to year.
Sales  at  department  stores  and  supermarkets  continued  to  be  below  the  previous  year’s  level.
These reflect some temporary factors, such as the typhoons which hit Japan in June and July, in
addition  to  the  continued  reaction  to  the  surge  in  demand  ahead  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.
However,  given  that  labor  market  conditions  as  well  as  income  formation  are  improving
steadily,  albeit  moderately,  the  recovery  trend  in  personal  consumption  does  not  seem  to  have
been hindered.
Among  leading  indicators  of  business  fixed  investment,  machinery  orders  have
been increasing steadily, although at a somewhat slower pace compared to the sharp rise in the
second half of 1996. The increase in the construction floor area has recently been weak, but it is
following a moderate recovery trend.
With  respect  to  housing  investment,  housing  starts  in  terms  of  the  seasonally-
adjusted  annual  rate  reached  a  substantially  high  level  in  the  fourth  quarter  1996,  partly
reflecting  the  stepped-up  demand  ahead  of  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate.    Later,  they
declined in reaction.  Housing starts recorded around 1.5 million in spring 1997, but fell to 1.34
million in June, the lowest level recorded since January 1993.
Regarding  public-sector  investment,  the  amount  of  public  works  contracted  has
recently picked up somewhat from the level recorded in early 1997 owing to orders included in
the  supplementary  budget  for  fiscal  1996.    However,  public-sector  investment  has  been
following a declining trend on average, reflecting the restrained budget for fiscal 1997.
Against the background of the steady overseas demand and the yen’s depreciation
to date, real exports stayed firm in July after having increased significantly in the second quarter
reflecting  some  additional  temporary  factors.    Real  imports  had  been  stagnant  since  April,  but
rose in July reflecting the rise in imports of foodstuffs and airplanes, in addition to the increasing
trend of information-related goods.  As a result, the real trade surplus stopped rising in July after
the  significant  increase  in  the  second  quarter.    The  nominal  current-account  surplus  showed  a
large expansion in the second quarter 1997, partly reflecting the decline in crude oil prices since
early 1997.Industrial production in the second quarter has been firm and  remained  virtually
unchanged after recording high growth during the second half of 1996 and the first quarter 1997.
Despite  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  surge  ahead  of  the  consumption  tax  hike,  factors
BIS Review   82/1997
- 2 -
such  as  the  substantial  increase  in  exports  and  the  rebuilding  of  inventories  have  supported
production.    Production  is  expected  to  increase  slightly  in  July  and  August  compared  to  the
second  quarter.    Meanwhile,  inventories  are  at  appropriate  levels  on  the  whole,  despite  some
accumulation in industries such as in automobiles.
Labor market conditions have continued to improve on the whole.  Although the
unemployment  rate  remains  at  a  high  level,  the  growth  in  nominal  wages  has  been  increasing
and the year-to-year employment growth has started to gather pace, albeit  gradually,  reflecting
the increase in production and corporate profits.
Prices remained stable on the whole, excluding the effect of the consumption tax
hike.  Although downward pressures remain, including that from the decline in import prices, as
well  as  that  from  technological  innovation  in  electrical  machinery,  domestic  wholesale  prices
(adjusted  for  seasonal  electricity  rates)  have  remained  virtually  unchanged.    This  reflects  the
moderate  improvement  in  overall  domestic  supply  and  demand  conditions.    The  year-to-year
declines  in  corporate  service  prices  are  narrowing  steadily  on  the  whole,  partly  owing  to  the
improvement in supply and demand conditions, particularly for real estate rents and information
services, although leasing charges continue to decline.  Consumer prices (nationwide, excluding
perishables) overall are marginally above the previous year’s level mainly because the year-to-
year declines in goods prices have narrowed.
The growth in monetary aggregates, measured in terms of the year-to-year growth
of M2 + CDs average outstanding, has been growing at around 3 per cent.
Regarding  money  market  rates,  the  overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized)  has
moved at a level slightly below  the  official  discount  rate.    The  3-month  CD  rate  has  stayed  at
around  0.55  -  0.60  per  cent.    Meanwhile,  the  long-term  government  bond  yield  rose  to  2.65  -
2.70 per cent in late May.  Later, it started to decline as the market confirmed the moderate pace
of the economic recovery, and reached a historically low level below 2.1 per cent in mid August.
With  respect  to  bank  lending  rates,  the  short-term  prime  lending  rate  has
remained at a record low level of 1.625 per  cent  since  September  1995.    The  long-term  prime
lending rate was raised by 0.6 percentage points in May, and was then lowered by 0.2 percentage
points  both  in  June  and  July  to  2.7  per  cent.  (The  record  low  level  is  2.5  per  cent.)    In  these
circumstances, short and long-term contracted  interest  rates  on  new  loans  and  discounts  (up  to
June) have moved at record low levels.
On  the  stock  exchange,  the  Nikkei  225  stock  average  moved  at  around
¥20,000 - 21,000 between May and July 1997, but later declined, reflecting such factors  as  the
fall in U.S. stock prices.  Recently, it has been moving at around ¥19,000.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen appreciated to ¥110 to the U.S. dollar in
the  first  half  of  June.    The  yen  later  depreciated  slightly,  and  has  recently  stayed  at  around
¥115 - 120.    Meanwhile,  the  yen  has  also  been  appreciating  against  the  Deutsche  Mark  since
May, and recently has moved at around ¥63 - 65.
BIS Review   82/1997
