Mr. Brash discusses fluctuations and long-term trends in exchange rates and
their  effects  on  export  commodities  and  comments  on  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Monetary
Conditions Index   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Dr. Donald
Brash, to the Counties Kiwifruit Growers Association in Pukekohe on 22/8/97.
Mr Chairman,  I  am  delighted  to  be  back  in  Pukekohe,  though  I  must  admit  I’d
rather be next door in my orchard instead of in here, explaining the impact of monetary policy
on the fruit-growing industry!
Two months ago, when you asked me to speak this  afternoon,  you  asked  me  to
focus on exchange rates. In particular, you suggested I speak about ‘fluctuations and long term
trends in exchange rates and their effects on export commodity pricing’. I am happy to do that,
but  I  also  want  to  make  a  few  comments  on  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Monetary  Conditions  Index,
both because it is relevant to the subject you have asked me to address and because the MCI has
become the subject of a good deal of public discussion and debate over the last month or two.
Indeed,  some  claim  it  is  only  the  Reserve  Bank’s  obsession  with  the  MCI  that  has  seen
exchange rate and interest rates pushed around in a rather volatile manner over the last couple of
months.
The exchange rate
First  let  me  talk  a  little  about  the  exchange  rate.  Here  the  concerns  seem  to  be
partly  about  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  and  partly  about  the  long-term  trends,  as  your
suggested subject for my speech indicates.
I have to say that I do not have a great deal of sympathy for those who complain
about the fluctuations in the exchange rate, and that for two quite  different  reasons.  First,  and
most  obviously,  there  is  now  a  very  well-developed  market  in  forward  foreign  exchange
contracts, so that it is readily possible for exporters to fix the exchange rate at which they sell
their  products  long  before  they  actually  want  to  repatriate  the  proceeds  to  New  Zealand.
Exporters may, of course, choose not to use that market and instead gamble that they might get
a more favourable exchange rate at some stage in the future. They should be free to make that
choice.  But  it  is  important  to  recognise  that  they  are  deliberately  taking  on  foreign  exchange
risk in the hope of getting something better in the future. They are not obliged to gamble in this
way.
This  point  is  perhaps  particularly  relevant  at  the  moment,  when  a  number  of
farmers are lamenting the fact that, while the exchange rate is now much more attractive,  that
doesn’t help farmers because few have stock to sell at the moment. But there  is  nothing  at  all
stopping  farmers  who  have  no  stock  to  sell,  or  meat  companies  on  their  behalf,  from  buying
foreign  exchange  forward  at  the  currently  prevailing  rates,  and  locking  in  current  exchange
rates. By doing that, they eliminate the risk that the exchange rate may rise before their stock is
ready  for  sale,  but  of  course  they  also  pass  up  the  additional  benefit  they  might  get  if  the
exchange rate were to fall further.
Secondly,  although  the  New  Zealand  dollar  has  been  subject  to  quite  marked
fluctuations  over  the  last  few  months,  by  and  large  the  New  Zealand  dollar  is  not  a  volatile
currency  by  the  standards  of  other  floating  rate  currencies.  Certainly  measured  on  a  trade-
weighted basis, the New Zealand dollar has in recent years been less volatile on a week-to-week
basis than, say, the Australian dollar, the US dollar, the pound sterling, or the Japanese yen.
BIS Review   78/1997
- 2 -
What about the longer-term trends? Since at least the beginning of the seventies,
the trade-weighted measure of the New Zealand dollar has tended to move to reflect differences
between inflation in New Zealand and inflation in our trading partners (graph 1).
Graph 1: Relative Consumer Prices and Nominal TWI
(1970 - June 1997 average equals 100)
Index
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
Nominal TWI
Foreign/Domestic price level
Index
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
In other words, when inflation was higher than in our trading partners, the New
Zealand  dollar  had  a  tendency  to  depreciate.  When  inflation  was  lower  than  in  our  trading
partners, the New Zealand dollar had a tendency to appreciate. Occasionally, the exchange rate
Graph 2: Nominal and 'Real' Trade Weighted Exchange Rate
(1970 - June 1997 average equals 100)
Index
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
Nominal TWI
Foreign/Domestic price level
'Real' exchange rate 
Index
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
BIS Review   78/1997
- 3 -
would depreciate a little faster than seemed warranted by a relatively poor inflation performance
in New Zealand, and exporters enjoyed the experience. Occasionally, as in the period from early
1993 to early 1997, the exchange rate appreciated faster than seemed warranted by a relatively
good inflation performance, and exporters found the experience anything but enjoyable (graph
2).
If  historical  relationships  hold,  one  would  expect  the  New  Zealand  dollar  to
move broadly in line with inflation differentials over the longer term, and a few months ago this
led a number of commentators to suggest that, at that time, the New Zealand dollar was clearly
over-valued. Last December I also expressed the view that, at that time, the New Zealand dollar
did  indeed  seem  somewhat  over-valued  on  that  basis,  though  it  should  be  noted  that,  to  the
extent  that  productivity  growth  is  higher  in  New  Zealand  than  in  our  trading  partners,  one
would  expect  to  see  the  exchange  rate  rise  somewhat  faster  than  inflation  differentials  alone
would suggest.
I have no difficulty at all in acknowledging the  fact  that  the  appreciation  in  the
New Zealand dollar from its floor of around 53 (on a trade-weighted basis) in January 1993 to
69.3 in March 1997, an increase of some 30 percent over just four years, put significant pressure
on a great many exporters. But four points need to be made in qualification.
First, it is very likely that an exchange rate of 53 on a trade-weighted basis was
as  unsustainable  as  an  exchange  rate  of  69.3.  Neither  represents  an  ‘equilibrium’  level  of  the
exchange  rate,  so  to  measure  exchange  rate  appreciation  from  that  artificially  low  level  risks
creating quite a false impression.
Secondly, while acknowledging the pressure which the rising exchange rate from
1993 to early 1997 placed on exporters, I am bound to express a degree of cynicism about the
way in which some producer boards have described this impact. To hear some tell it, the impact
of the rising exchange rate on the gross incomes of farmers and orchardists is the same as  the
impact of the exchange rate on their net incomes, and of course that it not correct. Granted, our
land-based export industries are not heavy users of imports, but they do use diesel, they do use
tractors,  they  do  use  fertilisers,  and  they  are  heavily  affected  by  the  costs  of  transport  to  and
from the farm-gate. And from their net incomes they still spend money on petrol for the family
car,  they  still  buy  clothes,  they  still  buy  other  goods  which  are  imported.  The  New  Zealand
dollar price of all these items would have been significantly higher over the last few years had it
not been for the appreciation of the currency. Indeed, it is very likely that wage increases would
also  have  been  significantly  higher  if  there  had  been  no  currency  appreciation.  So  while  the
increase  in  the  New  Zealand  dollar  in  recent  years  has  undoubtedly  had  a  severe  impact  on
gross farm incomes, the impact on farmers’ living standards was rather less severe.
Thirdly, while the exchange rate appreciation has clearly made matters worse, the
basic  problem  facing  our  land-based  exporters  is  that  the  inflation-adjusted,  or  real,  price  of
many of the items which they produce has been declining, and that for a long period. The New
Zealand  Meat  and  Wool  Boards’  Economic  Service  tells  me  that  between  1948  (prior  to  the
Korean War boom) and 1996, the inflation-adjusted price of lamb fell by 45 percent in the US
market; the price of dairy products fell by 55 percent; the price of beef fell by 69 percent; and
the  price  of  wool  fell  by  79  percent.  I  don’t  know  that  anybody  was  noticing  the  price  of
kiwifruit  in  the  US  market  in  1948,  but  I  can  still  recall  that  in  1982,  just  15  years  ago,  the
orchard-gate price of New Zealand kiwifruit was $11 per tray. Nobody yet knows what we will
realise in 1997, but if the orchard-gate price for this year’s crop is, say, $4.30 per tray, that will
be an inflation-adjusted fall in the orchard-gate price of some 85 percent in just 15 years - and
BIS Review   78/1997
- 4 -
that over a period during which the New Zealand dollar has fallen quite substantially against the
currencies of virtually all our trading partners, and especially against the Japanese yen and the
German mark, the two currencies of most direct relevance to kiwifruit exports. The basic reality
is that the market price of kiwifruit has fallen substantially over that time.
And in case New Zealand exporters feel hard done by by this reality, remember
that  very  substantial  falls  in  inflation-adjusted  prices  are  common  for  most  commodities,  and
indeed  for  a  great  many  other  goods  and  services  as  well.  Productivity  improves,  and
international  competition  often  ensures  that  the  benefit  of  that  improvement  is  passed  on  to
consumers,  rather  than  retained  by  producers.  Reflect  on  the  huge  fall  in  the  real  price  of
computers - a fall which dwarfs the falls suffered by New Zealand land-based exporters - or the
price of television sets, or of motor vehicles,  or  of  international  air  travel,  or  of  long-distance
telephone calls. Large price falls are by no means  unique  to  the  products  which  New  Zealand
exports.  To  remain  viable,  all  producers  must  be  constantly  seeking  new  ways  to  improve
productivity  or  add  value,  and  if  they  do  that  successfully,  they  can  maintain  profitability
despite a trend decline in prices.
Finally, apart altogether from the tendency for the prices of many commodities to
decline in the long term, commodity prices tend to be volatile and in recent years this volatility
has tended to swamp the impact of exchange rate trends. The best illustration is the experience
of beef farmers in the three years to the middle of 1996: of the fall in the farm-gate price of bull
beef over that period, more than three-quarters was caused by a fall in overseas market prices,
and less than one-quarter by the rise in the exchange rate. In other words, the fall in the market
price  of  bull  beef  was  substantially  greater  in  its  impact  on  farmers  than  the  effect  of  the
increase in the exchange rate. Our land-based exporters operate in  inherently  volatile  markets,
and would face major swings in prices even if, in some way, the New Zealand dollar could be
held  absolutely  stable.  This  should  influence  what  can  sensibly  be  paid  for  farming  and
orcharding assets.
So  yes,  monetary  policy  does  have  an  impact  on  the  exchange  rate,  but  that  in
turn  has  much  less  impact  on  exporters’  net  incomes  than  on  gross  incomes,  and  has  been  of
very  much  less  significance  to  land-based  exporters  than  the  fluctuations  in  international
commodity  prices  and  the  long-term  decline  in  the  real  prices  of  many  of  the  commodities
which New Zealand exports.
The Monetary Conditions Index
But what of the Reserve Bank’s Monetary Conditions Index? Is the MCI, as some
have suggested, really to blame for much of the current economic slowdown, or at very least for
the sharp increase in interest rates recently?
Before  answering  those  questions,  it  is  worth  recalling  briefly  that,  once  every
three months, the Reserve Bank does a comprehensive projection of the New Zealand economy
and  of  inflation  for  a  period  of  two  or  three  years.  That  projection  takes  into  account  all  the
information  available  to  the  Bank  at  that  time  -  the  official  statistics  covering  GDP,  prices,
wages, employment, imports, exports, and all the rest; the data collected by the Bank itself on
the  money  and  credit  aggregates,  and  the  path  of  interest  and  exchange  rates;  the  survey  data
covering  business  and  consumer  confidence;  the  views  expressed  to  us,  formally  and
informally,  about  individual  businesses  and  the  economy;  and  much  more.  At  the  end  of  that
process, we reach a view on how firm monetary conditions need to be to keep inflation moving
towards the middle part of the 0 to 3 percent inflation target we have agreed with Government.
BIS Review   78/1997
- 5 -
But  of  course  neither  we  nor  any  other  central  bank  can  control  the  mix  of
monetary  conditions.  In  other  words,  we  can  tighten  monetary  conditions,  but  we  can  not
determine whether that tightening takes the form of an increase in interest rates with little or no
increase  in  the  exchange  rate;  or  an  increase  in  the  exchange  rate  with  little  or  no  increase  in
interest rates; or an increase in the exchange rate with a decrease in interest rates; or an increase
in  interest  rates  and  a  fall  in  the  exchange  rate.  The  mix  depends  on  the  perceptions  and
reactions of a great many people, here and abroad, and indeed on what other central banks are
doing or are expected to do.
What  to  do?  In  a  small  open  economy  like  New  Zealand,  it  is  impossible  to
ignore  the  fact  that  monetary  policy  affects  inflation  through  both  interest  rates  and  the
exchange rate, and for a number of years we have factored that into our policy setting. What the
Monetary  Conditions  Index  seeks  to  do  is  to  give  the  public  and  financial  markets  a  broad
indication  of  how  we  see  the  relative  impact  of  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  on
medium-term inflation with a ‘rule of thumb’ combining both. Nobody can be dogmatic about
the precise nature of this relative impact - it clearly differs between economies depending on the
importance  of  international  trade,  and  almost  certainly  varies  depending  on  the  stage  of  the
economic  cycle.  On  the  basis  of  research  to  date  we  believe  it  is  reasonable  to  suggest  that  a
1 percent  increase  in  90  day  interest  rates  has  roughly  the  same  effect  on  inflation,  in  the
medium-term,  as  a  2  percent  increase  in  the  (trade-weighted)  exchange  rate.  This  ratio  is
particularly  helpful  in  helping  us  to  assess  how  the  overall  degree  of  monetary  restraint  is
evolving  when  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  are  moving  in  opposite  directions,  as  has
often been the case over the last year.
In June this year, we expressed this relationship in numerical form, called it the
Monetary  Conditions  Index,  and  indicated  that  our  projected  inflation  track  was  based  on
monetary conditions being at 825 on that Index through the September quarter.
Has this increased openness been constructive or destructive? On balance, I have
no doubt that it has been constructive. Financial markets now know explicitly what in the past
they  could  only  guess  at,  namely  how  we  ‘translated’  movements  in  exchange  rates  into
movements  in  interest  rates  in  assessing  their  effect  on  inflation.  In  the  last  few  months,  we
have  experienced  the  sharpest  decline  in  the  New  Zealand  dollar  since  late  1991  without  any
kind  of  drama  or  crisis.  Interest  rates  have  adjusted  upwards  to  offset  the  effect  of  that
depreciation on the medium-term inflation rate, and that with only a couple of brief comments
from the Reserve Bank. Of course, a sharp fall in the exchange rate is almost inevitably going to
be associated with rising interest rates, since the fall is likely to prompt many investors to want
to withdraw  funds  from  New  Zealand  investments,  and  this  inevitably  leads  to  higher  interest
rates. But the fact that interest rates moved to keep the MCI broadly unchanged - certainly over
the sharpest movements in the exchange rate - suggests that the system has worked well. For the
record, I think the MCI is working at least as well as other approaches - better in some respects
- and I am in no hurry to change it.
Let me put this another way. I’m sure that if the Reserve Bank had not published
an MCI actual monetary conditions would have evolved in a broadly similar way, but probably
with more anguish. Without the early interest rate  reaction,  the  exchange  rate  fall  would  have
left monetary conditions very much looser than we wanted. We would then have had to move to
recover the lost ground by tightening policy, probably requiring specific policy actions. In other
words,  the  MCI  is  only  an  indicator.  It  isn’t  driving  events  in  a  substantive  way,  so  people
BIS Review   78/1997
- 6 -
blaming the MCI are misdirecting their complaints. Give me stick, if you want, for misreading
inflationary pressures out there, but ‘don’t shoot the messenger’, for that’s all the MCI is.
What of criticism that the Bank has been operating the MCI mechanistically, or
robotically,  and  thus  causing  excessive  volatility  in  financial  markets?  Should  the  Bank  have
been  more  willing  than  it  has  been  to  allow  actual  monetary  conditions  to  diverge  from  its
announced  ‘desired’  conditions  of  825,  or,  alternatively,  should  we  have  adjusted  policy
instruments  to  ensure  that  actual  conditions  kept  within  the  plus  or  minus  50  points  of  825
announced as ‘desired’ on 27 June?
It  is  perhaps  worth  recalling  what  I  said  on  27  June,  in  releasing  our  latest
Monetary Policy Statement:
‘It  is  clear  that  deviations  from  desired  monetary  conditions  can  be  very  large
indeed without threatening either edge of our inflation target if those deviations
are of relatively short duration. This suggests that the Bank should be relatively
tolerant  of  quite  large  deviations  from  desired.  On  the  other  hand,  large
deviations, even for relatively short periods, may raise doubts - either about the
Bank’s determination to achieve the inflation goals we have been set or about the
possibility that the Bank, in accepting those large deviations, may have changed
its  view  of  desired  conditions.  These  doubts  can  create  uncertainty,  and  that
uncertainty  has  real  costs,  both  short-term  and  long-term.  We  already  allow
monetary  conditions  to  move  within  a  range,  without  reaction  from  the  Bank,
which is at least as wide as that allowed in other developed countries.
I  am  reluctant  to  be  too  precise  about  how  much  deviation  we  are  willing  to
accept  and  for  how  long.  Much  will  depend  on  the  circumstances  in  which  the
deviation  occurs.  We  may,  for  example,  be  more  tolerant  of  deviations  which
appear to arise out of sharp movements in overseas exchange rates, where local
interest  rates  or  exchange  rates  may  take  a  brief  period  to  adjust.  We  may  be
more  tolerant  of  deviations  during  the  weeks  immediately  preceding  our  next
quarterly inflation projection, since it is at that time when our last comprehensive
review of desired conditions is, by definition, getting most dated. We are likely
to be less tolerant if monetary conditions change very rapidly, and appear to be
building some momentum, without any obvious explanation in terms of overseas
exchange rates or changed prospects for inflation.
As a very approximate guideline, we would expect actual monetary conditions to
be  within  a  range  of  plus  or  minus  50  MCI  points  from  desired  in  the  weeks
immediately  following  a  comprehensive  inflation  projection.  As  more  data
comes  to  hand  over  the  ensuing  three  months,  and  as  our  last  comprehensive
inflation projection recedes into history, we may be rather more tolerant. But this
is not, repeat not, a binding rule which the market can expect us to follow under
all circumstances, and those expecting us to do so are likely to be disappointed.’
That is what I said on 27 June, and looking back with the wisdom of hindsight I
think the comments have stood the test of time rather well. Did we signal a tight band of plus or
minus  50  points  around  ‘desired’?  Hardly.  On  the  contrary,  we  made  it  clear  that  we  would
judge  monetary  conditions  in  the  light  of  emerging  data,  and  the  factors  we  believed  were
driving conditions. Should we therefore leap to change the target for settlement cash as soon as
BIS Review   78/1997
- 7 -
conditions stray by more than 50 points from the designated level? Absolutely not, and nobody
should expect us to do so.
My  only  regret  is  that  I  did  not  mention,  as  one  reason  for  being  tolerant  of
deviation  of  actual  monetary  conditions  from  desired  monetary  conditions,  the  complication
created  by  a  sharp  change  in  the  mix  of  conditions.  Clearly,  the  Index  is  based  on  the
assumption that a 1 percent movement in interest rates is equivalent, in medium-term effect, to a
2 percent change in the exchange rate, and that is our best estimate at this stage. But it is only an
estimate, and we recognise that the relationship may well change over time and in response to
very sharp movements in either interest or exchange  rates.  In  the  jargon,  the  relationship  may
not  be  linear.  It  is  partly  for  this  reason  that  we  have  been  willing  to  accept  quite  a  marked
divergence between actual and desired conditions in recent weeks.
It is important also to recall that, as indicated a moment ago, we can not control
the mix of monetary conditions. This was very clearly indicated between September 1996 and
March 1997. Over that period, 90 day interest rates fell from around 10 percent to around 7.5
percent, while the exchange rate rose from around 66 on the Trade-Weighted Index to over 69.
On  the  face  of  it,  this  period  of  rising  exchange  rate  and  falling  interest  rates  was  the  very
reverse of what might have been desirable - given that there was already little or no inflation in
the export and import-competing sectors of the economy, and plenty of inflation in the domestic
sectors - and I expressed my unhappiness about this mix  on  several  occasions,  all  to  no  avail.
For a whole host of reasons - perceptions of the likely trend of monetary policy in New Zealand
and overseas, perhaps concerns about the balance of payments deficit, perhaps general concern
about  currencies  in  this  part  of  the  world  -  the  mix  has  changed  quite  sharply  in  the  last  few
months, with an increase in interest rates, which has taken them about half way back to where
they were last September, and a sharp fall in the exchange rate. Overall, conditions have eased
considerably,  and  I  am  sure  that  there  won’t  be  an  exporter  in  the  country  who  is  not  a  good
deal happier with the present mix than with the one we had three or four months ago.
But aren’t monetary conditions still too tight, given the low level of business and
consumer  confidence,  the  general  flatness  of  the  economy,  and  the  fact  that,  on  the  Reserve
Bank’s own figures, we will have inflation at or slightly below 1 percent by the end of this year
and into 1998?
In less than a month, the Bank will be publishing its next comprehensive inflation
projection,  so  I  don’t  want  to  give  a  substantive  answer  to  that  at  this  stage.  But  let  me  just
remind you of a couple of relevant points.
It  is  hardly  surprising,  or  a  matter  for  regret,  that  our  June  Monetary  Policy
Statement projected that inflation would fall to 1 percent by the end  of this year: through all of
last  year,  until  10  December,  we  were  targeting  inflation  at  between  0  and  2  percent,  with  a
mid-point of 1 percent, because that’s what our Policy Targets Agreement with the Government
required at that time. We were battling to reduce inflation, which had been somewhat above the
top of that range throughout 1996. Given that it  takes  a  minimum  of  12  months  for  monetary
policy to have its impact on inflation, it would be surprising if inflation were not projected to be
moving towards 1 percent at the end of this year.
The  inflation  projection  which  the  Bank  published  at  the  end  of  June  was  not
only based  on  monetary  conditions  being  around  825  on  the  MCI  during  the  September  1997
quarter, it  was  also  based  on  a  particular  combination  of  interest  rates  and  exchange  rate.  We
assumed  that,  during  the  September  quarter,  the  trade-weighted  exchange  rate  would  average
BIS Review   78/1997
- 8 -
around  67.3,  and  90  day  interest  rates  would  average  around  7  percent.  We  also  explicitly
recognised  that  if  the  mix  of  conditions  changed,  the  short-term  track  of  inflation  could  be
different. With the exchange rate in fact significantly lower than assumed in the June Monetary
Policy  Statement,  and  interest  rates  significantly  higher  than  assumed,  it  is  possible  that  the
immediate  inflation  track  may  be  a  little  higher  than  projected  in  June  because  of  the  impact
which the lower New Zealand dollar may have on the prices of goods like television sets, cars,
and  other  imports.  In  other  words,  a  lower  dollar  may  increase  inflation  more  quickly  than
higher interest rates will reduce it.
Although  there  are  many  people  who  feel  that  monetary  conditions  are
inappropriately tight, and some who just feel that the combined wisdom of financial markets is
more  likely  to  be  right  than  is  the  Reserve  Bank,  it  is  worth  recalling  that  for  the  first  four
months  of  1997,  until  the  very  end  of  April,  financial  markets  kept  monetary  conditions
appreciably tighter than the Bank had indicated was necessary or appropriate, despite our saying
that we would be happier if conditions were somewhat easier. In other words, financial markets
are  not  infallible.  It  is  interesting  that  in  the  latest  Consensus  survey  of  New  Zealand
forecasters,  representing  views  in  mid-July  1997,  39  percent  felt  that  conditions  were  unduly
firm, but 54 percent felt that they were about right - and conditions have eased somewhat since
that survey was conducted.
Monetary conditions have eased substantially over the last six or eight months -
from  an  average  of  1000  on  the  MCI  in  the  December  1996  quarter  to  an  average  during  the
first half of August of 730. Put in more familiar terms, conditions have eased by the equivalent
of a 2.7 percent fall in interest rates with unchanged exchange rate; or by the equivalent of a 5.4
percent fall in the exchange rate, with unchanged interest rates. This is a considerable easing in
monetary conditions, which will not have its main effect on activity and inflation until well into
1998 - at about the time the economy is also experiencing a strong stimulus from  reduced  tax
rates  and  increased  government  expenditure.  In  other  words,  the  suggestion  that  the  Reserve
Bank  has  been  braking  the  economy  in  recent  months  is  factually  wrong.  In  fact,  over  recent
months the opposite is true.
We  will,  of  course,  be  weighing  all  these  factors  and  more  in  reaching  our
judgement  for  the  appropriate  level  of  monetary  conditions  in  the  December  quarter.  We  will
publish our considered judgement on 18 September. Unfortunately, given the long lags between
actions taken by the Reserve Bank today and the impact of  those  actions  on  inflation,  nobody
will know until at least the second half of next year whether we should have eased rather more
in June 1997, or indeed whether we should have kept things a little firmer.
Of  one  thing  you  can  be  certain.  We  will  do  everything  in  our  power  to  keep
inflation within the target which has been agreed with the Government. That will not guarantee
you  a  profit  in  fruit-growing,  or  in  exporting  more  generally.  It  will,  however,  be  the  best
contribution  which  the  Reserve  Bank  can  make  to  the  creation  of  an  environment  where  you
and  others  can  make  rational  investment  decisions,  to  the  ultimate  benefit  of  all  New
Zealanders.
BIS Review   78/1997
