Mr. de Swaan discusses the background, advantages and implementation of
the core principles for effective banking supervision   Speech by Mr. de Swaan, an Executive
Director  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision,  at  the  14th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Latin  American  and  Caribbean  Banking
The  banking  system  is  sometimes  compared  to  traffic.  This  comparison  is
justified  for  at  least  two  reasons:  first,  the  causes  of  traffic  accidents  are  essentially  the  same
around the world, just like the causes of banking crises. It is therefore not surprising that almost
all countries adopt the same type of rules, like speed limits in the case of traffic, or some kind of
limitation of risk exposures in the case of banking. A second similarity between banking systems
and  traffic  is  that  with  the  increase  of  cross-border  activity,  such  as  air  traffic,  the  need  for
harmonisation  of  national  regulations  has  grown.  The  minimum  requirements  for  banking
supervision which the Basle Committee has recently developed in conjunction with supervisors
in emerging markets are an important step in this direction. Today, I would like to discuss with
you the background, advantages and implementation of these core principles.
Background
l.
Banking crises in countries are no new phenomena at all. In this part of the world
a number of countries experienced severe banking problems in the early 1980s. In some western
countries,  notably  in  the  Scandinavian,  the  banking  community  also  faced  substantial
difficulties,  albeit  of  a  different  nature.  Since  the  Mexico  crisis  of  1995,  awareness  among
policy-makers  of  the  potential  damage  that  can  result  from  banking  problems  has  grown
significantly.  In  emerging  markets,  banking  problems  often  result  in  much  deeper  recessions
than  in  industrialised  countries.  Generally,  these  economies  are  more  vulnerable  to  banking
problems because almost all financial intermediation is carried out by banks. Most industrialised
countries  are  less  dependent  on  banks,  because  the  function  of  financial  intermediation  is  also
performed by institutional investors and well-developed capital markets. Since the Mexico crisis,
it  has  also  been  recognised  that  the  frequency  of  banking  problems  is  significantly  higher  in
emerging markets. Recent research has shown that 85% of the severe banking crises which have
occurred  in  the  past  fifteen  years  concerned  developing  and  transition  economies.  My
explanation for this striking fact is that the factors which cause banking crises are generally more
prevalent, but not essentially different in emerging markets than in industrialised countries. This
basic idea is the rationale behind the common set of core principles I would like to discuss with
you today.
2.
But  before  that  a  short  word  on  the  way  the  principles  have  been  developed
because  it  shows  an  important  development  in  the  cooperation  between  the  members  of  the
Basle Committee and other countries. The principles were first drafted by a joint working group
consisting  of  a  number  of  Basle  Committee  members  and  representatives  from  15  other
countries.  Subsequently  a  very  lively  exchange  of  views  took  place  in  a  meeting  in  Basle  in
March  of  this  year  in  which  representatives  of  approximately  40  countries,  including  the
chairmen  of  all  regional  groups,  participated.  To  my  satisfaction  the  consultation  period
following  that  meeting  produced  a  large  number  of  reactions,  nearly  all  of  them  favourable.
These  reactions  will  be  incorporated  in  the  core  principles.  To  endorse  the  final  text  of  the
principles,  a  similar  meeting  to  the  one  in  March  will  take  place  on  September  10th  in  Basle.
Two weeks later, in conjunction with the annual meeting in Hong Kong, the IMF and the Basle
Committee  will  co-sponsor  a  conference  to  introduce  the  principles  to  as  wide  as  possible  an
audience of Ministries of Finance and central banks.
BIS Review   79/1997
- 2 -
As  I  said,  the  main  rational  behind  the  core  principles  has  been  the  increased
3.
awareness  among  policy-makers  that  banking  crises  can  aggravate  recessions.  Another  reason
for the formulation of core principles is the  increased  globalisation  of  economic  activity.  With
the strong growth of trade and financial flows between national economies, banking problems in
one country have much more potential to spread to other parts of the world. A specific form of
globalisation  concerns  the  increasing  international  activities  of  large  banks.  Policy  makers
generally  welcome  cross-border  banking,  because  of  the  beneficial  effects  on  the  efficiency,
liquidity  and  depth  of  financial  markets.  However,  the  internationalisation  of  banking  also
increases  the  risk  of  contagion  of  banking  problems.  In  order  to  reduce  this  risk,  the  core
principles pay special attention to the supervision of cross-border banking. On this subject,  the
most  important  message  from  the  core  principles  is  that  home  country  supervisors  should
practise consolidated supervision over their internationally-active banks. In order to enable home
country  supervisors  to  fulfil  this  task  most  effectively,  host  country  supervisors  must  share
information with them about the  local  operations  of  foreign  banks.  Finally,  the  core  principles
state  that  banking  supervisors  must  require  the  local  operations  of  foreign  banks  to  meet  the
same high standards as are required of domestic institutions.
Advantages
4.
You  may  wonder  whether  the  core  principles  will  really  be  able  to  reduce  the
severity  and  frequency  of  banking  problems  around  the  world.  Let  me  try  to  answer  this
question  by  reviewing  the  main  causes  of  banking  crises  and  the  way  in  which  the  core
principles  deal  with  these  causes.  One  important  cause  of  banking  crises  is  macro-economic
instability. High and variable inflation rates, booms and busts in economic activity and exchange
rate volatility complicate credit assessments by banks. Moreover, during the expansion phase of
a  business  cycle,  there  is  often  a  tendency  towards  over-optimism  and  excessive  lending  by
banks, which in turn can result in asset price bubbles. This factor  can  be  regarded  as  the  main
cause of the current fragility of the Japanese financial sector. Thus, inadequate risk management
by banks is frequently a crucial link between macro-economic instability and banking problems.
Macro-economic  instability  is  on  average  greater  in  emerging  markets,  reflecting  less
diversification  and  greater  structural  rigidities.  Unsound  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  can  add
further to this problem. As a consequence, the risks faced by banks in emerging markets tend to
be higher.
5.
The core principles formulate prudential regulations and requirements in order to
promote a framework to control the risks inherent in banking. The application of this framework
can limit the negative influence of macro-economic volatility on the soundness of the financial
system.  The  requirements  concerned  cover  capital  adequacy,  loan  loss  reserves,  asset
concentrations,  liquidity,  risk  management  and  internal  controls.  Of  this  group  of  principles,  I
think  those  regarding  risk  management  and  internal  controls  deserve  special  attention.  For
example,  core  principles  12  and  13  state  that  banking  supervisors  must  be  satisfied  that  banks
have in place risk management systems which accurately identify, measure, monitor and control
market  risks  and  all  other  material  risks.  Furthermore,  banks  are  required  to  hold  an  adequate
amount of capital against these risks. These principles reflect the growing recognition that banks
bear  the  principal  responsibility  for  adequate  risk  management  themselves.  The  main  task  of
supervisors  is  to  set  minimum  standards  and  to  monitor  the  policies  and  procedures  through
which banks control their risks.
6.
I would like to emphasise that adequate risk management by banks can reduce but
not  eliminate  the  negative  effects  of  macro-economic  instability  on  the  soundness  of  financial
systems.  But  it  is  evident  that  a  sound  financial  sector  is  an  important  precondition  for
BIS Review   79/1997
- 3 -
macroeconomic  stability.  For  instance,  when  macro-economic  stabilisation  calls  for  monetary
tightening, concerns about the effect of higher interest rates on the loan portfolios of weak banks
may delay policy action. In Mexico, this delay contributed to a sudden reversal of capital flows
and  a  deep  recession 
to
macro-economic instability underscore the need for the application of the core principles.
in  1995.  These  so-called  feedback  effects  from  financial 
7.
The second main cause of financial fragility is premature financial liberalisation.
It is widely recognised that financial liberalisation promotes competition among banks, thereby
improving  the  efficient  allocation  of  financial  resources  in  the  long  run.  However,  during  the
transition, bank managers and supervisors often lack the expertise to deal with the higher risks
associated  with  the  new  activities  in  which  their  institutions  get  involved.  This  lack  of
experience  increases  the  probability  of  banking  crises.  Moreover,  increased  competition  from
foreign banks often encourages domestic banks to finance riskier investments in order to keep up
their  earnings.  This  chain  of  events  has  unfolded  not  only  in  emerging  economies,  but  also  in
well-developed Nordic countries and the United States. Policy makers have drawn an important
lesson  from  these  banking  crises,  namely  that  financial  liberalisation  should  be  preceded  by  a
strengthening  of  risk  management  systems  by  banks.  The  core  principles  regarding  risk
management  and  internal  controls  which  I  have  just  discussed  can  serve  as  a  guide  for  the
supervision of the risk management systems adopted by banks.
8.
The  third  culprit  is  government  involvement  in  banking.  One  way  in  which
government  policy  can  undermine  the  soundness  of  banks  is  by  means  of  the  tax  treatment  of
financial  institutions.  For  example,  tax  systems  which  do  not  allow  the  deduction  of  loan  loss
provisions  from  taxable  earnings  reduce  the  incentive  of  banks  to  recognise  these  losses  on  a
timely  basis.  A  perhaps  more  damaging  way  of  government  involvement  is  the  use  of  state
banks to finance government expenditures at below market rates. This channel has two apparent
advantages  to  the  government;  for  one  thing,  it  is  cheap,  at  least  in  the  short  run.  In  addition,
bank  financing  does  not  show  up  in  the  official  measurements  of  the  budget  deficit,  which
reduces the possibilities for public scrutiny. Although state-owned banks are most prone to this
kind of political exploitation, privately-owned banks can also function as quasi-fiscal agents, for
example  when  they  are  forced  to  lend  to  particular  sectors  or  industries.  Obviously,  these
financing practices reduce the viability of banks in the medium and long term.
9.
I would point out that, while political involvement in banking tends to occur more
frequently in developing countries, it is not restricted to them.  In  South  Korea  and  France,  for
example, recent banking problems seem to be linked at least in part to government involvement.
However,  in  less  wealthy  countries  the  pressure  on  government  funds  is  usually  larger,  which
increases the temptation to turn to state banks for funding. The risk of government influence on
banks  in  emerging  markets  is  also  larger,  because  state  banks  tend  to  control  a  much  bigger
share of banking assets.
10.
Core principle l contains a description of the preconditions for effective banking
supervision.  In  the  context  of  problems  related  to  government  involvement,  the  following
elements  of  this  first  principle  seem  particularly  relevant.  First,  the  explanation  of  core
principle 1 says that each supervisory agency should possess operational independence to pursue
a  sound  banking  system  free  from  political  pressure.  A  second  important  precondition  is  that
each  supervisory  agency  should  have  adequate  resources  to  meet  the  objectives  set.  These
resources should be provided on terms that do not undermine the autonomy and independence of
the  supervisory  agency.  The  emphasis  of  the  first  core  principle  on  the  independence  of
supervisory  agencies  is  important,  first  of  all  because  independent  supervisors  are  in  a  better
position to prevent political exploitation of banks. And secondly because it can limit forbearance
BIS Review   79/1997
- 4 -
in  dealing  with  problems  in  individual  banks.  A  number  of  banking  crises  could  have  been
prevented or alleviated if the supervisory authorities would have had the independence and the
instruments to intervene in a timely and adequate way.
In  addition,  the  appendix  of  the  core  principles  explicitly  mentions  the  need  for
supervisors  to  apply  their  supervisory  methods  in  the  same  manner  to  government-owned
commercial banks as to other commercial banks. The implementation of this advice should also
reduce the opportunities for governments to use state banks as a source of cheap funding.
ll.
A related cause of banking problems is connected lending, which refers to loans
extended  to  banks’  managers,  shareholders  or  to  parties  connected  to  them.  Just  like  loans  to
governments,  loans  to  connected  parties  are  often  granted  on  a  non-arm’s  length  basis  and  at
below  market  rates.  Another  similarity  with  government  involvement  is  that  there  is  reason  to
believe  that  connected  lending  is  a  more  serious  problem  in  emerging  than  in  advanced
economies. The risks of connected lending encompass a lack of objectivity in credit assessment
and  undue  concentration  of  credit  risk.  Core  principle  10  explicitly  addresses  the  problem  of
connected  lending.  This  principle  states  that  banking  supervisors  must  have  in  place
requirements that banks lend to related companies and individuals on an arm’s length basis, that
such extensions of credit are effectively monitored, and that other appropriate steps are taken to
control  or  mitigate  the  risks.  Moreover,  core  principle  9  calls  for  prudential  limits  to  restrict
bank  exposures  to  single  borrowers  or  groups  of  related  borrowers.  If  these  principles  are
implemented on a global scale, they will raise a significant barrier against connected lending.
12.
I  now  turn  to  a  fourth  set  of  causes  of  banking  problems,  that  can  be  labelled
inadequate corporate governance. This term refers to an absence of the right incentive structure
for bank owners, managers, depositors and supervisors to show prudent behaviour. Perhaps the
best  way  to  throw  light  on  these  types  of  problems  is  by  means  of  a  well-known  example,
namely the downfall of the US savings and loans institutions. In the early 1980s, the supervisory
authorities in the US sought ways to enable savings and loans institutions, which were generally
in  bad  shape,  to  continue  in  business.  The  range  of  activities  in  which  these  institutions  were
permitted  to  engage  was  expanded,  capital  standards  were  relaxed  and  the  level  of  deposit
insurance  was  increased.  As  a  consequence,  many  savings  and  loans  institutions  tried  to  grow
out  of  their  problems  by  investing  in  high-risk  assets,  such  as  property  and  so-called  ‘junk
bonds’. The point is that depositors were content to finance these risky investments, because of
the  generosity  of  the  US  deposit  insurance  at  that  time.  Moreover,  with  low  capital  standards,
equity holders or owners had little to lose. Finally, banking regulation in the US did not penalise
bank managers for excessive risk-taking and allowed  supervisors  to  delay  corrective  measures.
When  the  property  market  started  to  collapse  in  the  mid-eighties,  many  savings  and  loans
institutions became insolvent, which eventually resulted in a loss of at least $150 billion for the
US  taxpayers.  In  order  to  prevent  similar  banking  problems,  bank  regulation  in  advanced  and
emerging  economies  must  incorporate  the  right  incentives  for  all  participants  in  the  banking
system.
If you look at the core principles you will find various sorts of incentives in this
13.
field.  Firstly,  principle  3  requires  that  the  licensing  process  should  consist  of,  among  other
things,  an  assessment  of  the  bank’s  ownership  structure  as  well  as  of  its  directors  and  senior
management. The explanation of this principle makes clear that if the supervisory agency doubts
the integrity and standing of a bank’s owner or manager, it should have the authority to prevent
a specific ownership structure or the appointment of  a  certain  bank  manager.  In  this  way,  past
imprudent  behaviour  of  bank  owners  and  managers  is  penalised  by  excluding  them  from
responsible functions in the banking sector.
BIS Review   79/1997
- 5 -
Secondly,  core  principle  6  prescribes  that  capital  requirements  for  banks  should
14.
be no less than those established in the so-called  Basle  Capital  Accord.  The  Basle  Accord  sets
minimum  capital  requirements  of  8%  of  the  risk-adjusted  assets  of  banks.  Bank  capital
essentially  serves  three  functions;  it  is  a  base  for  further  growth,  it  provides  a  cushion  against
exceptional losses and it promotes better governance. The governance function relates to the fact
that if shareholders have more money at stake, they have stronger incentives to ensure that banks
are  managed  in  a  safe  and  sound  manner.  Regarding  the  loss-absorption  function  of  capital,  it
must  be  stressed  that  the  Basle  capital  requirements  are  considered  a  minimum  standard.  In
emerging  economies,  higher  minimum  capital  requirements  seem  appropriate,  because  banks
there usually operate in a more volatile and therefore riskier environment. I therefore welcome
the initiatives of the supervisory authorities in Argentina and Colombia, who have already raised
their minimum capital requirements to 11.5 and 9% respectively.
15.
As  the  example  of  the  US  thrift  crisis  showed,  the  design  of  deposit  insurance
deserves special attention. The second appendix of the core principles contains a balanced view
on this delicate issue, which can be summarised as follows: On the one hand, deposit insurance
is  desirable  because  it  limits  the  effect  that  problems  at  one  bank  might  have  on  other  banks.
This  obviously  increases  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  However,  deposit  insurance  can
also increase the risk of imprudent behaviour by banks, because depositors will be less inclined
to withdraw funds even if the bank pursues high-risk strategies. Therefore, governments should
incorporate mechanisms in the system of depositor protection that prevent excessive risk-taking
by banks. This can for example be achieved by a partial deposit insurance, so that depositors still
have  funds  at  risk.  Another  method  is  withholding  deposit  insurance  from  large,  institutional
investors. The precise form of such a program should be tailored to the specific circumstances of
each country.
16.
The  last  item  on  my  list  of  crisis  factors  is  a  poor  market  infrastructure.  It  is
widely accepted that imperfect accounting systems, limited disclosure  practices  and  inadequate
legal frameworks can hinder effective  banking  supervision  and  market  discipline.  Again,  these
deficiencies  are  more  pronounced  in  developing  countries,  but  deserve  continuous  efforts  for
improvement  in  developed  countries  as  well.  The  first  problem  concerns  the  accuracy  of
accounting  systems.  In  many  countries,  the  accounting  standards  for  classifying  bank  loans  as
non-performing  are  not  tight  enough  to  prevent  banks  from  making  bad  loans  look  good.  If
non-performing  loans  are  systematically  understated  and  are  not  properly  provided  against,
figures  about  profitability  and  bank  capital  become  meaningless.  On  the  disclosure  side,  the
ability to distinguish healthy from unhealthy banks is often hampered by the absence of financial
statements on a consolidated basis. Differences in accounting standards across countries and the
absence of serious penalties for publishing inaccurate information can also obstruct a meaningful
assessment of banks. Finally, the legal system sometimes impedes prudent banking, for example
when it hinders banks to seize collateral behind delinquent loans.
17.
Core  principle  21  relates  to  the  information  requirements  of  bank  organisations,
which  is  an  important  part  of  the  market  infrastructure.  This  principle  states  that  banking
supervisors must be satisfied that each bank maintains adequate records drawn up in accordance
with consistent accounting policies and practices. This information should enable supervisors to
obtain  a  true  and  fair  view  of  the  financial  condition  and  profitability  of  banks.  Banks  should
also publish financial statements that fairly reflect their condition on a regular basis. Moreover.
the  explanation  of  this  principle  prescribes  that  if  a  bank  provides  false  or  misleading
information, supervisory action or criminal prosecution should be taken against  the  individuals
involved and the institution.
BIS Review   79/1997
- 6 -
Having elaborated on the contribution that the core principles can make  towards
18.
alleviating the main causes of banking problems, I think it is now time for an overall assessment.
First of all, it would be an illusion to think that a global application of the core principles can by
itself  prevent  financial  crises  occurring  in  the  future.  As  I  already  mentioned  with  regard  to
capital  standards,  the  core  principles  contain  minimum  requirements.  Individual  countries,
particularly  those  in  emerging  areas,  should  therefore  consider  to  what  extent  they  need  to
supplement  the  core  principles  with  requirements  addressing  particular  risks  of  their  financial
systems. Moreover, banking supervision is a dynamic function that needs to respond to changes
in  the  marketplace.  Therefore,  the  principles  will  need  periodic,  but  not  necessarily  frequent,
refinement and readjustment. Finally, the core principles provide guidelines for bank regulation.
I hope my description of the causes of financial crises has made clear that financial stability not
only  requires  prudential  behaviour  by  banks,  but  also  macro-economic  stability,  a  transparent
government budget and an adequate legal framework. In these areas, which all have to do with
government policy, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund can make an important
contribution to financial stability.
Implementation
In  the  near  future,  the  implementation  of  the  core  principles  should  be  a  top
19.
priority. Of course the main burden of this lies with the governments of the individual countries.
I  don’t  underestimate  the  wide-ranging  legal,  infrastructural  and  educational  changes  the
implementation of the principles call for in a  large  number  of  countries.  Every  country  should
put in place an ambitious program with clear time-frames for the implementation. It is obvious
that  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  should  have  a  leading  role  with  regard  to  monitoring  the
implementation  of  the  core  principles.  The  main  argument  for  this  structure  is  that  the
international  financial  institutions  already  send  missions  to  almost  all  countries  in  the  world.
However,  it  is  generally  acknowledged  that  the  Basle  Committee  possesses  great  expertise  in
bank regulation. I therefore plead for a model in which the Basle Committee, the IMF and  the
World Bank each and together assist countries in realising financial stability in their respective
fields of competence. In this model, the IMF and the World Bank are primarily responsible for
creating  a  sound  environment  for  banking,  which  is  highly  dependent  on  viable  government
policies. As part of the assessment of government policies, these institutions will of course also
pay attention to the quality of bank supervision.
The  Basle  Committee 
is  primarily  responsible  for 
20.
the  amendment  and
interpretation  of  the  principles  and  will  review  compliance  with  the  principles  at  the
International  Conference  of  Banking  Supervisors  in  October  1998  and  bi-annually  thereafter.
The Basle Committee can furthermore make a major contribution towards the implementation of
the principles by offering technical assistance and courses to supervisors in emerging countries.
In  this  respect,  banking  and  traffic  again  look  alike.  It  is  all  a  matter  of  knowing  your
responsibility; if you do not make a timely agreement about who drives home, you both end up
drinking too much.
BIS Review   79/1997
