Mr.  Greenspan  dicusses  the  accuracy  of  the  US  consumer  price  index
Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan
Greenspan, before the Committee on Finance of the US Senate on 30/1/97.
Mr.  Chairman  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to
appear before you today. The Committee is faced with a number of complex policy issues that
will have an important bearing on the fiscal health of the nation and the welfare of our  people
well into the next century. I will be happy to respond to questions relating to any of those issues,
but in my formal comments this morning I intend to focus on the accuracy of the consumer price
index.
I would like to begin by commending this Committee for having done so much to
bring the issue of possible bias in the CPI to the attention of the Congress and of the nation in
general. The hearings conducted by this Committee in 1995, as well as the report produced by
the advisory commission that  was  sponsored  by  this  Committee,  have  advanced  the  discussion
considerably.  These  efforts,  along  with  the  continuing  contributions  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor
Statistics’  research  staff,  have  added  importantly  to  our  understanding  of  the  sources  of
measurement error in the CPI.
Any index that endeavors to measure the cost of living should aim to be unbiased.
That is, a serious examination of all available evidence should yield the conclusion that there is
just as great a chance that the index understates the rate of growth of the target concept as there
is that it overstates the truth. The present-day consumer price index does not meet this standard.
In  fact,  the  best  available  evidence  suggests  that  there  is  virtually  no  chance  that  the  CPI  as
currently  published  understates  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  appropriate  concept.  In  other  words,
there  is  almost  a  100  percent  probability  that  we  are  overcompensating  the  average  social
security recipient for increases in the cost of living, and almost a 100 percent probability that we
are causing the inflation-adjusted burden of the income tax system to decline more rapidly than I
presume the Congress intends.
A major reason for this is that consumers respond to changes in relative prices by
changing  the  composition  of  their  actual  marketbasket.  At  present,  however,  the  marketbasket
used in constructing the CPI changes only once every decade or so. Moreover, new  goods  and
services deliver value to consumers even at the relatively elevated prices that often prevail early
in their life cycles; currently, that value is not reflected in the CPI.
For  that  and  other  reasons  outlined  in  the  Boskin  Commission  report  and  other
studies, we know with near certainty that the current CPI is off. We do  not  know  precisely  by
how much, however. There is, nonetheless, a very high probability that the upward bias ranges
between  ½  percentage  point  per  year  and  1½  percentage  points  per  year.  Although  this  range
happens to coincide with the one I gave two years ago, it does reflect both the improvements in
the  index  that  the  BLS  has  implemented  since  then  and  the  emergence  of  evidence  suggesting
that the initial problem was of a slightly greater dimension than had previously been estimated.
This estimate is consistent with a number of microstatistical studies as well as an independently
derived macroevaluation by staff at the Federal Reserve Board, which I will discuss shortly.
In judging these evaluations, it is incumbent upon us to resist the  evident  strong
inclination to believe that precision is the equivalent of accuracy in price bias estimation. If we
cannot find a precise estimate for a certain bias, we should not implicitly choose zero as though
that was a more scientifically supportable estimate.
BIS Review   10/1997
- 2 -
There is no sharp dividing line between a pristine estimate of a price and one that
is  not.  All  of  the  estimates  in  the  CPI  are  approximations,  in  some  cases  very  rough
approximations. Further, even very rough  approximations  can  give  us  a  far  better  judgment  of
the cost of living, than holding to a false precision of accuracy. We would be far better served
following the wise admonition of John Maynard Keynes that “it is better to be roughly right than
precisely wrong.”
Estimates of the magnitude of the bias in our price measures are available from a
number of sources. Most have been developed from detailed examinations of the microstatistical
evidence.  However,  recent  work  by  staff  economists  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  has  added
strong corroborating evidence of price mismeasurement using a macroeconomic approach that is
essentially independent of the exercises performed by other researchers, including those on  the
Boskin Commission. In particular, employing  the  statistical  system  from  which  the  Commerce
Department  estimates  the  national  income  and  product  accounts,  the  research  finds  that
measured real output and productivity in the service sector are implausibly weak, given that the
return to owners of businesses in that sector apparently has been well-maintained. Taken at face
value,  the  published  data  indicate  that  the  level  of  output  per  hour  in  a  number  of
service-producing industries has been falling for more than two decades. In other words, the data
imply  that  firms  in  these  industries  have  been  becoming  less  and  less  efficient  for  more  than
twenty years.
These  circumstances  simply  are  not  credible.  On  the  reasonable  assumption  that
nominal  output  and  hours  worked  and  paid  of  the  various  industries  are  accurately  measured,
faulty  price  statistics  are  almost  surely  the  likely  cause  of  the  implausible  productivity  trends.
The source of a very large segment of these prices is the CPI.
For this exercise, the study used the GDP chain-weight price measures. Although
these  price  measures  are  based  on  many  of  the  same  individual  price  indexes  included  in  the
CPI,  they  do  not  suffer  from  upper-level  substitution  bias.  Hence,  the  price  mismeasurement
revealed  by  this  data  system  largely  reflects  shortcomings  in  quality  adjustment  and  in  the
treatment  of  new  goods  and  services.  If,  instead  of  declining,  productivity  in  these  selected
service  industries  was  flat,  to  up  a  modest  1  percentage  point  per  year,  the  implicit  aggregate
price bias associated with these service industries alone would be on the order of 1/2 percentage
point  or  so  per  annum  in  recent  years  --  very  similar  in  magnitude  to  the  Boskin  Commission
estimate of total quality adjustment and new products bias.
To  be  sure,  it  is  theoretically  possible  that  some  of  the  measured  productivity
declines  in  these  service  industries  merely  reflect  mispricing  of  intermediate  transfers  among
various industries. Such an occurrence would cause  an  understatement  of  productivity  in  some
sectors, but a corresponding overstatement in others. But the available evidence suggests that for
these  particular  service  industries  this  theoretical  possibility  is  not  of  a  sufficiently  large
empirical  magnitude  to  overturn  the  basic  conclusion  that  there  are  serious  measurement
problems in our price statistics. Moreover, the study did not attempt to evaluate possible quality
and new products bias in other industries.
Some  observers  who  are  skeptical  that  the  bias  in  the  CPI  could  be  very  large
have noted that the evidence on the magnitude of unmeasured quality change and the importance
of  new  items  bias  is  incomplete  and  inconclusive.  Without  a  doubt,  quality  change  and  new
items are among the most difficult of the problems  currently  confronting  the  BLS.  But  since  I
raised this issue two years ago in my testimony before this Committee, a number of studies have
BIS Review   10/1997
- 3 -
documented significant new examples of cases in which the current treatment in the CPI results
in an overstatement of the rate of growth of the cost of living.
There  doubtless  are  certain  components  of  the  CPI  that  are  biased  downward
because  quality  change  is  handled  inappropriately.  One  instance  in  which  there  may  well  be  a
problem  in  this  regard  pertains  to  new  vehicles,  where  it  may  be  more  appropriate  to  treat
pollution control and mandatory safety equipment, at least in part, as raising price to a consumer
rather  than  improving  quality,  as  is  the  present  practice.  But  the  potential  downward  bias
introduced  by  current  methodology  for  such  equipment  can  only  be  slight.  We  should  be
prepared  to  embrace  credible  new  research  on  quality  adjustment,  regardless  of  whether  that
research  points  to  additional  sources  of  upward  bias  or  previously  undetected  instances  of
downward bias. Nonetheless, currently available evidence very strongly supports the view that,
on balance, the bias is decidedly toward failing to appropriately capture quality improvements in
our price indexes. There is little reason to believe that this conclusion will change unless we alter
our procedures.
A  more  difficult  quality  related  issue  is  whether  to  reflect  changes  in  broad
environmental  and  social  conditions  in  price  measures  that  are  used  for  indexing  various
components  of  federal  outlays  and  receipts.  That  is,  should  the  CPI  reflect  the  influence  of
factors  such  as  the  level  of  crime,  air  and  water  quality,  and  the  emergence  of  new  diseases,
which  are  not  specifically  related  to  products  that  consumers  purchase?  There  is  little  in  the
record  to  suggest  that,  when  it  enacted  the  indexation  of  social  security  benefits  in  1972,  the
Congress intended for the beneficiaries of that program to be compensated for changes in such
environmental and social factors. Nor do these issues appear to have been raised when Congress
debated  the  indexation  of  various  tax  parameters  during  the  1980s.  Taking  account  of  such
conditions, particularly those that lie outside of the markets for goods and services, would be an
interesting exercise in its own right, but would appear to extend well beyond the original intent
of the Congress.
A considerable professional consensus already exists for at least two actions that
would almost surely bring the CPI into closer alignment with a true cost-of-living index. First,
we  should  move  away  from  the  concept  of  a  fixed  marketbasket  at  the  upper  level  of
aggregation,  and  move  toward  an  aggregation  formula  that  takes  into  account  the  tendency  of
consumers to alter the composition of their purchases in response to changes in relative prices.
The BLS already calculates such an index on an experimental basis with a lag of about a year. If
the  Bureau  adopts  the  Boskin  Commission’s  recommendation  that  it  publish  a  “best  practice”
version  of  the  CPI  with  a  lag  of  a  year,  it  should,  without  question,  build  that  index  on  the
foundation of a variable marketbasket.
There is a somewhat more difficult issue as to whether the concept of a variable
marketbasket  can  be  applied  in  “real  time,”  that  is,  with  the  same  degree  of  timeliness  that
characterizes the current CPI. It is not possible to implement the textbook versions of any of the
so-called  “superlative” 
those  formulas  require
contemporaneous data on expenditures, and those data are not presently available until about  a
year  after  the  fact.  However,  this  hardly  forecloses  the  possibility  of  implementing  an
approximation to a superlative formula, and work should continue on the development of  such
an approximation.
index  formulas 
time,  because 
in  real 
A second area that will require attention is the aggregation of prices  at  the  most
detailed  level  of  the  index.  This  is  a  highly  technical  area,  and  an  important  example  of  how
research by the staff at the BLS has advanced our knowledge. Without going into the details of
BIS Review   10/1997
- 4 -
the matter, it is sufficient to say that a selective move away from the current aggregation formula
is warranted, and would probably make a modest further contribution to bringing the index more
in line with the concept of a cost-of-living index.
Beyond these rather limited steps, most of the needed developments will require
time, effort, and quite possibly additional resources. It is important that the Congress provide the
Bureau with sufficient resources to pursue the agenda vigorously. These are difficult problems,
and they cannot be solved tomorrow or next week. But with adequate support and diligent effort,
the  pace  of  improvement  should  quicken.  Moreover,  an  accelerated  pace  of  BLS  activity,  and
heightened congressional interest should galvanize analysts outside the government to contribute
to the research effort.
Where  will  this  longer-term  effort  be  required?  One  of  the  key  areas,  by  all
accounts, is quality adjustment. As the Bureau has rightly noted, they do indeed already employ
a variety of methods to control for quality change, but available evidence suggests that these are
not  sufficient  to  the  task.  Unfortunately,  making  improvements  on  this  front  will  be  difficult:
Each  item  will  have  to  be  considered  on  its  own,  and  there  may  well  be  limited  transfer  of
knowledge from one item to the next.
Another key area on the longer-term agenda will be the estimation of the value of
new products to consumers. Significant innovations, such as the personal computer, the cellular
telephone, and the heart bypass operation create value for consumers, even at their typically high
initial  prices;  moreover,  this  value  is  even  greater  at  the  much  lower  prices  that  often  prevail
when  new  products  are,  in  fact,  introduced  into  the  CPI.  A  true  cost-of-living  index  would
reflect  this  value  and  its  implication  for  the  true  rate  of  growth  of  the  cost  of  living.  The  CPI
does  not  reflect  it,  and  accordingly  fails  to  capture  a  significant  offset  to  price  rises  in  other
products.  Deriving  an  estimate  of  this  value  and  building  it  into  the  CPI  will  not  be  an  easy
undertaking. But conceptually, it is unquestionably the right direction to be heading, and  some
recent research suggests that it could measurably affect the index.
Over time, we will need to investigate alternative sources of data. Already, there
is interesting work being done to develop techniques for processing data collected from bar-code
scanners  at  the  check-out  counter.  Scanner  data  will  allow  the  BLS  to  track  not  just  a  small
sample of products, but virtually the entire universe of products in selected lines of business and,
perhaps  most  importantly,  virtually  the  universe  of  transactions,  regardless  of  whether  those
transactions happen on a weekday, at night, or on a holiday.
We should also move to improve our understanding of the value that  consumers
place on their own time. Absent such knowledge, it will be impossible for the BLS to estimate
the value of many goods and services that mainly serve to enhance convenience and save time.
Finally, we will have to attempt to build an understanding of why consumers shop
at  the  places  they  do:  What  characteristics  of  an  outlet  are  important,  and  how  much  so?
Location,  hours  of  operation,  inventory,  and  quality  of  service  all  are  likely  influences  on  the
value that consumers place on their shopping experience, and all will be important in helping the
BLS to develop a more sophisticated statistical method for dealing with the appearance of new
consumer outlets, including those that operate over the Internet.
Even if the BLS moves aggressively, some upward bias will almost surely remain
in  the  CPI,  at  least  for  the  next  several  years.  Two  years  ago,  in  testimony  before  this
Committee, I suggested that a workable structure for dealing with this situation might involve a
BIS Review   10/1997
- 5 -
two-track  approach.  That  suggestion  still  seems  to  me  to  make  sense.  The  first  track  would
involve action by the BLS to address those aspects of the bias that can be dealt with in relatively
short  order,  say  within  the  next  year.  The  second  track  would  involve  the  establishment  of  an
independent  national  commission  to  set  annual  cost-of-living  adjustment  factors  for  federal
receipt and outlay programs. The Commission would examine available evidence on a periodic
basis, and estimate the bias in the CPI taking into account both the latest research on the sources
and magnitudes of the bias, and any corrective actions that had been taken by the BLS. This type
of approach would have the benefit of being objective, nonpartisan, and sufficiently flexible to
take  full  account  of  the  latest  information.  Moreover,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  two  tracks
could not proceed in parallel.
Without the second track, we are implicitly assuming, contrary to overwhelming
evidence,  that  the  most  accurate  estimate  of  the  bias  is  zero.  There  has  been  considerable
objection that such a second track procedure would be a political fix. To the contrary, assuming
zero for the remaining bias is the political fix. On this issue, we should let evidence, not politics,
drive policy.
We  have  an  overarching  national  interest  in  building  a  better  measure  of
consumer  prices  and  in  implementing  more  rational  indexation  procedures.  Through  these
efforts, we are most likely to ensure that the original intent of the relevant pieces of legislation
will  be  fulfilled  in  insulating  taxpayers  and  benefit  recipients  from  the  effects  of  ongoing
changes in the cost of living. At present this objective is not being met.
BIS Review   10/1997
