Bank of France reports industrial output continued to grow in  most  sectors  in
France in January 1997   BANK OF FRANCE, MONTHLY BUSINESS SURVEY, 17/2/97.
In  January,  according  to  the  business  leaders  surveyed  by  the  Banque  de  France,
industrial  output  continued  to  grow  in  most  sectors.    Activity  was  especially  buoyant  in  the
intermediate goods and consumer goods sectors.  The food processing sector was alone in recording a
contraction in activity.
The capacity utilization rate improved.
Overall  demand  strengthened  further.    French  products  were  very  competitive  on
foreign  markets  and  this  led  to  an  increase  in  export  orders.    Export  sales  increased  in  the  United
Kingdom, Italy and Germany, while demand remained firm in the United States and Asia.  On the
domestic market, inter-industry demand was strong, even though the orders received came with very
short delivery times in most cases.
Order books are now near to normal levels.  They are still considered to be low in the
food-processing and automobile industries, but are deemed to be satisfactory in the capital goods and
consumer goods sectors.  Inventories of finished products are gradually returning to normal overall,
but  they  still  exceed  the  desired  levels  in  the  consumer  goods,  food-processing  and  intermediate
goods sectors.
The outlook for the coming months is distinctly brighter.  Activity should increase in
all sectors, with marked improvements in the intermediate goods and food-processing sectors.
Commodity  prices  were  stable  overall,  while  finished  product  prices  declined
slightly.    This  fall  stemmed  mainly  from  substantial  price  cuts  in  the  automobile  industry,  while
prices generally held up in the other sectors.
Investment plans for 1997 appear to be less ambitious on the whole compared with
capital  spending  plans  at  the  same  period  in  1996.    Nevertheless,  the  business  leaders  polled  in
January were more confident about future activity than they were a few months earlier.  This could
mean  that  previously  postponed  investment  plans  may  be  implemented  in  the  coming  months.
However,  plans  for  increasing  output  capacity  remained  few  and  far  between,  owing  to  the  spare
capacity currently available, and depend on stronger growth in demand.
Retail  sales  in  January  were  up  markedly  over  December  1996,  and  only  slightly
down on the exceptionally high level recorded a year earlier.
Employment  levels  remained  stable  in  nearly  all  industrial  sectors.    They  showed
only  a  slight  change  in  the  services  and  retail  sectors,  but  there  were  further  falls  in  the  building
industry.
BIS Review   23/1997
