Mr.  George  weighs  up  the  pros  and  cons  of  European  Monetary  Union
Speech given by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. E.A.J. George, at the Bankers Club
Annual Banquet held in London on 3/2/97.
I’ve  been  a  follower  of  Jim  Wolfensohn  for  the  past  20  years,  and  it  is  a  great
pleasure to follow him again this evening.
I  first  came  across  him  when  he  was  an  extraordinary  investment  banker  -
reputedly  flying  the  world  with  his  cello  strapped  securely  in  the  adjacent  seat.    His  eventual
appointment to the Presidency of the World Bank was inspired.  He brings to it an outstanding
professionalism.  But - as you have heard this evening - he brings to it also a broad humanitarian
vision and total commitment to the World Bank’s task of improving the lives of people in those
parts of the world that still need outside official  help with their reconstruction and development.
President Wolfensohn’s canvas tonight has been global.  My own focus will be on
Europe, and in particular on European monetary union - though it’s fair to say that EMU could
well have significant consequences for the global economy.
This country is widely regarded elsewhere in Europe as being bloody-minded and
even  obstructive  about  monetary  union,  largely  because  there  is  indeed  an  intense,  and  often
impassioned,  debate  going  on  here  about  the  pros  and  cons.    And  so  there  should  be.    It’s  a
momentous  enterprise,  with  potentially  enormous  implications  for  Europe’s  political  and
economic future.  The simple fact is that there are real risks as well as real potential benefits in
monetary union;  and it would be foolhardy just to assume that the enterprise, if it is embarked
upon, will inevitably bring about the political harmony and economic prosperity across Europe
that  anyone  in  their  right  mind  wants  to  see.    It  is  hugely  important  to  all  of  us  that  Europe’s
political leaders stand back and weigh the risks as well as the potential benefits, dispassionately,
before  any  irrevocable  step  is  taken.    If  the  debate  in  this  country  encourages  open  debate
elsewhere then we will be doing a service to Europe as a whole.
It is something of a fashion these days to describe economic conditions in terms
of fairy stories.  I have heard the steady expansion in the United States, and more recently in this
country, described as  the  “Goldilocks”  condition  -  with  the  economic  temperature  not  too  hot,
not too cold, but just right.
In  the  same  vein  I  might  describe  European  monetary  union  as  Beauty  and  the
Beast.  The Beauty of it lies in intra-European exchange  rate  certainty.    And  if  you  don’t  find
that instantly seductive I suggest you speak, as I have, to some of Britain’s exporters.  They have
seen, over the past six months or so, an erratically sharp appreciation of sterling, against the core
European  currencies  in  particular,  which  can’t  be  adequately  explained  in  terms  of  economic
fundamentals.
But Beauty comes in a package along with the Beast, and the Beast in this case is
the single monetary policy - the single, one-size-fits-all, interest rate.  The trouble is that it may
not  in  the  event  suit  the  domestic  monetary  policy  needs  of  the  different  individual  Euro-area
countries.  And if you don’t find that instantly repulsive I suggest you ask yourself how, at this
particular juncture, we could keep the economic porridge - if I may mix my fairy stories - at just
the right temperature if we were obliged now to have German-level interest rates.
Now you can’t just hope the Beast will never appear.  I don’t know of any serious
analysis that doesn’t acknowledge that tensions could arise between the domestic policy needs of
BIS Review   14/1997
- 2 -
the  different  member  countries  -  as  a  result  of  different  cyclical  positions,  or  different  fiscal
policies, or as a result of external shocks which affect some member countries more than others,
or as a result of structural changes in one member country as against another.  The risks, like the
potential benefits, are, as I say, real.
You  might  more  reasonably  hope  that  Beauty’s  Beast  will  turn  into  Prince
Charming - and that all their problems turn out to be little ones.  But I have to tell you that it was
always at this point in the story that I began to wonder if my mother was making it all up!  In
any  event,  you  need  to  be  rather  confident  that  the  potential  tensions  are  indeed  likely  to  be
minor, or at least short-lived, because, if they do turn out to be serious, then you could be stuck
either with a weak Euro - and more rather than less inflation, higher  rather  than  lower  interest
rates over the medium-term, and exchange rate instability against outside currencies - or, if the
European central bank is allowed to do its job in accordance with its statutes, you could be stuck
with  persistent  stagnation  and  unemployment  across  the  economically  weaker  parts  of  the
Euro-area.  It’s not enough, it seems to me, to shrug one’s shoulders and say “well, that’s what
happens now anyway within individual countries”;  at least within individual countries there are
alternative  adjustment  mechanisms,  in  the  form  of  labour  mobility  and  fiscal  redistribution,  to
moderate the tensions, which will be much less effective within the Euro-area.
The architects of the Maastricht Treaty clearly knew all about the Beast, and they
evidently  shared  my  scepticism  about  it  turning  naturally  into  Prince  Charming.    The  famous
convergence  criteria  are  there  precisely  in  order  to  reduce  the  risks  of  tensions  emerging  after
the start of the Euro.  One can argue about how far they do in fact reduce the risks.  But it would
be  a  reckless  gamble  to  charge  ahead  if  even  those  criteria  were  not  met  -  sustainably,  and  in
substance rather than just in form.
So there needs to be a serious debate.  But it would be disappointing if that debate
degenerates  into  recrimination  and  antagonism.    That  would  be  to  obscure  the  remarkable
consensus that now exists - throughout the European Union and indeed more widely, and across
a broad spectrum of political opinion within the countries of Europe, including this country, on
the  broad  approach  to  macro-economic  management.    This  unforced  consensus  extends  to
monetary  policy  directed  to  price  stability,  and  it  extends  to  budgetary  policy  directed  to
medium  and  longer-term  fiscal  sustainability.    There  is  growing  recognition,  too,  across  the
continent,  of  the  importance  of  structural  policy  directed  to  supply-side  flexibility.    This
strengthening consensus is fundamentally important - more fundamentally important, in terms of
the economics of it at least, than whether these common objectives are pursued inside or outside
the framework of monetary union.
Pulling these thoughts  together,  it  would  be  a  mistake  in  my  view  for  monetary
union to go ahead without reasonable confidence of genuine, sustainable, convergence between
its  members;    and  it  would  be  a  mistake  for  any  individual  country  to  seek  to  join,  or  to  be
permitted to join, unless it had achieved genuine, sustainable, convergence.  If there are serious
doubts - generally or in any particular case - it would be in no-one’s interest to proceed.
But it would be just as big a mistake, if monetary union does not go ahead, or for
countries  on  the  outside,  if  individual  governments  saw  that  as  an  opportunity  to  seek  to  take
short-term  advantage  of  the  apparent  macro-economic  freedom  that  that  gave.    It  would  be
against their longer-term national economic interest;  and countries behaving in this way should
not  be  at  all  surprised  if  other  European  Union  countries  sought  to  protect  themselves  against
disruptive behaviour.  With or without monetary union, within it or outside, it is  of  overriding
importance that we all continue to pursue stability-orientated macro-economic policies.  On that
BIS Review   14/1997
- 3 -
basis I can see no reason, and certainly no right under the Treaty of Rome, for distinctions to be
made  among  the  member  states  of  the  European  Union  whatever  the  outcome  on  monetary
union.  Indeed we would all suffer if they were, because it would reduce the potential benefits of
the  single  market  to  Europe  as  a  whole.    Whatever  the  surrounding  noise,  we  must  surely  be
smart  enough  to  avoid  cutting  off  our  nose  to  spite  our  face  in  that  way.    Our  national  and
collective economic interests are too closely aligned for that to be allowed to happen.
So I am not particularly impressed either by the fears sometimes expressed about
the  economic  penalties  that  will  be  visited  on  countries  outside  monetary  union,  or  by  the
occasional rattling of the cage to try to bully them into it.  Unless we are convinced, as I say, in
general or in any particular case, that Beauty will in fact end up with Prince Charming, and not
be condemned to long-term cohabitation with the Beast, then it would be better for Europe as a
whole to delay until we were more confident of a happy ending.
Investment  will  continue  to  flow  to  this  country  so  long  as  we  succeed  in
maintaining an environment offering attractive returns, and our macro-economic and supply-side
policies are a much bigger factor in that than the exchange rate.
Similarly  the  City  will  continue  to  flourish  as  Europe’s  international  financial
capital  so  long  as  the  strongest  financial  firms  from  all  around  the  world  continue  to  find  it
attractive  to  conduct  their  business  here.    I  see  no  signs  of  that  changing:    indeed  the
international business of the City continues to increase;  and that has very little to  do  with  our
national  currency,  or  with  an  expectation  that  we  will  be  among  the  first  to  merge  it  into  the
Euro.
So  long  as  we  are  properly  prepared,  as  we  will  be,  and  so  long  as  we  have  in
place  efficient  infra-structure,  including  for  payments  and  settlements,  as  I  assure  you  we  will
have - in or out, then the Euro, if it comes, will be more of an opportunity than a threat to the
City.  There are those who sometimes  give  the  impression  that  they  think  the  Euro  could  -  by
regulation  or  restrictions  -  be  confined  to  within  the  territory  of  the  Euro  area,  and  that  this
would be “a good thing”.  That I have to say is not our experience.  In practice unnecessary or
ineffective  domestic  regulations  or  restrictions  have  often  been  the  cause  of  financial  activity
growing up elsewhere.  In any event we live in a global financial world and the Euro is bound to
become a widely-used and actively-traded currency internationally.  Its liquidity is likely to be a
key attraction to domestic and foreign users alike.  The City of London both contributes to, and
thrives upon, liquid markets, and the Euro-market, or the euro-Euro-market if we are an “out”,
will  be  no  exception.    That  can  only  be  good  for  the  development  of  financial  activity  -  the
provision  of  competitive  financial  services  -  across  Europe  as  a  whole,  because  we  are  not
talking  here  about  a  zero-sum  game.    Euro-activity  in  London  is  likely  to  stimulate  financial
activity  in  other  centres  and  vice  versa;    and  much  of  that  activity  will  be  undertaken  by
branches  or  affiliates  of  the  same  major  financial  firms.    The  first  ecu-Euro  bond  raised  last
week by a European borrower and managed from London by a Swiss/British and a French bank
and by another French bank in Paris, is a good example not just of London’s international role as
it  is  today,  but  of  how  it  is  likely  to  continue.    In  this  area,  too,  therefore  I  see  our  national
interests coinciding rather than conflicting with the collective European interest.  That is why the
Bank  of  England,  at  all  levels,  is  playing  a  full,  active,  and  constructive,  part  in  both  the
preparatory  work  of  the  EMI,  and  in  the  technical  preparation  of  London’s  great  financial
markets.  If monetary union goes ahead, with or without the UK, we have a vital interest in its
success, and we will do all that we can to ensure that outcome.
BIS Review   14/1997
- 4 -
Mr President, I am delighted to see so many bankers from around the world here
again this evening -  and  generally  looking  so  prosperous.    And,  come  what  may  in  relation  to
EMU, I confidently look forward to seeing you all at this great banquet again next year, and for
many years to come - looking just as prosperous.  It is in that context that I ask you to rise and
join  me  in  a  toast  to  the  Bankers  Club  -  coupled  with  the  name  of  its  President,  Sir  William
Purves.
BIS Review   14/1997
