Mr. Greenspan presents the views of the Federal Reserve in its semi-annual
Humphrey-Hawkins report on monetary policy   Testimony of the Chairman of the Board of
Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, Mr. Alan Greenspan, before Congress on 22/7/97.
I am pleased to appear before this Subcommittee to present the Federal Reserve’s
report on the economic situation and monetary policy.
The recent performance of the economy, characterized by strong growth and low
inflation,  has  been  exceptional  --  and  better  than  most  anticipated.  During  the  first  quarter  of
1997, real gross domestic product expanded at nearly a 6 percent annual rate, after posting a 3
percent increase over 1996. Activity apparently continued to expand in the second quarter, albeit
at  a  more  moderate  pace.  The  economy  is  now  in  the  seventh  consecutive  year  of  expansion,
making it the third longest post-World War II cyclical upswing to date.
Moreover,  our  Federal  Reserve  Banks  indicate  that  economic  activity  is  on  the
rise,  and  at  a  relatively  high  level,  in  virtually  every  geographic  region  and  community  of  the
nation. The expansion has been balanced, in that inventories, as well as stocks of business capital
and other durable assets, have been kept closely in line with spending, so overhangs have been
small and readily corrected.
This strong expansion has produced a remarkable increase in work opportunities
for Americans. A net of more than thirteen million jobs has been created since the current period
of growth began in the spring of 1991. As a consequence, the unemployment rate has fallen to 5
percent -- its lowest level in almost  a  quarter  century.  The  expansion  has  enabled  many  in  the
working-age  population,  a  large  number  of  whom  would  have  otherwise  remained  out  of  the
labor  force  or  among  the  longer-term  unemployed,  to  acquire  work  experience  and  improved
skills.  Our  whole  economy  will  benefit  from  their  greater  productivity.  To  be  sure,  not  all
segments  of  our  population  are  fully  sharing  in  the  economic  improvement.  Some  Americans
still have trouble finding jobs, and for part of our work force real wage stagnation persists.
In contrast to the typical postwar business cycle, measured price inflation is lower
now  than  when  the  expansion  began  and  has  shown  little  tendency  to  rebound  of  late,  despite
high rates of resource utilization. In the business sector, producer prices have fallen  in  each  of
the past six months. Consumers also are enjoying low inflation. The consumer price index rose
at  less  than  a  2  percent  annual  rate  over  the  first  half  of  the  year,  down  from  a  little  over  3
percent in 1996.
With  the  economy  performing  so  well  for  so  long,  financial  markets  have  been
buoyant, as memories of past business and financial cycles fade with time. Soaring prices in the
stock  market  have  been  fuelled  by  moderate  long-term  interest  rates  and  expectations  of
investors that profit margins and earnings growth will hold steady, or even increase further, in a
relatively stable, low-inflation environment. Credit spreads at depository institutions and in the
open market have remained extremely narrow by historical standards, suggesting a high degree
of confidence among lenders regarding the prospects for credit repayment.
The  key  questions  facing  financial  markets  and  policy  makers  are:  "What  is
behind  the  good  performance  of  the  economy?"  and  "Will  it  persist?"  Without  question,  the
exceptional  economic  situation  reflects  some  temporary  factors  that  have  been  restraining
inflation  rates.  In  addition,  however,  important  pieces  of  information,  while  just  suggestive  at
this point, could be read as indicating basic improvements in the longer-term  efficiency  of  our
BIS Review 70/1997
- 2 -
economy.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  aware  of  this  possibility  in  our  monetary  policy
deliberations and, as always, has operated with a view to supplying adequate liquidity to allow
the economy to reach its highest potential on a sustainable basis.
Nonetheless,  we  also  recognize  that  the  capacity  of  our  economy  to  produce
goods  and  services  is  not  without  limit.  If  demand  were  to  outrun  supply,  inflationary
imbalances  would  eventually  develop  that  would  tend  to  undermine  the  current  expansion  and
inhibit  the  long-run  growth  potential  of  the  economy.  Because  monetary  policy  works  with  a
significant lag, policy actions are directed at a future that may not be clearly evident in current
experience.  This  leads  to  policy  judgements  that  are  by  their  nature  calibrated  to  the  relative
probabilities of differing outcomes.  We  moved  the  federal  funds  rate  higher  in  March  because
we perceived the probability of demand outstripping supply to have increased to a point where
inaction would have put at risk the solid elements of support that have sustained this expansion
and made it so beneficial.
In  making  such  judgements  in  March  and  in  the  future,  we  need  to  analyze
carefully  the  various  forces  that  may  be  affecting  the  balance  of  supply  and  demand  in  the
economy,  including  those  that  may  be  responsible  for  its  exceptional  recent  behavior.  The
remainder of my testimony will address the various possibilities.
Inflation, Output, and Technological Change in the 1990s
Many  observers,  including  us,  have  been  puzzled  about  how  an  economy,
operating  at  high  levels  and  drawing  into  employment  increasingly  less-experienced  workers,
can still produce subdued and, by some measures even falling, inflation rates. It will, doubtless,
be  several  years  before  we  know  with  any  conviction  the  full  story  of  the  surprisingly  benign
combination of output and prices that has marked the business expansion of the last six years.
Certainly,  public  policy  has  played  an  important  role.  Administration  and
Congressional  actions  to  curtail  budget  deficits  have  enabled  long-term  interest  rates  to  move
lower, encouraging private efficiency-enhancing capital investment. Deregulation in a number of
industries has fostered competition and held down prices. Finally, the pre-emptive actions of the
Federal Reserve in 1994 contained a potentially destabilizing surge in demand, short-circuiting a
boom-bust  business  cycle  in  the  making  and  keeping  inflation  low  to  encourage  business
innovation.  But  the  fuller  explanation  of  the  recent  extraordinary  performance  may  well  lie
deeper.
In  February  1996,  I  raised  before  this  Committee  a  hypothesis  tying  together
technological  change  and  cost  pressures  that  could  explain  what  was  even  then  a  puzzling
quiescence  of  inflation.  The  new  information  received  in  the  last  eighteen  months  remains
consistent with those earlier notions; indeed, some additional pieces of the puzzle appear to  be
falling into place.
A surge in capital investment in high tech equipment that began in early 1993 has
since  strengthened.  Purchases  of  computer  and  telecommunications  equipment  have  risen  at  a
more than 14 percent annual rate since early 1993 in nominal terms, and at an astonishing rate of
nearly  25  percent  in  real  terms,  reflecting  the  fall  in  the  prices  of  this  equipment.  Presumably
companies have come to  perceive  a  significant  increase  in  profit  opportunities  from  exploiting
the improved productivity of these new technologies.
BIS Review 70/1997
- 3 -
It  is  premature  to  judge  definitively  whether  these  business  perceptions  are  the
harbinger  of  a  more  general  and  persistent  improvement  in  productivity.  Supporting  this
possibility,  productivity  growth,  which  often  suffers  as  business  expansions  mature,  has  not
followed  that  pattern.  In  addition,  profit  margins  remain  high  in  the  face  of  pickups  in
compensation  growth,  suggesting  that  businesses  continue  to  find  new  ways  to  enhance  their
efficiency.  Nonetheless,  although  the  anecdotal  evidence  is  ample  and  manufacturing
productivity  has  picked  up,  a  change  in  the  underlying  trend  is  not  yet  reflected  in  our
conventional data for the whole economy.
But even if the  perceived  quicker  pace  of  application  of  our  newer  technologies
turns out to be mere wheel-spinning rather than true productivity advance, it has brought with it
a  heightened  sense  of  job  insecurity  and,  as  a  consequence,  subdued  wage  gains.  As  I  pointed
out here last February, polls indicated that despite the significant fall in the unemployment rate,
the proportion of workers in larger establishments fearful of being laid off rose from 25 percent
in 1991 to 46 percent by 1996. It should not have been surprising then that strike activity in the
1990s has been lower than it has been in decades and that new labor union contracts have been
longer and have given greater emphasis to job security. Nor should it have been unexpected that
the number of workers voluntarily leaving their jobs to seek other employment has not risen in
this period of tight labor markets.
To be sure, since last year, surveys have indicated that the proportion of workers
fearful  of  layoff  has  stabilized  and  the  number  of  voluntary  job  leavers  has  edged  up.  And,
indeed,  perhaps  as  a  consequence,  wage  gains  have  accelerated  some.  But  increases  in  the
Employment  Cost  Index  still  trail  behind  what  previous  relationships  to  tight  labor  markets
would have suggested, and a lingering sense of fear or uncertainty seems still to pervade the job
market, though to a somewhat lesser extent.
Consumer surveys do indicate greater optimism about the economy. However, it
is one thing to believe that the economy, indeed the job market, will do well overall, but quite
another to feel  secure  about  one’s  individual  situation,  given  the  accelerated  pace  of  corporate
restructuring and the heightened fear of skill obsolescence that has apparently characterized this
expansion.  Persisting  insecurity  would  help  explain  why  measured  personal  saving  rates  have
not declined as would  have  been  expected  from  the  huge  increase  in  stock  market  wealth.  We
will,  however,  have  a  better  fix  on  savings  rates  after  the  coming  benchmark  revisions  to  the
national income and product accounts.
The  combination  in  recent  years  of  subdued  compensation  per  hour  and  solid
productivity advances has meant that unit labor costs of non financial corporations have barely
moved. Moreover, when you combine unit labor costs with non labor costs -- which account for
one-quarter of total costs on a consolidated basis -- total unit costs for the year ended in the first
quarter of 1997 rose only about half a percent. Hence, a significant part  of  the  measured  price
increase over that period was attributable to a rise in profit margins, unusual well into a business
expansion.  Rising  margins  are  further  evidence  suggesting  that  productivity  gains  have  been
unexpectedly strong; in these situations, real labor compensation usually catches up only with a
lag.
While  accelerated  technological  change  may  well  be  an  important  element  in
unravelling  the  current  economic  puzzle,  there  have  been  other  influences  at  play  as  well  in
restraining price increases at high levels of resource utilization. The strong dollar of the last two
years  has  pared  import  prices  and  constrained  the  pricing  behavior  of  domestic  firms  facing
import  competition.  Increasing  globalization  has  enabled  greater  specialization  over  a  wider
BIS Review 70/1997
- 4 -
array  of  goods  and  services,  in  effect  allowing  comparative  advantage  to  hold  down  costs  and
enhance  efficiencies.  Increased  deregulation  of  telecommunications,  motor  and  rail  transport,
utilities,  and  finance  doubtless  has  been  a  factor  restraining  prices,  as  perhaps  has  the  reduced
market power of labor unions. Certainly, changes in the health care industry and the pricing of
health  services  have  greatly  contributed  to  holding  down  growth  in  the  cost  of  benefits,  and
hence overall labor compensation.
Many of these forces are limited or temporary, and their effects can be expected
to diminish, at which time cost and price pressures would tend to re-emerge. The effects of an
increased  rate  of  technological  change  might  be  more  persistent,  but  they  too  could  not
permanently hold down inflation if the Federal Reserve allows excess liquidity to flood financial
markets. I have noted to you before the likelihood that at some point workers might no longer be
willing  to  restrain  wage  gains  for  added  security,  at  which  time  accelerating  unit  labor  costs
could  begin  to  press  on  profit  margins  and  prices,  should  monetary  policy  be  too
accommodative.
When  I  discuss  greater  technological  change,  I  am  not  referring  primarily  to  a
particular  new  invention.  Instead,  I  have  in  mind  the  increasingly  successful  and  pervasive
application  of  recent  technological  advances,  especially  in  telecommunications  and  computers,
to  enhance  efficiencies  in  production  processes  throughout  the  economy.  Many  of  these
technologies  have  been  around  for  some  time.  Why  might  they  be  having  a  more  pronounced
effect now?
In  an  intriguing  paper  prepared  for  a  conference  last  year  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve
Bank of Boston, Professor Nathan Rosenberg of Stanford documented how, in the past, it often
took  a  considerable  period  of  time  for  the  necessary  synergies  to  develop  between  different
forms of capital and technologies. One example is the invention of the dynamo in the mid 1800s.
Rosenberg’s colleague Professor Paul David had noted a number of years ago that it wasn’t until
the  1920s  that  critical  complementary  technologies  of  the  dynamo  --  for  example,  the  electric
motor as the primary source of mechanical drive in factories, and central generating stations --
were developed and in place and that production processes had fully adapted to these inventions.
What  we  may  be  observing  in  the  current  environment  is  a  number  of  key
technologies,  some  even  mature,  finally  interacting  to  create  significant  new  opportunities  for
value  creation.  For  example,  the  applications  for  the  laser  were  modest  until  the  later
development of fiber optics engendered a revolution in telecommunications. Broad advances in
software  have  enabled  us  to  capitalize  on  the  prodigious  gains  in  hardware  capacity.  The
interaction of both of these has created the Internet.
The  accelerated  synergies  of  the  various  technologies  may  be  what  have  been
creating the apparent significant new profit opportunities that  presumably  lie  at  the  root  of  the
recent  boom  in  high-tech  investment.  An  expected  result  of  the  widespread  and  effective
application of information and other technologies would be a significant increase in productivity
and reduction in business costs.
We  do  not  now  know,  nor  do  I  suspect  can  anyone  know,  whether  current
developments are part of a once or twice in a century phenomenon that will carry productivity
trends nationally and globally to a new higher track, or whether we are merely observing some
unusual  variations  within  the  context  of  an  otherwise  generally  conventional  business  cycle
expansion.  The  recent  improvement  in  productivity  could  be  just  transitory,  an  artifact  of  a
temporary surge in demand and output growth. In view of the slowing in growth in the second
BIS Review 70/1997
- 5 -
quarter  and  the  more  moderate  expansion  widely  expected  going  forward,  data  for  profit
margins on domestic operations and productivity from the second quarter on will be especially
relevant in assessing whether recent improvements are structural or cyclical.
Whatever  the  trend  in  productivity  and,  by  extension,  overall  sustainable
economic growth, from the Federal Reserve’s point of view, the faster the better. We see our job
as fostering the degree of liquidity that will best support the most effective platform for growth
to  flourish.  We  believe  a  non  inflationary  environment  is  such  a  platform  because  it  promotes
long-term planning and capital investment and keeps the pressure on businesses to contain costs
and enhance efficiency.
The Federal Reserve’s policy problem is not with growth, but with maintaining an
effective platform. To do so, we endeavor to prevent  strains  from  developing  in  our  economic
system, which long experience tells us produce bottlenecks, shortages, and inefficiencies. These
eventually  create  more  inflation,  which  undermines  economic  expansion  and  limits  the
longer-term potential of the economy.
In  gauging  the  potential  for  oncoming  strains,  it  is  the  effective  capacity  of  the
economy to produce that is important to us. An economy operating at a high level of utilization
and growing 5 percent a year is in little difficulty if capacity is growing at least that fast. But a
fully  utilized  economy  growing  at  1  percent  will  eventually  get  into  trouble  if  capacity  is
growing less than that.
Capacity  itself,  however,  is  a  complex  concept,  which  requires  a  separate
evaluation  of  its  two  components,  capital  and  labor.  It  appears  that  capital,  that  is,  plant  and
equipment, can adapt and expand more expeditiously than in the past to meet demands. Hence,
capital capacity is now a considerably less rigid constraint than it once was.
In  recent  years,  technology  has  engendered  a  significant  compression  of  lead
times  between  order  and  delivery  for  production  facilities.  This  has  enabled  output  to  respond
increasingly  faster  to  an  upsurge  in  demand,  thereby  decreasing  the  incidence  of  strains  on
capital capacity and shortages so evident in earlier business expansions.
Reflecting progressively shorter lead times for capital equipment, unfilled orders
to  shipment  ratios  for  non-defense  capital  goods  have  declined  by  30  percent  in  the  last  six
years.  Not  only  do  producers  have  quicker  access  to  equipment  that  embodies  the  most  recent
advances, but they have been able to adjust their overall capital stock more rapidly to increases
in demand.
The current lack of material shortages and bottlenecks, despite the high level and
recent robust expansion of demand, is striking. The effective capacity of production facilities has
increased substantially in recent years in response to strong final demands and the influence of
cost reductions possible with the newer technologies. Increased flexibility is particularly evident
in  the  computer,  telecommunications,  and  related  industries,  a  segment  of  our  economy  that
seems far less subject to physical capacity constraints than many older-line establishments, and
one  that  is  assuming  greater  importance  in  our  overall  output.  But  the  shortening  of  lags  has
been  pervasive  even  in  more  mature  industries,  owing  in  part  to  the  application  of  advanced
technologies to production methods.
At  the  extreme,  if  all  capital  goods  could  be  produced  at  constant  cost  and  on
demand, the size of our nation’s capital stock would never pose a restraint on production. We are
BIS Review 70/1997
- 6 -
obviously  very  far  from  that  nirvana,  but  it  is  important  to  note  that  we  are  also  far  from  the
situation a half-century ago when our production processes were dominated by equipment such
as open hearth steel furnaces, which had very exacting limits on how much they could produce
in a fixed time frame and which required huge lead times to expand their capacity.
Even so, today’s economy as a whole still can face capacity  constraints  from  its
facilities.  Indeed,  just  three  years  ago,  bottlenecks  in  industrial  production  --  though  less
extensive than in years past at high levels of  measured  capacity  utilization  --  were  nonetheless
putting  significant  upward  pressures  on  prices  at  earlier  stages  of  production.  More  recently
vendor performance has deteriorated somewhat, indicating that flexibility to meet demands still
has limits. Although further strides toward greater facilities flexibility have occurred since 1994,
this is clearly an evolutionary, not a revolutionary, process.
Labor Markets
Moreover, technology and management changes have had only a limited effect on
the ability of labor supply to respond to changes in demand. To be sure, individual firms  have
acquired  additional  flexibility  by  increased  use  of  outsourcing  and  temporary  workers.  In
addition,  smaller  work  teams  can  adapt  more  readily  to  variations  in  order  flows.  While  these
techniques put the right workers at the right spots to reduce bottlenecks, they do not increase the
aggregate  supply  of  labor.  That  supply  is  sensitive  to  changes  in  demand,  but  to  a  far  more
limited extent than for facilities. New plants can almost always be built. But labor capacity for
an individual country is constrained by the size of the working-age population, which, except for
immigration, is basically determined several decades in the past.
Of course, capital facilities and labor are not fully separate markets. Within limits,
labor  and  capital  are  substitutes,  and  slack  in  one  market  can  offset  tightness  in  another.  For
example, additional work shifts can expand output without significant addition to facilities, and
similarly more labor-displacing equipment can permit production to be increased with the same
level of employment.
Yet  despite  significant  increases  in  capital  equipment  in  recent  years,  new
additions to labor supply have been inadequate to meet the demand for labor. As a consequence,
the recent period has been one of significant reduction in labor market slack.
Of  the  more  than  two  million  net  new  hires  at  an  annual  rate  since  early  1994,
only about half have come from an expansion in the population aged 16 to 64 who wanted a job,
and  more  than  a  third  of  those  were  net  new  immigrants.  The  remaining  one  million  plus  per
year increase in employment has been pulled from those who had been reported as unemployed
(600  thousand  annually)  and  those  who  wanted,  but  had  not  actively  sought,  a  job  (more  than
400 thousand annually). The latter, of course, are not in the official unemployment count.
The key point is that continuously digging ever deeper into the available work age
population  is  not  a  sustainable  trajectory  for  job  creation.  The  unemployment  rate  has  a
downside limit if for no other reason than unemployment, in part, reflects voluntary periods of
job  search  and  other  frictional  unemployment.  There  is  also  a  limit  on  how  many  of  the
additional 5 million  who  wanted  a  job  last  quarter  but  were  not  actively  seeking  one  could  be
readily absorbed into jobs  --  in  particular,  the  large  number  enrolled  in  school,  and  those  who
may  lack  the  necessary  skills  or  face  other  barriers  to  taking  jobs.  The  rise  in  the  average
workweek since early 1996 suggests employers are having increasingly greater difficulty fitting
BIS Review 70/1997
- 7 -
the  millions  who  want  a  job  into  available  job  slots.  If  the  pace  of  job  creation  continues,  the
pressures  on  wages  and  other  costs  of  hiring  increasing  numbers  of  such  individuals  could
escalate more rapidly.
To be sure, there remain an additional 34 million in the  working-age  population
(age 16 - 64) who say they do not want a job. Presumably, some of these early retirees, students,
or  homemakers  might  be  attracted  to  the  job  market  if  it  became  sufficiently  rewarding.
However,  making  it  attractive  enough  could  also  involve  upward  pressures  in  real  wages  that
would trigger renewed price pressures, undermining the expansion.
Thus, there would seem to be emerging constraints on potential labor input. Even
before we reach the ultimate limit of sustainable labor supply growth, the economy’s ability to
expand employment at the recent rate should rapidly diminish. The availability of  unemployed
labor could no longer add to growth, irrespective of the degree of slack in physical facilities at
that  time.  Simply  adding  new  facilities  will  not  increase  production  unless  output  per  worker
improves. Such improvements are possible if worker skills increase, but such gains come slowly
through improved education and on-the-job training. They are also possible as capital substitutes
for  labor,  but  are  limited  by  the  state  of  technology.  More  significant  advances  require
technological  breakthroughs.  At  the  cutting  edge  of  technology,  where  America  finds  itself,
major improvements cannot be produced on demand. New ideas that matter are hard won.
The Economic Outlook
As I noted, the recent performance of the labor markets suggests that the economy
was  on  an  unsustainable  track.  Unless  aggregate  demand  increases  more  slowly  than  it  has  in
recent years -- more in line with trends in the supply of labor and productivity -- imbalances will
emerge. We do not know, however, at what point pressures would develop -- or indeed whether
the economy is already close to that point.
Fortunately, the very rapid growth of demand over the winter has eased recently.
To  an  extent  this  easing  seems  to  reflect  some  falloff  in  growth  of  demand  for  consumer
durables  and  for  inventories  to  a  pace  more  in  line  with  moderate  expansion  in  income.  But
some  of  the  recent  slower  growth  could  simply  be  a  product  of  abnormal  weather  patterns,
which contributed to a first-quarter surge in output and weakened the second quarter, in which
case the underlying trend could be somewhat higher than suggested by the second-quarter data
alone.  Certainly,  business  and  consumer  confidence  remains  high  and  financial  conditions  are
supportive of growth. Particularly notable is the run-up in stock market wealth, the full effects of
which apparently have not been reflected in overall demand, but might yet be.
Monetary policymakers, balancing these various forces, forecast a continuation of
less rapid growth in coming quarters. For 1997 as a whole, the central tendency of their forecasts
has real GDP growing 3 to 3¼ percent. This would be much more brisk than was anticipated in
February, and the upward revision to this estimate largely reflects the unexpectedly strong first
quarter.  The  central  tendency  of  monetary  policymakers’  projections  is  that  real  GDP  will
expand 2 to 2½ percent in 1998. This pace of expansion is expected to keep the unemployment
rate close to its current low level.
We  are  reasonably  confident  that  inflation  will  be  quite  modest  for  1997  as  a
whole.  The  central  tendency  of  the  forecasts  is  that  consumer  prices  will  rise  only  2¼  to  2½
BIS Review 70/1997
- 8 -
percent  this  year.  This  would  be  a  significantly  better  outcome  than  the  2¾  to  3  percent  CPI
inflation foreseen in February.
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  members  do  see  higher  rates  of  inflation  next
year.  The  central  tendency  of  the  projections  is  that  CPI  inflation  will  be  2½  to  3  percent  in
1998 -- a little above the expectation for this year. However, much of this increase is presumed
to  result  from  the  absence  of  temporary  factors  that  are  holding  down  inflation  this  year.  In
particular,  the  favorable  movements  in  food  and  energy  prices  of  1997  are  unlikely  to  be
repeated, and non-oil import prices may not continue to decline. While it is possible that better
productivity  trends  and  subdued  wage  growth  will  continue  to  help  damp  the  increases  in
business  costs  associated  with  tight  labor  markets,  this  is  a  situation  that  the  Federal  Reserve
plans to monitor closely.
I  have  no  doubt  that  the  current  stance  of  policy  --  characterized  by  a  nominal
federal  funds  rate  around  5½  percent  --  will  need  to  be  changed  at  some  point  to  foster
sustainable growth and low inflation. Adjustments  in  the  policy  instrument  in  response  to  new
information are a necessary and, I should like to emphasize, routine aspect of responsible policy
making.  For  the  present,  as  I  indicated,  demand  growth  does  appear  to  have  moderated,  but
whether that moderation will be sufficient to avoid putting additional pressures on resources  is
an  open  question.  With  considerable  momentum  behind  the  expansion  and  labor  market
utilization  rates  unusually  high,  the  Federal  Reserve  must  be  alert  to  the  possibility  that
additional action might be called for to forestall excessive credit creation.
The  Federal  Reserve  is  intent  on  gearing  its  policy  to  facilitate  the  maximum
sustainable  growth  of  the  economy,  but  it  is  not,  as  some  commentators  have  suggested,
involved  in  an  experiment  that  deliberately  prods  the  economy  to  see  how  far  and  fast  it  can
grow.  The  costs  of  a  failed  experiment  would  be  much  too  burdensome  for  too  many  of  our
citizens.
Clearly, in considering issues of monetary policy we need to distinguish carefully
between  sustainable  economic  growth  and  unsustainable  accelerations  of  activity.  Sustainable
growth  reflects  the  increased  capacity  of  the  economic  system  to  produce  goods  and  services
over the longer run. It is largely the sum of increases in productivity and in the labor force. That
growth  contrasts  with  a  second  type,  a  more  transitory  growth.  An  economy  producing  near
capacity can expand faster for a short time, often through unsustainably low short-term interest
rates  and  excess  credit  creation.  But  this  is  not  growth  that  promotes  lasting  increases  in
standards of living and in jobs for our nation. Rather, it is a growth that creates instability and
thereby inhibits the achievement of our nation’s economic goals.
The  key  question  is  how  monetary  policy  can  best  foster  the  highest  rate  of
sustainable  growth  and  avoid  amplifying  swings  in  output,  employment,  and  prices.  The
historical  evidence  is  unambiguous  that  excessive  creation  of  credit  and  liquidity  contributes
nothing  to  the  long-run  growth  of  our  productive  potential  and  much  to  costly  shorter-term
fluctuations.  Moreover,  it  promotes  inflation,  impairing  the  economy’s  longer-term  potential
output.
Our objective has never been to contain inflation as an end in itself, but rather as a
precondition for the highest possible long-run growth of output and income -- the ultimate goal
of macroeconomic policy.
BIS Review 70/1997
- 9 -
In  considering  possible  adjustments  of  policy  to  achieve  that  goal,  the  issue  of
lags  in  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  is  crucial.  The  evidence  clearly  demonstrates  that
monetary  policy  affects  the  financial  markets  immediately  but  works  with  significant  lags  on
output, employment, and prices. Thus, as I pointed out earlier, policy needs to be made today on
the basis of likely economic conditions in  the  future.  As  a  consequence,  and  in  the  absence  of
once-reliable  monetary  guides  to  policy,  there  is  no  alternative  to  formulating  policy  using
risk-reward trade-offs based on what are, unavoidably, uncertain forecasts.
Operating  on  uncertain  forecasts,  of  course,  is  not  unusual.  People  do  it  every
day, consciously or subconsciously. A driver might tap the brakes to make sure not to be hit by a
truck coming down the street, even if he thinks the chances of such an event are relatively low;
the  costs  of  being  wrong  are  simply  too  high.  Similarly,  in  conducting  monetary  policy  the
Federal Reserve needs constantly to look down the road to gauge the future risks to the economy
and act accordingly.
Growth of Money and Credit
The view that the Federal Reserve’s best contribution to growth is to foster price
stability  has  informed  both  our  tactical  decisions  on  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  and  our
longer-run  judgements  on  appropriate  rates  of  liquidity  provision.  To  be  sure,  growth  rates  of
monetary  and  credit  aggregates  have  become  less  reliable  as  guides  for  monetary  policy  as  a
result of rapid change in our financial system. As I have reported to you previously, the current
uncertainties regarding the behavior of the monetary aggregates have implied that we have been
unable to employ them as guides to short-run policy decisions. Accordingly, in recent years we
have  reported  annual  ranges  for  money  growth  that  serve  as  benchmarks  under  conditions  of
price stability and a return to historically stable patterns of velocity.
Over the past several years, the monetary  aggregates  --  M2  in  particular  --  have
shown some signs of re-establishing such stable patterns. The velocity of M2 has fluctuated in a
relatively  narrow  range,  and  some  of  its  variation  within  that  range  has  been  explained  by
interest  rate  movements,  in  a  relationship  similar  to  that  established  over  earlier  decades.  We
find  this  an  encouraging  development,  and  it  is  possible  that  at  some  point  the  FOMC  might
elect to put more weight on such monetary quantities in the conduct of policy. But in our view,
sufficient evidence has not yet accumulated to support such a judgement.
Consequently, we have decided to keep the existing ranges of growth for money
and credit for 1997 and carry them over to next year, retaining the interpretation of the money
ranges as benchmarks for the achievement of price stability. With nominal income growth strong
relative to the rate that would likely prevail under conditions of price stability, the growth of M2
is likely to run in the upper part of its range both this year and next, while M3 could run a little
above its cone. Domestic non financial sector debt is likely to remain well within its range, with
private  debt  growth  brisk  and  federal  debt  growth  subdued.  Although  any  tendency  for  the
aggregates to exceed their ranges would not, in the event, necessarily call for an examination of
whether  a  policy  adjustment  was  needed,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  be  closely  examining
financial  market  prices  and  flows  in  the  context  of  a  broad  range  of  economic  and  price
indicators for evidence that the sustainability of the economic expansion may be in jeopardy.
BIS Review 70/1997
Concluding Comment
- 10 -
The  Federal  Reserve  recognizes,  of  course,  that  monetary  policy  does  not
determine the economy’s potential. All that it can do is help establish sound money and a stable
financial  environment  in  which  the  inherent  vitality  of  a  market  economy  can  flourish  and
promote the capital investment that in the long run is  the  basis  for  vigorous  economic  growth.
Similarly, other government policies also have a major role to play in contributing to economic
growth.  A  continued  emphasis  on  market  mechanisms  through  deregulation  will  help  sharpen
incentives to work, save, invest, and innovate. Similarly, a fiscal policy oriented toward limited
growth  in  government  expenditures,  producing  smaller  budget  deficits  and  even  budget
surpluses, would tend to lower real interest rates even further, also promoting capital investment.
The  recent  experience  provides  striking  evidence  of  the  potential  for  the  continuation  and
extension of monetary, fiscal, and structural policies to enhance our economy’s performance in
the period ahead.
BIS Review 70/1997
