Mr.  Greenspan  gives  some  personal  perspectives  on  the  current  economic
situation in the United States   Testimony of the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the
US Federal Reserve System, Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget  of  the
US Senate on 21/1/97.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear here today.
In  just  a  few  weeks  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  will  submit  its  semiannual  report  on  monetary
policy  to  the  Congress.  That  report  and  my  accompanying  testimony  will  cover  in  detail  our
assessment of the outlook for the U.S. economy and the challenges facing monetary policy. This
morning, I would like to offer some personal perspectives on the current economic situation.
I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  overall  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy  has
continued  to  surpass  most  forecasters’  expectations.  The  current  cyclical  upswing  is  now
approaching  six  years  in  duration,  and  the  economy  has  retained  considerable  vigor,  with  few
signs of the imbalances and inflationary tensions that have disrupted past expansions. Although
the data for the fourth quarter are still incomplete, it is apparent that real gross domestic product
posted an increase in the neighborhood of 3 percent over the four quarters of 1996. This increase
may  seem  quite  moderate  compared  with  the  gains  registered  in  some  earlier  years  of  the
postwar  period;  however,  at  a  time  when  the  working-age  population  is  expanding  relatively
slowly  and  unemployment  is  already  low,  this  economic  growth  is  appreciable  indeed.  It  was
enough  to  generate  more  than  2½  million  new  payroll  jobs  last  year  and  to  cause  the
unemployment rate to edge down to 5¼ percent -- a figure roughly matching the low of the last
cyclical  upswing,  in  the  late  1980s.  But,  in  contrast  to  that  earlier  period,  we  have  not
experienced a broad increase in inflation; in  fact,  by  some  important  measures  of  price  trends,
inflation actually slowed a bit in 1996.
The balance and solidity of the expansion last year can be seen in the composition
of the growth. Notably, consumers appear to have been rather conservative in their spending. In
some instances, they may have been constrained by the debt-service burdens accumulated over
the  previous  few  years;  but  in  the  aggregate,  households  experienced  an  enormous  further
accretion  of  net  worth  as  the  stock  market  continued  to  climb  at  a  breathtaking  rate.  Judging
from historical patterns, such an increase in wealth might have inspired households to spend an
enlarged  share  of  their  current  income;  but,  if  we  take  the  available  data  at  face  value,
households  appear  instead  to  have  set  aside  a  greater  share  of  their  income  for  financial
investment.  Perhaps  Americans  are  finally  becoming  conscious  of  the  need  to  accumulate
additional assets to ensure not only that they can handle temporary interruptions in employment
but also that they will have the wherewithal to enjoy a lengthy retirement down the road.
Be that as it may, the increased flow of private savings -- and a reduced call upon
those  savings  by  the  Treasury  --  helped  to  fund  substantial  increases  in  fixed  investment  last
year.  Homebuilding  activity  was  up  considerably;  notably,  single-family  housing  starts  were
robust once again and helped to push the nation’s homeownership rate to a fifteen-year high. In
addition,  business  fixed  investment  posted  another  strong  advance.  Firms  acquired  large
amounts of computing and telecommunications equipment in particular, seeking to enhance the
efficiency of their operations as well as their overall productive capacity. At the same time, they
accumulated inventories rather cautiously: Stock-to-sales ratios, which had  risen  in  1995,  were
in  many  cases  near  historic  lows  as  of  November  1996,  the  most  recent  month  for  which
statistical information is available.
The growing economy had beneficial effects  on  the  finances  of  many  states  and
localities, which consequently could spend more on needed infrastructure and vital services and,
BIS Review   5/1997
- 2 -
in some instances, trim taxes. Of course, overall  government  sector  purchases  were  held  down
by  the  ongoing  efforts  to  reduce  the  federal  deficit.  It  clearly  was  private  demand  that  drove
economic growth last year.
To be more specific, it was domestic private demand that did so, for net exports
fell, on balance, in 1996. The volume of goods and services we sold abroad  grew  appreciably,
despite moderate economic expansion by our major trading partners, but our imports continued
to grow at a rapid clip. In fact, imports provided a safety valve in a U.S. economy marked by a
high degree of resource utilization.
I’ve already noted that our unemployment rate  reached  the  lowest  level  in  some
time.  Moreover,  throughout  the  year,  we  heard  reports  from  around  the  country  that  qualified
workers  were  in  tight  supply.  Although  increases  in  hourly  compensation  remained  relatively
subdued -- an important fact to which I shall return in a few moments -- they did become more
sizable,  and  they  raised  unit  costs  when  employers  were  unable  to  enhance  productivity
commensurately.  Thanks  to  the  very  substantial  additions  to  facilities  in  the  past  few  years,
physical capacity in the manufacturing sector was not greatly strained.
The  question  is,  of  course,  where  do  we  go  from  here?  Can  we  continue  to
achieve significant gains in real activity while avoiding inflationary excesses? Because monetary
policy works with a lag, it is not the conditions prevailing today that are critical but rather those
likely to prevail six to twelve months, or even longer, from now. Hence, as difficult as it is, we
must  arrive  at  some  judgment  about  the  most  probable  direction  of  the  economy  and  the
distribution of risks around that expectation.
Fortunately,  economic  events  are  not  wholly  random  and  unforecastable.  There
are  certain  principles,  and  certain  empirical  regularities  in  behavioral  relations,  that  we  can
follow  with  some  degree  of  confidence.  For  example,  capital  investment  responds  in  a
predictable  way  to  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  economy,  expected  profitability,  and  the  cost  of
capital.  Similarly,  housing  activity,  with  some  qualifications,  moves  inversely  with  mortgage
rates. And the largest component of final demand, personal consumption expenditures, generally
follows income over time. Many of these relationships are embedded in the traditional notion of
the  business  cycle  developed  by  Wesley  Clair  Mitchell  three-quarters  of  a  century  ago  and
worked  out  with  Arthur  F.  Burns,  one  of  my  predecessors,  in  the  definitive  tome,  Measuring
Business Cycles. Their insights remain relevant today.
Even so, each cycle tends to have its own identifying characteristic. For example,
in the late 1980s and the recessionary period of the early 1990s, the economy was dominated by
the sharp fall in the market value of commercial real estate; because such real estate served as a
major source of loan collateral, the drop in its value had a profoundly restrictive influence on the
willingness  and  ability  of  commercial  banks  to  lend.  As  you  may  recall,  at  that  time,  I
characterized the economy as trying to advance in the face of fifty-mile-an-hour headwinds. The
severe  credit  restraint  was  only  grudgingly  responsive  to  the  extended  efforts  of  the  Federal
Reserve to ease monetary conditions.
Similarly, the dramatic rise of inflation and of inflation expectations in the 1970s
was  key  in  shaping  the  cyclical  patterns  of  that  period.  One  manifestation  was  the  impetus  to
spending on houses, cars, and other consumer durables from buyers’ efforts to beat future price
increases.  Countering  this  inflation  required  a  major  monetary  tightening,  which  moved  both
nominal and real interest rates up sharply and led to substantial contractions in housing and other
interest-sensitive sectors in the early 1980s.
BIS Review   5/1997
- 3 -
In  contrast,  as  I’ve  mentioned  several  times  to  the  Congress  over  the  past  few
years, perhaps the dominant characteristic of the current expansion is low inflation and quiescent
inflation  expectations,  which  have  helped  create  a  financial  environment  conducive  to  strong
capital spending and longer-range planning generally. I emphasized this point in our Humphrey-
Hawkins testimony of a year ago. Since then, increases in hourly compensation as measured by
the employment cost index have continued  to  fall  far  short  of  what  they  would  have  been  had
historical  relationships  between  compensation  gains  and  the  degree  of  labor  market  tightness
held.
Reaching some judgment about the reasons for this departure from past patterns is
important.  As  I  see  it,  heightened  job  insecurity  explains  a  significant  part  of  the  restraint  on
compensation and the consequent muted price inflation.
Surveys of workers have highlighted this extraordinary state of affairs. In 1991, at
the bottom of the recession, a survey of workers at large firms indicated that 25 percent feared
being  laid  off.  In  1996,  despite  the  sharply  lower  unemployment  rate  and  the  demonstrably
tighter labor market,  the  same  survey  organization  found  that  46  percent  were  fearful  of  a  job
layoff.
The continued reluctance of workers to leave their jobs to seek other employment
as  the  labor  market  has  tightened  provides  further  evidence  of  such  concern,  as  does  the
tendency toward longer labor union contracts. For many decades, contracts rarely exceeded three
years.  Today,  one  can  point  to  five-  and  six-year  contracts  --  contracts  that  are  commonly
characterized by an emphasis on job security and that involve only modest wage increases. The
low level of work stoppages of recent years also attests to concern about job security.
Thus,  the  willingness  of  workers  to  trade  off  smaller  increases  in  wages  for
greater  job  security  seems  to  be  reasonably  well-documented  for  this  particular  business-cycle
expansion.  The  unanswered  question  is  why  this  insecurity  has  persisted  even  as  the  labor
market  has,  by  all  objective  measures,  tightened  considerably.  One  possibility  is  the  ongoing
concern of workers about job skill obsolescence. The reality of this obsolescence is evidenced by
the marked expansion of on-the-job training programs, especially in technical areas, in many of
the nation’s corporations. No longer can one expect to obtain all of one’s lifetime job skills with
a  high-school  or  college  diploma.  Indeed,  continuing  adult  education  is  perceived  to  be
increasingly necessary to retain a job.
Certainly,  there  are  other  possible  explanations  of  the  softness  in  compensation
growth  in  the  past  few  years.  The  sharp  deceleration  in  health  care  costs,  of  course,  is  cited
frequently.  Another  possibility  is  the  heightened  pressure  on  firms  and  their  workers  in
industries  that  compete  internationally.  Domestic  deregulation  has  had  similar  effects  on  the
intensity of competitive forces in some industries. In addition, the continued decline in the share
of the private workforce in labor unions has likely made wages more responsive to market forces
-- indeed, the converse is also true in that the new competitive realities have in many instances
undermined union strength. In any event, although I do not doubt that all these explanations are
relevant, I would be surprised if any were dominant.
Another  potential  explanation  is  that  persistently 
is
constraining wage increases. Historical evidence clearly indicates that price inflation is a factor
in wage change. But, if the causation is running mainly from product markets, where prices are
set, to labor markets, where wages are set, then we would expect to see some squeeze on profit
margins. Clearly, this is not the case at present. Rather, owing in part to the subdued behavior of
low  price 
inflation 
BIS Review   5/1997
- 4 -
wages, profits and rates of return on capital have risen to high levels. The high rates of return, in
turn,  seem  to  be  inducing  competitive  pressures  that  limit  the  ability  of  firms  to  raise  prices
relative to their underlying cost structures because they fear that competitors anxious to capture
a greater share of the market will not follow suit. Thus, the evidence seems more consistent with
the view that wage restraint is damping price increases than the other way around.
If  the  job  insecurity  paradigm  that  I  have  outlined  is  the  key,  then  we  must
recognize  that,  as  I  indicated  in  last  February’s  Humphrey-Hawkins  testimony,  “suppressed
wage cost growth as a consequence of job insecurity can be carried only so far. At some point in
the  future,  the  trade-off  of  subdued  wage  growth  for  job  security  has  to  come  to  an  end.”  In
short, this implies that even if the level of real wages remains permanently lower as a result of
the  experience  of  the  past  few  years,  the  relatively  modest  wage  gains  we’ve  seen  are  a
transitional rather than a lasting phenomenon. The unknown is how long the transition will last.
Indeed, the recent pickup in some measures of wages suggests that the transition may already be
running its course. If so, the important question from a monetary policy point of view is whether
prospective labor market conditions will be consistent with the maintenance of satisfactory price
performance.
I would like to  conclude  with  a  brief  discussion  of  some  issues  of  measurement
and economic data that may be useful as you begin your deliberations on the 1998 budget. One
issue you  will  have  to  grapple  with  is  the  growing  consensus  that  the  consumer  price  index  --
and  other  broad  price  measures  that  rely  heavily  on  CPI  data  in  their  construction  --  are
substantially overstating changes in the true cost of living. From your perspective, one important
implication  of  the  CPI  bias  is  that  it  creates  an  automatic  and  presumably  unintended  real
increase in social security and other indexed federal benefits and a real cut in indexed individual
income  taxes  each  year.  Less  widely  recognized  is  the  fact  that,  for  a  given  level  of  nominal
spending, the upward bias in the CPI in many cases is mirrored in a downward bias in estimates
of  real  spending;  this  muddies  the  interpretation  of  both  recent  economic  developments  and
longer-run trends in our economic performance.
Several researchers have attempted to quantify the bias in the CPI and other broad
measures  of  prices.  One  set  of  studies  has  examined  the  detailed  microstatistical  evidence  on
price measurement. The Boskin Commission drew heavily on  these  studies  and  concluded  that
the CPI is currently overstating changes in the true cost of living by approximately 1 percentage
point  per  year.  In  addition  to  some  technical  factors  associated  with  its  construction,  the  CPI
overstates inflation because of the slow introduction of new products and inadequate adjustment
for quality improvements.
Recently,  researchers  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  have  looked  at  the
measurement issue from a macroeconomic perspective. This analysis, which questions  whether
the pattern implied by the published price, output, and productivity statistics makes sense, also
suggests that the inflation rate is overstated. In particular, the research finds that measured real
output and productivity in the service sector of the economy are implausibly weak, given that the
return  to  the  owners  of  these  businesses  that  is  implicit  in  our  aggregate  statistics  on  GDP
apparently  has  been  well-maintained.  The  published  data  indicate  that  the  level  of  output  per
hour in several service-producing industries has been falling for more than two decades -- that is,
that firms in these industries have been getting less and less efficient for more than twenty years.
This  pattern  is  highly  unlikely.  Price  mismeasurement  seems  to  be  the  most  probable
explanation  of  the  data  anomalies,  and  the  order  of  magnitude  appears  consistent  with  the
microstatistical results.
BIS Review   5/1997
- 5 -
The evidence that inflation has been slower and that real  growth  has  been  faster
than  the  official  measures  indicate  is  welcome,  in  part  because  it  suggests  that  the  nation’s
current level of  economic  well-being  is  higher  than  we  had  thought.  But  I  want  to  make  clear
that revising our historical estimates of real growth to incorporate better price data would have
no  material  effect  on  measures  of  the  degree  of  resource  utilization,  because  such  a  revision
implies faster growth in potential output, as well as actual output; accordingly, it does not alter
the relationship between resource utilization and inflation. Nor does it change the outlook for the
federal  budget  deficit,  apart  from  any  modifications  to  the  indexing  formulas  for  entitlements
and income taxes.
Certainly, the judgment that aggregate productivity has been growing faster than
indicated  by  the  official  statistics  seems  reasonable  in  light  of  the  significant  business
restructurings and extraordinary improvements in technology in recent  years.  I  do  not  mean  to
imply,  however,  that  we  should  assume  that  the  full  productivity  gain  from  information
technology  has  already  been  reaped.  Clearly,  it  takes  some  time  for  firms  to  adopt  production
techniques that translate a major new technology into increased output. In an intriguing parallel,
electric motors in the late nineteenth century were well-known as a technology but were initially
integrated into production systems that were designed for steam-driven power plants. Not until
the  gradual  conversion  of  previously  vertical  factories  into  horizontal  facilities,  mainly  in  the
1920s, were firms able to take full advantage of the synergies implicit in the electric dynamo and
thus  achieve  dramatic  increases  in  productivity.  Analogously,  not  all  of  today’s  production
systems can be easily integrated with new information and communication technologies.  Some
existing equipment cannot be controlled by computer, for example. Thus, the full exploitation of
even the current generation of information and communication equipment may occur over quite
a few years and only after a considerably updated stock of physical capital has been put in place.
While such a scenario is quite plausible, we cannot be certain when, or if, it will
occur.  Thus,  we  must  be  vigilant  to  ensure  that  our  economy  remains  sufficiently  flexible  for
entrepreneurial  initiatives.  And  we  must  continue  our  efforts  to  further  enhance  productivity
growth  by  raising  national  saving  and  spurring  capital  formation.  Attaining  a  higher  national
saving  rate  quite  soon  is  crucial,  particularly  in  view  of  the  anticipated  shift  in  the  nation’s
demographics and associated pressures on federal retirement and health programs in the first few
decades  of  the  next  century.  Reducing  the  size  of  the  federal  budget  deficit,  and  over  time
moving the unified budget into surplus, would go a substantial way in that direction.
BIS Review   5/1997
