Mr.  Fazio  discusses  the  current  situation  as  regards  the  prevention  and
repression of money laundering in the financial system in Italy   Statement by the Governor
of the Bank of Italy, Dott. Antonio Fazio, before the Chambre of Commerce of the Senate of the
Italian Republic in Rome on 25/2/97.
In  my  statement  to  this  Committee  in  October  1994  I  focused  on  the  new  legal
framework  for  finance  and  credit,  the  role  of  the  supervisory  authorities  and  intermediaries  in
combatting illegal activities, and cooperation with the governmental authorities directly involved
in the fight against organized crime.
In  the  last  two  years  the  broad  context  has  changed  and  evolved.  Progress  has
been  made  in  developing  the  analysis  of  financial  offences,  instruments  for  preventing  and
repressing them.
The investment services Directive has been transposed; the law against usury has
been approved. The cooperation between the Bank of Italy, intermediaries and law enforcement
and judicial authorities has been further strengthened.
1.
Adverse  effects  of  criminal  activity  and  money  laundering  on  the  economy  and
finance
My  contribution  today  takes  account  of  the  experience  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and
that of the UIC;  since  1991  the  latter  has  been  entrusted  by  law  with  special  tasks  in  the  anti-
money-laundering field.
The  repercussions  of  criminal  activity  on  the  economy  and  finance  involve  the
supervisory  function  of  the  central  bank  and  its  responsibility  for  safeguarding  monetary
stability. Money is a typically and purely fiduciary value. It is indispensable that citizens should
be aware that the State, through its institutions, guarantees the security and prompt execution of
exchanges; financial enterprises must be able to operate in  an  efficient,  correct  and  transparent
manner.
In  the  first  place  it  is  necessary  to  prevent  financial  resources  of  illicit  origin
from  entering  the  legitimate  economy  through  the  creation  of  new  intermediaries  or  the
acquisition of existing ones. Analogous, and equally serious, problems, exist in other  sectors,
notably the distributive trades. It is necessary to ensure that illicit resources cannot influence the
ordinary course of financial intermediation.
The  proper  functioning  of  the  market  requires  compliance  with  fundamental
ethical  rules.  Correct  behaviour  is  an  economic  value  in  itself;  it  enhances  the  strength  and
security of economic agents.
The  existence  of  economic  agents  and  structures  in  collusion  with  organized
crime  profoundly  modifies  the  mechanisms  of  the  market  with  respect  to  rules  and  objectives,
distorts competition.
The  gap  between  the  level  of  economic  development  in  the  various  regions  of
Italy  is  due  to  a  considerable  extent  to  inadequate  economic  and  social  infrastructure;
shortcomings  in  the  public  administration  and  the  slowness  of  the  judicial  system  are  other
contributory factors.
Organized  crime  exploits  the  situation  of  underemployment  in  the  depressed
areas;  to  the  socially  weaker  members  of  the  community  it  appears  as  an  economic  force  and
even as a system of values, which undermines ethical principles and social solidarity.
It  is  possible  to  attack  criminal  organizations  in  the  phase  of  infiltrating  money
into the legal financial circuits. This task is the responsibility of the law enforcement authorities
and  those  entrusted  with  the  control  of  the  financial  system;  it  requires  full  and  convinced
support on the part of agents and intermediaries.
The  supervisory  authorities  of  the  leading  industrial  countries  are  aware  of  the
threat to the integrity and stability of intermediaries posed by illicit capital. Increasing efforts are
BIS Review   39/1997
- 2 -
being  made  to  prepare  weapons  and  defences  with  which  to  prevent  contagion  by  criminal
activities and the related instability of financial systems.
2.
The international dimension of the money laundering problem
The  removal  of  the  restrictions  and  controls  on  capital  movements  and  the
emergence  of  a  global  market  for  credit,  foreign  exchange  and  securities  have  undoubtedly
facilitated the international laundering of the proceeds of criminal activities.
The size of the phenomenon is difficult to gauge, but certainly considerable.
The authorities of the leading countries have defined a set of measures that should
be embodied in all their legal systems in order to make prevention and repression more effective.
The aim is to achieve uniform behaviour in the face of the phenomenon.
The recommendations of the international Financial Task Force set up within the
Group of Seven and Community Directive 1991/308 contain clear guidelines and prescriptions,
especially for EU countries.
International organizations are seeking to take more direct steps, in the first place
with  respect  to  countries  that  appear  reluctant  to  introduce  anti-money-laundering  provisions
into their legal systems.
The  effectiveness  of  such  provisions  is  reduced  by  the  tolerant  attitude  towards
money  laundering  in  some  countries,  the  so-called  off  shore  centres,  a  classification  that
stretches to include independent territories and states in various continents.
The protection offered by banking secrecy that is impenetrable even for criminal
investigators, shortcomings in legislation or the lack thereof, problems in cooperating with local
judicial authorities and difficulty in supervising intermediaries make it particularly easy in some
financial centres to launder money of illicit origin.
In  the  case  of  branches  and  subsidiaries  of  international  banks  located  in  such
centres,  the  controls  of  the  parent  bank  and  the  supervisory  authorities  are  sometimes  made
impossible or at any rate difficult. Since 1992 the Bank of Italy has adopted a restrictive stance
to Italian banks setting up establishments in some off-shore centres; no new establishments have
been authorized.
In  this  field  the  Italian  regulatory  framework  reflects  the  progress  made  by  the
agreements among the Group of Ten countries.
The choice of such financial centres for the laundering  of  illicit  proceeds  is  also
due  to  factors  that  in  any  case  attract  financial  resources  and  intermediaries,  including
particularly favourable tax regimes.
The use of electronic money in all its various forms has attracted the attention of
supervisory authorities to the vulnerable points these new instruments introduce into the system
of  defence  against  money  laundering.  The  nature,  speed  and  volume  of  transactions  tend  to
hinder the detection and reconstruction of anomalous financial operations. The greatest concern
arises  in  connection  with  the  issue  of  electronic  money  by  financial  businesses  not  subject  to
supervision.
Awareness of the seriousness of the problems has stimulated the renewed drive by
the  international  community  to  react  in  several  directions  with  measures  aimed  at  fighting  the
circulation  of  funds  deriving  from  criminal  activities  at  the  level  of  supervision  and  tax
harmonization.
One  route  to  limit  the  flows  of  dirty  money  towards  lax  financial  centres  is  to
require the financial institutions of countries where legislation is adequate to report transactions
lacking an obvious licit economic motive in which the counterparty is located in a country with
inadequate defences.
The top priority must be to improve the quality of supervision and the reliability
of  financial  intermediaries.  Steps  are  being  taken  in  this  direction  by  the  Basle  Banking
BIS Review   39/1997
Supervision Committee, which is working to promote the adoption of minimum standards in the
emerging countries.
The  problem  of  tax  harmonization  in  Europe  and  the  OECD  countries  remains
highly topical. It has been raised on several occasions in the Group of Seven and the European
Union and there appears to be renewed recognition of its importance on the part of the leading
countries. The OECD is carrying out analyses, but progress is slow and laborious.
The  Republic  of  San  Marino  introduced  a  number  of  statutory  provisions  on
money laundering in the spring of 1996. A bilateral committee is currently evaluating the degree
of conformity with EU and Italian standards.
3.
Illegal finance and usury
In  Italy,  despite  the  large  increase  in  the  number  of  bank  branches,  there
continues  to  be  a  far  from  negligible  area  of  unauthorized  financial  activity,  in  terms  of  both
lending and fund-raising.
Usury feeds on this situation and is a cause for alarm. As I had occasion to point
out  in  my  concluding  remarks  to  the  Bank’s  general  meeting  on  31  May  1996,  usury  is  a
complex phenomenon and first and foremost a problem of public order.
Usury  preys  on  households,  as  well  as  small  commercial  and  artisan  businesses,
which more often than not are no longer considered creditworthy. It often provides the means for
organized crime to infiltrate the legitimate productive economy. The present difficult phase that
the economy is passing through increases the risk of the phenomenon spreading.
Banks, especially local and cooperative banks, have been spurred by the Bank of
Italy to pay increased attention to the needs of smaller firms and guide them towards appropriate
forms of financial planning.
Numerous initiatives are designed to simplify dealings with customers and speed
up  decisions  on  loan  applications.  In  this  respect  the  code  of  conduct  prepared  by  the  Italian
Bankers’  Association  (ABI)  and  the  protocols  between  intermediaries  and  local  businessmen’s
associations are of particular importance. Funds have been earmarked  by  some  large  banks  for
the financing of persons in temporary difficulty and consequently exposed to the risk of usury.
These  funds  supplement  those  of  a  public  nature  provided  for  in  the  new  law  for  purposes  of
prevention and solidarity, which will be activated this year.
In the background there remains the need to educate households and firms to use
money  and  financing  responsibly.  Prevention  calls  for  full  awareness  of  the  dangers  of
borrowing from illegal sources of finance.
The new law on usury appears to be appropriately based on an overall view of the
phenomenon. There nonetheless remain causes for concern, as has been frequently pointed out,
concerning  the  possible  adverse  consequences  of  introducing  “threshold  rate”  for  regulated
intermediaries. As I put it on another occasion, “The specification of a usurious rate of interest is
intended to provide an objective yardstick for determining the existence  of  a  crime.  The  limits
established  and  their  application  to  regulated  intermediaries  may  push  up  interest  rates  for
smaller loans, lead to the rationing of credit to marginal, weaker customers.”
The Bank of Italy and the UIC are engaged in the complex task of gathering data
on the interest rates charged by banks and other financial intermediaries for different size classes
and types of loans. A start has been made on analysing the information collected with a view to
the publication of the related ministerial decree. The Bank of Italy and the UIC are committed to
providing the support needed to ensure a correct understanding and use of the data gathered.
The  law  requires  every  form  of  financial  intermediation  to  be  inserted  in  a
predetermined  legal  framework.  The  territorial  control  entrusted  to  governmental  authorities,
including the Bank of Italy for the matters assigned to it, is of fundamental importance.
BIS Review   39/1997
- 4 -
Banks that learn of the existence of unauthorized organizations notify the Bank of
Italy.  In  turn  the  Bank  provides  feedback  for  the  purpose  of  prevention  and  informs  the
competent authorities.
More decisive  steps  have  been  taken  to  forestall  and  punish  improper  behaviour
by  employees  of  financial  intermediaries.  Safeguards  have  been  introduced  to  protect  against
false representations to banks and breach of trust in the management of securities portfolios with
the aim of contributing to the regularity and transparency of dealings between intermediaries and
their customers.
4.
The activity of the Bank of Italy in preventing and repressing money laundering
Even  unwitting  involvement  by  an  intermediary  in  circulating  money  of  illicit
provenance will undermine its sound and prudent management in the end.
A  particularly  delicate  moment  is  the  market-entry  of  new  intermediaries,
especially the opening of new banks.
The Bank of Italy’s Supervision Department carries out controls on market entry;
in  particular,  it  examines  ownership  structure  and  organizational  arrangements,  and  verifies
compliance with the integrity and experience requirements for corporate officers.
In  the  three  years  1994-96,  75  applications  to  open  new  banks  were  considered
and  57  approved;  of  the  18  non-approvals,  16  concerned  Southern  Italy.  Authorization  was
denied on account of the presence of corporate officers or owners who could not be trusted for
the  purposes  of  sound  and  prudent  management  and,  in  some  instances,  were  suspected  of
collusion  with  organized  crime.  These  decisions  were  upheld  in  administrative  appeal
proceedings.
Supervisory action is performed continuously through documentary control of the
operational  indicators  and  frequent  meetings  with  banks’  officers.  On-site  verifications  are
carried out regularly and systematically. These inspections supplement the documentary controls
and are designed to assess banks’ ability to engage in the collection and investment of savings in
a correct manner, in accordance with criteria of sound and prudent management and all the legal
requirements.
Inspections  are  not  specifically  designed  to  discover  possible  violations  of
criminal law. If a case of irregular conduct is found, its technical and legal aspects are carefully
examined. Cases that may constitute crimes are resorted to the judicial authorities.
For  its  own  aims  of  banking  and  financial  supervision,  the  Bank  of  Italy  has
conducted 563 inspections in the last three years. Sixty per cent of Italy’s banks were examined
- 68  per  cent  of  all  those  established  in  the  South  and  57  per  cent  of  those  in  the  Centre  and
North.
Following a number of these inspections the Bank of Italy submitted proposals to
the  Treasury  Minister  for  the  adoption  of  disciplinary  measures  for  serious  operational
irregularities  involving  large  capital  losses.  In  particular,  25  banks  were  put  into  special
administration,  which  entails  the  dissolution  of  their  boards  of  directors  and  auditors.  Fifteen
banks were put into compulsory administrative liquidation.
The penal proceedings  now  under  way  will  clarify  whether  there  were  instances
of money laundering or collusion with criminal organizations.
The Bank submitted proposals to the Minister for pecuniary sanctions to be levied
against 2,779 officers of more than 200 intermediaries.
The  anti-laundering  rules  - Law  197/1997 -  rely  on  the  faithful  collaboration  of
intermediaries. This takes the form of preparing a “trail” of the transactions they have effected,
for  use  in  possible  investigations,  and  of  reporting  on  any  suspicions  provoked  by  specific
transactions on the technical and financial plane.
The rules:
BIS Review   39/1997
 set limits to the use of cash,
• prohibit the making of payments by unauthorized intermediaries,
•
require  the  identification  of  customers  and  the  registration  of  significant
transactions, and
• make it compulsory to report suspicious transactions.
The 
regular  performance  of  credit  and 
financial  activity  depends  on
intermediaries’ having adequate information on every customer.
To  assist  in  the  identification  of  suspicious  transactions,  the  Bank  of  Italy  has
published  a  “decalogue”  systematically  setting  out  examples  of  anomalies  whose  presence
requires the various aspects of the transaction to be scrutinzied and, possibly, a report to be filed.
Intermediaries are required to consider the objective features of a transaction and
to  compare  them  with  the  characteristics  of  the  person  making  it  in  order  to  detect  possible
anomalies.  Standardized  schemas  cannot  take  the  place  of  careful  transaction  analysis  and
assessment by intermediaries’ employees. The law calls for this kind of evaluation.
The difficulties initially encountered by the financial system are being overcome
and  the  flow  of  reports  has  increased  considerably.  In  1996  the  Finance  Police  received  3,075
reports,  most  of  them  from  banks.  There  is  growing  understanding  and  support  for  the  law’s
objectives among intermediaries and operators. It remains necessary to ensure the confidentiality
of  the  procedure  and,  for  reasons  of  personal  safety,  the  anonymity  of  the  persons  making
reports.
5.
The activity of the UIC
The UlC’s essential, traditional tasks are the management of the foreign reserves
and the collection and processing of the statistics needed to compile Italy’s balance of payments
and the related publications.
In  1991  Law  197  assigned  the  UIC  a  central  role  in  administrative  action  to
combat  money  laundering.  The  UIC,  in  agreement  with  the  competent  supervisory  authorities,
verifies  intermediaries’  compliance  with  the  anti-laundering  rules,  keeps  the  register  of
companies  in  the  financial  sector,  and  does  statistical  studies  using  the  aggregated  data  drawn
from the databases of authorized intermediaries.
There were 21,318 financial companies in the register at the end of last year. Only
1,604 of them did business with the public; the rest were groups’ dedicated financial companies
(the great majority) or loan underwriting consortia.
In  1996  the  UIC  issued  some  500  notices  to  companies  regarding  initial  or
subsequent  failure  to  satisfy  the  requirements  for  entry  in  the  register  or  findings  of  serious
violations of law. Among companies that do business with the public, which are potentially more
exposed to the risk of being used for illicit purposes, there were 120 deletions from the register
and 72  new  listings.  For  the  financial  sector  as  a  whole,  in  the  three  years  from  1994  to  1996
there were 3.803 de-listings and 1,571 new listings.
In  1995  a  survey  was  made  of  all  the  banks’  computerized  data  collection  and
database management procedures.
By  the  end  of  1996  72  inspections  aimed  at  verifying  compliance  with  the  anti-
laundering rules had been completed: these led to 40 reports being sent to the judicial authorities
and 36 to the Treasury Minister for administrative infractions.
The main deficiencies found during the inspections were attributable primarily to
organizational problems involving computerized procedures and inadequate internal controls.
The  UIC  is  charged  with  monitoring  the  aggregated  data  originating  from  the
company’s  single  databases,  with  a  view  to  bringing  out  anomalies  that  may  signal  money
laundering. The anomalies are detected from among the mass of available data on the basis of a
grid of essentially statistical criteria.
BIS Review   39/1997
- 6 -
Data  are  collected  from  2,000  authorized  intermediaries.  The  number  of
operations  subject  to  aggregation  is  more  than  30  million  a  month,  including  some  10  million
cash transactions.
This is a completely new field, and not just in Italy, and the UIC, in contact with
leading research centres, has begun to experiment in depth with new methodologies designed to
detect anomalous financial flows. Once the initial results are available the UIC will provide the
competent bodies with indications that can be used in investigative activity.
Careful  methodological  consideration  has  brought  out  the  need  for  a  deeper
scientific  analysis  of  the  nature  and  manner  of  the  links  between  the  economy  and  organized
crime.
Representatives  of  the  police  forces  and  the  judiciary,  together  with  academic
specialists, are collaborating with the newly formed “Anti-Money-Laundering Observatory”. For
now this body is strictly informal. It is a research facility established to investigate key aspects
of  the  economy,  organized  crime  and  money  laundering  in  particular,  with  a  view  to  keeping
preventive  strategies  abreast  of  the  evolution  of  criminal  techniques  and  the  spread  of  the
phenomenon to new sectors.
6.
Collaboration with the judicial authorities
In  the  last  three  years  the  Supervision  Department  has  sent  reports  on  92
intermediaries to the criminal justice authorities. A steadily growing number of requests for data
and technical  information  are  being  addressed  to  the  Bank  of  Italy.  Around  1,000  requests  for
information  and  documentation  have  been  handled,  and  officers  of  the  Bank  have  testified  in
185 cases.
Experts  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  UIC  are  increasingly  engaged  in  technical
advisory tasks: one fifth of the staff of the Central Supervision Inspectorate, that is to say some
30 officers, are assigned to such duties full-time. Major assistance is provided to the judicial and
investigating authorities in examining aspects of the various types of money laundering and for
refresher courses on technical points of the phenomena that may come under investigation.
There  is  intense  collaboration  with  the  law-enforcement  agencies,  especially  the
Finance Police, and with the Racket and Usury Bureau.
The Bureau of Antimafia Investigation is kept up to date on serious management
irregularities found at intermediaries operating in the regions most affected by organized crime.
Contacts  are  under  way  to  develop  collaboration  with  the  National  Antimafia  Bureau,  for  a
better knowledge of money laundering techniques and for the exchange of information.
Under the legislation in force, the judicial authorities inform the Governor of the
Bank of Italy, for the initiatives within his sphere of competence, when there is good reason to
think that banks are involved in money laundering
Cases of possible fraud or money laundering connected with foreign undertakings
established  in  countries  which  lack  reliable  controls  are  more  and  more  frequently  coming  to
the central  bank’s  attention.  These  are  the  subject  of  exchanges  of  information  with  domestic
and foreign authorities.
7.
The new shape of anti-money-laundering legislation
The  current  provisions  against  money  laundering  are  not  yet  the  outcome  of
systematic  legislative  intervention  corresponding  to  a  single  logic.  They  are  the  result  of
accretion  over  time,  as  was  underscored  in  the  chapter  of  the  Bank’s  1995  Annual  Report  on
supervisory activity.
According to the Financial  Action  Task  Force,  the  only  deficiencies  in  the  rules
adopted in Italy are lack of full confidentiality of reports and failure to provide for a body that
centralizes  reports.  The  active  collaboration  requested  of  intermediaries  is  not  protected  by
BIS Review   39/1997
adequate  safeguards  for  secrecy  in  reporting  suspicious  transactions.  This  entails  obvious
dangers for the safety of operators and creates obstacles to unreserved collaboration.
The  occasion  for  rectifying  these  deficiencies  is  the  delegation  of  legislative
power  under  Article  15  of  Law  52  of  6  February  1996,  which  establishes  the  criteria  for
completing  the  transposition  into  Italian  law  of  Community  Directive  308/1991  concerning
measures  to  combat  money  laundering.  Although  the  Directive  takes  the  approach  that
laundering must be fought primarily with penal instruments, it underscores the fundamental role
of collaboration by the financial system and the supervisory authorities.
Policymaking  in  the  fight  against  money  laundering  is  a  prerogative  of  the
Government.  From  a  strategic  point  of  view,  the  matter  is  essentially  financial,  and  so  it  is
natural for the central role to be entrusted to the Treasury Minister.
According to the orientations that are emerging, the basic approach is, correctly,
to keep the realm of financial controls distinct from that of investigative activity while ensuring
the  necessary  coordination.  The  UIC  would  be  made  responsible  for  financial  analysis  and
administrative  control  for  the  prevention  of  money  laundering,  to  capitalize  on  the  financial
system’s expertise in the fight against laundering.
The  solution  respects  the  distinction  between  administrative  and  investigative
activity. There must be no mingling of these roles.
Reports of suspicious transactions would be routed through the UIC, which would
subject  them  to  technical  examination  and  supplement  the  information  with  the  aid  of  the
sectoral  supervisory  authorities,  for  the  purpose  of  immediate  transmission  to  the  law-
enforcement  authorities.  The  confidentiality  of  sources  would  be  safeguarded  even  during  an
ensuing criminal investigation.
The  same  logic  of  coordination  between  different  functions  would  be  affirmed
with regard to the significant findings of the statistical studies performed by the UIC.
The  drafting  of  the  codified  law  provided  for  by  Law  52/1996  will  make  it
possible  to  put  prevention  before  repression  and  to  restrict  penal  sanctions  to  conduct  that  is
actually deviant with respect to standard operating practice. It is also necessary to specify other
activities to which the anti-laundering requirements should be extended. These include security
courier services, debt collection services and even some professional activities that are involved
in various types of circulation of wealth in the form of securities and real estate.
Honourable Members of Parliament,
The acquisition by organized crime of instruments serving to control finance is an
especially serious matter in that it can become a sort of multiplier of the criminals’ strength and
of the resulting contamination of the economy.
As  far  as  the  creation  of  new  banks  or  the  acquisition  of  existing  ones  is
concerned, we are fully confident in the efficacy of prevention.
Intercepting  illicit  capital  during  ordinary  operations  appears  more  problematic.
As  a  rule,  criminals  cannot  avoid  using  the  normal  financial  channels,  and  the  payment  and
funds transfer system operated by the banks is a natural conduit for funds of illegal provenance.
These are a very small share of the total funds handled by the banks, so that identifying them is
difficult in several respects.
The  collaboration  of  intermediaries  and  of  their  operating  staff  is  all-important.
Reports  of  suspicious  cases  are  on  the  rise.  Those  who  file  reports  have  to  have  greater
assurances as to their safety and protection.
Transfers of funds linked to illegal activities are becoming substantial in terms of
absolute  value  and  are  tending  to  concentrate  in  particular  regions,  areas  and  intermediaries.
Statistically-based  studies  are  being  conducted  at  the  UIC,  with  promising  results,  to  identify
“clusters” of illicit capital that tend to move systematically from particular areas to others.
BIS Review   39/1997
- 8 -
The Italian banking system is fully aware of the need for an unflagging effort to
detect and eliminate these pathological phenomena and to accept the costs involved.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has recognized the adequacy of Italy’s
legislation. It is necessary for the international community to avoid any tolerance, even tacit, for
those  financial  centres  and  international  banks  that  for  profit-seeking  motives  operate  in
conditions  of  less-than-perfect  transparency.  Such  attitudes  subvert  the  rules  of  correct
competition  and,  through  the  circulation  of  money  of  illegal  provenance,  the  international
economic order itself.
There  must  be  growing  awareness,  extending  beyond  the  circle  of  advanced
countries, of the grave threat that the spread of criminal economic activity poses to the benefits
of trade and financial liberalization.
The  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  UIC  remain  actively  committed  at  the  side  of  the  governmental
authorities  in  providing  the  necessary  collaboration  to  prevent  and  combat  financial  crime,  for
the good of our nation and of the international community.
BIS Review   39/1997
