Bank  of  Japan  presents  its  quarterly  economic  outlook  for  summer  1997
BANK OF JAPAN, QUARTERLY BULLETIN, August 1997 (advance summary).
1.
Japan’s economy continues on a moderate recovery trend.  Production and
income are showing underlying firmness despite the continued reaction to the temporary surge in
demand  ahead  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.    Among  final  demand  items,  public-sector
investment  has  been  on  a  decreasing  trend,  and  housing  investment  has  been  somewhat
lackluster, particularly as a result of the reaction to the rise in demand ahead of the consumption
tax hike.  On the other hand, net exports have recently increased significantly and business fixed
investment  has  been  rising  steadily.    Despite  the  continued  decline  in  demand  which  followed
the rise ahead of the consumption tax hike, particularly in consumer durables, the recovery trend
in personal consumption does not seem to have been hindered.  In these circumstances, industrial
production has been firm and the growth in employees’ income has been rising  steadily,  albeit
moderately.
Price  indices  were  pushed  up  in  April  1997  by  the  consumption  tax  hike,  but
excluding this factor, prices have been stable.  Both quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year changes
in domestic wholesale prices (adjusted for seasonal electricity rates) have been near zero, and the
year-to-year  declines  in  corporate  service  prices  have  narrowed.    The  year-to-year  rises  in
consumer prices (nationwide, excluding perishables) are widening  somewhat,  albeit  by  a  small
margin.  Changes in commercial land prices have varied by type, and residential land prices have
virtually stopped declining.
2.
In  the  financial  markets,  the  overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized)  stayed
slightly below the official discount rate of 0.5 per cent.  The long-term government bond yield
rebounded to near 2.7 per cent in late May, as market uncertainties about the economic outlook
and the Japanese financial system gradually subsided after the second half of April.  However, it
declined to around 2.2 - 2.3 per cent.  Stock prices  rose  to  ¥20,000  -  21,000  in  May  and  June
1997,  and  have  recently  been  fluctuating  without  showing  clear  direction.    In  the  foreign
exchange market, the yen reached ¥127 to the U.S. dollar in early May, but later appreciated and
has recently moved at around ¥113 - 116 to the U.S. dollar.
With  respect  to  the  fund-raising  activities  by  firms,  growth  in  bank  lending
continues to be lackluster but fund-raising through the capital market has been high, particularly
in straight bonds.  Growth in monetary aggregates in terms of M2 + CDs year-to-year  average
outstanding has continued at around 3.0 per cent.
3.
Looking  at  individual  components  of  final  demand,  public-sector
investment will be supported by implementation of public works included  in  the  government’s
supplementary budget for fiscal 1996 for the time being, but it is expected to follow a declining
trend.  Net exports, on the other hand, are likely to continue to be steady even after  the  recent
large  increase.    This  reflects  the  robust  increase  in  overseas  demand,  and  the  recovery  in  the
price  competitiveness  of  Japan’s  manufacturing  industry  supported  by  the  yen’s  depreciation
until early spring.
In  these  circumstances,  corporate  profits  on  the  whole  are  expected  to  continue
improving in fiscal 1997 although with varied strength across sectors.  Business fixed investment
is  also  expected  to  continue  increasing,  mainly  reflecting  1)  increases  in  corporate  profits,
2) further  progress  in  capital  stock  adjustments,  and  3)  the  rise  in  information-related
investment.    However,  because  of  the  remaining  balance-sheet  adjustment  pressures  and  the
BIS Review   /1997
- 2 -
absence  of  leading  industries,  the  increase  in  business  fixed  investment  is  unlikely  to  gather
significant momentum for the time being.
The  growth  in  the  employees’  income  has  been  rising  gradually  owing  to  the
increase  in  bonus  payments  and  the  moderate  recovery  in  employment  growth,  reflecting  the
improvement in the labor market conditions.  This shows that the recovery in the business sector
has  spread  to  the  household  sector.    Thus,  recovery  in  personal  consumption  is  expected  to
continue after the reaction to the rise in demand ahead of the consumption tax hike subsides in
the near future.  However, the pace of recovery is likely to be moderate considering the increases
in  the  tax  burden,  such  as  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax.    Meanwhile,  housing  investment,
which is in a generally favorable environment including low interest rates, is expected to recover
somewhat  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  1997,  although  it  has  recently  been  weak  reflecting  the
reaction to the surge in demand ahead of the consumption tax hike.
4.
With respect to  price  developments,  the  downward  pressure  on  domestic
prices from the increase in manufactured imports has weakened, as the rise in import penetration
rate has paused.  On the other hand, the upward pressure on import costs from materials prices
has also subsided owing to the decline in crude oil prices since spring 1997 and the appreciation
of the yen.  Thus, import prices are not exerting significant upward nor downward pressure on
domestic prices.  Meanwhile, final demand will continue to recover on the whole, but the output
gap is unlikely to narrow significantly as the pace of recovery in final demand is expected to be
moderate.  In these circumstances, prices are expected to be stable for some time.
5.
In  sum,  the  positive  cycle  among  production,  income  and  expenditure
continues  steadily  and  is  reflected  in  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  the  rise  in
employees’  income.    Thus,  despite  the  restraining  pressures  from  fiscal  policies,  including  the
consumption tax hike and the decline in public-sector investment, Japan’s economy is expected
to continue its recovery, supported by the yen’s depreciation until early spring and the expansion
of  information-related  demand.    However,  the  economic  recovery  is  unlikely  to  gather
significant momentum, as a result of fragility in some sectors, as well as the continued balance-
sheet  adjustment  pressure.    In  these  circumstances,  building  an  economic  environment  which
increases the confidence of the private sector is vital to strengthening the economic recovery.  In
this  process,  effective  structural  reforms  to  draw  out  the  dynamism  inherent  in  the  economy
continue to be essential in addition to appropriate macroeconomic policies.
