Mr.  George  discusses  the  framework  of  monetary  policy  in  the  UK  and
Europe   Text of the Sixteenth Mais Lecture delivered by the Governor of the Bank of England,
Mr. E.A.J. George, at the City University Business School in London on 24/6/97.
I was delighted to have been invited to deliver the Sixteenth Mais Lecture - until
some two or three months ago when you asked me to suggest a title! I confess that, at that stage,
I had not really thought about what I should talk about - so I offered you the portmanteau title of
“Monetary policy in Britain and Europe”, hoping, like Mr Micawber, that something would turn
up - either here or on the Continent - to give some topicality to what I might say. Well happily,
Vice  Chancellor,  it  has.  On  6  May,  just  four  days  after  taking  office,  the  Chancellor  of  the
Exchequer announced some radical changes to the monetary policy framework in this country -
including changes to the role and constitution of the Bank of England. I  should  like  to  discuss
some of those changes  this  evening  against  the  background  of  the  monetary  policy  framework
being developed in Europe, in preparation for the introduction of the euro, including the role of
the future European System of Central Banks (ESCB). But I should like to discuss them in the
context of the approach to economic management more generally in Europe and this country and
perhaps I might start with that.
Overall economic management
Sweeping generalisations are of course always dangerous. But from my particular
vantage point at least, there has, over the past decade or more, been a clear change of emphasis -
across Europe but much more widely internationally - away from short-term, macro- economic,
demand management as the means of promoting the agreed end-objectives of economic policy,
of growth  of  output  and  employment,  and  of  rising  living  standards,  and  towards  the  need  for
macro-economic stability in the medium and longer term. Where before the implicit assumption
appeared  to  be  that  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  would  respond  relatively  flexibly  to
increasing  demand,  there  is  now  the  perception  that  over-ambitious  short-term  demand
management,  which  attempts  to  push  capacity  to  its  limits  or  even  beyond,  can  generate
instability and uncertainty, damaging capacity growth in the longer term by distorting economic
decision-making in relation to investment, for example, or in relation to resource allocation.
The result is a broad consensus - across  countries  but  also  across  a  wide  part  of
the political spectrum within countries - on the need for macro-economic policy to  be  directed
towards stability and sustainability in the medium and longer term. This consensus is reflected in
the  Maastricht  Treaty  -  through  the  famous  convergence  criteria.  It  is  reflected,  too,  in  the
arrangements  for  the  conduct  of  macro-economic  policy  now  being  put  in  place  for  the
introduction  of  the  single  European  currency  -  including  the  monetary  preparations  for  the
European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  and  the  agreement  on  the  fiscal  Stability  and  Growth  Pact
recently confirmed by the European Council in Amsterdam.
But alongside this collective commitment to macro-economic stability, there is a
growing  recognition  that  stability,  on  its  own,  is  not  enough.  While  it  may  be  a  necessary
condition  for  achieving  sustainable  growth  of  output  and  employment,  and  rising  living
standards  -  the  truly  good  things  in  life  -  and  while  stability  may  indeed  be  the  most  that
macro-economic policy can contribute in the longer term to those agreed end-objectives, it is not
in  itself  a  sufficient  condition  for  achieving  them.  So  attention  everywhere  is  now  focusing
increasingly on the structural characteristics of our economies which essentially determine their
underlying, supply-side, rate of capacity growth.
BIS Review   65/1997
- 2 -
The  issue  is  starkly  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  despite  very  substantial  progress
towards  macro-economic  stability  within  the  European  Union  as  a  whole  in  recent  years  -
including real progress towards effective price stability (with measured inflation now below 2%)
and strenuous efforts everywhere to cut back public sector deficits as required by the Maastricht
convergence criteria - output has stagnated, growing at an average annual rate of only 1% or so
over the past five or  six  years,  and  unemployment  has  risen  inexorably,  to  around  11%  across
the Union as a  whole.  And  while  it  is  true  that  activity  may  now  be  beginning  to  recover,  the
pick-up  is  very  largely  driven  by  external  demand  -  with  the  domestic  economy  still
depressingly weak.
Against  this  background,  the  need  for  greater  supply-side  flexibility  within
Europe is increasingly widely acknowledged. And there are elements of a common approach to
bringing  it  about.  These  were  reflected,  for  example,  in  the  Resolution  on  Growth  and
Employment  adopted  at  the  European  Summit  in  Amsterdam  a  week  ago,  which  talks  of  the
need  to  improve  European  competitiveness  -  with  special  attention  to  be  given  “to  labour  and
product  market  efficiency, 
the  potential  for  small  and
medium-sized  enterprises  to  create  jobs”.  It  talks,  too,  of  improving  “training  and  education
systems,  including  life-long  learning,  work  incentives  in  the  tax  and  benefit  systems  and
reducing  non-wage  labour  costs,  in  order  to  increase  employability”.  But  these  policy
approaches are not well-defined across Europe, and it is probably at this stage stretching a point
to speak of even a “broad” consensus on specific approaches in this area. Even where particular
needs for change have been identified nationally, recent  experience  in  some  countries  suggests
that there can be formidable resistance to bringing it about.
innovation  and 
technological 
The new Government in this country is clearly joined in the European consensus
on the need for macro-economic stability; and it too emphasises  the  importance  of  supply-side
flexibility,  indeed  its  thinking  on  supply-side  issues  clearly  influenced  the  Amsterdam
Resolution which I have just mentioned. To quote a recent article by the Chancellor:
“The  Labour  Government  is  committed  to  monetary  stability  so  that  businesses
and families can plan for the future; to fiscal stability; and (on the supply side) to
higher levels of investment in both people and business; to a modernisation of our
welfare  state,  and,  not  least,  to  free  trade  and  a  constructive  engagement  in
Europe.”
This  country’s  approach  overall  to  economic  management  is,  therefore,  wholly
consistent with that of our European partners; and we start from a somewhat more comfortable
position, in which our own recent progress towards greater macro-economic stability has in fact
been accompanied by somewhat stronger growth of activity - averaging over 2½% over the past
five years - and by a sustained fall in unemployment to around 7¼% on a comparable ILO basis.
Monetary management
Within  this  overall  economic  policy  context,  there  is  a  particular  commitment,
throughout the European Union, to monetary stability; and I should like now to consider some of
the very recent changes to our own monetary policy framework against that background.
BIS Review   65/1997
(i) Objective
- 3 -
I  begin  with  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  which,  both  here  and  on  the
Continent, is allocated specific responsibility for achieving and maintaining price stability.
The Maastricht Treaty states that “The primary objective of the ESCB shall be to
maintain  price  stability.  Without  prejudice  to  the  objective  of  price  stability,  the  ESCB  shall
support the general economic policies of the Community....”
In  his  statement  to  the  House  of  Commons  on  May  20th,  the  Chancellor  said:
“The  Bank  (of  England)’s  monetary  policy  objective  will  be  to  deliver  price  stability,  and,
without prejudice to this objective, to support the Government’s economic policy, including its
objectives for growth and employment.”
At this level, our respective missions are effectively identical. But it is important
to  understand  that  price  stability  is  not  simply  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  means  to  the  end  of
sustainable growth. What in fact we are, in principle, trying to do in maintaining price stability
is  to  keep  the  growth  of  monetary  demand  more  or  less  continuously  broadly  in  line  with  the
underlying  capacity  growth  in  the  economy  -  in  effect  using  price  stability  as  an  indicator  of
stability  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  And  although  we  cannot  hope  to  achieve  that  in  practice
with any great precision, we can reasonably aspire to help to moderate the economic cycle rather
than aggravate it, as so often in the past.
The Maastricht Treaty makes no provision for any further definition of the ECB’s
primary  objective.  It  is  left  for  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  to  determine  how  to  interpret
“price stability” in any particular circumstance. Indeed, the ECB will need to decide whether it
has  a  specific  target  for  inflation  at  all,  or  whether,  operationally,  it  adopts  an  intermediate
monetary target, or elements of both.
In the case of the United Kingdom it is the Chancellor who determines the precise
inflation  target,  which  he  has  subsequently  set  at  2½%  for  the  Retail  Price  Index  excluding
mortgage  interest  payments;  and  the  Chancellor  reserves  the  right,  in  extreme  economic
circumstances,  to  override  the  Bank  of  England’s  operational  independence  in  seeking  to
achieve the Government’s target.
In  practice,  in  either  case,  the  degree  of  latitude  that  these  arrangements
apparently  provide  is  likely  to  be  limited  by  the  need  to  maintain  the  credibility  of  the
commitment  to  price  stability,  with  financial  markets  and  with  the  public  at  large.  But  in  the
United  Kingdom  at  least,  where  public  support  for  monetary  stability  is  more  recently
established  than  it  is,  for  example,  in  Germany,  the  elected  Government’s  public  and  explicit
commitment to low inflation may provide reassurance, and help to secure greater acceptance of
the policy.
In any event the Bank’s remit under the new arrangements is unmistakably clear.
We are charged with delivering the Government’s inflation target. Operationally, that means that
we  are  to  aim  consistently  to  achieve  2½%  on  RPIX  as  a  mid-point,  so  that,  with  a  balanced
distribution  of  risks,  there  should  be  an  even  chance  of  outturns  -  at  the  end  of  our  two-year
forecasting horizon - either above or below 2½%. The measure of our success will be how close
we in fact come to 2½%, not on any particular date, but on average over time.
BIS Review   65/1997
(ii) Transparency and accountability
- 4 -
The clear separation of responsibility for setting the inflation target (the political
decision) from responsibility for achieving it (the technical decision) also helps to ensure that the
Government and the Bank are separately accountable for their respective roles in the monetary
policy  process.  And  in  this  area  of  accountability,  too,  there  are  considerable  differences
between the arrangements that will apply to the ECB and to ourselves.
In the case of the ECB, the Treaty requires that it “shall address an annual report
on the activities of the ESCB, and on the monetary policy of both the previous and current year,
to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission, and also to the European Council.
The  President  of  the  ECB  shall  present  this  report  to  the  Council  and  to  the  European
Parliament, which may hold a general debate on that basis.” In addition, the ECB President and
the members of its Executive Board may be invited, or volunteer, to appear before the competent
Committees of the European Parliament.
In the case of the Bank of England:
(i)  The  minutes  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  (MPC)  meetings  to
determine  interest  rates  will  be  published,  identifying  how  each  member  voted,
with  an  explanation  of  why  the  individuals  who  voted  against  were  opposed  to
the majority decision.
(ii)  The  MPC’s  performance  will  be  reviewed  regularly  by  a  reformed  Court  of
Directors,  and  the  Bank’s  Annual  Report  will  be  debated  in  the  House  of
Commons.
(iii) The Bank will continue to publish its quarterly  Inflation  Report,  reviewing
both  the  outturn  and  the  prospect  for  inflation  in  relation  to  the  target;  and  the
Treasury  Select  Committee  will  take  evidence  from  the  MPC  on  the  Inflation
Report.
(iv)  And,  as  Chairman  of  the  MPC,  the  Governor  is  required  to  write  an  open
letter to the Chancellor if inflation strays by  more  than  1  percentage  point  either
side  of  the  2½%  target.  The  letter  would  refer  as  appropriate  to  the  Inflation
Report,  and  explain  why  inflation  was  adrift,  how  long  the  divergence  was
expected to last, and the action taken to bring it back on course.
Taken  as  a  whole,  these  arrangements  provide  for  greater  transparency  of,  and
greater accountability for, the technical monetary process than anywhere else in the world.
Now I do not suppose,  quite  honestly,  that  anyone  would  particularly  enjoy  this
degree  of  public  scrutiny.  But  it  will  certainly  help  to  concentrate  the  minds  of  the  MPC
members, and it is, I believe, a necessary feature of our new arrangements.
The  technical  implementation  of  monetary  policy  -  even  with  a  very  clearly
defined  objective  -  is  not  at  all  easy  at  the  best  of  times.  We  have  in  practice  a  single
instrument - the short-term interest rate - the precise effects of which on the economy are by no
means perfectly understood, including by ourselves. We do know that it can take up to a couple
of years or more to have its full effects. So we have to rely substantially on uncertain forecasts
that  are  subject  to  unforeseeable  shocks.  Policy  judgements  in  these  circumstances  are
BIS Review   65/1997
- 5 -
necessarily  an  art  rather  than  an  exact  science,  no  matter  how  much  we  apply  science  to
informing those judgements. And the judgements themselves need to be constantly reviewed and
frequently revised as relevant new information becomes available.
Transparency in these circumstances can only encourage a better informed public
debate and a more sophisticated public understanding of the issues. That in turn can only help to
strengthen confidence in the process - unless of course we make a frightful hash of it! I shall be
surprised  -  and  somewhat  disappointed  -  if  the  ECB  Governing  Council  does  not  go  to
considerable lengths to explain its policies to the public at large, for similar reasons, even if it is
not actually required to do so by statute.
(iii) The decision-making framework
Reflecting  its  multinational  character,  the  policy-making  body  of  the  ECB,  the
Governing Council, will comprise the Governors of the participating country central banks plus
the six members of the Executive Board. Our own MPC will comprise four “outside” members
directly  appointed  by  the  Chancellor,  together  with  five  Bank  executives  -  the  Governor,  two
Deputy Governors, and two Executive Directors. The common characteristic is that in each case
the  decision-makers  will  be  professional  experts  rather  than  representatives  of  particular
interests. Any doubts that this would in fact be the case in relation to the outside appointments to
the MPC were certainly immediately dispelled when the names were announced: together with
our inside appointees, they are, as a team, as well qualified professionally for the task we have
been set as I can imagine anywhere in the world - and we certainly need all the help we can get.
The processes of the Committee are inevitably still evolving. It will, as you would
expect,  be  supported  by  the  whole,  considerable,  range  of  the  Bank’s  monetary,  economic,
statistical  and  market  expertise,  supplemented  by  intelligence  from  the  Bank’s  network  of
regional agencies, with further front-line input  both  from  the  non-executive  members  of  Court
and from our wide range of industrial, commercial and financial contacts.
The  Committee  will  be  closely  involved  in  the  preparation  of  the  quarterly
Inflation Report, contributing to both the analysis and the forecasts. And, of course, it will meet
regularly  on  pre-announced  dates  each  month  -  the  dates  determined  by  the  monthly  cycle  of
statistical  information  -  to  take  its  decisions  on  monetary  policy.  These  monthly  meetings  are
spread  over  three  days:  a  whole-day  meeting  to  receive  briefings  from  the  Bank  staff  on  the
latest  developments;  an  afternoon  meeting  to  identify  and  discuss  the  important  underlying
issues, and any tactical considerations there may be; and a final morning meeting to decide upon
any necessary policy action. The Committee will need also to provide for emergency meetings in
the  event  of  a  crisis,  but  if  we  are  successful  in  our  task  of  achieving  permanent,  long-term,
stability I would hope that that will prove to be a very rare occurrence.
(iv) Implementation of policy
Compared  with  the  complexity  of  the  decision-making  process  in  relation  to
interest rates, implementation of those decisions is relatively straightforward.
In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  the  short-term  interest  rate  will  basically  be  contained
within a corridor, bounded, at the top, by an overnight lending facility to the commercial banks,
and, at the bottom, by an overnight deposit facility in which the banks can place surplus funds.
Within the corridor the market interest rate will be steered by means of open market repurchase
operations. The ECB may also require commercial banks to hold with the system minimum cash
BIS Review   65/1997
- 6 -
reserves; and it will offer a limited amount of longer-term credit to commercial banks at market
rates;  neither  of  these  features  appear  to  us  to  be  necessary  for  monetary  policy  purposes,  but
they  represent  an  element  of  continuity  from  the  arrangements  which  currently  apply  in  some
prospective member countries.
In our own case the arrangements are even simpler. The decision on interest rates
will  be  announced  at  noon  following  the  final,  morning,  meeting  of  the  MPC,  and  the  chosen
interest rate will be applied in our daily  money  market  operations  -  mostly  these  days  through
repurchase operations in gilt-edged securities. Limited facilities for late lending to the remaining
discount houses and the settlement banks are available to ensure the smooth functioning of the
payments system at the end of the day.
Looking  at  the  monetary  policy  arrangements,  planned  for  Europe  and  as  they
now are in this country, as a whole, it is clear that while there are significant differences of detail
-  such  that  our  own  arrangements  would  certainly  require  considerable  further  modification  to
make  them  compatible  with  membership  of  the  ESCB  -  the  essential  similarities  are  much
greater than the differences. Crucially, the primary monetary policy objective of price stability is
the same, and the responsibility for achieving that objective is in each case entrusted to a broadly
based  group  of  technical  experts  not  subject  to  political  influence.  That  does  not  of  course
guarantee that we will, here or in Europe, succeed in achieving permanently greater stability but,
perhaps presumptuously, I do think it gives us every chance of doing so.
Concluding remarks
Mr Chairman, what I have tried to do this evening is to draw attention to what I
see as a very striking coincidence of basic approach to economic - and in particular monetary -
management  within  Europe  but  also  between  Continental  Europe  and  this  country.  We  are
clearly,  it  seems  to  me,  on  parallel  tracks  as  far  as  our  commitment  to  macro-economic,  both
fiscal and monetary, stability is concerned, though we may be travelling at different speeds when
it comes to supply-side flexibility.
That  coincidence  of  basic  approach  is  a  prerequisite  for  sustainable  economic
convergence  within  Europe  -  without  it  I  do  not  see  how  monetary  union  could  be  on  the
agenda. But the question that is often then put to me is, if in fact we are on parallel tracks - in
terms of our basic approach - why then do we not get on the same train and commit ourselves to
joining monetary union. So let me conclude with just a few remarks on that subject.
The potential attraction of travelling together with our European partners is very
clear. There would, other things equal, be real economic advantages in exchange  rate  certainty
across the single market area, which can only be realised through the single currency. The same
certainty  cannot  be  achieved  by 
independently  pursuing
macro-economic  discipline,  although  that  should  over  time  help  to  minimise  the  degree  of
intra-European exchange rate volatility.
the  countries  of  Europe 
But there are real risks.
We are not all starting from the same station.  Domestic  demand  in  this  country,
for  example,  is  currently  growing  at  a  rate  which  we  cannot  sustain  for  very  long  without  the
emergence of inflationary pressures. In the major countries of Continental Europe, on the other
hand,  domestic  demand  remains,  as  I  say,  relatively  subdued.  The  possibility  of  such  cyclical
divergences will not simply disappear on January 1st 1999 and they would seriously complicate
BIS Review   65/1997
- 7 -
the operation of a single monetary policy. So too would a variety of possible internal or external
shocks which affected euro member countries in different ways or to different degrees.
But more fundamentally - and I can’t keep up the railway analogy - I am frankly
nervous at the prospect of introducing the euro at a time of very high and very different rates of
unemployment across Europe. It is not that I think unemployment can be addressed directly by
more expansionary macro-economic polices - that ought to be clear from my earlier remarks. I
share  the  view  that  unemployment  needs  to  be  addressed  fundamentally  through  supply-side
policies - though it may be that the problem is currently being aggravated in the short term by
the heroic attempts being made to meet the fiscal criteria according to the Maastricht timetable
in  a  context  of  cyclical  weakness.  The  problem  is  that  we  cannot  be  confident  how  individual
countries  may  respond  to  this  situation.  My  concern  is  that  the  persistence  of  these  wholly
unacceptable  levels  of  unemployment  across  Europe,  and  the  very  real  difficulty  of
implementing  appropriate  supply-side  reforms,  could  begin  to  undermine  public  support  for
macro-economic  stability  in  some  countries  -  even  though  significant  relaxation  on  this  front
would  provide  at  best  only  short-term  relief.  In  that  case,  economic  convergence,  if  it  were
achieved, could prove difficult to sustain. There are perhaps some suggestions that this may be
beginning  to  happen;  and  it  may  be  for  this  reason  that  the  foreign  exchange  markets  are
implying that they expect relative euro weakness - to our own considerable embarrassment as a
result of the corresponding strength of sterling’s exchange rate. I have no doubt that, if the euro
goes ahead, the ECB would in fact seek determinedly to exercise its statutory responsibility for
maintaining price stability within the euro area. But its job would be enormously more difficult
if this came to be seen, at least in some countries, within the euro area - however mistakenly - as
an  obstacle  to  the  end-objectives  of  economic  policy,  including  particularly  increasing
employment.
My  conclusion,  Mr  Chairman,  from  all  this  is  that  whether  or  not  the  euro
proceeds  on  the  present  timetable,  and  whether  or  not  the  UK  is  a  part  of  that,  the  really
important  thing  for  European  prosperity  is  that  the  present  broad  policy  consensus  holds
together. But if we are to be able to hold on to macro-economic stability - as we must - then we
have  to  find  answers  to  the  urgent  problem  of  European  unemployment.  That  involves
addressing  the  problems  of  supply-side  flexibility  as  an  immediate  priority.  And  that,  Vice
Chancellor, is the message that the new Government has recently carried to Europe.
BIS Review   65/1997
