Mr. Crockett reviews the changing role of central banks   Speech by the General
Manager of the Bank for International Settlements, Mr. Andrew Crockett, at the Money Macro and
Finance Annual Conference held in Durham on 11/9/97.
The  BIS  Annual  Report  for  1996-97  observes,  with  characteristic  understatement:
“The last 25 years have been an eventful time for central banking”. The period since the breakdown
of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  has,  indeed,  seen  enormous  changes  in  the  economic  and  financial
environment,  and  a  major  evolution  in  the  objectives,  indicators  and  instruments  of  central  bank
policy.  My  objective  this  afternoon  will  be  to  review  these  changes,  and  to  identify  some  of  the
common factors that lie behind them.
The changes in the environment have been of both a macro-economic and a structural
character. Macro-economically, the move to floating exchange rates in the early 1970s was followed
by  a  period  of  substandard  economic  performance.  In  the  industrial  world  high  inflation  rates
co-existed with disappointing growth. In the developing world, a borrowing spree was followed by a
debt crisis. Not until the last few years have monetary authorities been successful in restoring a more
satisfactory degree of price stability, and still the task is not complete. There have also been dramatic
changes in financial structure. The process of liberalisation and innovation has led to a globalisation
of finance and a quantum increase in intermediation. Coupled with an explosive growth in ever more
complex financial instruments, this has presented new opportunities to financial intermediaries, but
also created new sources of systemic risk.
The changing environment has both influenced and been influenced by an evolution
in the way central banks carry out their role of preserving monetary and financial stability. In the field
of monetary stability, attempts to exploit the Phillips curve trade-off produced almost wholly negative
results and led to a widespread consensus that the primary objective of monetary policy must be price
stability. The intermediate targets of monetary policy objectives have also evolved, with the earlier
emphasis on monetary aggregates giving way to exchange rate anchors in some countries and explicit
or implicit inflation targets in others. At the level of tactics, market management techniques, which
were formerly quite diverse, have  tended  to  coalesce  around  the  use  of  repurchase  operations  as  a
means of controlling very short-term interest rates.
The other main function of central banks, that of preserving financial system stability,
has acquired considerably more prominence as a result of financial liberalisation, which has led to the
greatest  spate  of  banking  sector  difficulties  since  the  interwar  period.  The  focus  of  central  banks’
approach to maintaining systemic stability has evolved from field-of-activity regulation to a greater
stress on capital adequacy, and is still in the process of change. Meanwhile, a number of countries are
rethinking the institutional structure of supervision, with some placing responsibility for day-to-day
regulation with specialised supervisory agencies and assigning to the central bank the broad, though
less well-defined responsibility for systemic stability.
Throughout  these  changes,  a  constant  feature  has  been  central  banks’  search  for
effective  means  of  implementing  policy  in  an  environment  where  economic  agents  can  use  new
instruments and markets to arbitrage their way around restrictions and controls. The desire to avoid
distorting incentives and exacerbating moral hazard has been a guiding principle in this search. The
authorities  have  sought  anchors  for  policy  that  are  compatible  with  profit-seeking  behaviour  by
private  agents  in  an  increasingly  competitive  market.  It  is  this  search  that  will  be  the  underlying
theme of this lecture.
I will begin by noting some of the driving forces behind the changes that have taken
place in the financial industry, and how they have manifested themselves. The key consequence for
policy,  I  will  argue,  is  that  markets  have  become  more  complete,  thus  increasing  the  scope  for
BIS Review   81/1997
- 2 -
arbitrage  by  private  agents,  and  decreasing  the  scope  for  the  monetary  authorities  to  use  direct
controls to achieve policy objectives. In the next part of my remarks, I will review how approaches to
monetary policy have evolved over the past 25 years, in respect of ultimate goals, intermediate targets
and  policy  instruments.  After  this,  I  will  consider  how  financial  stability  has  grown  as  a  policy
concern, and how the  way  in  which  supervision  is  viewed  has  evolved.  Finally,  I  will  have  a  few
words to say about the international monetary system.
I.   The Changing Financial Environment
The  driving  forces  behind  the  transformation  in  the  financial  environment  that  has
occurred  in  the  past  twenty  to  thirty  years  have  been  innovation  and  liberalisation.  Technological
advances  have  dramatically  lowered  the  cost  of  gathering  and  processing  information,  while  new
financial  instruments  have  increased  the  range  of  transactions  economic  agents  can  undertake.
Liberalisation has paved the way for the expansion and restructuring of the financial industry. It has
been  driven  both  by  the  ascendancy  of  the  free  market  philosophy  and  by  the  difficulty  of
maintaining controls in the face of innovation.
The  combined  effects  of  innovation  and  liberalisation  have  been  dramatic.
Geographical  barriers  have  largely  disappeared,  leading  to  the  emergence  of  an  increasingly
integrated  global  capital  market  with  a  sizable  group  of  multinational  financial  intermediaries
operating in all the major centres. Distinctions among different classes of financial intermediary have
become blurred, with the relaxation of regulatory restraints, the growth of conglomerate structures,
and  the  increasing  ease  with  which  institutions  can  transform  the  risk  characteristics  of  their
portfolios through the use of derivatives. Another significant development has been the securitisation
of  assets  and  the  institutionalisation  of  savings.  Together,  these  trends  have  greatly  increased  the
volume of tradable financial assets, and the amount of transactions passing through financial markets
and settled in clearing systems.
The significance for central banks of these developments in the financial environment
is  that  they  have  made  markets  more  complete,  that  is,  they  have  greatly  increased  the  ability  of
market participants  to  exchange  assets  and  income  flows  over  time,  space,  and  market  instrument.
Portfolio management is far less constrained than before by lack of access to liabilities or claims with
desired  pay-off  characteristics.  This  has  profound  effects  for  central  bank  activity,  both  in  the
formulation and implementation of monetary policy, and in the preservation of financial stability.
At the macro-economic  level,  markets  can  now  discipline  policies  far  more  quickly
and effectively than in the past. Bad policies, or indeed any policies that are unsustainable in the face
of profit-maximising behaviour by private agents, will quickly have to be reversed. This means that
the authorities always have to consider, in framing economic policies, whether they are credible and
how the market will react to them. It is very hard, for example, to spring an inflationary “surprise”
that has a positive effect on output; or to set an exchange rate objective that is inconsistent with the
underlying stance of macro-economic policies.
Concerning  financial  stability,  more  complete  markets  mean  that  competition
squeezes  out  rents  created  by  restricted  franchises.  Financial  institutions  have  less  of  a  cushion  of
protected  profits  and  are  therefore  more  vulnerable  to  losses  caused  by  mismanagement  or
misfortune.  This  has  inevitably  increased  the  emphasis  given  to  the  role  of  the  authorities  as  the
ultimate  guarantor  of  financial  stability.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  reduced  the  effectiveness  of
regulation  that  is  not  based  on  market  incentives.  Financial  institutions  have  a  broad  menu  of
techniques  that  enable  them  to  get  around  regulations  that  are  intended  to  increase  safety,  but  are
burdensome to the institutions to which they apply.
BIS Review   81/1997
- 3 -
II.   Monetary Policy
(a)
Objectives
In  the  aftermath  of  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  (and  for  the  United
States for some time before that), monetary policy was designed to secure the best trade-off between
output  growth  and  inflation.  The  intellectual  basis  of  policy  was  the  Phillips  curve.  Eventually,
however,  the  stagflation  that  marked  the  1970s  caused  both  the  objective  of  policy  and  its
implementation to be reassessed.
Today, there is a widespread consensus among central bankers, and economists more
generally,  that  price  stability  should  be  the  overriding  goal  of  monetary  policy.  The  rational
expectations  literature,  and  the  lessons  of  experience,  suggest  that  there  is  no  exploitable  trade-off
between output and inflation in anything other than the very short run. Moreover, inflation leads to
distortions  and  uncertainties  that  impair  economic  performance.  Worse,  the  short-run  relationship
between  inflation  and  output  growth  seems  to  be  asymmetric:  the  output  sacrifice  needed  to  get
inflation down may be greater than the output gain when inflation is allowed to rise. Taken together,
these considerations mean that the best service monetary policy can render for the real economy is to
keep inflation credibly at low levels.
In  fact,  policy  has  been  remarkably  successful  in  recent  years  in  bringing  inflation
down in virtually all industrial countries. So much so, that a number of issues are now coming to the
fore that were previously considered as of second-order importance. These questions include: how to
avoid bias in  the  measurement  of  inflation;  whether  inflation  should  be  zero  or  some  low  positive
number; whether the authorities’ objective should be expressed in terms of inflation or the price level;
and how quickly one should return to the stated objective after a disturbance.
It is hard to dispute that measurement bias in inflation should be corrected, if possible.
That is easier said than done, however. Some biases can be relatively easily removed, such as that
arising  from  infrequent  re-weighting  of  the  consumption  basket.  Others  are  more  difficult  to  deal
with, such as adjusting adequately for quality changes. And some are very difficult to correct, such as
properly  incorporating  new  goods  and  services.  Still,  with  some  heroic  assumptions  it  should  be
possible to arrive at a serviceable estimate. The Boskin Commission in the United States has put the
bias at just over 1%; in other countries, the bias is thought to be no more than half that.
Concerning the desirable level of (properly measured) inflation, there seems to be a
consensus  that  a  low  positive  number  (1-3%)  is  better  than  zero.1  The  reasons  for  this  are  both  a
priori and empirical. When inflation averages zero over time, the price level must, by definition, be
falling for a significant part of the time (and a significant number of individual prices will be falling,
even  if  the  general  price  level  is  flat).  This  creates  two  problems.  Firstly,  if  wages  and  prices  are
sticky downward, it may require a higher level of unemployment to stabilise the overall inflation rate
at zero than at some higher number.2 Secondly, since nominal interest rates cannot go below zero, it
will become impossible to engineer negative (or even very low) real interest rates to help recovery
from a recession. Such considerations have led most observers to favour a low but positive rate of
inflation. Those who prefer zero tend to point to the distortionary effects of the tax system,3 or to the
risk that any positive number can be revised up, as justifying the more ambitious target.
                                                  
1
Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. Published by the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1996.
2
on Economic Activity, No. 1 (July 1996), pp. 1-59.
3
Romer (eds.), Monetary Policy and Inflation, Chicago. University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Akerlof, George, William Dickens and George Perry: "The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation", Brookings Papers
Fischer, Stanley: "Why are Central Banks Pursuing Long-Run Price Stability?" in "Achieving Price Stability", A
Feldstein, Martin: "The Costs and Benefits of going from Low Inflation to Price Stability", in C. Romer and D.
BIS Review   81/1997
- 4 -
It  is  the  fear  of  slippage  that  also  motivates  the  suggestion  to  express  the  price
stability objective as a constant price level (rather than a zero or constant rate of inflation). The idea is
that  the  impact  of  an  inflationary  (or  deflationary)  surprise  in  one  period  should  be  offset  in  the
succeeding period by a policy aiming at reversing the initial shock. In this way, the price level would
be  constant  through  time,  enhancing  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  and  facilitating  the
development of very long-term contracts.
One obvious objection to the pursuit of a policy of literal price level stability, namely
that it would require deliberate deflation following any inflationary disturbance, can be overcome by
expressing  the  price  objective  in  terms  of  a  rising  trend  through  time.  Nevertheless,  perhaps
surprisingly, there is still little support in central banking circles for expressing the inflation objective
in terms of the price level, rather than its first derivative. This may be because, if there is believed to
be an optimal inflation objective, whether zero or a low positive number, it seems odd to adjust it as a
result of past events.
The last element of objective setting for central banks is how quickly they should seek
to return to an inflation target once having been forced away from it. There seems to be an emerging
consensus, reflected, inter alia, in statements by the Bank of England, that a period of 1-2 years is
appropriate, this being the time it takes for a change in monetary policy to have the bulk of its effect
in  prices.  To  attempt  a  quicker  restoration  of  price  stability  would  risk  overshooting,  while  to  go
more  slowly  would  tend  to  undermine  credibility.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  this
recommendation holds clearly only for minor departures from the objective. If the actual inflation rate
is a long way away from the desired rate, there is no consensus on whether gradual or shock therapy
is to be preferred. Much depends on the political circumstances, as well as on surrounding economic
policies (e.g. fiscal policy) that affect credibility.
(b)
Anchors
Just as difficult as setting the  objective  of  monetary  policy  has  been  settling  on  the
means  for  achieving  it.  A  variety  of  approaches  have  been  in  vogue  at  various  times  in  the  past
twenty or thirty years.
Pure  discretion  has  acquired  a  bad  name  because,  at  least  in  countries  with  non-
independent  central  banks,  it  is  seen  as  a  cloak  for  politically-motivated  decisions.  Such  decisions
have sometimes been a crude attempt to buy votes by easing of monetary policy before elections, the
benefits of monetary relaxation coming relatively quickly and the costs of higher inflation emerging
only  later.  More  frequently,  however,  they  have  involved  an  attempt  to  use  a  presumed
output/inflation  trade-off  to  strengthen  employment  prospects;  or  an  unwillingness  to  tighten
monetary policy until evidence of inflationary pressures was already apparent in the data. Whatever
the  motivation,  a  fully  discretionary  policy  has  often  lacked  the  strategic  coherence  to  prevent
inflation accelerating.
Monetary targeting became popular in a number of  countries  in  the  1970s,  on  the
back  of  Milton  Friedman’s  dictum  that  “inflation  is  always  and  everywhere  a  monetary
phenomenon”.4 The powerful intuitive appeal of the money-inflation link was undoubtedly helpful in
mobilising  support  for  a  rigorous  anti-inflation  policy  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom  and
elsewhere in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Nevertheless, one  of  the  key  requirements  for  such  a
policy, namely a stable  demand  for  some  monetary  aggregate,  has  not  been  adequately  fulfilled  in
recent years (at least in most countries). One by one, central banks that had adopted monetary targets
                                                  
4
Controls, and the Market Place: Policy Choices in a Full Employment Economy", Chicago and London.
Friedman, Milton: "What Price Guideposts?", in George P. Schultz and R.Z. Aliber (eds.): "Guidelines, Informal
BIS Review   81/1997
- 5 -
in the 1970s, dropped or downgraded them in the 1980s and 1990s. Nowadays only Germany  and
Switzerland place strong reliance on monetary aggregate targeting, and even they apply such policies
with a significant measure of judgment.
Exchange rate targeting has a long history. The gold standard involved stabilising
the domestic price level in terms of gold, and the Bretton Woods system linked national currencies to
the  dollar.  More  recently,  exchange  rate  anchors  have  been  used  effectively  by  a  wide  range  of
countries. Their value in restoring discipline and credibility is hard to doubt. But they have two major
disadvantages that have become evident in recent years. Firstly, when capital markets are integrated,
any country adopting a strict exchange rate peg subordinates its monetary policy to that of the anchor
country. This works well when monetary policy requirements are in harmony; less well when there
are  divergences,  as  the  United  Kingdom  discovered  in  1992.  Secondly,  if  a  country  adopting  a
currency  peg  fails  to  master  domestic  inflationary  pressures,  it  may  find  that  its  balance  of  trade
deteriorates and eventually reaches a point of unsustainability. The decision to adjust or abandon an
unrealistic  peg  has  proved  to  be  one  of  the  most  difficult  of  economic  policy  decisions  –  in  part
because so much has typically gone into seeking to achieve credibility through adherence to the peg.
In response to the perceived shortcomings of monetary and exchange rate targets, and
of  unconstrained  discretion,  attention  has  been  given  in  recent  years  to  inflation  targeting  and
central bank autonomy as a means of strengthening the likelihood that price stability objectives will
be  met.  At  first  sight  it  might  seem  tautological  to  use  an  inflation  target  to  achieve  an  inflation
objective. In fact, there is rather more to it, as the practice in the United Kingdom shows. The idea is
that  a  public  commitment  to  an  inflation  target,  coupled  with  the  maximum  of  transparency  in
describing the authorities’ forecasts and decision-making process, enables a discretionary approach to
be  applied  with  less  risk  that  monetary  policy  decisions  will  be  biased  toward  leniency.  If,  in
addition,  the  central  bank  is  made  fully  independent  to  pursue  a  clearly-defined  goal,  political
interference will be avoided.
A  growing  list  of  countries  have  adopted  the  inflation  targeting  approach  in  recent
years,  including  Canada,  New  Zealand,  Australia,  the  United  Kingdom,  Sweden  and  Finland.  The
practical implementation of the approach has varied in a number of respects, including who sets the
target  (government  or  central  bank);  whether  it  is  expressed  as  a  range  or  a  fixed  point;  the  price
index  employed;  the  use  of  adjustment  or  “override”  mechanisms,  and  so  on.  These  differences,
however, are less significant than the common principle on which targets are based. So far, targets
have been rather successful, though the approach has yet to be tested under adverse conditions.
(c)
Tactics
Just as there has been convergence in the goals and the strategy of monetary policy
implementation, so too there has been in matters of tactics. Twenty or thirty years ago, a variety of
operating tactics were used, including control of some measure of the monetary base; variations in
reserve  requirements;  discretionary  discount  window  intervention;  open  market  operations,  at  a
variety of maturities; direct lending controls; and moral suasion.
Nowadays, direct controls on lending have been abandoned in virtually all countries.
Reserve  requirements  have  been  reduced  to  very  low  levels,  to  avoid  distorting  patterns  of
intermediation,  thus  making  control  of  the  monetary  base  an  imprecise  instrument.  Use  of  the
discount  window  and  bond  market  intervention  have  similarly  fallen  out  of  favour.  Central  banks
now generally use very short-term reversible transactions (“repos” and “reverse repos”) to inject or
withdraw  cash  from  the  money  market.  The  maturity  of  these  transactions  is  typically  either
overnight or for a few days.
BIS Review   81/1997
- 6 -
Short-term  money  market  operations  enable  central  banks  to  maintain  control  over
overnight interest rates. Longer-term interest rates are then influenced by expectations of how central
banks are likely to adjust overnight rates in the face of economic developments. This, in turn, places a
premium on credibility and effective signalling of policy intentions.
The use of interest rates as the principal operating instrument does not mean, it should
be  stressed,  that  the  volume  of  money  and  credit  is  considered  unimportant  as  a  determinant  of
inflationary trends. Rather, it reflects the view that “noise” in the demand for bank reserves is better
accommodated  by  some  short-term  flexibility  in  the  growth  of  liquidity  than  by  fluctuations  in
overnight interest rates; and by the belief that judicious management of overnight interest rates will
enable  the  authorities  to  achieve  the  desired  degree  of  control  over  credit  volumes  in  the  medium
term. At the same time, it is also part and parcel of the process that has led central banks  to  place
relatively more weight on prices (interest rates, exchange rates) than on quantities in the formulation
and  implementation  of  policy.  There  are  several  reasons  for  this,  ranging  from  the  socio-political
climate to structural economic factors such as the development of financial markets.
II.   Financial System Stability
Besides  the  achievement  of  price  stability  through  the  appropriate  use  of  monetary
policy, the other major focus of central bank activity is the preservation of stability in the financial
system. As first articulated by Bagehot, this involves a willingness to act as a lender-of-last-resort to
the  banking  system,  to  counteract  the  possibility  of  a  “run”  developing  on  a  solvent  but  illiquid
institution,  and  to  avoid  the  risk  of  a  contagious  spread  of  financial  distress.  Central  banks  have
always had an important role in maintaining systemic stability, but it is only comparatively recently
that economists generally have become aware of the analytic issues involved.
Following the crisis of the  1930s,  there  was  growing  agreement,  first  in  the  United
States and later elsewhere, that the stability of the financial system should be based on two pillars:
firstly,  explicit  or  implicit  support  to  protect  depositors  at  banking  institutions;  and  secondly,  a
structure of regulation that would reduce the risk of banks getting into trouble in the first place.
For the first twenty-five years or so of the post-war period, banking system stability
attracted relatively little attention. Economic conditions were favourable, which limited the scope for
troublesome bad-lending decisions. Just as important, restrictions on market access and regulation of
permitted activities enhanced franchise values and provided protection against losses.
Essentially, entry into banking was restricted, both by natural economies of scale and
by regulatory restraints. Competition within the banking industry was limited by tolerating cartel-type
practices  and  by  rules,  such  as  interest  rate  and  credit  expansion  ceilings,  that  protected  existing
firms.  Such  practices  greatly  reduced  the  probability  of  bank  failure.  The  value  of  the  banking
franchise made stockholders and managements unwilling to take risks with the continued viability of
firms under their control. And if serious losses did occur, rescue by other firms was likely, either in
order to acquire a valuable franchise, or as part of an implicit quid pro quo for the maintenance of
their own favoured status.
Two forces came to the fore in the 1970s and subsequently that made this regulatory
approach  unsustainable.  One  was  the  growing  influence  of  the  free  market  philosophy,  and  the
accompanying  dismantling  of  controls  and  restrictive  practices.  This  affected  the  willingness  of
public authorities to limit competition in the name of stability. The other was the development of new
financial  instruments  that  enabled  market  participants  to  replicate  virtually  any  kind  of  contract,
regardless of regulatory restraints. This affected the  ability  of  policy  makers  to  influence  financial
activity through regulatory controls. Interest ceilings on demand deposits were circumvented by the
development  of  NOW  accounts;  exchange  controls  spawned  the  development  of  Euro-currency
BIS Review   81/1997
- 7 -
accounts; and the growth of derivatives markets provided transactors with a multiplicity of ways of
creating contracts with equivalent pay-off characteristics but different forms.
The  breakdown  and  eventual  abandonment  of  direct  controls  required  renewed
attention to the issue of how to make the financial system resilient. The search was made more urgent
by the fact that banks’ capital strength had (predictably enough) weakened during the period when
their protected franchise generated guaranteed profits. This weaker capital position was highlighted
by  a  number  of  episodes  in  the  1970s  and  early  1980s,  notably  the  Third  World  debt  crisis  that
erupted in 1982.
The vulnerability of banking systems in industrial countries that was revealed by the
1980s  debt  crisis  led  to  a  renewed  focus  on  risk-based  capital  adequacy  as  a  means  of
strengthening  systemic  resilience.  Bank  regulators  had,  of  course,  always  had  rules  for  capital
holding by the institutions they supervised, but these were not harmonised across countries, and in
many jurisdictions, they were in the form of crude capital/asset ratios. What was different about the
regulatory approach developed in the 1980s is that it was founded on international agreement, and it
focused on the concept of capital as a cushion against risk.
The  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  had  been  created  in  1974,  with  the
initial  task  of  identifying  which  country’s  supervisors  should  be  responsible  for  the  activities  and
soundness of internationally active banks. In the mid-1980s the Committee turned its attention to the
development of capital standards for such banks. When finally promulgated in 1988, these standards
divided  banks’  assets  into  five  risk  categories,  running  from  sovereign  securities  of  industrial
countries  (with  a  zero  risk  weight)  to  ordinary  commercial  credits  (with  a  100%  risk  weight).
Supervisors  from  G-10  countries  agreed  to  see  that  internationally-active  banks  under  their
jurisdiction held capital at least equivalent to 8% of risk weighted assets.
The Basle Capital Accord, which has subsequently been updated and amended, was a
substantial step forward for bank regulation. It meant that required levels of capital were more closely
related to the reasons for which banks hold capital, that is, to cover the risks in their portfolio. At a
practical  level,  it  led  to  a  marked  strengthening  of  major  banks’  capital  ratios,  which  had  become
dangerously low.
But  although  the  Basle  Capital  Accord  took  regulatory  practice  a  significant  way
towards the market, it did not take it the whole way. The limited number of risk categories obviously
(and  deliberately)  did  not  capture  the  full  spectrum  of  creditworthiness.  And  the  “building  block”
approach to the calculation of risk did not allow for the risk-reducing (risk-enhancing) properties of
diversification (concentration).
Much  recent  thinking  has  focused  on  incentive-compatible  regulation  –  using  the
market’s own internal forces – as the most promising next step strengthening the financial system. It
is banks’ shareholders and management that have the strongest interest to measure risk accurately (at
least if they expect to be around to bear the consequences of their actions). An internally generated
measure  of  risk  should  be  better  than  one  derived  from  formulaic  risk-weights  generated  by
supervisors. There is,  therefore,  a  strong  case  for  supervisors  to  use  the  calculations  developed  by
firms themselves, at least if they can be satisfied that the risk assessment model is adequately robust.
This  is  the  approach  that  the  Basle  Committee  in  fact  followed  when  the  capital
accord was amended to include market risk in addition to credit risk. The difficulties of extending the
approach to credit risk are considerable, since a loan portfolio does not have a market value whose
variability can be tracked over a series of observations. Nevertheless, the concept is similar, and the
best financial firms are now beginning to apply a similar methodology to the calculation of credit risk
as they do to market risk.
BIS Review   81/1997
- 8 -
Does this mean that decisions relating to prudential capital requirements can be left to
private institutions? Not quite. Although private institutions are, in principle, best placed to measure
the riskiness of their own portfolio, they are not necessarily the best judge of how much capital they
ought  to  hold.  This  is  because  when  a  public  authority  acts  as  a  lender-of-last-resort,  or  ultimate
guarantor  of  systemic  stability,  that  authority  is  providing  part  of  the  “capital”  that  the  banking
system needs to safeguard stability. In the absence of regulatory rules, financial institutions would be
tempted to  economise  on  capital  holding,  reasoning  that  the  authorities  would  either  come  to  their
assistance, or shoulder the consequences of systemic failure. So even if the task of measuring risk
can  be  largely  privatised,  the  task  of  deciding  the  appropriate  level  of  capital  holding  may  still
require a public policy judgment.
Important  public  policy  decisions  are  also  involved  in  dealing  with  financial
institutions  which,  for  whatever  reason,  find  themselves  with  an  inadequate  capital.  Low  levels  of
capital can lead to the phenomenon of “gambling for resurrection” – banks pursuing risky strategies
in the knowledge that shareholders will get the benefit of good outcomes, while bad outcomes will
impose losses on third parties.
Thus far, I have discussed financial stability in terms of the health of the institutions
that go to make up the banking system. But there is another dimension that has received increasing
attention from central bankers over the past 10-15 years. It concerns the market infrastructure that
underpins  financial  transactions,  and  in  particular  the  payment  and  settlement  system.  While  this
might  seem  an  unexciting  subject  to  economists,  it  is  in  fact  of  great  practical  importance.  At  a
conservative estimate, more that $5 trillion per day passes through the settlement system, most of it
representing large-value financial transactions cleared by a relative handful of major clearing banks.
If one of these institutions became unable to meet its obligations in the  clearing,  the  consequences
could be dramatic.
Because  this  is  the  case,  it  is  worth  taking  a  moment  to  understand  the  issues  that
arise. Broadly speaking, there are two sets of problems. Easiest to understand are the problems facing
users of payment and settlement systems – that is, those who trade in financial markets and then have
to use the systems to settle their deals. Almost every deal has two sides – one party pays, the other
party  delivers  whatever  is  being  bought.  For  these  users,  the  difficulty  arises  where  there  is  no
mechanism  to  co-ordinate  the  two  sides.  The  party  paying  is  thus  exposed  to  the  risk  that  the
counterparty fails to deliver, and vice versa. In other words, there is often no mechanism to ensure
delivery-versus-payment.  In  securities  markets  this  is  by  now  a  relatively  familiar  issue.  More
recently, the need to tackle the similar problem which arises when settling foreign exchange deals has
come to be appreciated. In both cases the value of the deals being settled  is  so  substantial  that  the
resulting settlement risks can be of a size to cause systemic concern.
The  second  set  of  problems  concerns  one  particular  category  of  system  users  –
namely banks, who also typically provide the payment and settlement systems. Until quite recently,
the standard form of settlement was end-of-day net settlement. That is to say, all the payments and
receipts between banks were allowed to accumulate during the day, to be settled by a transfer of the
smaller, net amount at the end of the day. Banks liked this arrangement because it meant they could
hold  smaller  balances  on  their  accounts  at  the  central  bank.  But  its  systemic  weakness  was  that  it
usually required participants in the clearing to grant unsecured, uncontrolled and unlimited credit to
other  participants  during  the  period  until  final  settlement  occurs.  It  is  quite  common  for  the  credit
thereby extended to a single counterparty to exceed a bank’s entire capital. Implicitly, the participants
in the clearing are assuming that the central bank would be forced to come to the rescue if problems
arose.
BIS Review   81/1997
- 9 -
Over  the  past  few  years,  considerable  effort  has  been  devoted  to  alleviating  these
sources of systemic risk, and solutions are now being implemented. Solutions to protect users of the
systems  include  introducing  improved  delivery  versus  payment  mechanisms  for  securities  markets
and the possible introduction of some new form of multi-currency settlement arrangement for foreign
exchange markets. Solutions to protect system providers include the introduction of tighter internal
controls within  traditional  end-of-day  settlement  systems  or,  in  an  increasing  number  of  cases,  the
replacement  of  such  traditional  systems  by  so-called  RTGS  arrangements.  In  these  real-time  gross
settlement  systems,  individual  transactions  are  settled  one-by-one  throughout  the  day  rather  than
being allowed to accumulate, thereby attempting to get to the heart of the problem by removing the
exposures between banks. As a result of these major efforts, payment and settlement arrangements all
over the world are – gradually – becoming safer.
IV.   International Monetary Arrangements
The nature of international monetary arrangements has also changed dramatically over
the past two and a half decades. Once again, the driving force has been the growing power of market
forces, and the recognition on the part of monetary authorities of the need to work with these forces,
rather than to resist them.
The  Bretton  Woods  system,  which  lasted  until  the  early  1970s,  was  based  on
decisions reached by collective agreement among governments. Exchange rates were  fixed  within
narrow  margins,  with  changes  being  possible  only  by  international  agreement  in  conditions  of
“fundamental disequilibrium”. International liquidity was externally supplied through gold, reserve
currencies  or,  latterly,  collective  decisions  to  allocate  Special  Drawing  Rights  (SDRs).  The
adjustment  mechanism  worked  through  governments  managing  domestic  demand  so  as  to  keep
their  current  accounts  close  to  balance  (capital  account  restrictions  were  tolerated  or  even
encouraged).
By the beginning of the 1970s, the difficulties of maintaining such a government-led
system were becoming increasingly apparent. International transactions were growing in importance,
and  countries  were  less  willing  to  have  their  domestic  macro-economic  objectives  subordinated  to
considerations  of  fixed  exchange  rates  and  balance-of-payments  equilibrium.  This  issue  came  to  a
head in the late 1960s, when the United States was not prepared to adopt restrictive domestic policies
to stem a dollar outflow when it was trying to finance domestic social reforms and the Vietnam war
at  the  same  time;  and  its  partner  countries  were  unwilling  to  accept  the  domestic  inflationary
consequences of a continued peg to the US dollar.
Meanwhile, capital flows were increasing in volume as international financial markets
expanded, and market participants found ways  around  pre-existing  capital  controls.  The  result  was
that private markets had growing means (and incentives) to challenge officially-maintained exchange
rate  pegs.  Central  bank  reserves  were  increasingly  inadequate  to  resist  such  pressures,  despite  the
introduction in 1970 of a Special Drawing Rights (SDR facility) at the IMF.
As is well-known by now, the combined effects of these trends was to bring about the
demise  of  the  fixed  exchange  rate  (Bretton  Woods)  system  in  1973.  Thereafter  it  was  quickly
recognised that the most effective role for central banks and other public authorities was to make the
new market-driven system work as efficiently as possible, working with rather than against the grain
of market forces.
BIS Review   81/1997
- 10 -
Each of the three main elements of the international monetary system is now “market-
led”.5 Exchange rates are floating, except where governments have taken a conscious decision to use
the  exchange  rate  as  an  anti-inflationary  anchor,  or  where  they  are  pursuing  other  goals  (e.g.
monetary  union  in  Europe).  Liquidity  is  demand-driven,  with  creditworthy  governments  able  to
borrow the reserves they need, and private markets being much more important to the availability of
liquidity  than  central  banks.  And  the  adjustment  mechanism  is  largely  the  consequence  of  market
forces  and  private  capital  flows,  which  now  provide  the  disciplining  mechanism  that  previously
operated through intergovernmental discussion and pressures.
The  fact  that  market  forces  are  now  more  important  in  the  operation  of  the
international monetary system has probably avoided  some  types  of  problem,  but  it  has  highlighted
others. For example, exchange rates have often fluctuated over wider ranges than can be justified by
fundamentals. Inflation has sometimes reached dangerously high levels (e.g. following the oil price
increase  in  the  1970s).  And  some  countries  have  found  themselves  in  a  vicious  circle  of  currency
crisis and domestic financial strains.
The  conclusion  from  this  experience  has  been  to  underline  the  essentially  unitary
nature  of  financial  stability.  The  growing  links  among  markets  mean  that  domestic  economic
stability, the stability of the international monetary system, and the robustness of financial institutions
and markets are closely tied together. The achievement of international stability therefore depends on
actions  on  a  number  of  fronts:  the  pursuit  of  effective  stability-oriented  macro-economic  policies;
adequate prudential supervision of financial institutions and markets, and a co-operative approach by
monetary authorities where their domestic policies “interface”, i.e. in exchange rate relationships and
the agreement of international regulatory policies.
V.   Concluding Comments
What of the future? Where are the trends that have been described in this paper likely
to lead? And how can public policy best equip itself to provide the stable financial environment that
is most conducive to the development of the real economy?
Predictions  are  always  hazardous,  but  certain  propositions  can  be  made  with
reasonable confidence. Firstly, financial innovation will continue at a rapid pace, and global financial
markets will become even more integrated, efficient and complete. The capacity of governments to
resist  market  trends  or  pursue  unsustainable  policies  will  shrink  further.  Secondly,  as  a
consequences,  there  will  be  a  premium  in  firm,  transparent  and  credible  anchors  for  policy.
Achieving  price  stability  will  be  easier  (though  not  easy)  if  market  participants  know  what  the
authorities are trying to achieve and how they are going about it (and if there is an effective market
discipline on the authorities to prevent backsliding).
A third proposition which it seems safe to advance is that there will be an intensified
search  for  ways  to  ensure  systemic  stability  while  fostering  a  competitive  and  efficient  banking
system. The plethora of financial system crises in recent years6 has amply illustrated the costs of lax
practices  in  the  financial  sector.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  recognition  that  any  indiscriminate
expansion of safety net arrangements creates moral hazard problems, while excessive regulation leads
to inefficiencies. My expectation is that regulatory economics will become a fruitful area of research
for central bankers and financial supervisors. The goal will be to develop a regulatory structure that
has as its anchor the replication of market disciplines, while  at  the  same  time  providing  protection
Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso and Fabrizio Saccomanni: "Managing a Market-Led Global Financial System", Banca
Goldstein, Morris: "The Case for an International Banking Standard", Institute for International Economics,
                                                  
5
d'Italia, Mimeo.
6
Washington, April 1997.
BIS Review   81/1997
- 11 -
against the systemic transmission of instability. Transparency and disclosure have an obvious role to
play here.
Fourthly,  and  lastly,  the  international  monetary  system.  Here,  too,  the  power  of
market forces seems likely to grow. This has the potential for beneficial consequences insofar as bad
policies are disciplined and good policies are rewarded. But it would be naive to suggest that market
forces always get it right. My expectation is that efforts will need to be devoted to promoting greater
stability  in  the  market-led  international  monetary  system.  The  bulk  of  these  efforts  will  be  in  the
direction of improving policies (and their mutual consistency) and making markets more transparent
(e.g. through better information). But it cannot be excluded that more direct measures will be required
to limit damaging exchange rate fluctuations or contain the cost of currency crises.
Taken together, this presents a full agenda for central bank policy-makers. I noted at
the  outset  of  this  lecture  that  “the  last  twenty-five  years  have  been  an  eventful  time  for  central
banking”. The years ahead promise to be no less eventful.
BIS Review   81/1997
