Mr.  McDonough  assesses  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  ensuring  a  stable
price  and  financial  environment  and  fostering  sustainable  growth      Remarks  by  the
President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Mr. William J. McDonough, at the Society
of Investment Analysts in Dublin on 11/2/97.
I  am  delighted  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  the  Society  of  Investment
Analysts here in Ireland, home of my forebears. In my remarks this evening, I want to say a few
words  on  a  topic  of  great  importance  to  both  our  professions:  the  role  of  central  banks  in
ensuring a stable price and financial environment, and fostering sustainable growth. I would also
like to offer some thoughts on the importance of a safe and sound banking system for the well-
being of the economy.
As members of the financial community, we all recognize the importance of price
stability to the successful long-run performance of the economy. Indeed, there now seems to be
a worldwide convergence of views among central bankers and investors alike on the importance
of price stability as the primary goal of monetary policy. For me personally, stable prices have
always been the prism for making monetary policy decisions.
As  I  see  it,  price  stability  must  be  viewed  in  a  long-run  context  as  an  ongoing
goal,  not  a  one-time  objective.  That  goal  requires  monetary  policy  to  be  oriented  beyond  the
horizon  of  its  immediate  or  near-term  impact  on  inflation  and  the  economy.  The  primary
purpose  of  near-term  policy  actions  should  be  to  set  the  economy  on  a  long-term,  permanent
path to price stability and sound economic growth.
This  orientation  puts  the  focus  of  policy  on  inflation  expectations  over  the  long
term -- the time horizon that is appropriate for most saving and investment decisions. Businesses
and households are understandably concerned about the long-term consequences of inflation and
price  level  uncertainty.  This  is  the  frame  of  reference  reflected  in  the  conceptual  definition  of
price  stability  offered  by  the  chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  Alan  Greenspan  --  that  price
stability  is  achieved  when  people  do  not  consider  inflation  a  factor  in  their  business  and
economic decisions.
Long-term inflation expectations must be anchored to a transparent and rigorous
commitment  by  the  central  bank  to  a  well-defined  standard  of  price  stability,  and  unavoidable
deviations from the goal of price stability must be explained with reference to that standard.
In my  view,  price  stability  is  a  means  to  an  end  --  the  promotion  of  sustainable
economic  growth.  Only  with  long-term  price  stability  can  the  economy  expect  to  achieve  the
maximum levels of productivity and living standards.
Price stability is both important and desirable because a rising price level, even at
moderate  rates,  imposes  substantial  economic  costs  on  society.  These  costs  emanate  from  a
variety of sources, including:
increased  uncertainty  about  the  outcome  of  business  decisions  and
-
profitability;
-
inflation with the tax system;
-
-
activities.
adverse  effects  on  the  cost  of  capital  resulting  from  the  interaction  of
reduced effectiveness of the price and market systems; and
distortions  that  create  perverse  incentives  to  engage  in  nonproductive
BIS Review   17/1997
- 2 -
As a former commercial banker, I am especially aware of the negative effects of
one particular type of nonproductive activity induced by inflation’s distortion of incentives -- the
overinvestment  of  resources  in  the  financial  sector.  It  is  well  known  that,  in  high-inflation
economies,  the  resources  diverted  from  productive  activities  to  nonproductive  financial
transactions are enormous. But even moderate inflation rates can cause substantial  diversion  to
nonproductive  financial  activities,  and  this  diversion  deserves  greater  attention  than  it  often
receives in economists’ list of the costs of inflation.
As I look back over the last ten years or so, I am pleased that the Federal Reserve
and  many  other  central  banks  have  been  successful  in  controlling  price  pressures  and  putting
inflation on a long-run downward track. Success  in  dealing  with  inflation  clearly  enhances  the
credibility of monetary policy and policy makers.
From  my  perspective,  the  continuing  challenge  for  central  banks  is  to  ensure
long-term  credibility  for  monetary  policy  by  sustaining  low  inflation  environments.  Central
banks are generally better able to meet this challenge if they are substantially immunized from
short-term political pressures, and are firmly committed to price stability as the overriding goal
of monetary policy.
Empirical  research  in  recent  years  has  shown  that  both  the  average  rate  of
inflation  and  its  variability  tend  to  decline  in  tandem  with  increased  independence  for  central
banks.  This  is  why  so  many  governments,  including  those  among  the  emerging  market
economies,  have  been  providing  their  central  banks  with  increased  autonomy.  Of  course,  it  is
possible to have low inflation or price stability even with a limited degree of legal central bank
independence, but the record clearly shows that a country is more likely to have low inflation if
its  central  bank  is  independent.  One  important  reason  for  this  is  that  the  fiscal  authorities  in
many countries have not proven to be highly disciplined.
Of course, some would argue that focusing on price stability as the primary goal
of monetary policy means that central banks would no longer be concerned about output or job
growth.  I  believe  this  view  simply  is  wrong.  A  stable  price  and  financial  environment  almost
certainly enhances the capacity of monetary policy to fight occasions of cyclical weakness in the
economy.
A  central  bank’s  commitment  to  price  stability  over  the  longer  term  does  not
mean that monetary policy can ignore the short-term impact of economic events. It is important
to  recognize  that,  even  when  an  economy  is  set  on  the  path  to  price  stability,  and  price
expectations are contained, it does not necessarily mean that all potential sources of inflationary
shocks have been eliminated.
Moreover, while there is no long-run trade-off between unemployment, or output,
and inflation, both formal evidence and common sense observation on wage and price rigidities
attest to the existence of such  a  trade-off  in  the  short  run.  In  the  long  run,  however,  monetary
policy’s  impact  is  only  on  inflation;  potential  output  primarily  is  determined  by  advances  in
technology, growth in human and physical capital and other real resources.
Because  of  the  uncertainty  about  the  timing  and  significance  of  short-term
monetary  policy  effects  on  economic  activity,  as  well  as  all  other  uncertainties  concerning  the
economy,  there  are  always  differences  of  view  about  the  speed  with  which  policy  should  be
adjusted,  and  on  the  balance  of  risks  in  dealing  with  ongoing  economic  developments.  These
conflicts become more marked when an economy confronts supply  shocks  that  drive  up  prices
BIS Review   17/1997
- 3 -
sharply and suddenly -- such  as  the  two  oil  shocks  of  the  1970s.  In  those  circumstances,  from
my perspective, the appropriate course, consistent with maintaining  longer  term  price  stability,
should  be  to  bring  inflation  down  somewhat  gradually,  as  the  economy  adjusts  to  the  shift  in
relative prices.
As  I  see  it,  monetary  policy  must  be  formulated  cautiously,  and  cannot  ignore
business  cycle  developments.  In  establishing  price  stability  as  the  primary  goal  of  monetary
policy, therefore, it is best to recognize that monetary policy does affect output in the short run.
A  central  bank  can  appropriately  be  assigned  the  task  of  promoting  sustainable  economic
growth,  while  maintaining  long-term  price  stability  and  ensuring  the  health  of  the  financial
system. This way of articulating policy goals has the advantage of meeting the public’s need to
understand  the  basis  for  monetary  policy  decisions,  and  may  help,  therefore,  to  enhance  the
democratic accountability of monetary policy.
Once  monetary  policy  is  firmly  committed  to  price  stability,  how  can  a  central
bank best reach that goal? Clearly, at an operational level, no single formula or implementation
strategy  can  be  expected  to  succeed  in  all  countries  and  under  all  circumstances;  possible
approaches can take many different forms. The choices depend on a country’s history, economic
conditions,  traditions  and  institutions.  But  all  successful  approaches  share  two  important
features:  first,  they  focus  on  a  long-term  time  horizon  and,  second,  they  provide  a  clear  and
public standard for the assessment of policy.
What  is  most  significant  is  not  the  specific  way  a  central  bank  chooses  to  seek
price stability, but rather the underlying commitment to that goal.
While  monetary  policy  aimed  at  long-run  price  stability  is  critical  to  fostering
sustainable  economic  growth,  central  banks’  role  in  promoting  growth  and,  more  generally,  a
healthy  economy  goes  beyond  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Through  involvement  in
financial regulation and supervision, as well as in the oversight of payments system operations,
central  banks  play  a  key  role  in  preserving  and  enhancing  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the
banking and financial system.
All  of  these  central  bank  functions  are  mutually  dependent  and,  together,
highlight  the  fact  that  the  structure  and  workings  of  the  banking  system  are  integral  to  a
country’s  financial  stability  and  economic  growth.  Clearly,  monetary  policy  cannot  succeed  in
its mission if the underlying financial system is unstable.
The importance of an efficient, safe and sound banking and financial system for a
country’s  long-term  economic  prospects  cannot  be  overstated.  In  any  market  economy,  the
banking  and  financial  system  plays  a  central  role  in  mobilizing  a  society’s  savings  and  in
channeling these savings into investment and other productive uses. This intermediation process
is one of the core determinants of the pace of a country’s economic development. Moreover, the
banking  and  financial  system  must  facilitate  transactions  in  an  economy  by  ensuring  that  they
can  be  effected  safely  and  swiftly  on  an  ongoing  basis.  Both  buyers  and  sellers  of  goods  and
services  must  have  confidence  that  instruments  used  to  make  payments  will  be  honored  and
accepted by all parties.
These crucial functions of transforming savings into productive uses and making
payments are often taken for granted. But, in fact, it can be difficult to ensure that the legal and
institutional framework within which these functions are performed is consistent with the often
conflicting  goals  of  free  choice,  economic  efficiency,  safety  and  financial  market  stability.
BIS Review   17/1997
- 4 -
Experience has proven that there is no easy way to shape financial institutions in a manner that
appropriately balances these goals under changing economic conditions.
Today,  numerous  countries  --  including  Ireland  and  the  United  States  --  are
considering which paths to follow in reforming and modernizing their banking industries. These
deliberations  are  of  great  importance,  because  a  well-functioning  and  stable  banking  and
financial system is a critical foundation for long-run growth and prosperity of an economy. And
such  reform  is  inevitably  difficult,  for  reasons  which  are  a  classic  blend  of  political  and
economic  considerations  rooted  in  the  crucial  functions  the  banking  system  must  perform  in  a
market economy.
Moreover,  banking  system  reform  is  made  all  the  more  challenging  by  the  fact
that such reforms cannot be viewed in isolation from reforms in the central bank, or independent
of those in the capital markets. In fact, the greatest challenge may lie in forging these individual
pieces in such a way that they fit together in a cohesive whole that serves the dictates of stability,
growth, and public confidence.
For  a  financial  system  to  mobilize  and  allocate  a  society’s  savings  successfully
and  facilitate  day-to-day  transactions,  there  must  be  a  class  of  financial  institutions  and
instruments that the  public  views  as  safe  and  convenient  outlets  for  its  savings.  Of  course,  the
single dominant class of institution that performs this  crucial  dual  role  as  repository  of  a  large
part  of  society’s  liquid  savings,  and  the  entity  through  which  payments  are  made  is  the
commercial  bank.  This  is  true  even  in  countries  with  highly  developed  capital  markets,
especially  when  it  is  kept  in  mind  that  participants  in  the  capital  markets  rely  heavily  on  the
banking system for their financing facilities.
Banks cannot play an effective role in the financial intermediation process unless
the public has the utmost confidence in the banking system. This confidence is a key reason why
banking  institutions  and  banking  instruments  are  crucial  to  a  country’s  economic  growth  and
development. The combination of functions typically provided by commercial banks, however,
also carries with it the risk that a loss of confidence in an individual institution can spread to the
system as a whole, the so-called systemic risk phenomenon.
Instances  in  which  a  country  experiences  a  loss  of  confidence  in  its  financial
institutions  usually  result  in  major  damage  to  the  economy.  Given  the  indispensable  role  that
financial  institutions  play  in  the  success  of  a  country’s  economy,  governments  clearly  have  a
responsibility to subject financial institutions to some form of regulation or oversight.
But  here  again,  there  is  need  for  balance.  Restrictions  placed  on  banks  by  the
financial  oversight  apparatus  cannot  be  allowed  to  discourage  risk-taking  per  se,  because
risk-taking  is  an  inherent  part  of  banking  and  finance  in  market  economies.  To  perform
successfully, a commercial banking system requires a delicate balance  between  risk-taking  and
maintaining  public  confidence.  Because  of  the  importance  and  the  difficulties  inherent  in  the
balancing act, banking systems are generally subject to a higher degree of official oversight and
regulation  than  are  most  other  forms  of  private  enterprise,  and  supported  by  some  form  of  a
broad safety net.
While  the  specifics  can  differ  appreciably  across  countries,  these  safety  nets  are
usually  constructed  along  similar  lines.  They  generally  include  oversight  of  the  affairs  of
banking institutions in the form of inspection and examination of the institutions for compliance
with  a  broad  set  of  safety  and  soundness  standards;  some  type  of  protection  against  losses  for
BIS Review   17/1997
- 5 -
small  depositors  and  investors;  and  some  form  of  emergency  liquidity  facility  for  banking
institutions  and,  occasionally,  for  other  financial  institutions  as  well.  Finally,  the  payments
system,  a  crucial  link  in  any  financial  system,  generally  includes  some  form  of  official
regulation of or participation in its operations.
These  important  aspects  of  the  safety  net  often  feed  into  one  or  more  of  the
functions  performed  by  central  banks.  For  this  reason,  the  central  bank  usually  plays  a  major
role in the operation of one or more of these facets of the safety net. For example, the emergency
liquidity facility is almost always the discount window of the central bank. In many countries --
including  Ireland  and  the  United  States  --  the  central  bank  also  plays  an  important  role  in  the
supervision of banking institutions and in the oversight of payments system operations.
The  important  role  played  by  the  central  bank  in  helping  to  build  and  maintain
confidence in the underlying stability of the financial system in turn implies that there must be a
high  degree  of  public  confidence  in  the  central  bank  itself.  This  brings  me  back  full  circle:
achieving and maintaining that public confidence  depends  first  and  foremost  on  the  success  of
the central bank in discharging its monetary policy responsibilities. A sound economy and sound
money are virtually synonymous, which is why monetary policy stands at the center  of  central
bank functions.
The  importance  of  monetary  policy  is  also  the  reason  why  central  banks  need
special  independent  status  within  the  governments  they  serve.  In  my  view,  it  is  particularly
critical  that  the  central  bank  not  be  directly  responsible  for  financing  government  budget
deficits;  such  a  responsibility  can,  over  time,  compromise  the  financial  integrity  of  the  central
bank, and thereby, public confidence in it. Note, however, that even without any involvement in
direct  financing  of  government  budget  deficits,  central  banks  have  a  major  stake  in  the
development  and  maintenance  of  a  smoothly-functioning  government  securities  market,  which
can  provide  substantial  benefits  to  the  economy  beyond  those  emanating  from  private  sector
financing of government budget deficits.
In closing, I want to stress that the commitment to price stability  as  the  primary
goal  of  monetary  policy  in  no  way  implies  that  the  health  of  the  economy  or  of  the  financial
system  should  be  sacrificed.  On  the  contrary,  what  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  is  that  by
ensuring  a  stable  price  and  financial  environment,  the  central  bank  helps  foster  economic
growth.
I  believe  that  no  central  bank  can  maintain  price  stability  over  the  longer  term
without public support for the necessary policies. Only with the confidence of the public in their
policies  and  their  own  lasting  dedication  to  non-inflationary  growth  together  with  a
well-functioning financial system can central banks succeed in achieving and maintaining price
and financial stability.
BIS Review   17/1997
