Ms. Rivlin discusses the prudential regulation of banks and how to improve
it      Remarks  by  the  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve
System,  Ms.  Alice  M.  Rivlin,  at  the  The  Brookings  Institution  National  Issues  Forum  in
Washington on 19/12/96.
I discovered when I joined the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
about  six  months  ago  that  most  of  my  friends  --  including  my  sophisticated  public  policy
oriented  friends  --  had  only  a  hazy  notion  what  their  central  bank  did.  Many  of  them  said,
enthusiastically,  “Congratulations!”  Then  they  asked  with  a  bit  of  embarrassment,  “Is  it  a
full-time job?” or “What will you find to do between meetings?” The meetings they were aware
of,  of  course,  were  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  They  knew  that  the  FOMC
meets every six weeks or so to “set interest rates.”  That  sounds  like  real  power,  so  the  FOMC
gets a lot of press attention even when, as happened again this week, we meet and decide to do
absolutely nothing at all.
The  group  gathered  here  today,  however,  realizes  that  monetary  policy,  while
important, is not actually very time-consuming. If you cared enough to come to this conference,
you also have a strong conviction that the health and vigor of  the  American  economy  depends
not only on good macro-economic policy, although that certainly helps, but also  on  the  safety,
soundness and efficiency of the banking system. We need a banking system that works well and
one  in  which  citizens  and  businesses,  foreign  and  domestic,  have  high  and  well  placed
confidence.
So I want to talk today, as seems appropriate on the fifth anniversary of FDICIA,
about  the  subject  that  occupies  much  of  our  attention  at  the  Federal  Reserve:  the  prudential
regulation of banks and how to improve it. Indeed, I want to focus today, not so much on what
Congress  needs  to  do  to  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  bank  system  in  this  rapidly
changing world -- there are others on the program to take on that task -- but more narrowly on
how bank regulators should go about their jobs of supervising bank risk-taking.
The evolving search for policies that would guarantee a safe, sound and efficient
banking  system  has  featured  learning  from  experience.  In  the  1930s,  Americans  learned,
expensively,  about  the  hazards  of  not  having  a  safety  net  in  a  crisis  that  almost  wiped  out  the
banking  system.  In  the  1980s,  they  learned  a  lot  about  the  hazards  of  having  a  safety  net,
especially about the moral hazard associated with deposit insurance.
Deposit  insurance,  which  had  seemed  so  benign  and  so  successful  in  building
confidence  and  preventing  runs  on  banks,  suddenly  revealed  its  downside  for  all  to  see.  Some
insured  institutions,  mostly  thrifts,  but  also  savings  banks,  and  not  a  few  commercial  banks,
were taking on risks with a “heads I win, tails you lose” attitude -- sometimes collecting on high
stakes  bets  but  often  leaving  deposit  insurance  funds  to  pick  up  the  pieces.  At  the  same  time,
some  regulators,  especially  the  old  FSLIC,  which  was  notably  strapped  for  funds,  were
compounding  the  problem  --  and  greatly  increasing  the  ultimate  cost  of  its  resolution  --  by
engaging in regulatory “forbearance” when faced with technically insolvent institutions.
The  lessons  were  costly,  but  Americans  do  learn  from  their  mistakes.  The
advocates  of  banking  reform,  many  of  them  participants  in  this  conference,  saw  the  problems
posed  by  moral  hazard  in  the  context  of  ineffectual  supervision  and  set  out  to  design  a  better
system.
BIS Review   1/1997
- 2 -
Essentially, the reform agenda had two main components:
* First,  expanded  powers  for  depository  institutions  that  would  permit  them  to
diversify in ways that might reduce risks and improve operating efficiency;
* Second,  improving  the  effectiveness  of  regulation  and  supervision  by
instructing  regulators,  in  effect,  to  act  more  like  the  market  itself  when
conducting prudential regulation.
FDICIA  was  a  first  step  toward  meeting  the  second  challenge  --  how  to  make
regulators  act  more  like  the  market.  It  called  for  a  reduction  in  the  potential  for  regulatory
“forbearance”  by  laying  down  the  conditions  under  which  conservatorship  and  receivership
should  be  initiated.  It  called  for  supervisory  sanctions  based  on  measurable  performance  (in
particular,  the  Prompt  Corrective  Action  provisions  that  based  supervisory  action  on  a  bank’s
risk-based capital ratio). The Act required the FDIC and RTC to resolve failed institutions on a
least-cost  basis.  In  other  words,  the  Act  required  the  depository  receivers  to  act  as  if  the
insurance  funds  were  private  insurers,  rather  than  continue  the  past  policy  of  protecting
uninsured  depositors  and  other  bank  creditors.  Finally,  FDICIA  placed  limitations  on  the
doctrine of “Too Big To Fail,” by requiring agency consensus and administration concurrence in
order to prop up any large, failing bank.  In  a  few  places,  however,  FDICIA  went  too  far.  The
provisions of the Act that dealt with micro management by regulators were immediately seen to
be  “over  the  top,”  and  were  later  repealed.  The  Act  provided  a  framework  for  regulators  to
invoke market-like discipline. It left room for them to move their own regulatory techniques in
this direction -- a subject to which I will return in a minute.
The  other  objective  of  reform  --  diversification  of  bank  activities  through  an
expansion of bank powers -- has not yet resulted in legislation and is still very much an on-going
debate.  In  part,  this  failure  to  take  legislative  action  reflected  the  long-running  ability  of  the
nonbank competition to use its political muscle to forestall increased powers for banks. But the
inaction  on  expanded  powers  also  reflected  a  Congressional  concern  that  additional  powers
might be used to take on additional risk, which, on the heels of the banking collapse of the late
1980s, represented poor timing, to say the least. There was also some Congressional disposition
to punish “greedy bankers,” who were seen as  the  reason  for  the  collapse  and  the  diversion  of
taxpayer  funds  to  pay  for  thrift  insolvencies.  Whatever  the  reasons,  not  only  did  the  102nd
Congress  fail  to  enact  expanded  bank  powers,  but  so  did  the  next  two  Congresses.  We  are
hopeful that the 105th Congress will succeed where its predecessors have failed. Meanwhile, the
regulatory agencies have acted to expand bank powers within the limits of existing law.
The Federal Reserve has proposed both liberalization of Section 20 activities and
expedited  procedures  for  processing  applications  under  Regulation  Y.  The  OCC  has  acted  to
liberalize  banks’  insurance  agency  powers  and,  most  recently,  to  liberalize  procedures  for
operating subsidiaries of national banks. Of course, I would have to turn in my Federal Reserve
badge  and  give  up  my  parking  pass  if  I  did  not  mention  that  we  at  the  Fed  believe  that  some
activities are best carried out in a subsidiary of the holding company rather than a subsidiary of
the bank. We believe that the more distance between the bank and its new, nonbank operations,
the more likely that we can separate one from the other and avoid the spreading of the subsidy
associated with the safety net.
While  the  regulators  can  move  in  the  right  direction,  it  is  still  imperative  that
Congress  act.  Artificial  barriers  between  and  among  various  forms  of  financial  activity  are
harmful  to  the  best  interests  of  the  consumers  of  financial  services,  to  the  providers  of  those
BIS Review   1/1997
- 3 -
services,  and  to  the  general  stability  and  well-being  of  our  financial  system,  most  broadly
defined. Congress should consider this issue and take the next steps.
Let  me  turn  now  to  what  I  consider  to  be  one  of  the  most  critical  issues  facing
regulators, especially in a future in which financial markets likely will dictate significant further
increases in the scope and complexity of banking activities. I am referring to the issue of how to
conduct  optimal  supervision  of  banks.  Fortunately,  there  appears  actually  to  be  an  evolving
consensus at least on the general principle. Regulators, including the Federal Reserve,  strongly
support the basic approach embodied in FDICIA; namely that regulators should place limits on
depository  institutions  in  such  a  way  as  to  replicate,  as  closely  as  possible,  the  discipline  that
would be imposed by a marketplace consisting of informed participants and devoid of the moral
hazard associated with the safety net.
Unfortunately, as always, the devil is in the details. The difficult question is how
should a regulator use “market-based” or “performance-based” measures in determining which,
if  any,  supervisory  sanctions  or  limits  to  place  on  a  bank.  FDICIA’s  approach  was
straightforward. Supervisory sanctions under Prompt Corrective Action were to be based on the
bank’s risk performance as measured by its levels of regulatory capital, in particular its leverage
ratio  and  total  risk-based  capital  ratio  under  the  Basle  capital  standards.  These  standards  now
seem  well-intended  but  rather  outdated.  Certainly,  the  Basle  capital  standards  did  the  job  for
which they were designed, namely stopping the secular decline in bank capital levels that, by the
late  1980s,  threatened  general  safety  and  soundness.  But  the  scope  and  complexity  of  banking
activities has proceeded apace during the last two decades or so, and standard capital measures,
at least for our very largest and most complex organizations, are no longer adequate measures on
which to base supervisory action for several reasons:
* The regulatory capital standards apportion capital only for credit risk and, most
recently,  for  market  risk  of  trading  activities.  Interest  rate  risk  is  dealt  with
subjectively, and other forms of risk, including operating  risk,  are  not  treated
within the standards.
* Also, the capital standards are, despite the appellation “risk-based,” very much
a “one-size-fits-all” rule. For example, all non-mortgage loans to corporations
and  households  receive  the  same  arbitrary  8  percent  capital  requirement.  A
secured  loan  to  a  triple-A  rated  company  receives  the  same  treatment  as  an
unsecured loan to a junk-rated company. In other words, the capital standards
don’t measure credit  risk  although  they  represent  a  crude  proxy  for  such  risk
within broad categories of banking assets.
* Finally,  the  capital  standards  give  insufficient  consideration  to  hedging  or
mitigating  risk  through  the  use  of  credit  derivatives  or  effective  portfolio
diversification.
These  shortcomings  of  the  regulatory  capital  standards  were  beginning  to  be
understood  even  as  they  were  being  implemented,  but  no  consistent,  consensus  technology
existed at that time for invoking a more sophisticated standard than the Basle norms. To be sure,
more  sophisticated  standards  were  being  used  by  bank  supervisors,  during  the  examination
process,  to  determine  the  adequacy  of  capital  at  any  individual  institution.  These  supervisory
determinations  of  capital  adequacy  on  a  bank-by-bank  basis,  reflected  in  the  CAMEL  ratings
given  to  banks  and  the  BOPEC  ratings  given  to  bank  holding  companies,  are  much  more
inclusive  than  the  Basle  standards.  Research  shows  that  CAMEL  ratings  are  much  better
predictors of bank insolvency than “risk-based” capital ratios. But, a bank-by-bank supervision,
of course, is not the same thing as the writing of regulations that apply to all banks.
BIS Review   1/1997
- 4 -
It  is  now  evident  that  the  simple  regulatory  capital  standards  that  apply  to  all
banks  can  be  quite  misleading.  Nominally  high  regulatory  capital  ratios  --  even  risk-based
capital ratios that are 50 or 100 percent higher than the minimums -- are no longer indicators of
bank soundness.
Meanwhile, however, some of our largest and most sophisticated banks have been
getting  ahead  of  the  regulators  and  doing  the  two  things  one  must  do  in  order  to  properly
manage  risk  and  determine  capital  adequacy.  First,  they  are  statistically  quantifying  risk  by
estimating the shape of loss probability distributions associated with their risk positions.  These
quantitative measures of risk are calculated  by  asset  type,  by  product  line,  and,  in  some  cases,
even  down  to  the  individual  customer  level.  Second,  the  more  sophisticated  banks  are
calculating  economic  capital,  or  “risk  capital,”  to  be  allocated  to  each  asset,  each  line  of
business,  and  even  to  each  customer,  in  order  to  determine  risk-adjusted  profitability  of  each
type  of  bank  activity.  In  making  these  risk  capital  allocations,  banks  are  defining  and  meeting
internal  corporate  standards  for  safety  and  soundness.  For  example,  a  banker  might  desire  to
achieve at least a single-A rating on his own corporate debt. He sees that, over history, single-A
debt has a default probability of less than one-tenth of one percent over a one year time horizon.
So the banker sets an internal corporate goal to allocate enough capital so that the probability of
losses  exceeding  capital  is  less  than  0.1  percent.  In  the  language  of  statistics,  this  means  that
allocated capital must “cover” 99.9 percent of the estimated loss probability distribution.
Once  the  banker  estimates  risk  and  allocates  capital  to  that  risk,  the  internal
capital  allocations  can  be  used  in  a  variety  of  ways    --    for  example,  in  so-called  RAROC  or
risk-adjusted return on capital models that measure the relative profitability of bank activities. If
a particular bank product generates a return to allocated capital that is too low, the bank can seek
to cut expenses, reprice the product, or focus its efforts on other, more profitable ventures. These
profitability  analyses,  moreover,  are  conducted  on  an  “apples-to-apples”  basis,  since  the
profitability of each business line is adjusted to reflect the riskiness of the business line.
What  these  bankers  have  actually  done  themselves,  in  calculating  these  internal
capital  requirements,  is  something  regulators  have  never  done  --  defined  a  bank  soundness
target. What regulator, for example, has said that he wants capital to be high enough to reduce to
0.1 percent the probability of insolvency? Regulators have said only that capital ratios should be
no lower than some number (8 percent in the case of the Basle standards). But as we should all
be aware, a high capital ratio, if it is accompanied by a highly risky portfolio composition, can
result in a bank with a high probability of insolvency. The question should not be how high is
the bank’s capital ratio, but how low is its failure probability.
In  sharp  contrast  to  our  8  percent  one-size-fits-all  capital  standard,  the  internal
risk-capital calculations of banks result in a very wide range of capital allocations, even within a
particular category of credit instrument. For example, for an unsecured commercial credit line,
typical  internal  capital  allocations  might  range  from  less  than  1  percent  for  a  triple-A  or
double-A  rated  obligor,  to  well  over  20  percent  for  an  obligor  in  one  of  the  lowest  rating
categories. The range of internal capital allocations widens even more when we look at capital
calculations  for  complex  risk  positions  such  as  various  forms  of  credit  derivatives.  This  great
diversity in economic capital allocations, as compared to regulatory capital allocations, creates at
least two types of problem.
* When  the  regulatory  capital  requirement  is  higher  than  the  economic  capital
allocation, the bank must either engage in costly regulatory arbitrage to evade
BIS Review   1/1997
- 5 -
the  regulatory  requirement  or  change  its  portfolio,  possibly  leading  to
suboptimal resource allocation.
* When  the  regulatory  requirement  is  lower  than  the  economic  capital
requirement,  the  bank  may  choose  to  hold  capital  above  the  regulatory
requirement  but  below  the  economic  requirement;  in  this  case,  the  bank’s
nominally high capital ratio may mask the true nature of its risk position.
Measuring  bank  soundness  and  overall  bank  performance  is  becoming  more
critical as the risk activities of banks become more complex. This condition is especially evident
in  the  various  nontraditional  activities  of  banks.  In  fact,  “nontraditional”  is  no  longer  a  very
good  adjective  to  describe  much  of  what  goes  on  at  our  larger  institutions.  Take  asset
securitization, for example. No longer do our largest banks simply take in deposit funds and lend
out the money to borrowers. Currently, well over $200 billion in assets that, in times past, have
resided on the books of banks, now are owned  by  remote  securitization  conduits  sponsored  by
banks.  Sponsorship  of  securitization,  which  is  now  almost  solely  a  large  bank  phenomenon,
holds  the  potential  for  completely  transforming  the  traditional  paradigm  of  “banking.”  Now,
loans are made directly by the conduits, or are made by the banks and then immediately sold to
the conduits. To finance the origination or purchase of the loans, a conduit issues several classes
of  asset-backed  securities  collateralized  by  the  loans.  Most  of  the  conduit’s  debt  is  issued  to
investors who require that the senior securities be highly rated, generally double-A and triple-A.
In order to achieve these ratings, the conduit  obtains  credit  enhancements  insulating  the  senior
security  holders  from  defaults  on  the  underlying  loans.  Generally,  it  is  the  bank  sponsor  that
provides these credit enhancements, which can be in the form of standby letters of credit to the
conduit, or via the purchase of the most junior/subordinated securities issued by the conduit. In
return for providing the credit protection, as well as the loan origination and servicing functions,
the bank lays claim to all residual spreads between the yields on the loans and the interest and
non-interest cost of the conduit’s securities, net of any loan losses. In other words, securitization
results in banks taking on almost identically the same risks as if the loans were kept on the books
of the bank the old-fashioned way.
But while the credit risk of a securitized loan pool may be the same as the credit
risk of holding that loan pool on the books, our  capital  standards  do  not  always  recognize  this
fact. For example, by supplying a standby letter of credit covering so-called “first-dollar” losses
for the conduit, a bank might be able to reduce its regulatory capital requirement, for some of its
activities,  by  90  percent  or  more  compared  with  what  would  be  required  if  the  bank  held  the
loans directly on its own books. The question, of course, is whether the bank’s internal  capital
allocation systems recognize the similarity in risk between, on the one hand, owning the whole
loans and, on the other hand, providing a credit enhancement to a securitization conduit.
If  the  risk  measurement  and  management  systems  of  the  bank  are  faulty,  then
holding a nominally high capital ratio -- say, 10 percent -- is little consolation. In fact, nominally
high capital ratios can be deceiving  to  market  participants.  If,  for  example,  the  bank’s  balance
sheet  is  less  than  transparent,  potential  investors  or  creditors,  seeing  the  nominally  high
10 percent  capital,  but  not  recognizing  that  the  economic  risk  capital  allocation  should,  in
percentage terms, be much higher, could direct an inappropriately high level of scarce resources
toward the bank.
Credit derivatives are another example of the evolution. The  bottom  line  is  that,
as  we  move  into  the  21st  century,  traditional  notions  of  “capital  adequacy”  will  become  less
useful  in  determining  the  safety  and  soundness  of  our  largest,  most  sophisticated,  banking
organizations.  This  growing  discrepancy  is  important  because  “performance-based”  solutions
BIS Review   1/1997
- 6 -
likely  will  continue  to  be  touted  as  the  basis  for  expanded  bank  powers  or  reductions  in
burdensome  regulation.  For  example,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  recent  proposed  liberalization  of
procedures for Regulation Y activities applies to banking companies that are “well-capitalized”
and  “well-managed.”  Similarly,  the  OCC’s  recent  proposed  liberalization  of  rules  for  bank
operating  subsidiaries  applies  to  “well-capitalized”  institutions.  Also,  industry  participants
continue to call for expanded powers and/or reduced regulatory burden based on “market tests”
of good management and adequate capital.
It  will  not  be  easy  reaching  consensus  on  how  to  measure  bank  soundness  and
overall  bank  performance.  It  cannot  simply  be  done  by  observing  market  indicators.  For
example, we cannot easily use the public ratings of holding company debt. The ratings, after all,
are  achieved  given  the  existence  of  the  safety  net.  The  ratings  are  biased,  therefore,  from  the
perspective of achieving our stated goal -- to impose prudential limits on banks as if there were
no net. In addition, I am sure that there would be disagreement between market participants and
regulators over what should be acceptable debt ratings. The solution may be for the regulators to
use  the  analytical  tools  developed  by  the  market  participants  themselves  for  risk  and
performance assessment. Regulators already have begun to move in this direction. For example,
beginning in January 1998, qualifying large multinational banks will be able to use their internal
Value-at-Risk  models  to  help  set  capital  requirements  for  the  market  risk  inherent  in  their
trading  activities.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  also  conducting  a  pilot  test  of  the  pre-commitment
approach  to  capital  for  market  risk.  In  this  approach,  banks  can  choose  their  own  capital
allocations, but would be sanctioned heavily if cumulative trading losses during a quarter were
to  exceed  their  chosen  capital  allocations.  These  new  and  innovative  methods  for  treating  the
age-old problem of capital adequacy are likely to be followed by an unending, evolutionary flow
of  improvements  in  the  prudential  supervisory  process.  As  the  industry  makes  technological
advances in risk measurement, these advances will become imbedded in the supervisory process.
For example, the banking agencies have announced programs to place an increased emphasis on
banks’  internal  risk  measurement  and  management  processes  within  the  assessment  of  overall
management quality -- that is, how well a bank employs modern technology to manage risk will
be reflected in the “M” portion of the bank’s  CAMEL  rating.  In  a  similar  vein,  now  that  VaR
models  are  being  used  to  assess  regulatory  capital  for  market  risk,  it  is  easy  to  envision  that,
down the road, banks’ internal credit risk models and associated internal capital allocations will
also be used to help set regulatory capital requirements.
Regulation  and  supervision,  like  industry  practices  themselves,  are  continually
evolving  processes.  As  supervisors,  our  goal  must  be  to  stay  abreast  of  best  practices,
incorporate these practices into our own procedures where appropriate, and do so in a way that
allows banks to remain sufficiently flexible and competitive. In conducting prudential regulation
we  should  always  remember  that  the  optimal  number  of  bank  failures  is  not  zero.  Indeed,
“market-based”  performance  means  that  some  institutions,  either  through  poor  management
choices, or just because of plain old bad luck, will fail. As regulators, we must carefully balance
these market-like results with concerns over systemic risk. And, as regulators of banks, we must
always  remember  that  we  do  not  operate  in  a  vacuum  --  the  activities  of  nonbank  financial
institutions are also important  to  the  general  well-being  of  our  financial  system  and  the  macro
economy.
Regulators, of course, can only work with the framework laid down by Congress.
Let  me  conclude  with  the  hope  that  this  Congress  will  build  on  the  experience  of  the  last  few
years, including the experience with FDICIA, and take the next steps toward creating a structural
and regulatory framework appropriate to the 21st century.
BIS Review   1/1997
