Mr.  Stals  looks  at  the  effects  of  the  changing  financial  environment  on
monetary  policy  in  South  Africa      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve
Bank,  Dr.  C.  Stals,  at  the  Annual  Dinner  of  the  Pretoria  branch  of  the  Economic  Society  of
South Africa held in Pretoria on 15/5/97.
1. The objectives of monetary policy
The  Gerhard  de  Kock  Commission  of  Inquiry  into  the  Monetary  System  and
Monetary Policy in South Africa laid the foundation  for  the  monetary  policy  model  applied  in
South  Africa  over  the  past  decade.  Although  the  De  Kock  Commission’s  final  report  on
monetary policy was submitted in May 1985, it was only since 1986, when money supply targets
were  first  introduced,  that  the  implementation  of  the  model  took  its  course.  Indeed,  full
implementation only came about after the untimely death of Gerhard de Kock in August 1989.
In  line  with  monetary  policies  applied  in  most  developed  economies,  the  South
African monetary policy model is firmly directed towards the overall objective of creating and
maintaining  a  stable  financial  environment.  For  central  bankers,  the  ultimate  price  of  a  stable
financial environment is a low rate of inflation --  a  rate  that,  in  the  words  of  Alan  Greenspan,
will have no material effects on the macroeconomic decisions of consumers, investors,  traders,
producers and all other participants in total economic activity.
This monetarist approach to monetary policy does not imply that central bankers
have no interest in or sympathy for the national objectives of economic growth, job creation and
the improvement of the living conditions of the people. On the contrary, central bankers believe
that maximum economic development can only be achieved and sustained in an environment of
stable  financial  conditions.  The  efforts  of  monetary  policy  must  therefore  be  directed  towards
what central bankers can do best in support of the national objectives, and that is to manage the
money system of the country in the interest of overall economic development.
A  stable  financial  environment  is  a  precondition  for  sustainable  economic
development, but provides no guarantee that the real economy will indeed perform at maximum
capacity. There are too many other macroeconomic (and non-economic) factors that will in the
end  determine  the  actual  economic  growth  performance.  There  is,  however,  convincing
theoretical  logic  and  much  empirical  evidence  to  confirm  that  persistent  unstable  financial
conditions are detrimental  for  growth,  particularly  in  a  country  with  an  economy  based  on  the
principles of the market mechanism.
The De Kock Commission therefore in 1985 summarised its findings as follows:
“(The Commission) does not believe, for example, that anything can be gained in
the  long  run  in  terms  of  real  growth  or  employment  by  accepting  higher  inflation  rates.  The
opposite is more likely to be true. Higher inflation will in the long run militate  against  growth
and job creation. The objectives of external balance, growth and employment will over time be
served best  by  creating  and  maintaining  a  climate  of  reasonable  domestic  price  stability”.  (Par
47)
2. The changing financial environment
The  deliberations  of  the  De  Kock  Commission  took  place  in  an  overall  socio-
political and economic environment that was completely different from what we have to contend
with  in  South  Africa  today.  With  his  wisdom  and  his  foresight,  Gerhard  de  Kock  may  have
BIS Review   54/1997
- 2 -
envisaged,  and  surely  wished  for,  an  environment  in  which  monetary  policy  could  be  applied
without the shackles of sanctions, boycotts, exchange controls, high inflation, social unrest and
political distortions that characterised the period of his domain.
Over  the  past  decade,  the  situation  has  changed  dramatically.  The  major
socio-political  reforms  of  the  early  1990’s  opened  up  the  way  for  a  normalisation  of  South
Africa’s position in the world environment. Also in the field of economic and financial relations,
South Africa has been reintegrated in the international community from which it was excluded
over  the  preceding  two  decades.  The  international  economic  punitive  actions  against  South
Africa were repealed in great haste after the Government of National Unity took power in April
1994, and South Africa took its rightful place again in international forums such as the  United
Nations,  the  Bretton  Woods  Institutions  (IMF  and  World  Bank),  the  Organisation  of  African
Unity, and the British Commonwealth of Nations.
South  Africa  became  reintegrated  into  a  world  financial  system  that  was  vastly
different  from  the  one  it  had  left  in  the  late  1970’s  and  early  1980’s.  The  explosive
developments  during  its  absence  in  electronics  and  in  communications,  and  the  revolutionary
trans-formation  from  mainly  manufacturing/trading  economies  to  a  new  service/information
based  culture,  led  to  a  strong  movement  of  globalisation  in  financial  market  activity.  This
process  forced  the  liberalisation  of  domestic  and  international  financial  markets  in  many
countries, led to the  abolition  of  exchange  controls  and  exposed  countries  more  directly  to  the
disciplines of international markets.
Today  in  South  Africa,  there  are  more  than  60  foreign  banks  that  compete
through  representative  offices,  branches  and  subsidiaries  with  the  domestic  banks  to  provide
financial services to the South African community. We are in the process of gradually removing
our  exchange  controls  to  join  the  other  approximately  60  (out  of  185)  countries  of  the  world,
that  have  already  succeeded  in  removing  all  restrictions  on  current  and  capital  account
international  transactions.  Non-residents  participate  very  actively  in  the  South  African  market
for foreign exchange and in the domestic money and capital markets. Prices on the Johannesburg
Stock Exchange and the Bond Exchange of South Africa are affected almost instantaneously by
developments in the rest of the world. Volumes in these markets have exploded to a level that a
De Kock Commission of fifteen years ago could not anticipate, not even in the wildest flight of
the imagination.
Recent changes in the South African community led to the more active absorption
of many South Africans in the market economy. Latent demands were stimulated by the reforms
and  many  expectations  were  created  by  the  new  political  dispensation.  The  emphasis  in  fiscal
policy has changed dramatically, with the retention, fortunately, of basic sound disciplines.
The South African banking sector had to be restructured to provide for thousands
of informal savings clubs (Stokvels) and for community banking. There is even pressure on the
Reserve  Bank  to  legalise  fraudulent  pyramid  schemes  such  as  those  that  recently  brought  the
country of Albania to anarchy.
3. The implications for monetary policy
The question does arise whether all these changes did not make the findings of the
De Kock Commission irrelevant. Should monetary policy still hold onto the same objective, and
has  the  task  and  the  functions  of  the  central  bank  perhaps  not  also  changed  over  the  past  few
years?
BIS Review   54/1997
- 3 -
The Reserve Bank believes, however, that the main objective of monetary policy
as  defined  by  the  De  Kock  Commission  is  as  important  and  warranted  today  as  it  was  in  the
mid-1980s. Indeed, in the environment of a greater involvement of international participants in
the  South  African  financial  markets,  it  is  of  even  greater  importance  that  South  Africa  shall
maintain overall financial stability, that our rate of inflation shall be brought more in line with
the  average  rate  of  inflation  in  the  economies  of  our  major  trading  partners,  and  that
internationally recognised sound monetary and fiscal policies shall be applied  at  all  times.  The
main objective of monetary policy in the new South Africa must remain to protect the value of
the currency.
Critics of this unbending attitude of the Reserve Bank often confuse the objective
of  monetary  policy  with  three  other  aspects  of  Reserve  Bank  operations,  namely  the  strategy
followed  by  the  Bank  in  pursuance  of  its  objective,  the  operational  procedures  applied  by  the
Bank, and the instruments used to achieve its objective. There may be a need at this juncture, in
light of the major changes of the past few years, to reconsider some of these aspects of monetary
policy that have more to do with the implementation of the policy, and not with the objective.
The strategy of a central bank can be described as the model it uses to pursue the
non-negotiable objective of protecting the value of the currency. On recommendation of the De
Kock Commission, the South African monetary policy model was based on monetary targeting
which anchors monetary policy decisions to changes  in  the  money  supply.  This  model  worked
extremely well, particularly in the times of South Africa’s economic isolation from the outside
world. It is doubtful, however, if this model is still the most effective strategy to maintain in the
new  environment.  It  has,  for  example,  become  much  more  difficult  for  the  Reserve  Bank  to
control the money supply in a situation where so  many  foreign  banks  operate  in  South  Africa,
and  where  South  African  banks  have  so  much  easier  access  to  financial  resources  from
correspondent banks in the rest of the world.
It is also a debatable issue whether the demand for credit in South Africa is not in
the  new  environment  less  sensitive  to  interest  rate  changes  than  before.  And,  furthermore,  the
relationship between changes in the money supply and eventual price changes may have become
much  weaker  now  that  the  volumes  of  transactions  in  the  financial  markets  have  increased  so
much relative to turnovers in the markets for goods and services.
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  money  supply  has  lost  some  of  its  usefulness  as  an
anchor for monetary policy. With South Africa not yet being ready for direct inflation targeting,
and with our inability to fix the exchange rate of the rand because of a lack of foreign reserves,
the Reserve Bank is gradually moving to  a  more  ecclesiastic  approach  where  a  wider  range  of
monetary indicators are being used as a basis for monetary policy decisions. This wider range of
indicators includes changes in bank credit extension, the overall liquidity in the banking system,
the level and the yield curve of interest rates, changes in the official foreign reserves and in the
exchange rate of the rand and, of course, actual and expected movements in the rate of inflation.
The  operational  procedures  of  the  central  bank  include  the  methods  used  for
providing  accommodation  to  banking  institutions,  open  market  operations,  intervention  in  the
foreign  exchange  market,  the  manipulation  of  interest  rates,  and  the  signalling  to  markets  of
policy  intentions.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  main  operational  procedures  over  recent
years have been what the De Kock Commission described as the “classical cash reserve system
as  a  means  of  controlling  bank  credit  creation,  rather  than  the  socalled  American  cash  reserve
system”. (Par. 76)
BIS Review   54/1997
- 4 -
Without going into the details, in the South African system the Reserve Bank uses
its open market operations and other instruments of monetary policy to force banking institutions
to borrow more from the discount window whenever it is regarded as necessary to apply a more
restrictive policy. At some stage, the Reserve Bank will then also raise the Bank rate which, in a
situation  of  great  dependence  on  the  central  bank,  will  force  the  private  banks  to  follow  with
increases in their lending and deposit rates.
Many  other  central  banks  operating  in  sophisticated  financial  markets  are  now
influencing short-term interest rates more directly with their operations in the markets. Instead of
overnight  loans  provided  at  the  discount  window,  they  enter  into  repurchase  transactions  with
banking  institutions,  with  the  added  advantage  that  it  can  be  coupled  with  a  tender  system  for
central bank money, and a variable Bank rate.
The South African Reserve Bank will also have to introduce greater flexibility in
the operating procedures for the implementation of monetary policy if we want to cope with the
volatile international capital flows, exchange rate changes, and financial assets price movements.
It  is  of  some  concern  to  the  Reserve  Bank  that  over  the  past  year  interest  rates  in  the  South
African  money  market  seem  to  have  become  more  rigid.  In  the  present  system,  the  Bank  no
longer  gets  reliable  signals  from  market  interest  rates  on  changes  in  the  underlying  financial
conditions.  If  necessary,  the  operational  procedures  of  the  Bank  will  have  to  change  to  bring
more interest rate flexibility into the money market.
Finally, the instruments used for monetary policy may also have to be adapted to
the changing financial environment. In the past, the Reserve Bank, for example, often used the
Exchequer Account of the Government for the short-term withdrawal of surplus funds from the
money market. The recent introduction of an improved system for tax and loan accounts held by
Government  with  private  banks,  rules  out  the  extensive  use  of  this  instrument  for  monetary
policy purposes. Similarly, arrangements now under negotiation with the Department of Finance
to relieve the Reserve Bank of the responsibilities for the primary issue  of  Government  bonds,
and  for  the  development  of  the  secondary  market  in  these  bonds,  will  also  change  the  Bank’s
position in the capital market. It opens up the way for the Bank to  have  a  more  single-minded
open market policy approach.
The  introduction  of  repurchase  transactions  in  strictly  defined  acceptable
underlying  financial  assets  will  also  provide  an  instrument  of  monetary  policy  that  is  more
malleable  and  can  be  adapted  easier  to  the  needs  of  the  new  financial  environment  of  which
South Africa is now rapidly becoming an integral part.
4. Conclusion
There is much room for a continuing debate in South Africa on monetary policy,
but not so much on  the  issue  of  what  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  should  be,  or  whether
inflation is  bad  or  good  for  the  overriding  objective  of  creating  more  jobs  in  the  country.  The
debate should rather concentrate on the effectiveness of the strategy, the operational procedures
and  the  instruments  used  in  the  pursuance  of  a  monetary  policy  objective  that  has  in  any  case
been casted in iron in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.
BIS Review   54/1997
