Mr. Grenville discusses the Reserve Bank of Australia and the business cycle*
Talk  by  Mr.  Stephen  Grenville,  a  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the
Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research Conference on “Business Cycles:
Policy and Analysis” held in Melbourne on 5/9/97.
“Real  output  …  fluctuates  around  a  rising  trend.”  (Solow  1997,  p. 230).  This
seemingly 
statement  encompasses  much  of  what  practical,  operational
macro-economics  is  about:  how  to  raise  the  trend;  and  how  to  reduce  fluctuations  around  this
trend.
innocuous 
This talk focuses on what monetary policy might do to reduce fluctuations around
the trend. The Governor spoke only a few weeks ago about what monetary policy might do for
growth  (Macfarlane  1997).  In  a  nutshell,  price  stability  will  be  generally  helpful  to  long-term
growth  because  it  ensures  resources  are  deployed  more  efficiently,  but  the  main  sources  of
growth are to be found in increases in labour inputs and productivity.
What about monetary policy and the cycle? The starting point is that life would be
more comfortable all around if the cyclical swings are not too big and if  the  bumps  in  various
parts of the economy are not too coincident. It seems likely, too, that however convenient it is
analytically to separate trend from fluctuations, there will be a link between the cycle and either
the  level  of  GDP  or  its  trend  growth  rate.  If  the  severity  of  the  downturns  is  reduced  and  the
economy operates with a smaller output gap, then the level of income over time is, on average,
higher.  As  well,  big  swings  (such  as  1982  and  1990)  risk  hysteresis:  the  process  of  winding
unemployment down again has proved to be slow and difficult.
Is there anything to be said on the other side of the argument? You will recall the
Schumpeterian argument that cycles have some cathartic, cleansing function. I have more faith
in competition to ensure that the benefit of technology is introduced as quickly as it should be,
and  so  I  do  not  see  a  vital  need  for  the  Schumpeterian  cleansing  process.  But,  in  any  case,
however successful policy may be, enough of a cycle seems likely to remain, in order to ensure
the Schumpeterian process has the opportunity to take place.1
So let us take as given that it is desirable to have  as  little  cycle  as  possible,  and
examine two aspects of this. First, the role of monetary policy in the cycle, and secondly, how
the cycle may have changed over time to alter the way monetary policy impinges on the cycle.
Characteristics of monetary policy
A  thumb-nail  sketch  of  history  serves  as  a  reminder  that  the  role  of  monetary
policy in the cycle has been the subject of changing views over the years.
•  For  the  first  couple  of  decades  of  this  century,  the  gold  standard  was  the
undisputed  centre-point  of  monetary  policy,  anchoring  prices.  Income
smoothing  was  not  an  objective  of  monetary  policy.  The  result  --
unsurprisingly -- was that price level stability was maintained (in the sense
David Gruen, John Hawkins and Amanda Thornton helped greatly in the preparation of this paper.  The
                                                  
* 
usual disclaimer applies.
1 
To explore the issues raised by Real Business Cycle theory, with its implication that cycles are the result
of optimal responses to supply-side shocks, would take us too far afield here.  Let me put my biases on the record
by agreeing with Solow’s comment:  “This explanation has been an empirical failure, or at best a non-success”
(Solow 1997, p. 230).
BIS Review   80/1997
- 2 -
that  there  was  a  longer-term  anchor  which  forced  the  price  level  back
towards  its  starting  point),  but  there  was  considerable  variation  (both  in
prices and in output) in the short term.
•  The  Depression  forced  a  re-appraisal,  but  fiscal  policy  became  the
instrument to smooth the fluctuations in output -- monetary policy was seen
to  be  caught  in  the  infamous  liquidity  trap.  This  idea  has  not  entirely
disappeared, and the notion of “pushing on a string” still has currency.
•  Somewhere  in  the  ensuing  decade  or  two,  monetary  policy  emerged  as  a
counter-cyclical  co-player,  on  a  par  with  fiscal  policy.  There  was  no
particular, specialised difference between monetary policy and fiscal policy
(at least in the eyes of most policy-makers) -- inflation control and cyclical
smoothing were more or less the same task. Inevitably, in time, the attempt
was  made  to  squeeze  more  out  of  the  Phillips  curve  trade-off  than  was
available.
•  By  the  1970s,  a  clear  specialisation  had  developed  (most  precisely
enunciated  in  the  academic  literature,  but  reflected  also  in  operational
monetary  policy).  The  over-use  of  the  Keynesian  tools  had  unanchored
price  expectations,  and  the  OPEC  oil  price  shock  contributed  to  the
reassessment. Most central banks in industrial countries adopted a monetary
target, specifically aimed at achieving price stability.
•  The high water of this monetarist view occurred around 1980. Over the next
five years, it rapidly lost its pivotal role, because the key relationship in this
view-of-the-world  broke  down  --  the  relationship  between  money  and
nominal  income  turned  out  to  be  unstable.2  With  the  breakdown  of  the
anchor  of  a  stable  money  demand  function,  practitioners  were  forced  to
look elsewhere. In our own case, it has taken us, eventually, to an inflation
target.  But  others  have  put  forward  the  view  that  monetary  policy  should
only care about price stability, without any direct concern with output. The
origins of this can be found in Friedman’s monetarism (he  was,  of  course,
concerned  above  all  with  price  stability).  It  seems  only  a  minor  elision  to
slip  from  monetarism  to  a  single  objective  for  monetary  policy.  But  the
point to note here is that the old monetary rules had an important element of
income  smoothing  built  into  them  --  when  output  slowed  in  the  course  of
the cycle, money supply rules produced a more-or-less automatic easing of
monetary  policy,  because  the  central  relationship  was  between  money  and
nominal income. As the stability of the monetary demand relationship broke
down,  it  would  have  been  logical  enough  to  focus  on  the  next  link  of  the
causal  chain,  and  replace  money  by  nominal  income  as  the  target.
                                                  
2 
There were lasting legacies of this period.  An important and useful element of the thinking at the time
was the replacement of the earlier “control theory” approach to policy (i.e. the belief that the central point was to
find an appropriate spot on the Phillips curve and to stay there), towards a “game theoretic” view, in which the
critical  issues  related  to  behaviour --  the  interaction  between  the  monetary  authorities  and  the  public.    In
Australia, the Reserve Bank never accepted the degree of policy instrument specialisation found in the academic
literature,  particularly  as  wages  policy  was  also  addressing  inflation  control.    Partly  because  most  inflation
problems were demand-driven over the course of the cycle, there was a continuing belief that if the cycle could be
smoothed,  inflation  would  be  contained,  and  both  fiscal  or  monetary  policy  were  available  instruments  in
addressing the cycle.
BIS Review   80/1997
- 3 -
Curiously,  however,  the  de facto  inheritors  of  this  stream  of  thought  took
price  stability  --  the  long-term  element  of  monetarism  --  and  made  it  a
short-term  target.  In  this  view  of  the  world,  there  was  no  role  at  all  for
monetary policy as a cyclical buffer.
How was this justified? The arguments put forward were:
•  the classical dichotomy between prices and activity: money does not affect
activity;
•  what  might  be  called  the  “Tinbergen  proposition”:  with  one  instrument,
only one goal can be achieved;
•  political  economy  reasons  --  usually  associated  with  “time  inconsistency”
arguments;
•  a  simple,  unambiguous  commitment  to  price  stability  anchors  price
expectations most effectively, and  this  benefit  is  worth  the  cost  that  might
come from ignoring activity;
•  the  lags  in  recognition  and  implementation  of  policy  are  so  long  that
activity stabilisation is futile or even counter-productive.
I have looked at these in some detail in an earlier paper (Grenville 1996), so I will
be  brief  here.  The  classical  dichotomy  between  prices  and  activity  reminds  central  bankers  of
their  long-term  priorities,  but  even  though  the  long-run  Phillips  curve  may  be  vertical,  the
short-run curves are certainly not. The Tinbergen proposition is superficially attractive, but not
much help in practical decision-making. Trade-offs between  various  objectives  are  common  to
policy-making (and just about every aspect of life), and these trade-offs have to be handled by a
weighing of the conflicting objectives, not by ignoring one of them.
The “political economy” aspects have been prominent in the academic literature,
and some very neat models can be built to illustrate the issues of time inconsistency. The models
usually  involve  the  “monetary  authorities”  (no  distinction  is  made  between  governments  and
central banks) making an ex ante commitment to price stability, but reneging on this to squeeze
higher  activity  in  the  short  term,  in  the  form  of  an  “inflation  surprise”  (Kydland  and  Prescott
1977). The simple versions of the arguments have never appealed much to central bankers who
believe that their own reputation is at stake and who, because of this, are unlikely to exploit the
short-term Phillips curve trade-off. To see central bankers as congenitally inclined to administer
“inflation surprises” does not seem to capture their true character.3 If there is a problem here, it
seems more likely to lie in the political interaction of policy-making between governments and
central  banks  and  it  is  best  addressed  by  greater  independence,  not  by  imposing  a  single
objective on the central bank.
What  about  the  role  of  a  simple  single  price  objective  in  anchoring  price
expectations? A decade or so ago, there was a realistic hope that the clear enunciation of a target
for prices would stabilise price expectations. It would have to be said that the experience of the
last decade would suggest that expectations are to a very large degree backward-looking. Central
banks  give  prominence  to  their  price  stability  objective  in  an  attempt  to  influence  price
                                                  
3 
up the wrong tree”.
Blinder (1997, p. 13) describes this as:  “One place where academic economists have been barking loudly
BIS Review   80/1997
- 4 -
expectations in this way, and it seems sensible for them to do so. But it would be a mistake to
think that there is a big dividend waiting to be reaped here.
Whether  the  lags  in  recognition  and  implementation  are  so  long  as  to  make  the
operation of monetary policy perverse in relation to the business cycle is something that can be
established  only  empirically.  Like  most  empirical  matters,  there  is  room  for  considerable
difference of opinion. While the lags seem to be (as Friedman promised) “long and variable”, a
policy which leans against the business cycle with a view to containing demand-driven inflation
will  generally  affect  activity  beneficially  rather  than  perversely.4  At  the  other  end  of  the
spectrum  is  the  view  that  “central  bank  manipulation  of  financial  variables  has  seemingly
exaggerated,  not  smoothed,  economic  fluctuations”  (Makin  1993,  p. 12).  One  problem  in  this
sort of assessment is  that  we  do  not  know  the  counter-factual.  What  we do  know,  however,  is
that cycles are endemic to all economies. So the counter-factual is not straight-line growth. We
know, too, that Australia’s cycles are broadly the same as those in other similar countries. In a
world where cycles are universal and endemic, it is easy to blame the authorities for the failure
of  the  economy  to  proceed  along  a  steady  path,  perfectly  aligned  with  trend  growth.  As  the
upswing accelerates, policy is tightened: it is then blamed for being too slow to react. When the
inevitable downturn comes, the firm policies that are in place at that time are pronounced “guilty
by association”. The appropriate counter-factual should specify an alternative policy regime, and
compare the performance under this rule.5
One relevant issue here is: how strong are the “self-righting” forces which tend to
take  unemployment  back  towards  its  natural  rate?  If  these  are  strong,  the  case  for  an  activity
component in policy-making is weaker. To put this more specifically, will the in-built stabilising
forces operate more quickly than the lags in monetary policy?
The  important  empirical  issue  here  is  the  lags  in  policy,  interacting  with  the
uncertainty of forecasts. Most estimates of the lags suggest that a change in interest rates has its
maximum effect on activity after about four to six quarters. This is often popularly interpreted to
mean that nothing happens, after the monetary policy lever is pulled, for four or six quarters. Of
course, this is quite wrong. Even with these estimates, there is a fair bit of action during the first
year, and provided forecasts are sufficiently accurate, it is possible for policy to be effective over
shorter lengths of time -- for instance, if it was desired to have an effect for the next year only,
policy  could  be  reversed  some  time  during  the  year  to  achieve  rough  neutrality  beyond  the
period of a year (Gruen, Romalis and Chandra 1997).6
                                                  
4 
For some econometric support of this view, see Dungey and Pagan (1997, pp. 31-34).
5 
Makin’s  alternative  is  money-base  targeting.    The  Bank  has  written  extensively  on  money  rules  (the
widest variety of tests appears in de Brouwer, Ng and Subbaraman (1993)).  Makin’s model is Switzerland (the
only  major  central  bank  that  has  tried  to  implement  a  money-base  rule)  in  the  1980s,  but  this  hardly  seems  a
supporting example.  Switzerland still has business cycles and experienced inflation of nearly 7 per cent in the late
1980s.
6 
I should record, very much in parentheses, my own biases that these lags are consistently over-estimated,
and that when we find more subtle techniques of econometric testing, we will find that the lags are shorter.  This
is based on pure, intuitive observation, particularly of the 1994 experience, where the effect of monetary policy
seemed  to  be  quite  quick.    This  is  a  reminder  that  there  are,  essentially,  two  problems  with  the  econometric
method used to establish lag lengths.  The first is the implicit assumption that the lags are much the same length
from episode to episode (occasionally there are tests for changing lag length, as in Gruen et al. (1997)), whereas it
may be that the lag depends very much on the particular episode.  Where actors in the economy quickly come to
believe  that  the  authorities  are  determined  to  slow  a  speeding  economy,  it  may  well  be  that  the  lags  are  quite
short.  The contrast here is between 1988 (long lags) and 1994 (short).  The other problem is the classic one of
separately identifying the policy reaction function and the effect of policy on the economy.  Relatively early in the
upswing,  policy  is  tightened,  but  there  is  no  discernible  response  because  the  upswing  still  has  a  good  deal  of
BIS Review   80/1997
- 5 -
Perhaps  a  more  telling  argument  is  that  it  is  simply  not  sensible  --  or  even
possible -- to ignore the cycle, unless a suitable “neutral” operating rule can be found for setting
monetary  policy.  The  monetary  aggregates  were,  in  this  sense,  a  “neutral”  rule.  They  could
provide  an  operating  rule  for  monetary  policy  which  could  be  relied  on  to  influence  activity
beneficially  in  the  face  of  demand  shocks:  a  monetary  rule  exercises  some  degree  of
counter-cyclical influence, without any overt discretionary action. But with the breakdown of the
close relationship between money and nominal income, such a monetary rule is not a satisfactory
“automatic pilot” for policy, and no similarly neutral rule suggests itself. One possible “neutral”
monetary  policy  would  be  to  leave  real  interest  rates  unchanged,  but  it  is  hard  to  see  that,  in
practice, this would be sustainable in the face of an economy either running abnormally quickly
or  slowly  --  there  would  be  continuing  questions  about  whether  the  real  interest  rate  that  had
been chosen was neutral or was, in fact, skewed in one direction or the other. Also, such a rule
would  not  tie  down  the  rate  of  inflation  --  for  this  you  need  a  nominal  rather  than  a  real
objective.
Another  possibility  that  can  be  rejected  fairly  quickly  is  the  rule  of  thumb
apparently sometimes offered in the face of medical uncertainty: “First do no harm”. This may
be sensible if medical malpractice suits threaten, but hardly seems a proper basis for economic
policy, as it seems to be unduly biased towards inaction.
Equally  easy  to  dismiss  are  those  who  suggest  that  we  should  do  something  to
control inflation, but say that the lags between policy and activity are so long and uncertain that
we should never try to do anything to influence activity. The problem with this suggestion is that
if  the  lags  between  policy  and  activity  are  long,  uncertain  and  variable,  then  the  lags  between
policy  and  inflation  are  longer  and  more  uncertain  still.  In  a  world  where  demand  shocks  are
common  and  policy  operates  on  inflation  largely  via  activity,  it  is  hard  to  conceive  of  an
anti-inflation policy which was somehow directed solely at inflation, in the belief that an attempt
to direct it at activity will cause more problems than it solves.7
Given the long lags in policy, there would seem to be a prima facie case for the
authorities moving not just pre-emptively, but by large amounts whenever they believe that the
cycle is turning. Such a policy has been advocated by Goodhart (1992).8 Curiously, in the light
of  these  arguments,  policy  in  Australia  and  just  about  everywhere  seems  to  do  precisely  the
opposite -- it has the characteristic of “interest rate smoothing”. Others in the Bank have written
about  this  recently  (see  Lowe  and  Ellis  (1997)),  so  I  can  cover  this  quite  briefly.  In  short,  the
reasons seem to be:
•  uncertainty. Thirty years ago, Brainard established that, if policy-makers are
uncertain  about  the  effect  of  their  policies,  they  should  do  less  than  they
think would otherwise be optimal;
 
•  if policy-makers erred  by  applying  too  much  of  the  instrument  against  the
cycle,  they  would  surely  be  severely  blamed  for  it;  on  the  other  hand,
                                                                                                                                                                   
momentum.    In  this  phase,  the  econometrics  are  trying  to  separate  two  effects  with  different  signs,  and  to  the
extent  that  these  two  effects  are  confounded  (because,  for  example,  the  equation  may  not  embody  a  perfect
explanation  for  the  non-policy  forces  operating  on  activity),  this  negates  or  reduces  the  apparent  power  of
monetary  policy  in  this  early  phase  of  the  cycle.    In  this  view  of  the  world,  the  econometrically-estimated  lag
lengths are as much a reflection of the periodicity of the cycle as they are of the lags of monetary policy.
7 
8 
sharply, both up and down.” (Goodhart 1992, p. 333).
For those who prefer a more formal explanation of the same point, see de Brouwer and O’Regan (1997).
“Central  bankers  need  to  brave  their  innate  caution  and  be  prepared  to  vary  nominal  interest  rates
BIS Review   80/1997
- 6 -
dampening the cycle without entirely eliminating it is seen as an acceptable
outcome. In this world, policy-makers are more likely to lean on the side of
caution in exercising their instrument.
In short, the arguments about the difficulties of influencing activity should make
central  bankers  cautious  and  modest  about  their  role  as  cyclical  stabilisers,  but  do  not  excuse
them from taking the cycle into account in setting policy, and doing what they can to lop peaks
and fill troughs. With inflation down, a consensus among central banks seems to  be  emerging.
Central banks still give very high priority to inflation control (they are, after all, the embodiment
of  Rogoff’s  anti-inflationary  central  banker),  but  they  do  not,  generally,  focus  exclusively  on
price  stability.  The  arguments  are  essentially  empirical  ones,  with  the  focus  on  the  question:
“how fast can the economy grow while maintaining price stability?” You will note the Reserve
Bank’s  rhetoric  is  precisely  along  these  lines,  with  policy  driven  by  common-sense  and  a
strenuous effort to understand the cycle, rather than some doctrinal adherence to a simple rule.
Has the cycle changed (and if so, how)?
There  is  much  talk,  particularly  in  America,  of  a  New  Era  in  economics  --  of
rapid growth, no cycles and price stability. While something important and beneficial does seem
to be happening in the United States, we need to separate out what is possible from the wishful
thinking.  We  all  hope  that  productivity  is  higher  than  before:  this  is  possible  and  might  add
modestly to US long-term growth potential, which has in the past been put at around 2-2½ per
cent.  We  hope  that,  with  price  stability  well  established  and  various  other  changes  in  the
economy (on which, more later), the amplitude of cycles might be lessened and policy may be
more effective. We hope, also, that prices are well anchored by America’s good  record  of  low
inflation. But the fundamental law of economics -- scarcity -- has not been repealed. The factors
that  are  held  to  be  responsible  for  the  New  Era  --  “globalisation  of  production,  changes  in
finance,  the  nature  of  employment,  government  policy,  emerging  markets,  and  information
technology” (Weber 1997, p. 71) -- will all be helpful, but they raise the long-term sustainable
growth rate only to the extent to which they raise productivity growth on an on-going basis. If
the  actual  rate  of  growth  exceeds  the  long-term  potential,  sooner  or  later  pressure  comes  on
resources and inflation will be the result.
The same helpful factors may well apply in Australia:
•  if  some  kind  of  multiplier/accelerator  process  is  the  driving  force  of  the
cycle, we know that the type of  investment  has  changed  substantially  over
the  years,  with  large  fixed  long-term  investment  becoming  less  important
and short-term investments (such as computers) becoming more important.
The old traditional driving force was the inventory cycle. Work done at the
Bank (Flood and Lowe 1993) shows a clear change in the cyclical pattern.
The average quarterly contribution of inventory investment to GDP(E) has
fallen  from  close  to  1 per  cent  in  1960/61-1971/72  to  around  a  quarter  of
that  in  1984/85-1995/96  (with  smaller  standard  deviations  as  well).  This
confirms  our  intuitive  observation  of  the  prevalence  of  “just  in  time”
inventory systems.9 What is clear, too, is that service industries (with much
more limited stock-holding) have become very much more important;
                                                  
9 
Of  course,  the  story  has  to  be  more  complicated  than  this,  because  “just  in  time”  simply  pushes  the
problem  back  to  a  different  stage  of  production,  and  raises  the  question  that  if  inventories  are  not  acting  as  a
buffer for production, then perhaps the processes of production become more cyclical.
BIS Review   80/1997
- 7 -
•  as cyclical components of production become less dominant, the cycle may
be  attenuated.  Manufacturing,  construction  and  wholesale  trade  have  been
the  production  sectors  most  correlated  with  the  overall  cycle  and  these,
together,  have  fallen  from  nearly  40 per  cent  of  production  in  1974/75  to
just  over  30 per  cent  in  1995/96.  As  the  economy  becomes  more  complex
and varied, correlation between sectors diminishes: the tourism  sector  may
be doing well when house construction is slow;
 
•  perhaps the most important on-going change to  the  cycle  is  the  continuing
integration  of  Australia  with  the  international  economy.  Thirty  years  ago,
10 per cent of (real) GDP was exported; now it is almost 25 per cent. When
domestic demand rises, there is much greater capacity than before for this to
“spill” overseas, into imports.
All  this  is  for  others  to  examine  in  more  detail.  The  focus  here  is  on  just  one
aspect of the way the cycle might have changed over time -- that is, how the interaction between
monetary policy and the cycle may have altered.
First, has financial deregulation changed the interaction between monetary policy
and  the  cycle?  This  was  certainly  expected  to  be  one  of  the  impacts  of  financial  deregulation.
The Campbell Inquiry talked about it.10 In the housing sector, for example, the upswing of the
cycle  suddenly  came  up  against  the  restraints  of  quantitative  controls,  and  this  was  enough  to
turn the cycle down. In the old, regulated world, firms and households were not able to borrow
enough  to  smooth  their  expenditure  over  time  (they  were  “liquidity  constrained”  --  see
Blundell-Wignall and Bullock (1992)). It may well be that deregulation has removed these  old
constraints, but at the same  time,  it  seems  to  have  had  some  tendency  to  encourage  or  at  least
facilitate large or longer swings of the cycle. To put it crudely, financial deregulation provided
more  rope  for  the  cycle  to  swing  with  greater  amplitude.  It  would  be  easy  to  exaggerate  the
importance  of  this  effect,  because  there  were  very  large  swings  in  the  housing  sector  before
deregulation, and asset-price booms and busts occurred even in the regulated world. We  might
hope,  too,  that  some  lessons  have  been  learned  from  the  asset  boom  of  the  late  1980s.  The
conclusion  that  can  be  drawn  is  that  those  who  expected  financial  deregulation  to  smooth  the
cycle by itself have been disappointed.
One  specific  aspect  of  deregulation  --  the  floating  of  the  exchange  rate  --  has
altered  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  a  way  which  should  have  smoothed  the  cycle.
One of the characteristics of the floating exchange rate is that its movement more or less mirrors
the  course  of  the  cycle,  with  an  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  at  those  moments  when  the
cycle is running fastest. Partly this reflects the impact of commodity prices on the exchange rate,
but it also reflects the policy response of interest rates over the course of the cycle. The result is
that demand is more readily “spilt” into imports during the expansionary phase of the cycle, so
production is buffered. (This reinforces the effect of greater international integration, mentioned
                                                  
10 
“The Committee concludes that, in the long run, housing financiers’ inflows would be more stable if their
interest rates were allowed to move in line with market forces.  Coupled with greater overall monetary stability,
interest  rate  decontrol  may  help  appreciably  to  stabilise  housing  finance  flows,  especially  as  household  sector
investors have become more interest-rate sensitive.  The reduced volatility in funds flows should contribute to a
more stable housing sector over the long term.  This might result in a slower growth in housing costs.” (Australian
Financial System Inquiry 1981, p. 639).
BIS Review   80/1997
- 8 -
above.)11 Even this, however, does not ensure that the new world of the floating exchange rate
makes  the  cycle  smoother:  it  can  be  argued  that  in  the  old  fixed-exchange-rate  world,  policy
reacted  earlier  to  stop  the  expansionary  phase  of  the  cycle,  for  fear  of  it  spilling  over  into  an
unacceptable current account deficit. So, once again, financial deregulation has given the cycle,
for better or worse, more room for manoeuvre. The old world of “stop/start” did not have much
to recommend it, but nor did the world of the late 1980s, where an asset boom developed a big
head of steam and inevitably was damaging when it came to an end. The floating exchange rate
probably allows expansions to last longer, but does not ensure that they end gently.
Graph 1:
Graph 2:
This history makes us look for a degree of caution in policy-making, aiming for
longer, gentler phases in the cycle. There is nothing in the historical patterns of the cycle which
suggests that they have a pendulum-like determinancy. On the contrary, the variation in length
and amplitude (contrast, for example, 1986 with 1982 or 1990: see also Graph 2) would suggest
that the shape of the cycle is not at all regular and pre-determined. While it may be possible to
explain  cycles  in  terms  of  “a  stochastically  disturbed  difference  equation  of  very  low  order”
(Lucas  1977),  the  true  causes  seem  less  mechanical  than  this  might  imply,  particularly  if  the
implication is that cycles are unaffected by and unresponsive to policy.
                                                  
11 
Graph 1 shows the combined effect.  This effect was noted, in the early 1960s, by Burge Cameron.  Has
greater  integration  and  a  flexible  exchange  rate  made  this  effect  stronger  over  time?    There  was  a  fair  bit  of
exchange rate flexibility in the 1970s, so the proper comparison may need to go back earlier.
BIS Review   80/1997
- 9 -
The  hope  is  that  the  upswing  which  has  been  underway  since  1991  can  go  for
quite some time yet. This may well require it to travel at a sedate pace at certain stages during
the expansion, and we have certainly witnessed this over the past two years or so. But this seems
far preferable to an economy which is running clearly too fast and has to be brought to a sudden
halt. While it is true that the economy might well have grown a bit faster over the past two years
without this igniting inflationary pressures, the one factor that most economists agree on is that
monetary policy cannot fine-tune the cycle. Let me develop this idea by looking in detail at the
1994 experience.
The  starting  point  here  was  an  economy  which  began  to  grow  too  fast,  with
demand  growing  at  7 per  cent  in  the  year  to  the  September  quarter,  and  excessive  wage
demands. The Bank judged that this would produce inflationary pressures, and so raised interest
rates three times in relatively quick succession in the second half of 1994. As far as we can tell,
this  was  a  necessary  adjustment  of  policy,  because  the  classic  symptoms  of  excess  demand
emerged  over  the  1994/95  period  with  wages  accelerating  (to  reach  over  5 per  cent  by  the
middle of 1995, despite high unemployment, at around 9 per cent) and then, lagged behind this,
inflation rising to 3.3 per cent. Given the fragile nature of price expectations and the importance
of getting actual inflation back towards 2½ per cent relatively quickly to reinforce the  stability
of  price  expectations,  the  response  of  policy,  even  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  seems  about
right. (Graph 3)
Graph 3:
To  round  off  this  section,  ensuring  that  you  are  not  left  with  a  false  impression
about the Bank’s (limited) ability to tame the cycle, I present Graph 4. This might suggest that
the  Australian  cycle  (at  least  from  the  early  1980s  until  the  mid  1990s)  has  followed  the
American  cycle  so  closely  that  any  other  explanation  seems  superfluous.  To  put  this  point
differently, the problem in explaining the cycle is not  to  find  the  causes  of  cyclical  behaviour,
but to decide -- in the  face  of  a  wide  variety  of  “culprits”  --  which  one  is,  in  fact,  driving  the
cycle. In some ways this is like an Agatha Christie detective story, with all the characters equally
and obviously suspect. Unlike an Agatha Christie novel, however, it is possible that they all did
it,  if  not  simultaneously  and  in  concert,  at  least  more  or  less  coincidentally.  The  Bank’s
BIS Review   80/1997
- 10 -
econometric  research  certainly  gives  a  very  important  place  to  the  United  States  in  explaining
the Australian cycle (see Gruen and Shuetrim (1994)) and we have looked at the puzzle of why
the United States seems so much more important than its trade share would imply (see de Roos
and Russell (1996), de Brouwer and Romalis (1996) and Debelle and Preston (1995)). But there
is  still  an  important  role  for  monetary  policy  (Gruen  and  Shuetrim  1994,  and  Gruen,  Romalis
and Chandra 1997). The moral is: don’t expect monetary policy to be able to eliminate the cycle,
but don’t ignore its ability to “top and tail” the fluctuations.
Graph 4:
The cycle and prices
The Reserve Bank does expect that its activities will have some beneficial effect
on the course of the cycle, but the main focus is on inflation. We accept that there will be some
movement of inflation over the course of the cycle, but we want to make sure that inflation does
not  rise  over  time  (now  that  price  stability  has  been  achieved).  You  can  see  this  sense  of
priorities  --  with  medium-term  price  stability  being  the  sine  qua  non,  and  our  acceptance  that
inflation  may  vary  a  little  over  the  course  of  the  cycle  --  in  the  specification  of  the  inflation
target  as  being  an  average  “over  the  course  of  the  cycle”.  This  has  caused  quite  a  bit  of
misinterpretation  about  the  specification.  In  talking  to  an  audience  such  as  this,  I  can  take  the
time to set out quite specifically what we have in mind by “over the course of the cycle”.
We can go back a bit in history to illustrate the point here. In the 1950s and 1960s
(see Graph 5), inflation moved about quite a bit -- from more or less zero to around 5 per cent
per annum -- but people look back on this period as “price stability”. Why is that so? The critical
issue  here  is  that  even  though  inflation  rose  and  fell  over  the  course  of  the  cycle,  price
expectations did not move -- even when inflation was  running  at  5 per  cent,  the  community  at
large expected it would soon be back to its normal lower pace. Stabilising and maintaining price
expectations is the key issue in thinking about the question of “over the course of the cycle”. The
 
BIS Review   80/1997
- 11 -
Graph 5:
Bank  should  not  be  so  trigger  happy  that  it  tightens  policy  at  every  threat  of  a  price  rise  (no
matter  how  slight  or  temporary).There  is  a  trade-off  between  output  stabilisation  and  price
stabilisation  (see  Debelle  and  Stevens  (1995)),  and  an  attempt  to  smooth  the  path  of  prices
perfectly  would  make  policy  destabilising.  We  want  to  be  on  --  and  stay  on  --  the  short-term
Phillips  curve  associated  with  2-3 per  cent  price  expectations.  We  would  not  be  too  fretted  if
actual inflation moves about a bit over the short term, provided price expectations do not change
(i.e. we stay on this short-run curve). To put this in operational terms, if we have limited price
stability credibility, we have to be more careful that inflation does not depart much from 2½ per
cent, or depart for too  long.  As  credibility  builds  over  time,  monetary  policy  does  not  have  to
respond  to  every  hint  of  inflation,  knowing  that  the  small  fluctuations  in  inflation  over  the
course of the cycle will not have any permanent effects. We would then, in effect, be back to the
world of the 1950s and 1960s, at least as far as price expectations are concerned.
In raising this issue of price movements over the course of the cycle, I should also
record  that  the  relationship  between  activity  and  prices  probably  has  changed  quite  a  bit  over
recent years. I have written about this in more detail (Grenville 1997 ), so I will not go into it in
detail today. But summarising the argument, there are a number  of  factors  which  should  make
prices less sensitive to the course of the cycle:
•  the float of the exchange rate;
•  greater international integration;
•  greater  competition,  coming  both  from  international  integration  and  from
domestic measures to enhance competition;
•  better 
linkages  between  markets, 
largely  via  better 
transport  and
communication.
All  this  fits  with  the  earlier  discussion  of  “New  Era  economics”.  These  factors
help  to  prevent  inflation  being  triggered  by  the  expansionary  phase  of  the  cycle,  and  limit  the
propagation of inflation shocks. While we often think of price stability as being a medium-term
and long-term problem, the obvious point is that the medium term is made up of a series of short
terms -- if short-term  hikes  in  inflation  can  be  avoided,  then  the  problem  of  maintaining  price
BIS Review   80/1997
- 12 -
stability in the medium and long term has been solved. But Chairman Greenspan’s warning, in
February 1997,  about  too-ready  acceptance  of  a  “New  Era”  is  still  relevant:  “But,  regrettably,
history is strewn with visions of such ‘new eras’ that, in the end, have proven to be a mirage. In
short, history counsels caution.” (Greenspan  1997).  Price  stability  still  requires  good  monetary
policy supported by an anti-inflation consensus.
Conclusion
Economics  has  long  been  known  as  the  dismal  science,  but  in  recent  years
mortality  has  become  a  pre-occupation.  Judging  by  recent  book  titles,  not  only  is  the  business
cycle dead, but so too are inflation,  economics,  history  and  capitalism.  Following  Greenspan’s
lead, it would be wise to withhold judgment on the death of the cycle for the moment, or at least
borrow Mark Twain’s line and say that the reports are greatly exaggerated. Economies still seem
vulnerable  to  alternating  “over  optimism  …  (and)  a  contrary  error  of  pessimism”  as  noted  by
Keynes.  Periodic  supply-side  shocks  still  seem  likely.  And  policy-makers  have  not  suddenly
become omniscient masters of the previously-recalcitrant economy. But two factors should help.
The first is the greater price resilience, noted in the previous section. Inflation is not  dead,  but
enhanced  competition  in  goods  and  factor  markets  inhibits  the  propagation  of  price  shocks
across the economy. Second, low inflation has now become the international norm. The variance
over  the  course  of  the  cycle  has  also  fallen.  In  Australia,  inflation  has  averaged  2½ per  cent
annually for the past  six  years.  The  last  two  sharp  downturns  (1982  and  1990)  followed  sharp
rises in inflation (including asset inflation) in the previous upswing. If excessive optimism in the
upswing  can  be  resisted  and  inflation  can  be  kept  in  check,  there  is  a  good  chance  that  such
sharp downturns can be avoided.
Good, forward-looking and far-sighted policy can reduce the amplitude of cycles
and lengthen them. The seven-year upswing which started in 1982 (with a “pause that refreshes”
in  1986)  should  not  be  regarded  as  the  norm:  it  can  be  exceeded.  The  current  upswing  has,
already, lasted almost as long and seems to have a fair bit of life left in it yet. The price that may
have  to  be  paid  for  these  long-lasting  upswings  is  to  avoid  periods  of  excessive  exuberance  --
this is what brought  the  1980s  upswing  to  a  halt.  This  was  the  motivation  for  the  1994  policy
response  --  to  avoid  the  stop/go  policies  of  earlier  years.  We  should,  instead,  be  prepared  to
allow growth to build momentum over time, without becoming too impatient. This will produce
a world of longer expansions, which will not require the extremes of policy-setting which were
needed in the late 1980s (or, for that matter, the  early  1980s)  to  bring  that  expansion  (with  its
asset-price bubble) back under control.
References
Australian  Financial  System  Inquiry  (1981),  Australian  Financial  System:  Final  Report  of  the
Committee of Inquiry, September 1981, (J.K. Campbell, Chairman), AGPS, Canberra.
Blinder, A.S. (1997), ‘Distinguished Lecture on Economics in  Government:  What  Central  Bankers
Could Learn from Academics -- and Vice Versa’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 11,
No. 2(Spring), pp. 3-19.
Blundell-Wignall,  A.  and  M.  Bullock  (1992),  ‘Changes  in  the  Characteristics  of  the  Australian
Business Cycle: Some Lessons for Monetary Policy from the 1980s and Early 1990s’, Reserve
Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9212.
Brainard,  W.  (1967),  ‘Uncertainty  and  the  Effectiveness  of  Policy’,  American  Economic  Review,
May, 57, pp. 411-425.
Debelle, G. and B. Preston (1995), ‘Consumption, Investment and International Linkages’, Reserve
Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9512.
BIS Review   80/1997
- 13 -
Debelle, G. and G. Stevens (1995), ‘Monetary Policy Goals for Inflation in Australia’, Reserve Bank
of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9503.
de Brouwer, G., I. Ng and R. Subbaraman (1993), ‘The Demand for Money in Australia: New Tests
on an Old Topic’, Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9314.
de Brouwer, G. and J. O’Regan (1997), ‘Evaluating Simple Monetary-Policy Rules for Australia’, in
P. Lowe  (ed.),  Monetary  Policy  and  Inflation  Targeting,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  Sydney
(forthcoming).
de  Brouwer,  G.  and  J.  Romalis  (1996),  ‘External  Influences  on  Output:  An  Industry  Analysis’,
Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9612.
de Roos, N. and B. Russell (1996), ‘Towards an  Understanding  of  Australia’s  Co-Movement  with
Foreign Business Cycles’, Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9607.
Dungey, M. and A. Pagan (1997), ‘Towards a Structural VAR Model of the Australian Economy’,
Australian National University Working Paper No. 319.
Flood,  D.  and  P.  Lowe  (1993),  ‘Inventories  and  the  Business  Cycle’,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia
Research Discussion Paper No. 9306.
Friedman, B. (1995), ‘Does Monetary Policy Affect Real Economic Activity? Why Do We Still Ask
This Question?’, NBER Working Paper 5212, August.
Goodhart,  C.  (1992),  ‘The  Objectives  for,  and  Conduct  of,  Monetary  Policy  in  the  1990s’,  in
A. Blundell-Wignall  (ed.),  Inflation,  Disinflation  and  Monetary  Policy,  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia, Sydney, pp. 314-334.
Greenspan, A. (1997), Monetary Policy Testimony and Report to the Congress, 26 February.
Grenville,  S.A.  (1996),  ‘Recent  Developments  in  Monetary  Policy:  Australia  and  Abroad’,  The
Australian Economic Review, 1st Quarter, pp. 29-39.
Grenville, S.A. (1997), ‘The Death of Inflation?’, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, May.
Gruen,  D.,  J.  Romalis  and  N.  Chandra  (1997),  ‘The  Lags  of  Monetary  Policy’,  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9702.
Gruen, D. and G. Sheutrim (1994), ‘Internationalisation and the Macroeconomy’, in P. Lowe and J.
Dwyer (eds), International Integration of the Australian Economy, Reserve Bank of Australia,
Sydney, pp. 309-363.
Kydland, F.E. and E.C. Prescott (1977), ‘Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal
Plans’, Journal of Political Economy, LXXXV, pp. 473-492.
Lowe, P. and L. Ellis (1997), ‘The Smoothing of Official Interest Rates’, in P. Lowe (ed.), Monetary
Policy and Inflation Targeting, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney (forthcoming).
Lucas,  R.E.  Jr  (1977),  ‘Understanding  Business  Cycles’,  Carnegie-Rochester  Series  on  Public
Policy, Vol. 5, pp. 7-29.
Macfarlane,  I.J.  (1997),  ‘Monetary  Policy  and  Economic  Growth’,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia
Bulletin, August.
Makin, T. (1993), ‘Reserve Bank Independence  or  a  Money-Growth  Rule?’,  Policy,  Vol. 9,  No. 4,
Summer, pp. 9-12.
Rogoff,  K.  (1985),  ‘The  Optimal  Degree  of  Commitment  to  an  Intermediate  Monetary  Target’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100, No. 4, pp. 1169-1189.
Solow, R.M. (1997), ‘Is There a Core of Usable Macroeconomics We Should All Believe In?’, The
American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 2, May, pp. 230-232.
Weber, S. (1997), ‘The End of the Business Cycle?’, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 76, No. 4, July/August,
pp. 65-82.
BIS Review   80/1997
