Mr.  Rangarajan  elucidates  the  monetary  and  credit  policy  of  the  Reserve
Bank of India for the first half of the 1997-98 financial year   Address by the Governor of the
Reserve Bank of India, Mr. C. Rangarajan, at the Madras Chamber of Commerce and Industry at
Chennai on 19/4/97.
I would like to take this opportunity given to me to speak to you this afternoon to
focus on the monetary and credit policy for the first half of 1997-98 which was announced a few
days ago. It may be useful at the outset to review the major developments during 1996-97.
2.  The growth rate of broad money (M3) in 1996-97 was 15.6 per cent which was
within the targetted band of 15.5 - 16.0 per cent. The real GDP is expected to have grown by 6.8
per cent. The inflation rate as measured by the change in the Wholesale Price Index was 7.3 per
cent  on  a  point-to-point  basis.  A  notable  feature  of  1996-97  was  that  the  money  and  foreign
exchange markets were generally calm in contrast with the turbulence witnessed in these markets
in  the  previous  year.  A  strong  growth  in  bank  deposits,  coupled  with  substantial  reduction  in
cash reserve requirements resulted in abundant liquidity in the system. However, the off-take of
bank  credit  was  subdued.  Short-term  money  market  rates  have  moved  down  as  a  result  of  the
easy  liquidity  conditions.  Lending  rates  are  known  for  their  stickiness  and  remained  at  high
levels during the first half of 1996-97 but softened later. There has been a strong accretion to the
foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  slow  growth  in  non-food  bank  credit,  the  persistence  of
relatively  high  lending  rates  despite  comfortable  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  and  the
acceleration  of  inflow  of  funds  from  abroad  call  for  active  monetary  and  exchange  rate
management by the Reserve Bank.
3.  While the overall growth momentum has been sustained in 1996-97, divergent
trends were observed in various sectors with agricultural output showing an impressive recovery
and  industrial  growth  slowing  down.  Even  within  the  industrial  sector,  the  decline  in  growth
rates in mining and electricity sectors was sharp. The inflation rate at 7.3 per cent was a matter
of concern. While manufacturing prices rose only by 5.1 per cent, primary articles recorded an
increase of 8.3 per cent. During 1996-97, procurement of foodgrains was low, while the off-take
was high. With the result, buffer stocks of foodgrains fell from 23.3 million tonnes at the end of
March 1996 to 18.6 million tonnes at the end of January 1997. The decline in wheat stocks was
sharper.
4.  The target for expansion in M3 during 1996-97 was set at 15.5 - 16.0 per cent.
During  the  financial  year  1996-97,  M3  increased  by  15.6  per  cent  as  compared  with  13.7  per
cent in 1995-96. Aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial banks showed a strong growth of
Rs.697.8 billion (16.1 per cent) during 1996-97 as compared with a modest increase of Rs.469.6
billion  (12.1  per  cent)  during  1995-96.  However,  the  increase  in  non-food  credit  of  scheduled
commercial  banks  by  Rs.247.1  billion  (10.1  per  cent)  during  1996-97  was  substantially  lower
than  that  of  Rs.449.4  billion  (22.5  per  cent)  during  1995-96.  The  depressed  capital  markets
seemed to have played a role inasmuch as there has to be some balance between debt and equity.
Equity raised by the corporates was significantly lower in 1996-97 than in 1995-96. Investments
by banks in bonds/debentures/shares of public  sector  undertakings  and  private  corporate  sector
and  commercial  paper  increased  by  Rs.65.8  billion  in  1996-97  as  compared  with  a  decline  of
Rs.1.62 billion in the previous year. Thus, the total resource flow from banks to the commercial
sector  inclusive  of  loans  and  advances  as  well  as  investments  in  bonds/debentures/shares
amounted to Rs.312.9 billion as against Rs.447.7 billion in 1995-96. Investments by scheduled
commercial  banks  in  Government  securities  showed  a  quantum  jump  with  an  increase  of
Rs.268.6  billion  during  1996-97  as  compared  with  the  increase  of  Rs.145.4  billion  during
1995-96.
BIS Review   52/1997
- 2 -
5.    One  of  the  major  objectives  of  financial  sector  reform  has  been  to  eliminate
financial  repression  which  is  inherent  in  an  administered  interest  rate  structure  and  significant
strides have been made in this direction. This process of change which began in late 1980s has
not been abrupt but gradual. During this period, considerable degree of freedom has been given
to banks to determine both deposit and lending rates. Following moderation in the inflation rates
in 1995-96 and 1996-97 and the reductions in cash reserve ratio, there has  been  a  conspicuous
reduction in both deposit rates and lending rates of banks as also spreads over the prime lending
rates (PLR). In July 1996, some public sector banks reduced their PLR by 0.5 percentage point.
However,  as  a  number  of  banks  were  charging  lending  rates  far  higher  than  PLR,  banks  were
directed  in  the  monetary  policy  announcement  of  October  1996  that  along  with  the
announcement  of  their  PLR,  they  should,  with  the  approval  of  their  respective  Boards,  also
announce the maximum spread over the PLR for all advances other  than  consumer  credit.  The
public sector banks have since reduced their PLR further from 16.5 per cent in March 1996 to
14.0 - 15.5 per cent by March 1997 and spreads in the rate of 2.5 - 4.0 percentage points were
announced. During 1996-97, many banks had also brought down interest rates on term deposits
by 1 to 2 percentage points on the shorter end of their maturity spectrum with a view to reducing
the average cost of deposits.
6.    Reflecting  the  easy  liquidity  conditions  during  1996-97,  there  has  been  a
significant  softening  of  money  market  interest  rates.  At  the  short  end  of  the  market,  the  rates
have come down sharply and have ruled generally low as compared with the levels prevailing in
1995-96. The typical call money rates ruled low in the range of 2.00 - 5 per cent in the recent
period. The rate on 91-day Treasury Bills came down  from  12.97  per  cent  at  the  beginning  of
April  1996  to  7.96  per  cent  in  March  1997.  Similarly,  the  rate  on  364  day  Treasury  Bills
declined from 13.12 per cent in April 1996 to 10.10 per cent in March 1997. The typical rates of
discount  on  Certificates  of  Deposits  (CDs)  and  Commercial  Paper  (CP)  have  also  declined
sharply  since  end-March  1996.  There  was  also  some  softening  of  coupon  rates  on  long-term
Government bonds.
7.    The  stance  of  monetary  policy  in  1997-98  would  be  to  achieve  the  twin
objectives  of  maintaining  reasonable  price  stability  and  ensuring  availability  of  adequate  bank
credit  to  support  the  growth  of  the  real  sector.  The  economy  is  still  subject  to  inflationary
pressures.  There  is  need  for  continued  caution  on  the  price  front  and  this  would  require  a
moderation  in  monetary  expansion  consistent  with  the  expected  real  growth.  There  is  also  the
need for developing the Bank Rate as reference rate to signal policy stance of the Reserve Bank.
This would require rationalisation of the interest rate structure and linking of interest rates to the
Bank Rate. There is an urgency to step up the flow of bank credit. This would need streamlining
and improving credit delivery system by giving greater freedom to banks. Besides, banks must
endeavour  to  bring  down  the  interest  rates  by  reducing  the  spreads.  The  money,  foreign
exchange and government securities markets need to be further developed and integrated.
8.  In regulating money supply growth in the coming year, the Reserve Bank will
have to reckon with the impact of capital inflows. If capital inflows remain strong, the Reserve
Bank must take care to see that the resultant reserve money expansion after taking into account
the net RBI credit to the Central Government does not exceed a level that is consistent with the
expansion in money supply justified by the growth of the real sector.
9.    Given  the  real  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  growth  of  6.0  -  7.0  per  cent,
monetary policy would seek to maintain the expansion in M3 in the range of 15.0 - 15.5 per cent
to  keep  the  inflation  rate  at  around  6  per  cent  in  1997-98.  The  projected  increase  in  money
supply  may  be  reviewed  and  revised  depending  upon  macro-economic  developments.  On  the
BIS Review   52/1997
- 3 -
basis of the projected increase in M3, the working estimate of the growth of aggregate deposits
of scheduled commercial banks is placed at Rs.800 billion (16.0 per cent). The expansion in net
scheduled commercial bank credit including such  investments  as  in  bonds/debentures/shares  of
Public Sector Units (PSUs) and private corporate sector, is envisaged to be of the order of 20.0 -
21.0 per cent. The policy measures which are being announced have been so framed that banks
will have adequate resources to meet all the genuine productive requirements of the economy.
10.    Broadly  speaking,  the  current  monetary  and  credit  policy  seeks  to  achieve
four  objectives.  The  various  measures  announced  as  part  of  the  policy  can  be  brought  under
these  four  objectives.  The  first  objective  of  course  is  to  maintain  a  reasonable  degree  of  price
stability  and  moderate  inflationary  pressures  in  the  system  by  regulating  money  supply.  As
indicated earlier, the target rate of growth of M3 is set in the range of 15 - 15.5 per cent. With a
real  rate  of  growth  between  6  and  7  per  cent,  this  would  enable  us  to  keep  the  inflation  rate
around 6 per cent.
11.  The second objective is to expand the lendable resources of banks and also to
bring  about  a  reduction  in  the  lending  rates.  The  Cash  Reserve  Ratio  (CRR)  was  lowered  at
different points of time during the previous year. The full impact of the reductions in the CRR
effected  last  year  will  be  seen  in  the  current  year.  The  CRR  on  inter-bank  liabilities  has  been
withdrawn  as  part  of  the  policy.  Apart  from  the  impact  this  will  have  on  the  creation  of  an
appropriate term deposit market, this will release about Rs.9500 million of lendable resources to
banks. We have also introduced a general refinance facility which will be available to banks and
this facility will be equivalent to one per cent of the demand and time liabilities of banks. All of
these measures will have the impact of expanding the lendable resources of banks. The bank rate
has been reduced from 12 per cent to 11 per cent to signal a reduction in the  interest  rate.  We
want the bank rate to emerge as an effective signal rate as well as a reference rate. To coincide
with the reduction in bank rate, the term deposit rate for maturity of 30 days and upto one year
has been reduced by one percentage point. The same rate has been made applicable to rates on
term  deposits  of  Non-Resident  (External)  Rupee  Deposit  accounts  of  maturity  of  over  six
months  and  upto  one  year.  On  Foreign  Currency  Non  Resident  Accounts  (Banks)  deposits,
banks are free to determine interest rates subject to a ceiling prescribed by the RBI from time to
time.  Thus  the  various  measures  announced  will  have  the  effect  of  expanding  the  lendable
resources of banks on the one hand  and  bringing  about  on  the  other  a  reduction  in  the  deposit
rates and consequently lending rates.
12.  Responding  to  the  policy  announcement,  a  number  of  banks  in  the  public
sector  banks  have  already  reduced  their  PLR  by  50-100  basis  points  to  take  it  to  14  per  cent.
Needless  to  say  the  only  enduring  way  to  bring  about  a  reduction  in  the  interest  rate  is  by
keeping the inflation rate low and breaking inflationary expectations.
13.  The  third  objective  relates  to  the  revamping  of  the  credit  delivery  system
which has become necessary for accelerating the credit flow from the banking system. A number
of measures announced fall in this category. I would like to list the most important among them.
The mandatory consortium requirements for credit limits of Rs.500 million and more has been
dispensed  with.  Banks  and  their  customers  can  now  enter  into  a  variety  of  arrangements
including  syndication  subject  of  course  to  the  exposure  limits.  Banks  have  been  given  full
freedom  to  evolve  their  own  methods  of  assessing  the  working  capital  requirements  of
borrowers. This should result in quicker decision making and speedier flow of funds from banks
to  their  borrowers.    The  loan  component  of  the  working  capital  limits  is  being  gradually
enhanced. However, banks are now free to fix the maturity period of the loans on their own. The
limits  set  on  the  extent  of  bank  credit  that  can  be  made  available  to  Non-Banking  Financial
BIS Review   52/1997
- 4 -
Companies  (NBFCs)  has  been  removed.  This,  however,  applies  only  to  NBFCs  which  have
complied  with  the  requirements  of  registration,  credit  rating  and  prudential  norms.  Banks
hitherto  have  been  permitted  to  invest  5  per  cent  of  their  incremental  deposits  of  the  previous
year  in  shares  and  debentures.  Debentures  are  now  excluded  from  this  limit  so  that  this  limit
would  be  available  exclusively  for  shares  of  corporates  including  PSUs.  In  the  context  of  the
present condition of the capital market, banks have been allowed to extend  loans  to  corporates
against shares held by them to enable such corporates to meet the promoters' contribution to the
equity of new companies in anticipation of raising resources. The credit delivery system is thus
sought to be improved.
14.  The  fourth  objective  is  the  improvement  in  the  functioning  of  the  various
markets  -  money  market,  government  securities  market  and  the  foreign  exchange  market.  The
important  measures  that  relate  to  the  money  market  are:  removal  of  cash  reserve  ratio  on  the
inter-bank liabilities; reduction in the minimum period of maturity for the commercial paper to
30 days; reduction  in  the  minimum  size  of  certificates  of  deposit  and  improved  access  to  cash
surplus entities through primary dealers. The Government securities market  will  benefit  by  the
enlargement  of  instruments  eligible  for  Repo  transactions,  allowing  the  entry  of  non-bank
entities  who  are  holders  of  SGL  accounts  with  the  Reserve  Bank  to  enter  into  reverse  Repo
transactions and the introduction of Treasury Bills of varying maturities. In order to deepen and
widen the foreign exchange market, certain measures have been taken. These include permission
to  book  forward  contracts  on  the  basis  of  declaration  of  exposure,  permission  to  Authorised
Dealers to borrow upto US$ 10 million from abroad as well as to invest up to US$ 10 million
abroad  and  permission  given  to  Authorised  Dealers  to  engage  in  Forex-Rupee  current  swap
without  the  prior  approval  of  RBI.  The  various  measures  taken  in  the  area  of  market
improvement  will  lead  not  only  to  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  individual  markets  but  also
bring about a greater integration among them.
15. In order to facilitate greater flow of credit to agriculture, the share capital of
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) as well as the General Line
of  Credit  granted  to  NABARD  by  RBI  have  been  increased.  The  simplified  procedure  of
assessing the working capital needs on the basis of 20 per cent of the projected turn over is being
extended to borrowers having working capital limits up to Rs.20 million as against Rs.10 million
earlier. This should benefit a large number of Small Scale Industrial Units.
16. The measures announced cover a wide range and touch almost every  part  of
the  financial  system.  Some  of  the  measures  are  directed  towards  improving  the  functioning  of
the various markets and bringing about a greater integration among them, which should reduce
the volatility of the rates in these markets. These measures are in the nature of institutional and
structural reforms. The improvements in the credit delivery system should remove the ‘chokes’
in the flow of credit.
17.  All  in  all,  the  measures  announced  should  have  the  effect  of  accelerating
economic growth, keeping inflationary pressures under control and improving the flow of credit
from the banking system to the various segments of the Indian economy.
BIS Review   52/1997
