Mr.  Thiessen  looks  at  flexible  exchange  rates  in  a  world  of  low  inflation
Remarks  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  Mr.  Gordon  Thiessen,  to  the  FOREX  ’97
Conference held in Toronto on 30/5/97.
There  is  a  good  deal  of  discussion  these  days  about  Economic  and  Monetary
Union  (EMU)  in  Europe  --  about  the  benefits  and  difficulties  of  organizing  such  a  union.
However, today I would like to examine a somewhat different issue, one that is at the other end
of  the  spectrum;  namely,  How  is  the  international  system  of  flexible  exchange  rates  working
these days?
This is not to denigrate or deny the importance of the challenges surrounding the
EMU  initiative,  nor  its  relevance  for  those  who  will  be  directly  or  indirectly  affected  by  its
debut.  But  while  many  European  countries  have  operated  under  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime
during the post-Bretton Woods period, most other industrial economies have chosen to operate
under a flexible  currency  arrangement.  The  three  major  currencies,  those  of  the  United  States,
Japan,  and  Germany,  float  against  one  another.  So  I  thought  what  I  might  do  this  morning  is
focus  on  flexible  exchange  rates  and  discuss,  in  particular,  how  they  have  performed  over  the
past few years.
The  main  message  I  would  like  to  convey  to  you  is  that,  when  all  is  said  anddone, the flexible exchange rate system  has  not  done  badly  over  the  past  25  years.  And  in  the
last three or four years, it has done rather well in an environment characterized by low inflation
and improved fiscal performance across the major industrial countries. Exchange rates have, for
the  most  part,  moved  in  the  “right  direction.”  And  short-run  exchange  rate  volatility  has
diminished, notwithstanding some evident cyclical swings of the U.S. dollar.
The  initial  reason  for  adopting  floating  exchange  rates  was  more  a  matter  of
Why are the major currencies floating?
circumstance  than  a  considered  choice.  The  Bretton  Woods  system,  which  was  established
shortly  after  the  Second  World  War,  collapsed  in  the  early  1970s,  forcing  most  industrial
countries onto a flexible exchange rate regime as an “interim measure.” Attempts to rescue the
Bretton Woods system in the summer of 1971 and the fall of 1973 proved unsuccessful.
The  reputed  reasons  for  the  collapse  of  the  system  were  the  inflationary
macropolicies  pursued  by  the  United  States  during  the  late  1960s  and  early  1970s  and  the
unwillingness of other countries either to inflate their economies to the same extent or to allow
the  U.S.  dollar  to  devalue.  But  the  true  reasons  for  its  demise  were  more  deep-seated.  This
system,  which  had  been  viable,  although  prone  to  periodic  crises,  throughout  the  1950s  and
1960s,  was  clearly  unable  to  cope  in  a  world  of  liberalized  trade  and  international  capital
The  main  problem  was  that  the  imbalances  that  the  system  was  supposed  to
address, through discrete changes in the parity value of the affected currencies vis-à-vis the U.S.
dollar and gold, proved to be much larger and more intractable than the architects of the system
had ever envisaged. Moreover, countries were reluctant to adjust their currencies, even when the
problems  were  shown  to  be  fundamental.  Thus,  authorities  would  often  subvert  domestic
economic objectives, such as price stability, economic growth and full employment, in order to
protect outdated parities. As a result, the system was in disequilibrium more often than not. And
its  adjustable  nature  did  not  prove  flexible  enough  to  help  countries  deal  with  the  shocks  that
regularly hit the international financial system.
BIS Review   57/1997
- 2 -
While  the  adoption  of  floating  exchange  rates  may  have  been  more  a  matter  of
necessity  than  choice,  floating  rates  did  promise  greater  independence  in  the  conduct  of
monetary  policy  and  better  insulation  from  external  shocks.  Advocates  of  a  floating  regime,
partly influenced by Canada’s favourable experience with such a system in the 1950s, suggested
that exchange rates would automatically adjust to correct external imbalances in an orderly and
continuous manner. And this would give domestic policymakers greater freedom than under the
pegged rate system  as  well  as  obviate  the  need  for  official  intervention  and  large  international
reserves.
Experience with the floating rate system
Needless  to  say,  experience  under  the  floating  rate  system  has  not  been
problem-free. Events did not unfold quite as its proponents had suggested, and the past 25 years
have been characterized by volatile short-term movements and sizable long-term swings in most
of the major currencies.
The magnitude of these currency movements and our evident inability to explain
them in a comprehensive, precise manner, led many observers to presume that such movements
were  driven  by  market  speculation  and  that  they  were  largely  disconnected  from  economic
fundamentals.
There is no simple way to resolve this issue. Nonetheless, it is possible to identify
some  of  the  forces  that  have  influenced  exchange  rates  through  this  period,  either  by  shaping
their  broad  movements  or,  at  times,  by  contributing  to  uncertainty  and  hence  to  excessive
volatility  in  these  rates.  I  would  stress,  in  particular,  the  uncertainty  over  the  future  course  of
monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  which  made  it  difficult  for  financial  markets  to  cope  with  the
macroeconomic pressures of the day.
What forces am I talking about? In the 1970s, we had the two oil shocks, one at
the beginning and one at the end of the decade. These may  have  been  precipitated  by  political
developments in the Middle East, but the initial shock was encouraged by the pursuit, among the
major  industrial  countries,  of  higher  output  and  employment  through  monetary  ease  and  a
willingness  to  tolerate  increased  inflation.  Subsequently,  the  monetary  accommodation  of  the
price  effects  caused  by  the  oil  shocks  added  to  the  turbulent  environment  that  followed.  The
1970s and early 1980s turned out to be a period of high and variable inflation in many countries.
High  inflation,  balance-of-payments  difficulties  arising  from  the  oil  shocks,  and
the large fiscal transfers necessary to support economic activity in energy-dependent  countries,
were the catalyst for much of what followed in the 1980s. Excessive government spending and
rising public indebtedness were coupled with tighter monetary policy, as authorities struggled to
maintain social services, restore full employment, and dampen the inflationary pressures that had
been allowed to grow in the 1970s. The effects of this uncomfortable policy mix hit the major
industrial  countries  with  varying  severity  and  triggered  a  debt  crisis  in  the  developing  world.
Success on the inflation front was mixed, adding to the strains that the exchange rate system was
expected to cope with.
While  the  problems  in  the  industrial  countries  were  generally  less  severe  than
those  in  the  developing  world,  they  nevertheless  caused  serious  dislocations.  Because  of
differences  in  the  mix  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  in  the  United  States  compared  with
Germany  and  Japan,  the  U.S.  dollar  appreciated  sharply  against  the  deutschemark  and  the  yen
through the first part of the 1980s. In turn, these developments led to an  accumulation  of  very
BIS Review   57/1997
- 3 -
large current account imbalances among these three major countries. In these circumstances, the
flexible exchange rate system did not perform as well as it might have. But it is not obvious that
any other alternative would have been practicable, and I doubt very much that a fixed exchange
rate system for the U.S. dollar, the mark, and the yen could have survived these strains.
The  three  major  currencies  were  not  the  only  ones  subjected  to  tensions.
Uncertainty  about  whether  and  how  fiscal  imbalances  might  be  corrected,  and  considerable
cross-country  differences  in  actual  and  expected  inflation  contributed  to  major  exchange  rate
pressures among other currencies in the 1980s and early 1990s. By 1992-93, these pressures had
reached  the  breaking  point  in  continental  Europe  and  the  United  Kingdom,  putting  extreme
stress  on  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  (ERM).  As  well  as  causing  the  United  Kingdom  and
Italy  to  leave  the  arrangement,  the  situation  necessitated  a  widening  of  the  ERM  intervention
bands.
What is the current situation?
Although  it  is  still  early  days,  conditions  in  exchange  and  asset  markets  have
improved  considerably  since  1993.  Short-term  exchange  rate  volatility,  and  even  the  trend
movements in bilateral rates, while still significant, are much smaller than those of the previous
two decades.
I believe that this improved perfomance has a lot to do with the convergence we
have  seen  in  recent  years  towards  low  and  stable  rates  of  inflation  among  the  major  industrial
countries.  But  progress  on  the  fiscal  front  has  also  been  essential,  helping  to  reduce  risk
premiums and stabilize expectations, both with regard to the long-run viability of the fiscal track
in many countries and the prospects for continued low inflation.
Thus, I would argue that consistently low inflation and improved fiscal positions
have  brought  about  more  stable,  “better  behaved”  exchange  rates,  just  as  theory  would  have
predicted.  This  is  not  to  say  that  exchange  rates  have  remained  absolutely  stable  over  the  past
four years. They have not. But movements have been more orderly,  unlike  those  of  the  earlier
periods, and most of the observed trends can be explained by the different cyclical positions of
countries,  the  different  monetary  and  fiscal  responses,  and  by  changes  in  world  commodity
prices.
Exchange  rate  movements  have,  at  times,  appeared  to  contribute  to  trade
imbalances  or  exacerbate  existing  ones.  But  this  should  not  be  interpreted  as  evidence  that
markets are pushing rates in the wrong direction. Indeed, imbalances  often  reflect  the  fact  that
economies  are  at  different  points  of  the  business  cycle.  For  example,  Japan  has,  until  very
recently, seen the value of its currency decline, on balance, against the U.S. dollar, even though
the country is running a large and growing trade surplus. It is obvious  that  much  of  the  recent
movement  in  the  U.S.  dollar/yen  exchange  rate  has  been  driven  by  the  different  cyclical
positions  of  the  two  countries.  Thus,  the  relatively  low  yen  has  been  helping  to  rejuvenate
demand in Japan. Meanwhile, a strong U.S. dollar has been helping the United States to counter
inflationary pressures that would otherwise require stronger doses of interest-rate medicine.
Of  course,  it  is  possible  for  exchange  rates  to  overreact,  even  in  the  benign
environment  I  described  a  moment  ago.  But  the  chances  of  a  serious  misalignment  are  much
lower when markets are operating in a climate of greater predictability, provided by a monetary
policy grounded in domestic price stability. When exchange rates are not anchored by a credible
BIS Review   57/1997
- 4 -
commitment to price stability, it is difficult, if not impossible, for markets to perform the tasks
that are expected of them.
The operation of the flexible exchange rate system in Canada
As  you  know,  Canada  has  been  one  of  the  strongest  proponents  of  a  flexible
exchange rate system. We were the only major industrial country to operate under such a system
in the 1950s and early 1960s, and we were the first major country to adopt it again in the 1970s.
As a medium-sized open economy that relies on exports of primary commodities more than our
principal  trading  partners,  we  are  vulnerable  to  external  shocks  and  appreciate  the  ”shock
absorber” effect provided by a flexible exchange rate.
Let  me  tell  you  briefly  how  the  Canadian  economy  has  performed  under  the
flexible  exchange  rate  system  and  describe  the  main  forces  that  have  been  acting  on  our
exchange  rate.  The  most  significant  trend  movement  occurred  over  the  1976  to  1986  period,
when the Canadian dollar experienced a large depreciation vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar, falling from
roughly parity to a low of 69 cents (U.S.) in February 1986. During this time, annual inflation
rates in Canada exceeded those in the United States by about one per cent, on average. While on
a yearly basis this may not sound like much, cumulatively the differential was rather significant
and  can  explain  most  of  the  trend  depreciation  in  the  Canada-U.S.  exchange  rate  over  this
period.
As  for  the  cyclical  swings  that  accompanied  the  trend  depreciation  of  the
Canadian dollar, they reflected a number of factors. Among these, the most significant has been
the  variability  in  the  world  prices  of  primary  commodities,  which  remain  an  important
component of our exports. But the most worrisome factor during the 1980s and 1990s was  the
growth  of  the  fiscal  deficit  and  the  destabilizing  effect  that  this  had  on  financial  markets,
including the foreign exchange market. Rising public debts and deficits contributed importantly
to the risk premiums in interest rates on Canadian dollar assets and were the catalyst, if not the
cause, of unsettling episodes in 1986, 1992, and 1994. Fiscal policy concerns, at times coupled
with  political  uncertainty,  proved  to  be  a  volatile  mix  and  led  to  serious  financial  market
turbulence and speculative pressures, complicating the task of monetary policy.
Fortunately, the situation has recently improved considerably. Inflation in Canada
is stable, at its lowest level in decades. And it has been somewhat below that in the United States
since 1992. This implies a potential appreciation of the Canadian dollar vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar
over time, if the inflation differential persists.
But  other  factors  also  tend  to  favour  a  stronger  Canadian  dollar.  First,  deficit
reduction  by  Canadian  governments  has  eased  the  uncertainty  that  had  pervaded  financial
markets, thereby shrinking risk premiums in interest rates and reversing the currency weakness
caused  earlier  by  these  premiums.  Second,  Canadian  industries  are  in  a  stronger  competitive
position  than  they  have  been  for  years,  and  this  has  contributed  to  a  sharp  reduction  of  the
persistent deficit in the current account of our international balance of payments. Third, primary
commodity  prices  are  firm  and  likely  to  move  higher  with  the  pickup  in  global  economic
activity.
In light of all this, it is not surprising that several analysts, as well as the Bank of
Canada, expect a stronger Canadian dollar in the future and think that the currency is currently
undervalued relative to its longer-term fundamentals.
BIS Review   57/1997
- 5 -
Why,  then,  has  the  Canadian  dollar  not  been  stronger?  The  explanation  lies
mainly  in  the  different  cyclical  positions  of  the  Canadian  and  U.S.  economies.  The  more
accommodative  monetary  conditions  pursued  in  Canada  during  the  past  two  years  have  been
consistent with the  needs  of  an  economy  characterized  by  considerable  excess  capacity  and  an
inflation rate that has tended to be in the lower half of the current 1 to 3 per cent target range.
Thus,  lower  interest  rates  and  a  relatively  low  Canadian  dollar  have  been  temporarily
appropriate for economic reasons.
While no central bank ever wishes to have a weak currency, since late 1995, the
Bank  of  Canada  has  encouraged  easier  monetary  conditions  --  conditions  that,  at  times,  have
taken the form of lower interest rates and a somewhat softer dollar. Put another way, the Bank
did not purposely push the dollar lower, but simply aimed for the path of  monetary  conditions
that  seemed  appropriate  given  sluggish  domestic  economic  conditions.  The  particular  mix  of
interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  adjustments  necessary  to  achieve  the  desired  path  of  monetary
conditions is not under the direct control of the Bank of Canada. It is essentially determined by
the markets.
However,  the  Canadian  economy  has  been  gathering  momentum  lately,  and
prospects are good for continued robust expansion through  1997  and  into  1998,  in  response  to
the  substantial  past  monetary  easing.  With  the  margin  of  excess  capacity  in  the  economy  still
fairly wide, there is ample room for strong growth in coming quarters  without  a  resurgence  of
inflation.  However,  as  the  slack  is  absorbed,  the  Bank  will  need  to  pursue  less  stimulative
monetary conditions, consistent with a durable, low-inflation economic expansion.
In  other  words,  for  cyclical  as  well  as  for  more  fundamental  reasons,  the
prospects are good for a stronger Canadian currency.
 In  summary,  I  would  say  that  the  exchange  market  for  the  Canadian  dollar  has
worked rather well in recent years, interpreting and responding to both the fundamental trends in
our economy and the cyclical differences between Canada and the United States. I believe that
fiscal  discipline  and  a  credible  commitment  to  low  inflation  are  key  ingredients  of  that  good
performance.
BIS Review   57/1997
