Dr.  Stals  assesses  the  new  opportunities  for  South  African  investors  in  an
environment of no exchange controls   Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve
Bank,  Dr.  C.  Stals,  at  a  Business  Breakfast  Forum  hosted  by  Marriott  Merchant  Bank  and
Deloitte & Touche in Durban on 17/3/97.
1. Background
The announcement on the further relaxation of exchange controls by the Minister
of  Finance,  Mr.  Trevor  Manuel,  on  Wednesday  last  week  received  as  much,  if  not  more,
attention as his announcements on fiscal policy for the 1997/98 fiscal year.
For  more  than  35  years,  South  African  residents  were  not  permitted,  at  least
within the rules of the law, to make  investments  outside  of  the  country  without  prior  approval
from the exchange control authorities. Approval was seldom given, particularly not before 1994
when the besieged South African economy had to contend with international sanctions, boycotts
and disinvestment campaigns.
Following upon the political and social reforms in the country and the withdrawal
of  punitive  international  economic  actions,  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Department  of  Finance
started  with  a  gradual  phasing  out  of  the  exchange  controls.  A  major  constraint  remained  an
acute  shortage  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  which  were  completely  depleted  by  the  time  the
Government of National Unity came into power in April 1994.
Looking back over the past three years, good progress has nevertheless been made
with  the  gradual  phasing-out  of  the  exchange  controls.  As  a  first  priority,  all  restrictions  on
non-residents  to  repatriate  their  investment  funds  from  South  Africa  were  removed.  Various
ways  and  means  were  introduced  to  enable  South  African  corporates  to  acquire  foreign
investments in branches or subsidiaries controlled by them. They were, for example, allowed to
use  the  proceeds  of  foreign  equity  or  convertible  debenture  issues  to  finance  foreign
investments. The Reserve Bank has approved a cumulative amount of more than R18 billion for
this purpose.
In  June  1995,  a  scheme  was  introduced  to  enable  South  African  insurers  and
pension and mutual funds to diversify part of their existing asset portfolios into foreign currency
denominated  investments.  Approval  has  been  given  for  more  than  R30  billion  of  asset  swap
transactions  in  terms  of  which  institutional  investors  could  exchange  South  African  assets  for
foreign  assets  in  this  process.  According  to  information  available  to  the  Reserve  Bank,  more
than R17 billion of these transactions have been executed.
A number of internal arrangements were introduced to reduce the administrative
burden  of  exchange  controls,  for  example  to  grant  the  authorised  dealers  in  foreign  exchange
more scope for discretionary decisions on exchange control applications, without prior reference
to  the  Reserve  Bank.  In  the  process,  virtually  all  exchange  controls  on  current  account
transactions in the balance of payments (i.e. payments for goods and services) were removed.
The  announcement  made  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  last  week  extended  the
exchange control relaxation programme now also to foreign investments by private individuals.
A basis has been established for a continuation of the gradual removal of the exchange controls
through  the  periodic  lifting  of  limits  and  other  administrative  measures  over  a  wide  front  to
cover the corporate sector, institutional investors and private individuals. There remains but the
BIS Review   30/1997
- 2 -
blocked assets of emigrants (former South African residents) that need to be addressed at some
stage.
2. The relaxations announced last week
The announcement of some further exchange control relaxations last week by the
Minister of Finance was very important, not only for the substance of the relaxations but also for
the clear policy direction indicated. This was the first major relaxation of the exchange controls
announced by Mr Manuel since he became Minister of Finance in April 1996 and confirmed his
endorsement of the policy of the gradual removal of the exchange controls.
Secondly,  the  Minister  himself  regarded  the  announced  relaxations  as  an
important change in the underlying philosophy held by the Government on exchange controls. In
his Budget Speech the Minister said:
“The package of exchange control reforms placed before this House today moves
South  Africa  to  a  system  with  a  positive  rather  than  a  negative  bias  .......  The  objective  is  to
reach a point where there is equality of treatment between non-residents and residents in relation
to inflows and outflows of capital.”
The Minister, in other words wants to indicate that  South  Africa  now  has  a  free
foreign exchange system with a number of temporary exceptions, instead of a controlled system
with a few special concessions.
The  wide-ranging  concessions  now  made  give  South  African  corporates  more
freedom to make direct investments outside of South Africa, with some special dispensation for
investments  in  other  members  of  the  Southern  Africa  Development  Community  (SADC);
increase  the  scope  for  institutional  investors  to  diversify  part  of  their  portfolios  into  foreign
assets  and  for  the  first  time  enable  South  African  private  individuals  to  make  foreign
investments,  either  directly  or  through  South  African  authorised  dealers  in  foreign  exchange.
Some of the details of these relaxations must still be worked out, but the Minister indicated that
all the relaxations announced will be implemented by 1 July 1997.
3. New options for the investor
In the past, many South Africans wanted to invest part of their savings outside of
the  country  for  non-financial  reasons,  and  this  may  still  be  so  in  future.  The  more  rational
investor,  however,  may  think  twice  before  making  an  investment  in  a  foreign  currency,  in  a
foreign  country  and  perhaps  also  in  the  shares  of  a  foreign  company.  In  considering  such  a
possibility, a few important macroeconomic realities will have to be taken into account.
The first is that markets, the more free they become  and  the  more  efficient  they
function, also work more effectively as a catalyst for equalisation. For example,  if  the  average
rate  of  inflation  in  South  Africa  over  time  is  10  per  cent  per  annum  and  the  average  rate  of
inflation  in  the  rest  of  the  world  is  3  per  cent,  nominal  interest  rates  in  South  Africa  will  on
average  be  about  7  per  cent  above  the  level  of  nominal  interest  rates  in  other  countries.
Differences  in  real  rates  of  interest  will  reflect  differences  in  the  risk  factor  attached  to
investment in different countries.
In the same example, the exchange rate of the South African rand will depreciate
over time by about 7 per cent per annum. The depreciation in  the  exchange  rate  will  therefore
BIS Review   30/1997
- 3 -
make sure that the converted rand value of a foreign investment will keep up with the value of a
similar South African investment, adjusted for inflation. There are therefore no special gains to
be made from the investment in a foreign currency.
Thirdly,  taxation  in  South  Africa  will  be  levied  on  income  earned  on  foreign
investments  on  the  same  basis  as  income  earned  in  South  Africa.  (The  taxation  on  “passive
income” earned in foreign countries as referred to by the Minister in his Budget Speech.)
Foreign  investments  will,  however,  hold  new  risk  exposures  for  South  African
investors, particularly in an environment of volatile international exchange rates. The timing of
the  transfer  of  an  investment  into  a  foreign  currency  can  be  detrimental.  A  South  African
investor who may have transferred his savings into a sterling investment earlier this year when
the exchange rate between the rand and the pound was R8.00 = £1.00 could have lost 10 per cent
of his investment within a very short period of time. Last Friday the exchange rate was back to
R7.10 = £1.00. This brings into any foreign investment a new speculative element that does not
exist in the local investment market.
Finally, very few private individuals in South Africa have the knowledge and the
expertise to manage foreign investment portfolios, and to assess the alien risk exposures that are
connected to such investments. We should not, just because of sentimental reasons, make use of
a new freedom to invest funds abroad when a local investment will serve  our  needs  better  and
more effectively.
4. Monetary policy in an environment of no exchange controls
The  new  situation  brings  new  challenges  also  for  monetary  policy.  The
depreciation  of  the  rand  last  year,  and  the  appreciation  of  almost  10  per  cent  since  November
1996,  gave  us  a  taste  of  the  new  exposures  of  our  financial  system  to  the  global  markets.  If
South  Africa  wants  to  be  part  of  the  global  village,  we  shall  have  to  abide  by  the  rules  of  the
international markets.
Without  exchange  controls,  capital  in  and  outflows  will  be  dictated  by  market
forces,  and  markets  are  inclined  to  put  heavy  penalties  on  errors  made  by  governments  and
central banks in their macroeconomic policy decisions. It will be fatal for a country to liberalise
its financial systems and to encourage the integration of its domestic financial markets into the
global system, and then to balk at the disciplines of these markets.
5. Financial institutions without exchange controls
Many South African financial institutions have already taken up the challenge of
becoming  part  of  the  international  financial  community.  Such  institutions  will  also  have  to
consider carefully how this new venture will affect their own security, liquidity and solvability.
There  are  numerous  examples  in  the  world  of  the  collapse  and  failure  of  major  financial
institutions because of international exposure.
Governments or financial regulators and supervisors cannot protect multinational
institutions  against  the  many  risks  involved  in  being  global.  South  African  institutions  were
protected from these international risk exposures through the isolation of  our  country  from  the
BIS Review   30/1997
- 4 -
international  markets.  Now  that  the  opportunities  are  being  opened  up  for  an  outward
movement, they have to tread with care and with caution.
6. Conclusion
The removal of exchange controls opens up new opportunities for South African
corporates,  institutional  investors  and  private  individuals.  All  of  them,  however,  must  not  be
overwhelmed  by  emotional  considerations  inspired  by  a  new  freedom,  but  must  give  careful
consideration before any decision is taken to invest hard earned savings in a foreign country, in a
foreign currency and in a foreign institution.
BIS Review   30/1997
