Mr.  McDonough  examines  recent  developments  and  trends  in  the  foreign
exchange  markets      Remarks  by  the  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,
Mr. William J. McDonough, before the 39th International Congress of the Association Cambiste
International, The Financial Markets Association in Toronto on 30/5/97.
I  am  delighted  to  be  invited  to  address  the  39th  International  Congress  of  the
Association Cambiste Internationale (ACI) -- The Financial Markets Association. I must confess
to  a  certain  affinity  for  the  foreign  exchange  community,  stemming,  no  doubt,  from  my
commercial  banking  experience  and  my  time  overseeing  the  foreign  exchange  desk  at  the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. I’ve long believed that, more so than in most other sectors
of the finance industry, there is a real community among those engaged in foreign exchange -- a
community  that  relies  on  close  personal  ties  and  contacts.  It  is  this  spirit  of  community  that
makes  events  such  as  these  ACI  meetings  today  and  tomorrow  so  enjoyable  and  important,
giving us the opportunity to renew old friendships and build new relationships that will enable
us to do our respective jobs that much better.
In  my  remarks  to  you  this  morning,  I  would  like  to  highlight  some  recent
developments in the foreign exchange market and share with you my view, as a central banker,
of what has been driving some of the trends we’ve been observing. We heard a lot of talk in the
foreign exchange markets in 1996 about the “end of  volatility.”  As  the  market  performance  of
the  last  few  weeks  has  demonstrated,  such  commentary  was  a  bit  exaggerated.  However,  even
with  the  spike  in  volatility  we’ve  seen  in  recent  weeks,  there  is  no  question  that  we  have
witnessed  a  remarkable  period  of  relative  stability  in  foreign  exchange  rates  over  the  past  six
quarters or so.
What accounts for this relative stability in the foreign exchange markets since late
1995? Economic fundamentals are certainly one factor -- we have had a period of relative price
stability  in  the  major  world  economies,  and  a  general  absence  of  severe  market  shocks.
However,  I  would  argue  that  what  we’ve  been  observing  is  also,  in  part,  a  by-product  of
continuously  greater  transparency  that  has  characterized  the  foreign  exchange  market  over  the
past  several  years.  Moreover,  I  am  convinced  that  the  increased  transparency  in  the  foreign
exchange  markets  is  beneficial:  for  the  foreign  exchange  community,  for  financial  markets  in
general, and for the global economy as a whole.
Before explaining what I mean by greater transparency and why I believe it is so
beneficial,  I  would  like  to  take  a  quick  look  at  the  record  itself.  Is  the  talk  about  declining
volatility  reflected  in  hard  evidence?  Yes,  it  largely  is.  Thirty-day  dollar-mark  and  dollar-yen
historical volatility remained below 10 percent throughout most of 1996 and the first quarter of
1997, and, even with the price action we saw in May, the spike in thirty-day historical volatility
we’ve observed is not particularly dramatic when compared with  similar  periods  in  past  years.
Similarly, implied volatility on dollar-mark and dollar-yen options traded to near record lows in
1996.
But, as this month has shown, volatility has not been eliminated. There also have
been  a  number  of  days  in  the  past  year  and  a  half  with  considerable  volatility  in  the  foreign
exchange market. And, I have no doubt that we’ll have many more of these days -- at times, for
example,  when  markets  rapidly  adjust  to  new  information  or  when  periods  of  poor  liquidityresult in exaggerated price swings.
What is clear is that this is a market that is constantly  evolving.  None  of  us  can
say with any certainty whether we’re observing the beginning of a trend or an anomalous period
BIS Review   60/1997
- 2 -
that will ultimately be viewed as a brief lull in volatility. However, I don’t  think  many  of  you
would disagree with me when I say that the foreign exchange market over the past six quarters
or so has changed significantly from that in 1994 and 1992. For those of you who, like me, were
involved  in  this  business  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  following  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods
system, the contrast is very dramatic.
Given  these  realities,  we  must  ask  ourselves  what  has  changed  to  alter  the  way
foreign exchange rates fluctuate in the global marketplace? It is obvious that this is not a case of
declining  volume.  The  foreign  exchange  survey  most  recently  published  by  the  Bank  for
International Settlements in 1996 shows that daily volume in foreign exchange grew by almost
50 percent between 1992 and 1995, and we have no reason to think that anything has changed
since then to alter this trend.
What  has  changed,  however,  is  the  new,  higher  level  of  transparency  that  has
been introduced in recent years into the foreign exchange market. When I speak of transparency,
I  am  actually  referring  to  a  combination  of  several  factors.  Broadly  speaking,  I  define
transparency in this market as the degree to which its participants have equal and simultaneous
access  to  the  inputs  necessary  to  price  assets  and  their  associated  risk  accurately.  By  reducing
guesswork and uncertainty, transparency helps to smooth price adjustments and eliminate some
of  the  shocks  that  can  result  when  market  participants  discover  they  have  “priced  in”
assumptions  that  are  inaccurate.  In  my  view,  the  current  move  toward  greater  market
transparency  is  reflected  in  four  broad  categories:  policy,  information,  pricing,  and  risk
management.
The  increased  transparency  of  central  bank  policy  --  which  is  a  product  of
deliberate  steps  taken  by  policymakers  --  is  an  important  aspect  of  the  move  toward  more
transparent  overall  market  conditions  that  we’ve  been  observing.  Over  the  past  several  years,
central banks in a number of countries, most notably in Canada, New Zealand, Australia, and the
United  Kingdom,  have  become  increasingly  convinced  of  the  value  of  making  a  public
commitment to an articulated and transparent policy standard, usually price stability. By setting
clear policy objectives, the makers of monetary policy can eliminate much of the guesswork that
central  bank  watchers  must  engage  in  to  figure  out  what  the  central  bank  will  do  next.  In  so
doing,  they  can  help  anchor  inflation  expectations  over  the  long  term,  and  thereby  foster
economic growth by ensuring a stable price environment.
Many  central  banks  are  also  increasingly  coming  to  realize  that  much  of  the
secrecy  and  cautious  signaling  that  once  characterized  monetary  policy  decisions  is,  to  some
extent,  counterproductive.  In  recent  years,  a  number  of  central  banks  have  taken  measures  to
further  open  up  their  policy  processes  to  the  public.  For  example,  prior  to  February  1994,
changes  in  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States  were  signaled  to  the  market  through  open
market  operations.  Since  that  time,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  publicly  announced  changes  in
policy,  typically  following  each  meeting  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  or  FOMC.
Some  policymakers  had  been  concerned  that  this  shift  in  procedure  for  communicating  policy
decisions  might  create  additional  market  volatility.  In  fact,  a  recent  study  by  some  of  my
colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis found just the opposite -- that announcing
policy  changes  has  not  led  to  increased  volatility  in  the  federal  funds  rate.  By  making
information  on  monetary  policy  decisions  available  quickly  and  broadly,  we  at  the  Federal
Reserve have helped level the playing field and, I believe, contributed to smoothing the process
by which new information on FOMC policy is incorporated more quickly and efficiently in asset
prices.
BIS Review   60/1997
- 3 -
Other  central  banks  have  similarly  increased  transparency  in  their  monetary
policy  processes.  One  example  is  the  Bank  of  England’s  move  to  publish  the  minutes  of  the
monthly policy meetings between the Chancellor and the Bank of England Governor, a practice
that is to continue under the new monetary policy council. The Bank of Canada, too, has taken
steps  to  increase  the  level  of  transparency  in  its  markets.  It  now  publishes  a  semiannual
monetary policy report and sets an explicit level for its bank rate.
National governments also  have  contributed  to  greater  transparency  in  monetary
policy  by  increasingly  recognizing  the  value  of  endowing  their  central  banks  with  greater
independence.  Moves  of  this  sort  have  occurred  in  several  Western  European  countries  and
many emerging market economies, especially in Latin America, over the past several years.
A second area where recent developments have resulted in improved transparency
in the foreign exchange market is information technology. Easy and inexpensive access to a vast
array of information has changed the way financial markets absorb new data. Most of us in this
room sit in offices or trading rooms with keyboard access to data, analysis, and news that once
took  huge  resources  to  manage.  And,  neither  bankers  nor  traders  have  a  monopoly  on  this
capacity -- corporate treasurers and institutional investors can pull up most of the same screens
we can. At one time, a presence in a local market and access to early newspapers could provide a
trading  advantage  for  a  large  market  maker.  Today,  news  from  that  market  is  available
electronically worldwide with almost no lag. Information is cheaper and easier to come by than
ever  before.  The  result?  A  global  market  that  reacts  quickly  and  efficiently  to  new  data,  and
participants  who  have  more  time  to  analyze  information  because  they  need  to  spend  less  time
gathering it. One  consequence  of  this  improved  transparency  in  information  technology  is  that
information gets reflected in asset prices more quickly and more smoothly than ever before.
A closely related development that has also contributed to increased transparency
in the foreign exchange market has been the rapid evolution of the price discovery process in the
past several years. Electronic brokerage and electronic interbank dealing systems  have  evolved
that have smoothed the dissemination of current pricing and improved market liquidity. Whereas
truly  competitive  pricing  was  once  the  province  of  only  the  largest  market  makers,  smaller
interbank  dealers  --  and  even  some  foreign  exchange  end-users  --  now  also  have  access  to
narrow  bid-ask  spreads.  The  result  so  far  has  been  a  deeper  market  and,  again,  a  more  level
playing  field  for  all  market  participants,  with  pricing  no  longer  dominated  by  a  few  large
players.
The final area in which recent innovations have improved market transparency is
risk management. While we are far from being able to rest on our laurels, there is no denying the
fact  that  financial  institutions,  their  customers,  and  their  investors  have  become  more
sophisticated over the past several years at evaluating, monitoring, and controlling market risk.
If market participants better understand the risk of the positions they put on their books, they are
more able to react effectively and efficiently when their assumptions are challenged or unwound.
Although it is crucial that rapid innovations in trading and risk management practices continue,
most of the institutions represented here have already made important progress along these lines
in recent years.
What  needs  to  be  stressed,  however,  is  that  it  is  not  enough  for  a  firm  to
develop -   for  internal  purposes  alone  --  sophisticated  new  techniques  to  assess,  price,  and
manage  increasingly  refined  components  of  financial  risk.  If  financial  markets  are  to  function
most efficiently, shareholders, creditors, and counterparties of  these  firms  also  must  be  able  to
BIS Review   60/1997
- 4 -
assess  the  risks  when  they  make  their  evaluations.  In  order  for  them  to  do  this,  meaningful
information about risks and risk management performance must be available.
The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  has  been  actively  involved  in
encouraging an  evolution  of  disclosure  practices  that  will  improve  the  functioning  of  financial
markets.  As  you  may  know,  Peter  Fisher,  an  executive  vice  president  of  the  New  York  Fed,
chaired a working group of the Euro-Currency Standing Committee of the G-10 central banks,
which  published  a  discussion  paper  on  “Public  Disclosure  of  Market  and  Credit  Risks  by
Financial Intermediaries” in September 1994. This so-called Fisher report described how trading
and  financial  risk  management  practices  had  developed  far  beyond  the  public  disclosure  of
financial  information,  creating  a  gap  between  the  precision  with  which  a  firm’s  management
could assess and adjust the firm’s own risk exposures and the information available to outsiders
to help them assess the riskiness of that firm’s activities.
Recognizing  that  such  an  asymmetry  of  available  information  could  cause  the
misallocation  of  capital  among  firms  and  amplify  market  disturbances,  the  Fisher  report
recommended  that  all  financial  intermediaries  --  regulated  and  unregulated  --  move  in  the
direction  of  publicly  disclosing  periodic  quantitative  information.  The  information  requested
would provide estimates relied upon by the firm’s management of:
the market risks in the relevant portfolio or portfolios, as well as the firm’s actual
performance in managing the market risks in these portfolios; and
the counterparty credit risks arising from the firm’s trading and risk management
activities.
By  and  large,  these  proposed  measures  for  reporting  risk  have  been  adopted
voluntarily by many major banking institutions around the world, with many others  moving  in
that direction. As such, they have contributed importantly to improved transparency in financial
markets.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York has also been deeply involved in efforts
to reduce foreign exchange settlement risk -- efforts that should further serve to improve market
efficiency and overall financial stability. In October 1994, the New York Fed-sponsored Foreign
Exchange Committee issued a major report on “Reducing Foreign  Exchange  Settlement  Risk.”
The Bank has also been working actively in this area with other central banks through the G-10
central  bank  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,  or  CPSS,  which  I  have  had  the
pleasure  to  chair  in  recent  years.  Building  upon  the  work  of  the  New  York  Foreign  Exchange
Committee,  the  CPSS  published  a  document  in  March  of  last  year,  often  referred  to  as  the
Allsopp  report,  that  contains  a  comprehensive  strategy  outlining  how  the  public  and  private
sectors can work together to reduce foreign exchange settlement risk. The strategy was endorsed
by the G-10 central bank governors and calls for specific action on the part of individual banks
and industry groups.
A survey conducted by the CPSS last autumn indicates that individual banks are
answering the G-10 governors’ call for action. Many banks have made a good start in improving
their ability to measure, manage, control, and net their bilateral settlement exposures,  and  they
plan  to  push  these  efforts  even  further  over  the  next  year.  While  this  is  a  very  encouraging
beginning, we can’t ignore the fact that more work must be done by individual banks. With this
in mind, the CPSS will continue to closely monitor progress over the next year for any signs of
slippage.
BIS Review   60/1997
- 5 -
The  search  by  individual  banks  for  efficient  ways  to  reduce  their  foreign
exchange  settlement  risk  has  brought  about  important  progress  at  the  industry-group  level  as
well.  The  Allsopp  report  noted  the  efforts  of  FXNET,  S.W.I.F.T,  ECHO,  Multinet,  and  the
Group of 20 banks to offer various types of risk-reducing services, and these ongoing efforts are
very encouraging. Some banks are also exploring the elimination of settlement risk altogether by
shifting  the  market  to  trades  that  simply  settle  the  gain  or  loss  associated  with  exchange  rate
movements -- called “contracts for difference” -- instead of requiring delivery of the underlying
currencies.
We  are  well  aware  that  many  market  participants  are  currently  debating  what
constitutes the most efficient multi-currency netting and settlement services. While there will be
potential winners and losers, I believe that the market as a whole should ultimately benefit from
this  rigorous  competition.  At  the  same  time,  settlement  risk  reduction  should  not  be  used  to
justify the concentration of market power. The G-10 central bank governors have long been on
record in favor of fair and open access to services that permit participation by a broad range of
institutions, consistent with the prudent management of risk. Such access was formally adopted
as a requirement for multilateral netting systems, and I am convinced that the G-10 central banks
would  apply  a  similar  standard  when  evaluating  the  start-up  of  any  major  multi-currency
settlement service.
In  sum,  the  evolution  toward  more  transparent  foreign  exchange  markets  that
we’ve observed in the past several  years  is  largely  a  product  of  both  technological  progress  in
the  private  sector  and  conscious  policy  decisions  in  the  public  sector.  None  of  the  policy
decisions, I should stress, were taken with any explicit or implicit intention of reducing market
volatility.  On  the  contrary,  the  policy  community  has  viewed  moves  toward  increased
transparency as desirable ends in and of themselves for a number of reasons.
For  one,  transparency  promotes  a  more  level  playing  field  for  all  market
participants. In other words, transparent markets tend not to be dominated by just a few players.
Rather,  they  are  open  to  new  entrants,  large  and  small.  In  such  markets,  no  one  group  of
institutions or type of institution can develop a monopoly on information or competitive pricing.
As  in  most  industries,  competition  in  the  area  of  financial  services  spurs  innovation,  better
service for customers, and a more efficient allocation of resources.
Second,  transparency  in  these  markets  also  promotes  investment.  If  money  and
investment fund managers or corporate CFOs can better understand the risks entailed in various
investment  alternatives,  they  are  more  likely  to  make  the  investment  decisions  best  suited  to
their  needs.  The  result,  again,  is  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  global  capital  than  would
otherwise be possible.
To  the  extent,  therefore,  that  reduced  volatility  in  the  foreign  exchange  market
stems  from  improved  transparency,  I  would  view  this  result  as  a  beneficial  by-product  --  one
that  also  contributes  to  the  ultimate  goal  of  economic  and  monetary  policy:  namely,  sustained
growth and a stable price environment.
The move toward increased transparency in global markets and the accompanying
relative decline in foreign exchange market volatility and trading ranges that we have observed
in the last year and a half have posed considerable challenges to market makers, spot traders, and
brokers,  on  both  an  institutional  and  a  personal  level.  There  is  an  axiom  in  these  markets  that
volatility is good for market makers. I believe that this is a short-sighted view. On the contrary, I
BIS Review   60/1997
- 6 -
would  submit  that  excessive  volatility  not  only  frightens  investors,  but  also  potentially
undermines growth and, in so doing, benefits none of us.
As a result, I cannot help but conclude that stable -- and not volatile -- markets are
in  the  best  interests  of  both  central  banks  and  the  financial  community.  Stability  in  foreign
exchange  and  other  financial  markets,  along  with  price  stability,  is  vital  to  the  promotion  of
sustainable economic growth and rising living standards for everyone. Reducing the diversion of
resources  to  deal  with  uncertainty  and  volatility  allows  resources  to  be  directed  toward  more
productive  uses  and,  in  so  doing,  promotes  long-term  growth  by  increasing  the  resource  base
available to the economy.
We  have  seen  in  high-inflation  economies  how  the  transfer  of  resources  away
from  productive  activities  and  into  financial  transactions  geared  toward  dealing  with  inflation
uncertainty  can  negatively  affect  growth.  We  have  also  seen  how  a  proliferation  of  tax  code
dodges can decrease the available resource base. If individuals must spend more time engaging
in financial maneuvers because of uncertainty, then more of the economy’s productive capacity
is transferred to the activity of handling transactions.  An  expansion  of  the  financial  sector  that
stems from an increasing number of people employed to handle distortions arising from inflation
and  its  attendant  uncertainty  is  growth  that  diverts  resources  better  employed  elsewhere.  By
contrast, an expansion of the financial sector that stems from growth of  productivity  is  growth
that offers benefits to all.
The  same  basic  principle  applies  to  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Foreign
exchange rates are fundamentally determined by market forces and should be free to fluctuate as
a vital adjustment mechanism for the global economy. However, excessive volatility, like price
instability,  can  diminish  resources  otherwise  available  for  productive  growth.  The  economy  in
which we live and work is a global one, and becomes more so every year. Regions and industries
in need of private capital and investors requiring adequate returns benefit when money can move
across  national  boundaries  without  excessive  risk  or  hedging  costs.  Foreign  exchange  markets
that are more stable and more transparent ultimately will better allow investors to allocate their
capital efficiently, thereby improving global economic growth.
Change  is  difficult  in  any  industry  and  can  put  enormous  stress  on  individuals.
I’m not ignoring this dynamic. However, I am persuaded that, in the long run, what is good for
economic  growth  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the  financial  community,  and,  in  turn,  benefits  the
individuals that make up that community. Just as U.S. industries went through enormous stress
in the 1970s and 1980s in coping with a new era of expanding international trade and emerged in
the 1990s as among the most competitive in the world, so too must global financial institutions
adapt  and  find  new  ways  to  add  value  and  share  in  the  larger  benefits  that  transparency  and
reduced volatility can bring.
We central bankers can contribute to this process. While we can do little to limit
market  volatility  directly,  we  can  work  toward  more  transparent  markets  supported  by  sound
infrastructure, and by these means lay the groundwork for market stability. And, while we’re not
in the business of determining market rates or the ranges in which rates should trade,  what  we
are trying to do is move increasingly toward improving the transparency of our own operations
as an end in and of itself.
Our  collective  efforts,  along  with  developments  in  information  technology  and
risk  management  techniques,  have  already  contributed  to  improved  market  stability.  The
growing,  and  successful,  commitment  of  central  banks  to  the  achievement  of  price  stability  as
BIS Review   60/1997
- 7 -
their  primary  goal  is  another  crucial  and  positive  contribution  toward  market  stability.
Moreover, where we as central banks see gaps that develop in the global financial system, as we
did in the areas of market risk and settlement risk management, we play the role of facilitator to
private  sector  solutions.  As  central  bankers,  we  tend  to  view  our  role  in  the  global  financial
markets  as  ensuring  that  the  necessary  infrastructure  is  in  place  to  promote  well-functioning
markets for all players. Then we step aside and let the markets take care of themselves.
BIS Review   60/1997
