Bank  of  Japan's  December  review  of  monetary  and  economic  trends  in  Japan
BANK OF JAPAN, MONTHLY ECONOMIC REVIEW, 20/12/96.
A moderate economic recovery continues in Japan, as private demand shows increasing
firmness. With respect to final demand, public sector investment has peaked, but housing investment has
remained at a high level because of low interest rates. The decline in  net  exports  has  paused.  Business
fixed investment is increasing steadily and a moderate increase also continues in personal consumption.
Meanwhile,  inventories  on  the  whole  are  at  appropriate  levels.  In  these  circumstances,  industrial
production  growth  is  somewhat  accelerating  and  corporate  sentiment  is  improving  gradually.  Labor
market conditions have improved on the whole, although the unemployment rate has remained at a high
level. Meanwhile, the decline in prices is slowing gradually and monetary aggregates continue to grow at
3.0 - 4.0 per cent.
With regard to personal consumption,  growth  in  sales  of  electrical  appliances  has  been
high, particularly in personal computers and cellular phones, and passenger car sales (excluding compact
cars) have recently increased significantly. Outlays for travel have remained firm and sales at department
stores and supermarkets are increasing at a moderate pace.
Among leading indicators of business fixed investment, machinery orders are increasing
steadily  albeit  with  some  quarterly  fluctuations.  After  the  decline  in  the  third  quarter  1996,  they  are
expected  to  increase  significantly  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Construction  floor  area  has  also  picked  up
moderately. According to the Bank of Japan’s Tankan -- Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in
Japan  of  November  1996,  business  fixed  investment  plans  of  principal  manufacturing  firms  for  fiscal
1996 continued to increase at the same pace as those for fiscal 1995, while those of non-manufacturing
firms turned to increase for the first time in five years. As a result, business fixed investment of principal
firms overall is expected to expand at a faster pace than in fiscal 1995. Business fixed investment plans
of  small  firms  (all  industries)  were  revised  upwards  substantially  from  the  August  Tankan,  marginally
exceeding the level of the previous year for the first time in five years. This shows that the recovery in
business fixed investment is spreading across a wider spectrum of industries and corporate sizes.
With respect to housing investment, housing starts have continued to grow reflecting low
interest rates and reasonable housing prices. It recorded a seasonally-adjusted annual rate of 1.82 million
starts in October 1996, the highest level since November 1973, partly reflecting the increase in orders in
September 1996 before the expected rise in the consumption tax.
Regarding  public-sector  investment,  the  volume  of  public  works  contracted  has,  since
spring  1996,  stayed  virtually  unchanged  from  the  level  of  the  previous  year  as  orders  included  in  the
economic  policy  package  of  September  1995  subsided.  Public  works  activities  such  as  shipments  of
related  goods  increased  until  summer  1996,  reflecting  time  lags  between  the  order  and  actual
implementation of public works. Recently, however, they have also peaked out.
Real  exports  have  shown  a  moderate  increase  as  the  effects  of  the  yen’s  depreciation
since  summer  1995  have  gradually  become  apparent  after  a  time  lag.  Meanwhile,  real  imports  have
continued to rise, in part supported by structural elements, e.g., the  increased  supply  capacity  of  Asian
economies. However, the tempo of increase has somewhat slowed, which also reflects the depreciation of
the yen. Thus, both the real trade surplus and the nominal current account surplus declined rapidly until
the first half of 1996 but have been rising since summer 1996.
Industrial  production  increased  steadily  in  the  third  quarter  1996  by  an  annual  rate  of
about 6 per cent and also rose significantly in October. These increases reflect the progress in inventory
adjustments and the continued increase in shipments of capital goods, which is closely related to business
fixed investment. They also reflect higher growth in domestic sales and exports of passenger cars which
have a large influence on production activities. Industrial production is expected to increase by an annual
rate of about 10 per cent in the fourth quarter 1996 on the whole.
BIS Review   142/1996
- 2 -
The Tankan of November 1996 shows that the corporate profits of principal firms in both
the manufacturing (excluding petroleum refining) and non-manufacturing sectors are forecast to continue
increasing  in  fiscal  1996.  Profit  levels  have  risen  particularly  for  manufacturing  firms;  the  current
profit-to-sales  ratio  is  expected  to  reach  over  4  per  cent  for  the  first  time  in  five  years.  In  these
circumstances, business confidence of principal manufacturing firms improved moderately and is forecast
to continue its upward trend. In the assembly industry in particular, the percentage differential between
firms  responding  "favorable"  and  "unfavorable"  has  turned  positive  for  the  first  time  since  February
1992.  For  non-manufacturing  firms,  business  confidence  has  strengthened  but  it  is  forecast  to  weaken
somewhat  in  the  near  future.  On  average,  business  confidence  of  non-manufacturing  firms  is  on  an
upward  trend.  Small  firms  in  both  the  manufacturing  and  non-manufacturing  sectors  are  expected  to
show continuing growth in profits in fiscal 1996. However, while business confidence of manufacturing
firms  continues  to  improve  moderately,  that  of  non-manufacturing  firms  remains  virtually  unchanged
partly as a result of uncertainties about the outlook for public-sector investment.
Labor  market  conditions  have  improved  somewhat  on  the  whole.  Although  the
unemployment  rate  remains  at  a  high  level  and  employment  growth  is  weak,  overtime  working  hours
have increased, and the ratio of job offers to job applications has continued its gradual rise.
With  respect  to  price  developments,  domestic  wholesale  prices  (adjusted  for  seasonal
electricity  rates)  seem  to  have  stopped  declining  although  downward  pressures  from  competition  with
imports  remain  strong.  This  development  was  supported  by  the  yen’s  depreciation  to  date,  the  rise  in
crude  oil  prices  and  the  improvement  in  domestic  supply  and  demand  conditions,  particularly  in
construction-related  goods.  Corporate  service  prices  have  declined,  particularly  in  rents  and  leasing
charges,  but  the  year-to-year  decrease  has  become  smaller.  Consumer  prices  (nationwide,  excluding
perishables) have stayed slightly above the previous year’s level as commodity prices have continued to
fall gradually and service prices have risen somewhat.
Growth in monetary aggregates, measured in terms of the year-to-year growth rate of M2
+CDs average outstanding, has remained at 3.0 - 4.0 per cent, albeit with some fluctuations.
Regarding money market rates, the overnight call rate (uncollateralized) on the whole has
stayed below the official discount rate of 0.5 per cent. The 3-month CD rate has moved at around 0.5 per
cent.  Meanwhile,  with  regard  to  the  market’s  interest  rate  expectations,  3-month  Euro-yen  futures
declined at a somewhat brisk pace between the second half of July and autumn 1996, and have moved at
around  0.7  -  0.9  per  cent  since  September  1996.  As  the  market’s  expectations  of  higher  interest  rates
receded,  the  long-term  government  bond  yield  has  declined  since  mid-July  1996,  and  recorded  a
historical low of 2.34 per cent in early December. Recently, it has been moving at around 2.4 per cent.
With respect to bank lending rates, the short-term prime lending rate has remained at a
record low level of 1.625 per cent since September 1995. The long-term prime lending rate was lowered
by a total of 0.8 percentage points in September, October, and December to reach a record low of 2.5 per
cent, reflecting developments in long-term market rates. In these circumstances, short-term and long-term
average contracted interest rates on new loans and discounts have moved at record low levels.
On the stock exchange, the Nikkei 225 Stock Average had remained virtually unchanged
since  summer  1996  at  around  ¥20,000  -  21,000,  varying  across  firms.  Recently,  however,  it  has
weakened somewhat.
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen’s  appreciation  reversed  its  course  and
depreciated against the U.S. dollar between summer 1995 and autumn 1996. Since  early  1996,  the  yen
has  continued  to  depreciate  and  has  recently  moved  at  around  ¥114.  Meanwhile,  the  yen  depreciated
temporarily against the deutsche mark in October and November 1996, and has recently moved at around
¥72 - 73.
BIS Review   142/1996
