Ms.  Rivlin  reports  on  the  positive  perfomance  of  the  US  economy  and  the
policies needed to sustain growth in the future   Testimony of the Vice Chairman of the Board of
Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Ms.  Alice  M.  Rivlin,  before  the  Committee  on
Banking and Financial Services of the US House of Representatives on 23/7/97.
I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation to the Committee for holding this
hearing to solicit a wide range of views on appropriate monetary policy at this extremely favorable
moment in our economic history. All too often congressional hearings are called when something bad
is happening. In a deteriorating situation, Congress finds it necessary to survey the damage, assess
responsibility and call for better policies in the future.
At  the  moment,  however,  the  economy  as  a  whole  is  functioning  amazingly  well.
Employment is high and rising, unemployment is low, incomes are increasing, profits are high, the
Federal budget deficit is plummeting, state and local finances are increasingly strong, and inflation is
benign. The overriding economic objective -- shared by all participants in the economy -- is to keep
the  good  news  flowing.  We  all  want  the  economy  to  grow  at  its  highest  sustainable  rate,  to  keep
unemployment and inflation low, and above all, to avoid recession as long as possible.
Thoughtful  people,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  and  elsewhere,  have  somewhat  different
views  about  why  the  economy  is  doing  so  well  and  how  best  to  keep  it  going.  Your  invitation  to
share those views is timely, constructive and welcome.
I would like briefly to discuss three questions:
1.
2.
3.
Why is the economy performing so well -- and, in particular, why do we have
so little   inflation with such low unemployment?
Why is it so important, especially right now, to keep the economy growing at
its highest sustainable rate and to avoid recession?
What policies -- monetary and other economic policies -- are  most  likely  to
keep economic performance high and sustained?
Why is the economy doing so well?
Most economists are frankly surprised that the economy has been  able  to  grow  fast
enough to push unemployment rates below 5 percent without generating accelerating inflation. Until
recently,  most  students  of  the  economy  thought  that  unemployment  rates  below  5.5  -  6.0  percent
(estimates differed) for an appreciable period would lead to rising labor costs that would be passed on
in higher prices and start a self-perpetuating wage-price spiral that would be hard to reverse. True,
unemployment  had  been  lower  in  the  1960s  while  inflation  remained  low,  but  the  structure  of  the
economy and the characteristics of the labor force subsequently changed in ways that seemed to make
the economy more inflation-prone for given levels of unemployment. The experience of the period
since  about  1970  appeared  to  confirm  that  inflationary  pressure  emerged  at  unemployment  rates
appreciably higher than those of the 1960s.
Five  years  ago,  most  economists  would  have  thought  the  Federal  Reserve
irresponsible and derelict in its duty if it had not used monetary policy to slow an economy operating
at such a high level that unemployment remained under 5.5 percent for more than a short time. The
inflation might not appear immediately, but it was thought to be inevitable, and allowing it to get up a
head of steam before acting was taking a high risk of having to react more strongly, perhaps strongly
enough to bring on a recession.
Nevertheless, the unemployment rate has been below 5.5 percent for over a year and
below 5.0 percent in 1997 while inflation has shown no signs of picking up -- indeed, producer prices
BIS Review   72/1997
- 2 -
have actually been falling. The Federal Reserve, except for a quarter point tightening of the federal
funds  rate  in  March  (after  months  of  inaction),  has  left  the  monetary  levers  alone.  Is  the  Federal
Reserve ignoring risks of future inflation?
The  answer  depends  on  whether  the  coexistence  of  higher  growth  and  lower
unemployment with benign inflation is explained by a fundamental improvement in the structure of
the economy making it less inflation-prone, or by temporary factors that might return to “normal” and
kick-off an inflationary wage-price spiral, or by some combination of the two. The honest answer is:
We don't know yet.
One surprise has been that such tight labor markets have not resulted in more rapid
increases in wages  and  other  labor  compensation.  Part  of  the  explanation,  as  Chairman  Greenspan
noted  in  his  testimony  on  July  22,  may  lie  in  less  aggressive  behavior  on  the  part  of  workers.
Workers may be more reluctant than previously to bargain for higher compensation or to take drastic
action, such as striking or quitting to look for a better job. They may be reluctant because they are
insecure in the face of rapidly changing technology, for which they fear they may not have the right
skills, because they have recent memories of company “downsizing,” or because they are less likely
than in previous tight labor markets to be members of a union. These explanations of less aggressive
worker behavior are plausible, but likely to be temporary. Workers are not likely to get more insecure
as low unemployment continues, and union strength is unlikely to ebb further.
Part  of  the  explanation  of  moderate  compensation  increases  may  also  lie  in  more
aggressive employer resistance to labor cost increases than in previous cycles. Business owners and
managers  appear  to  believe  strongly  that  they  are  operating  in  such  a  competitive  environment  --
whether  domestic  or  international  --  that  they  cannot  pass  cost  increases  on  to  their  customers  in
higher prices because they would lose those customers to competitors overseas or down  the  street.
Low import prices resulting from growing international competition and the strong dollar reinforce
this  perception.  Domestic  markets  have  also  become  more  fiercely  competitive  as  the  result  of
deregulation, lower transportation and communication costs, and more competitive business attitudes.
These  competitive  forces,  well  known  to  workers,  may  give  employers  a  plausible  reason  --  or  at
least an excuse -- for strong resistance to wage and benefit demands.
The subdued inflation rate itself, moreover, has dampened inflationary expectations.
These lower expectations contribute both to diminished compensation demands of workers and stiffer
employer resistance to those demands. An important contribution to lower total compensation costs
has  also  come  from  the  slowdown  in  the  rise  of  health  benefit  costs  associated  with  the  shift  to
managed care and the  general  reduction  in  the  rate  of  health  care  inflation.  It  is  not  yet  clear  how
much of this slowdown is temporary.
The other surprise is that prices have shown no reaction to the moderate compensation
increases that have occurred. Increased foreign and domestic competitiveness is certainly part of the
answer,  but  the  remarkable  fact  is  that  this  competition  has  not  generally  eroded  profit  margins.
Persistent high profits suggest that, on the average, employers have been able to increase productivity
enough to absorb larger  compensation  increases  without  comparable  price  increases.  Whether  they
will be able to continue to do so is the crucial unanswered question facing monetary policy makers at
the  moment.  Measured  productivity  has  grown  slowly  for  more  than  two  decades  and  did  not
accelerate in this expansion as economists hoped it  would.  Nevertheless,  output  per  hour  seems  to
have picked up a little recently, which is surprising late in an expansion when productivity increase
normally  slows.  If  productivity  growth  were  on  the  verge  of  sustained  acceleration,  a  possibility
discussed  in  Chairman  Greenspan's  testimony,  it  would  greatly  increase  the  chances  of  higher
sustained growth without accelerating inflation. There are reasons to be optimistic, but only time will
tell if the optimists are right.
BIS Review  72/1997
Why is sustained growth so important now?
- 3 -
It  is  always  desirable  to  live  in  an  economy  that  is  growing  at  a  healthy  rate.  The
general  standard  of  living  rises  and  average  people  are  normally  better  off.  Not  only  do  private
resources grow, giving consumers more and better choices, but public resources also grow, making it
easier to solve public problems and improve national and community infrastructure. Healthy growth
has to be sustainable, not bought at the price of environmental degradation or inflationary overheating
that turns a boom into a bust.
Nevertheless, there are at least three reasons why it seems especially important for the
United  States  in  the  next  few  years  to  do  everything  possible  to  keep  the  economy  growing  at  a
healthy sustainable rate and avoid recession.
Welfare reform
Recent  legislation  requires  extremely  ambitious  state  and  Federal  efforts  to  reduce
dependency  and  channel  large  portions  of  the  present  and  future  welfare  population  into  self-
supporting jobs. For these efforts to be even moderately successful will require effective skill training
and job placement, adequate child care and, above all, low unemployment rates and plentiful entry
level jobs. If economic expansion continues and labor markets remain tight, there is a good chance
that  many  families  who  would  otherwise  have  depended  on  welfare  can  acquire  the  job  skills  and
experience that can enable them to live more independent and satisfying lives. If the economy slides
into recession before welfare recipients have time to establish new skills, work patterns and eligibility
for unemployment benefits, welfare reform is almost certain to be a failure, if not an outright disaster.
Community development
Partnerships for community development are beginning to create new hope for some
devastated  areas  of  big  cities,  smaller  towns  and  rural  areas.  Partners  include  business  and
community groups, financial institutions and governments. With continued economic growth and low
unemployment,  these  efforts  could  transform  many  blighted  areas  into  viable  communities  with
decent housing and  an  economic  base.  Recession,  especially  a  deep  one,  would  dry  up  public  and
private resources and greatly reduce the chances of successful community development.
Preparing for more older people
Perhaps  the  biggest  challenge  to  the  U.S.  economy  (indeed  to  all  industrial
economies) over the next couple of decades is the prospective rise in the ratio of elderly to working
age people. Barring a huge increase in working age immigrants or dramatic increases in the length of
working life, the number of retirees will rise much faster than the working population beginning early
in the next century. No matter what combination of public and private pensions are used to sort out
the claims of retirees to a share of the nation's output, the only way to guarantee a rising standard of
living for both retirees and workers is to greatly increase the future productivity of that workforce. A
high growth economy over the next decade could generate  enough  saving  and  investment  to  make
that increased future workforce productivity feasible. Slower growth and repeated recessions  could
make the burden of an aging population far heavier and policy choices more contentious.
What policies are needed?
These three challenges to the American economy simply reinforce  the  need  to  keep
the economy on the highest sustainable growth track attainable and to keep recessions as shallow and
infrequent as possible. The biggest problem for monetary policy at the moment is that no one knows
what growth rate is sustainable. It may be true that the structure of the economy has changed in ways
BIS Review   72/1997
- 4 -
that make a higher growth rate sustainable without inflation than we thought possible a few years ago
-- or it may not be true. The question turns on whether productivity growth has shifted up out of the
doldrums of the last couple of decades. It's possible that it has, but by no means certain.
This  leaves  monetary  policymakers  with  the  difficult  job  of  watching  all  the  signs,
weighing the risks and making a new judgment call every few weeks. At the moment, there seems to
be  little  risk  of  the  economy  slowing  down  too  much  in  the  near  term  and  sliding  into  recession.
Growth has already slowed from its clearly unsustainable pace in the first quarter, but all the current
signs  point  to  continued  economic  expansion  for  the  rest  of  this  year  and  into  the  next.  The  risks
seem higher on the other side --  that  many  of  the  factors  holding  down  inflationary  pressures  will
prove temporary, that the rebound of productivity necessary for higher  sustainable  growth  will  not
occur or not prove robust and durable. The Federal Open Market Committee has to weigh the risk of
slowing the economy unnecessarily against the risk of waiting too long and having to put the brakes
on harder later. Waiting longer may increase the possibility of overheating followed by recession. It's
a tough call. I can't promise we will make the right decisions, but I can promise we will try.
It  is  important  not  to  overestimate  the  role  of  monetary  policy  and  the  Federal
Reserve. Monetary policy can help keep the economy from falling off the sustainable growth track in
either direction -- either by overheating and generating enough inflation to unbalance  the  economy
and threaten growth or by chugging along too slowly with excessive unemployment. But monetary
policy cannot do much to determine how high the sustainable growth rate is. How fast the economy
can  grow  is  determined  by  how  rapidly  the  employed  labor  force  is  increasing  and  how  fast  the
productivity of that workforce is growing. There are only two ways to get more output: either more
people work or working people produce more (or both).
In  the  1960s  and  1970s,  the  American  workforce  was  growing  rapidly  as  the  large
baby  boom  generation  reached  working  age  and  women,  especially  mothers,  moved  into  the
workforce in much larger proportions than previously. But those two  trends  have  run  their  course.
The labor force is likely to grow slowly over the next few years, about 1 percent per year. The main
hope for increasing labor force growth, besides encouraging more immigration, is that continued tight
labor  markets  plus  increased  flexibility  in  employment  hours  will  gradually  begin  to  reverse  the
trends to early retirement that has reduced labor force participation among older people. Continued
employment  opportunities  combined  with  well-designed  training  programs,  especially  in  computer
related  skills,  could  also  attract  into  the  labor  force  people  who  are  not  actively  looking  for  work
because  they  don't  think  they  have  the  skills  to  get  a  “good”  job  --  principally  older  workers  and
young people who have dropped out of school.
Indeed,  the  shortage  of  workers  with  modern  technical  skills  may  be  the  biggest
problem facing the American economy at the moment, as well as its biggest opportunity. As long as
labor  markets  stay  tight,  investment  in  skill  training  is  likely  to  pay  off  handsomely  both  for
individuals and for companies that can retain the trained workers long enough to benefit from their
increased productivity. Public investment in training for workers with low skills -- often unsuccessful
when jobs are scarce -- also stands a far better chance in tight labor markets of moving workers into
jobs  in  which  they  can  gain  increasing  skills,  experience  and  higher  wages.  Continued  low
unemployment rates, plus public and  private  investment  in  skill  training  are  essential,  not  only  for
successful welfare reform, but also for modernizing the skills of the portion of the workforce whose
real  incomes  and  opportunities  have  declined  both  relatively  and  absolutely  in  the  last  couple  of
decades.
The other key to productivity increase, of course, is continued investment, both public
and private, in research and development and the technology and infrastructure needed for continuous
modernization of the economy. Stable low inflation tends to foster long-term planning and investment
by businesses and households. A high growth economy should generate more of the saving needed to
BIS Review  72/1997
- 5 -
finance  the  investment.  Reducing  the  public  dissaving  inherent  in  running  a  deficit  in  the  Federal
budget also adds to national saving. Near term reform of social security and Medicare in ways that
add to national saving, public and private, could make a significant contribution to future productivity
increase and hence to raising the future rate of sustainable economic growth.
In  summary,  the  objective  of  economic  policy  --  monetary  policy  included  --  is  to
keep the economy on the highest sustainable growth  path.  No  one  knows  exactly  what  that  rate  is
right now, or what it can be in the future, but a combination of  policies,  intelligently  pursued,  can
raise it as far as possible. These policies include:
wise monetary policy that helps the economy expand, and keeps labor markets tight,
without incurring excessive risk of accelerating inflation;
investment  in  skills  by  individuals,  firms  and  the  public  and  non-profit  sectors;
increased  saving  (public  and  private)  invested  in  research,  technology  and
infrastructure.
The  Federal  Reserve  will  do  its  part,  in  the  face  of  huge  uncertainties,  to  steer  an
appropriate monetary policy. Fiscal and other policies, both public and private, are needed to take full
advantage of the opportunity we have today to keep the American economy operating at a high level
in the future.
BIS Review   72/1997
