M.  Hannoun  discusses  issues  relating  to  financial  markets  and  European
Monetary  Union      Article  by  M.  Hervé  Hannoun1,  a  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,
published in the autumn 1996 issue of “revue d’économie financière no. 38”.
What impact will Monetary Union have on the financial markets?
I  should  preface  any  attempt  to  answer  that  question  by  saying  that  the  financial  markets  have
already  been  affected  by  Monetary  Union,  even  though  1 January  1999  is  still  in  the  future.  The
interest rates on the French-franc market for maturities of 3, 5, 10 and 30 years already incorporate
1, 3, 8 and 28 years in euro. this means that medium-term market rates for the French franc already
depend on the soundness and the credibility of the euro.
The first part of this article will deal with the changeover of the markets to the euro on 1 January
1999. The second part will discuss the more strategic issue of the new environment that will affect
the leading European financial markets as a result of Monetary Union.
1.          The  technical  preparations  for  the  1999  changeover  of  the  markets  to  the  euro  are
already well under way.
1.1.
The Options Chosen
1.1.1. A Two-Stage Scenario
The  scenario  adopted  comprises  two  stages,  with  the  changeover  in  wholesale  transactions
occurring in the first and the changeover in retail operations in the second.
The changeover in the financial markets will occur rapidly because, starting on 1 January 1999, the
European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB)  will  conduct  its  monetary  policy  in  euro  and  the
Monetary  Union  Member  States  will  denominate  their  new  government  securities  issues  in  euro.
Then, by 1 January 2002, at the latest, when the euro bank  notes  and  coins  have  been  introduced
and general government agencies have made the changeover to the euro, all retail banking activities
will be conducted in euro.
During  the  transitional  period  from  1999  to  2002,  banks  will  be  on  the  frontier  between  two
spheres, with the euro-denominated markets on one side, and the world of retail transactions, where
national currencies will continue to be used, on the other. At the place where the two spheres meet
and overlap, banks will play the vital role of interface, making them an important driving force in
the changeover of the markets to the euro.
Converters will enable banks to meet the demand for euro from non-financial agents and let them
integrate transactions on markets where the quotation, trading and settlement systems all operate in
euro,  into  an  economy  where  the  national  currency  is  bound  to  remain  in  widespread  use.  The
converters will be located in the financial institutions.
1.1.2. The  changeover  will  occur  on  1  January  1999  for  flows  in  the  financial
markets. It will be more gradual for the  outstanding  stock  of  securities  and
transactions.
The objective of the Paris banking and financial community is for all of the markets to change over
                                                  
1
This article was written with the help of Denis Beau, the head of the French-franc trading room and Yves
Nachbaur, Deputy Manager of the Financial Markets Division.
BIS Review   7/1997
- 2 -
to  the  euro  completely  and  for  good  on  1  January  1999.  This  applies  to  the  foreign  exchange,
money, bond and equity markets.
However, we must make a distinction between the flows, which are the market transactions, and the
stock  of  outstanding  securities  and  market  instruments  exchanged  in  these  transactions  or
underlying them. The diagram below shows that the changeover in terms of flows will be complete
and immediate, whereas technical considerations will make the changeover in terms of stock more
gradual and, in some cases, the pace of the changeover may differ.
The Changeover of the Markets to the Euro
Markets
Foreign Exchange Market
Flows
(transactions)
Euro (1/1/1999)
Stock
(instruments)
Euro
Quotes
Trading
Immediate  conversion  of  outstanding
currency swaps, options and futures
Money Market
Euro (1/1/1999)
Euro
Quotes
Trading
Automatic 
denominated securities
conversion 
of 
Ecu-
Rapid 
conversion  of  outstanding
French-franc  securities  and  repos  into
euro
New  government  securities  issues  in
euro
Bond Market
Euro (1/1/1999)
Quotes
Trading
Euro/Franc
conversion 
Automatic 
denominated bonds
of 
Ecu-
Conversion of  outstanding  government
bonds at the start of Stage 3
Gradual  conversion  of  outstanding
private-sector bonds
New government bonds issued in euro
Equity Market
Euro (1/1/1999)
Euro
Quotes
Trading
Conversion  of  par  values  into  euro  on
1/1/2002
1.2.
The Impact of the Changeover on the Ways Markets Work
1.2.1. The Foreign Exchange Market
The  foreign  exchange  markets  are  set  to  change  over  to  the  euro  on  4  January  1999.  In  practical
terms, this means that non-euro-area currencies will be quoted against the euro exclusively.
BIS Review   7/1997
- 3 -
Currency rates on the euro market could be quoted quite naturally as rates against the euro to ensure
continuity with practices on the Ecu market, where the rates for  all  currencies,  including  sterling,
are quoted as rates against the Ecu.
At  the  same  time,  the  institutions’  foreign  exchange  holdings  of  euro-area  currencies  must  be
converted  into  the  single  currency  and  settlements  arising  from  the  interbank  foreign  exchange
market will be made in euro.
Market  professionals’  open  interest  in  swaps,  futures  and  options  on  euro-area  currencies  will
automatically be converted, with the substitution of the euro for the national currencies of the euro
area countries.
The immediate changeover of the foreign exchange market will call for some operating rules to be
worked out by 1 January 1999.
Such  rules  should  cover  such  matters  as  the  way  benchmark  exchange  rates  are  worked  out.  The
Banque  de  France  publishes  daily  benchmark  rates  for  the  franc  against  various  other  currencies.
These  rates  are  often  used  for  valuation  for  tax,  accounting  and  prudential  purposes.  Benchmark
rates will still be  needed  after  1  January  1999  to  give  the  euro  price  of  non-euro-area  currencies.
We must make sure we know how this need will be met.
Rules  must  also  be  defined  to  harmonize  value  dates.  The  creation  of  a  unified  foreign  exchange
market for the whole euro area will be an incentive for such harmonization.
Other  rules  will  be  needed  for  dealing  with  open  interest  in  currency  futures  and  swaps  on
currencies  from  the  countries  entering  Monetary  Union.  By  31 December  1998  at  the  latest,  the
final  value  of  such  contracts  will  be  known  for  certain,  and  a  cash  settlement  price  can  then  be
worked  out  on  the  basis  of  the  difference  between  the  rate  originally  contracted  and  the
irrevocably-fixed  conversion  rate  that  is  ultimately  set.  The  questions  that  then  arise  are  whether
contracts  should  be  liquidated  early  or  whether  they  should  continue  to  run  until  their  originally
agreed  maturities.  These  are  the  kinds  of  questions  that  the  working  groups  are  studying  at  the
moment.
1.2.2. Interest-Rate Markets
The  changeover  to  the  euro  on  1  January  1999  will  not  raise  any  problems  for  quotes  on
interest-rate markets, because they are given as rates or percentages of par values. Cash settlements
arising from delivery-versus-payment securities transactions will be made exclusively in euro in the
RGV and RELIT securities settlement systems.
The Money Market
The  changeover  in  the  money  market  should  occur  quickly  for  transactions  in  the  interbank,
negotiable debt securities and repo segments.
On  the  interbank  market,  the  changeover  will  be  facilitated  because,  starting  on  1  January  1999,
monetary policy transactions will be conducted in euro, the banks’ accounts with the central banks
will  be  held  exclusively  in  euro  and  the  large-value  payment  systems  will  operate  in  euro.  The
TARGET system, which will handle all monetary policy operations and many interbank payments,
will be operational and should ensure perfectly smooth circulation of central money, thus enhancing
the effectiveness of the changeover process.
BIS Review   7/1997
- 4 -
On  negotiable  debt  securities  market,  the  outstanding  government  bonds  will  be  converted  into
euro  immediately.  The  technical  process  of  converting  other  debt  securities  will  be  facilitated  by
the  fact  that  most  of  them  are  short-term  securities  issued  or  held  by  credit  institutions.
Nevertheless, the participants in these markets must define the technical procedures for converting
securities of all maturities into euro so that they can be used as instruments in a broader euro money
market.
The repo market could, of course, operate in euro with securities denominated in francs at first. But
outstanding repos  must  be  converted  into  euro  rapidly  in  1999  so  as  to  constitute  a  uniform  euro
money  market  in  which  the  expertise  and  experience  of  operators  in  Paris  should  give  them  an
important role.
The Bond Market
The technical problems involved in the changeover of the bond market are a more delicate matter.
New State bonded debt will be issued in euro starting on 1 January 1999, and the French treasury
has committed itself to converting its outstanding bonds into euro as soon as possible. This is bound
to create a very favourable volume effect, but the conversion of other outstanding bond issues may
occur more gradually.
One  of  the  difficulties  arising  in  the  changeover  in  bonds  is  how  to  convert  par  values.  Because
bonds  carry  set  denominations,  the  conversion  of  par  values  raises  the  problem  of  rounding  and
fractional  values.  For  example,  how  should  a  2,000-franc  OAT  bond  be  converted  into  a
euro-denominated  bond,  and  what  should  the  new  denomination  be,  as  the  franc/euro  conversion
rate  is  unlikely  to  produce  a  whole  number.  One  solution  under  consideration  is  to  create  bonds
with a par value of one euro each. The feasibility of this solution is under study.
Benchmark  rates  are  another  problem  that  requires  further  thought  and  it  affects  both  the  money
and  bond  markets.  Will  the  benchmark  rates  such  as  the  average  weighted  money  market  rate
(TMP), the average bond yield (TMO) and the PIBOR still be in use after the changeover? Should
we  consider  making  some  of  them  “European”  rates?  The  dynamics  of  a  single  financial  market
obviously create an incentive to harmonize the market benchmark rates used in the various financial
centres for the money market, and for the bond market as well. It is in everybody’s interest for the
different financial centres to work together and with the monetary authorities on these issues, which
the EMI will also study as part of its work on the harmonization of market standards.
Interest-Rate Derivatives Markets
On  the  interest-rate  derivatives  markets,  the  changeover  to  the  single  currency  will  lead  to  the
constitution of a euro yield curve. Traders will be able to start trading on this curve immediately.
Financial centres, such a Paris, must be prepared to:
- offer a complete range of products covering all the strategic points on the new yield curve as soon
as possible;
-  ensure  that  the  liquidity  of  contracts  denominated  in  national  currency  is  transferred  to  euro
contracts.
Some  80%  of  the  trading  volume  on  the  MATIF  futures  market  in  Paris  involves  interest-rate
products, and all of them are to be converted into euro on 1 January 1999.
BIS Review   7/1997
- 5 -
With this in mind, MATIF SA, and the market players, have just presented a strategic plan aimed at
providing participants with instruments covering the whole euro yield curve in 1999, and ensuring
greater  liquidity  for  the  existing  French-franc  products,  for  example,  by  introducing  a  five-year
contract. MATIF SA has also decided that PIBOR contracts maturing after 1999, will be traded in
an environment of euro-denominated benchmark rates, and not French franc rates.
1.2.3. Equity Markets
 The  banking  and  financial  community  opted  for  a  simultaneous  changeover  for  the  monthly
settlement, spot, and OTC equity markets on 1 January 1999.
Starting on 1 January 1999, shares, profit-sharing certificates and convertible bonds will be quoted
in euro. Credit institutions’ entire securities operations will change over to the euro all at once. The
market  intermediaries  will  install  converters  to  provide  the  interface  for  customers  holding
French-franc denominated accounts during the transitional period up until 1 January 2002.
The changeover in equity transactions will be a complex project that must reconcile the use of the
euro  for  quotations  and  delivery-versus-payment  settlements  with  the  use  of  the  French  franc  by
issuers for their accounting. French-franc issuers will have to convert the par values of their shares
at a later date.
Thus, if we wish to limit the number of conversion operations that the intermediaries will have to
carry out, we should examine which legal conditions would enable listed companies to express the
financial  flows  relating  to  their  securities  issues  and  dividend  payments  in  euro  during  the
transitional period.
Transactions  with  customers  will  continue  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  national  currency  during  the
transitional period, particularly in the case of shares. On the other hand, the changeover to the euro
in  over-the-counter  market  transactions  between  professionals  is  unlikely  to  raise  any  special
problems.  Markets  always  adapt  rapidly  by  nature.  The  work  under  way  proves  that  market
professionals are determined to be ready on time, but the legal framework defined for the use of the
euro also has an important role to play. The options chosen in the draft European regulations on the
status of the euro provide market participants with a clear-cut legal framework that will make the
changeover easier.
2.         European Financial Markets and Monetary Union: The New Environment
The  changeover  of  the  financial  markets  to  the  euro  on  1  January  1999  requires  appropriate
technical  preparations  to  set  the  ground  rules.  But,  within  this  carefully  defined  framework,  the
strategic responses of the participants and institutions involved will be vitally important. The Paris
financial  market  should  be  able  to  build  on  its  considerable  advantages  to  flourish  as  the
environment grows more competitive.
2.1.
Expected Changes in the Competition between European Financial Centres
2.1.1. Short-term interest rates will be the same throughout the euro area.
Entry  into  Monetary  Union  will  be  based  on  macro-economic  convergence,  irrevocable  fixing  of
exchange  rates,  a  single  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policies  that  are  consistent  with  the  Stability
Pact.  This  means  that  the  main  macro-economic  factors  influencing  the  value  of  financial  assets
should become more uniform.
BIS Review   7/1997
- 6 -
Substitution between financial assets within the same categories should become easier, even though
the issuers are still of different nationalities. This phenomenon is bound to have the greatest impact
on interbank deposits, because the single monetary policy within the euro area will mean that banks
with  comparable  credit  ratings  should  logically  pay  the  same  rate  of  interest,  no  matter  which
country they are from. It follows that the prices of other categories of short-term securities, which
are  usually  set  with  reference  to  interbank  interest  rates,  should  also  start  to  show  uniform  yield
curves. For example, the prices of French Treasury bills (BTFs) are set with reference to interbank
rate expectations via the arbitraging mechanisms linking the interbank rates to their derivatives in
the form of interest-rate futures and swaps.
2.1.2. At  the  long  end  of  the  yield  curve  there  may  be  some  residual  differences
between government bond markets in the euro area.
2.1.2.1.  Entry  into  Monetary  Union  is  a  powerful  factor  for  producing  uniform  yields  on  the
participating countries’ government bonds.
Traditionally,  two  essential  factors  are  put  forward  to  explain  differences  in  government  bond
yields. These are the premiums to cover credit and exchange risks. As Monetary Union is based on
macro-economic  convergence  and  irrevocably  fixed  exchange  rates  for  the  countries  taking  part,
these premiums should be greatly reduced, or even disappear.
Theoretical Impact on the Credit Risk Premium
Traders will distinguish between the creditworthiness of two sovereign issuers if they feel that the
risk of default is not the same in both cases.  The  credit  risk  depends  directly  on  the  issuer’s  debt
servicing  capacity.  The  assessment  of  a  government  as  a  credit  risk  is  naturally  based  on  an
estimate of how sound its financial position is. The criteria that the major rating agencies and others
usually  apply  relate  to  the  main  aspects  of  a  country’s  economy,  such  as  growth,  inflation,  the
balance of payments, fiscal balance and outstanding government debt.
On  the  basis  of  these  criteria,  the  countries  in  Monetary  Union  should,  in  theory,  be  given
comparable  credit  ratings.  Entry  into  Union  requires  strict  adherence  to  the  convergence  criteria
and  compliance  with  the  Stability  Pact.  These  are  serious  guarantees  of  durable  macro-economic
convergence in the participating countries.
The leading international agencies have already given comparable ratings to the countries with the
most similar economies, which are also the ones most widely believed by the markets to be the first
to enter Monetary Union on 1 January 1999.
Theoretical Impact on the Exchange Risk Premium
Operators  will  demand  a  higher  yield  before  investing  in  a  foreign  market  if  they  perceive  an
exchange  risk.  This  extra  yield,  or  premium,  offsets  the  losses  that  could  be  incurred  due  to  a
change in the exchange rate.
The  exchange  risk  between  the  various  countries  entering  Stage  Three  of  Monetary  Union  will
disappear on 1 January 1999. The yield differentials between these countries’ government securities
reflecting  the  risk  of  variations  in  the  exchange  rates  between  their  currencies  should  naturally
cancel each other out.
The euro is to be as strong and credible as the leading currencies in the European Exchange Rate
Mechanism today. It will be a magnet for savings from non-euro area countries. A very large and
BIS Review   7/1997
- 7 -
liquid  market  of  European  government  securities  with  fairly  uniform  features  can  be  expected  to
emerge as an alternative to dollar-denominated investments. This is another  factor  contributing  to
uniform yields on bonds issued by the governments of countries in the euro area.
2.1.2.2. Some economic and technical factors could be an obstacle to uniform yields and residual
differentials may persist.
The  logical  conclusion  of  the  theoretical  considerations  outlined  above  would  be  that  there  is  no
fundamental reason for the yields on government bonds in the euro area to diverge once Monetary
Union has been achieved. However, not all analysts agree with this prognosis and major financial
players  are  conducting  intensive  research  to  estimate  the  yield  differentials  on  euro-denominated
government securities and to identify the determinants. Three main types of  factors  could  explain
the persistence of residual yield differentials.
Investor Behaviour in the New Euro Area
The irrevocable fixing of the parities between the currencies participating in Monetary Union and
the  economic  convergence  requirements  for  entry  will  eliminate  many  sources  of  the  market
segmentation and have a twofold impact on the flow of investment into interest-rate markets.
- There will be a reallocation of the savings invested in interest-rate products within the euro area;
and
- a greater share of the total savings is likely to be invested in interest-rate markets outside the euro
area.
These potential portfolio reallocations could be related to the fact that the range of assets on offer in
the euro area countries will be less attractive once Monetary Union has been completed, because the
variations  in  the  exchange  rates  between  their  currencies,  which  can  cause  the  value  of  the
securities they issue to increase, will have been eliminated.
The  changes  in  the  prices  of  interest-rate  products  in  euro  area  countries  will  be  increasingly
similar, making these products less attractive for international portfolio managers, who use modern
portfolio management strategies based on diversification to optimize the risks-rewards relationship.
The  disappearance  of  exchange  risk  will  also  lead  to  reallocation  by  inciting  portfolio  managers
who had previously limited their activity to the domestic market to expand into the markets in other
euro area countries. A major source of risk in investing in foreign markets within the euro area will
have been eliminated and the factors affecting interest-rate product prices in two different Monetary
Union currencies will become more and more similar.
This restructuring of interest-rate product portfolios could actually help maintain yield differentials
on various euro area government securities. Since the bond markets in the euro area would appear
to  be  good  substitutes  for  each  other  once  Monetary  Union  looks  like  a  viable  proposition,  there
would be a risk that the reallocation of cross-border investment flows could favour the markets with
the most attractive technical features. The substantial technical differences between markets in the
euro zone could, all things being equal, introduce yield differentials on government securities.
However,  some  major  institutional  investors  in  the  euro  area  currently  have  management
constraints, such as the matching principle for insurance companies, that limit  their  ability  to  buy
securities  denominated  in  other  currencies.  We  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  such  investors
may  overlook  the  technical  differences  between  national  market  segments  in  the  euro  area  and
BIS Review   7/1997
- 8 -
increase  their  investment  in  securities  carrying  a  premium.  This  would  further  contribute  to  a
convergence of yields within the euro area.
The Way Fiscal Policy is Implemented
Article 104b of the Maastricht Treaty prohibits joint financial liability between the Member States.
This  means  that  when  investors  define  and  implement  their  portfolio  strategies,  they  will  still  be
just as sensitive to differences in fiscal policies as before, even though these policies will never be
able to stray far or for long from the discipline laid down in the Stability Pact.
Under these conditions, the slightest sign perceived by the markets as a loosening of fiscal policy
will  be  penalized  by  a  widening  of  the  yield  differential  between  the  offending  country  and  the
other countries in the euro area.
Technical Elements
Technical differences between national bond markets that have not been ironed out by the start of
Stage Three could also contribute to the persistence of yield differentials on government securities.
The  prime  causes  would  be  differences  in  the  liquidity  of  government  bonds  stemming  from  the
various governments’ issuance policies, unequal development in repo markets and whether stripped
bonds are available for investors wishing to take more sensitive positions.
Other causes could be differences in taxation and regulatory requirements affecting intermediaries
and investors.
2.1.2.3.  Sizeable  yield  differentials  between  different  bond  markets  could  have  a  big  impact  on
market benchmarks and financial asset pricing techniques.
Financial asset pricing techniques all rely on the riskless yield curve and this raises the question of
which  rates  will  constitute  this  curve  in  the  euro  area.  It  could  be  made  up  of  the  lowest  rates  at
each point along the curve, in which case it would not be very uniform. Or else, it could be made
up of the average yields on government bonds. The lack of an undisputed benchmark curve could
lead to varying practices within the market.
This problem could result in the interest-rate swap curve being taken as the benchmark curve, since
the swap market is very wide and the technical conditions are the same everywhere. Indeed, we can
see  that  the  convergence  process  has  already  had  a  more  pronounced  impact  on  the  interest-rate
swap market. As this will continue after the  start  of  Stage  Three,  the  yield  curve  based  on  swaps
can  be  expected  to  be  more  uniform  than  the  government  bond  yield  curve,  thus  prompting
operators to use it as the benchmark for their pricing techniques.
Up until now these techniques have been based on the riskless yield curve. They will have to adopt
a new and radically different benchmark.
2.1.2.4. Certain measures can be considered to minimize yield differentials as far as possible.
-  Issuing  strategies  could  be  harmonized.  Differences  in  issuing  patterns  relating  to  the  range  of
securities on offer, the degree of fungibility and standardization of coupon payment dates, as well
as issuing timetables can create liquidity premiums that vary from  one  country  to  the  next  on  the
same  segment  of  the  yield  curve.  For  example,  the  differences  in  the  yields  on  2-year  issues  in
France  and  Germany  are  amplified  by  the  lesser  liquidity  of  the  German  securities.  Sweden  has
BIS Review   7/1997
- 9 -
already started to standardize coupon payment dates by aligning that of its latest 10-year issue  on
the most liquid line of the 10-year French OAT bonds (25/10/2006).
- Issuing techniques and market-making techniques on the secondary market could be harmonized.
Here  again,  differences  in  the  techniques  used  can  create  yield  differentials  between  comparable
securities.  This  type  of  phenomenon  is  undoubtedly  at  work  for  French  and  German  bonds.  The
Bundesbank’s auction technique, which combines syndication, competitive bidding and tap issues,
as well as its presence in the secondary market are in contrast to the mainly competitive procedures
used  for  French  Treasury  issues  with  bid-price  auctions  and  the  marginal  role  played  by  the
Treasury on the secondary market.
- Taxation could be harmonized. Here, the priority should be on harmonizing taxes on income and
capital  gains  from  bonds.  The  example  of  municipal  bonds  in  the  United  States,  where  tax
exemptions lead to lower yields on these bonds than on federal government bonds, shows that tax
considerations have a substantial impact on yields. It would also be a good idea to  harmonize  tax
collection techniques, with the preference being given to withholding taxes on bonds.
The  Strengths  of  the  Paris  Market  in  the  New  Environment  Created  by  Monetary
2.2.
Union
The  Paris  financial  centre  and  its  participants  have  substantial  advantages  to  meet  the  new
competitive  challenges  in  financial  markets.  These  advantages  will  enable  them  to  seize  the
opportunities offered by Monetary Union for the development of their activities.
2.2.1. A Wide Range of Competitive Financial Services and Products
Paris  offers  an  array  of  financial  services  and  products  that  enjoy  a  strong  position  in  the
international competition.
- The regulated markets, SBF, Bourse de Paris and MATIF, rank among the world leaders. MATIF
is Europe’s second largest derivatives market. The French equity market has surged ahead in recent
years and attracts large numbers of foreign investors, who currently hold about a third of the total
market capitalization.
-  Paris  OTC  markets,  particularly  for  derivatives,  are  technically  advanced  and  highly  active.
According to a Banque de France survey published in April 1995 as part of a coordinated project
involving six financial centres under the aegis of the Bank for  International  Settlements,  France’s
derivatives  markets  rank  fourth  world-wide,  accounting  for  6.4%  of  world  activity.  The
transactions are highly international, with 76% of the transactions in currency derivatives and 47%
of the transactions in interest-rate derivatives involving non-resident counterparties.
- France’s attractive money market is open to industrial and commercial companies, allowing them
to issue negotiable debt securities. It is based on highly efficient repurchase agreements. The repo
market has grown substantially in recent years. The volume of the main operators’ lending granted
under  repurchase  agreements  with  delivery  of  the  securities  increased  twelve  fold  between  the
fourth quarter of 1991 and the fourth quarter of 1994, and then it doubled again by the end of 1995.
This form of repo accounted for only 3% of the main operators’ lending on the interbank market in
1991, but this figure increased to 37% in 1995. The Banque de France worked hard to achieve this
increase.  It  helped  eliminate  legal  risk  with  a  market  agreement  introduced  in  September  1988,
followed by a second version, backed up by a standard repo contract in July 1990. At the same date,
the Banque de France also introduced Treasury bill repos for its bid tenders. This momentum was
BIS Review   7/1997
- 10 -
reinforced  in  1994  and  1995  by  an  Act  of  Parliament  defining  the  repurchase  agreement  with
delivery  of  the  securities.  The  Act  cleared  up  the  remaining  uncertainties  over  the  legal  and  tax
status  of  repos.  The  Treasury  also  set  up  a  circle  of  market-makers,  creating  a  class  of  primary
dealers in Treasury repos (SPVTs-Spécialistes en pensions sur valeurs du Trésor).
- Paris has a large bond market driven by both public- and private-sector issuers. The overall value
of  outstanding  issues  on  the  French  bond  market  stood  at  USD 1,011 billion  at  the  end  of  1995,
which  is  16%  of  the  world  total.  This  makes  the  French  market  the  fourth  largest  in  the  world,
behind the American, Japanese and German markets.
- Paris offers fast and reliable delivery-versus-payment settlement systems. In 1997, the Transferts
Banque  de  France,  or  TBF,  real-time  gross  settlement  system  will  be  introduced  as  part  of  the
risk-prevention  programme.  It  will  provide  immediate  finality  of  payment  for  large-value  funds
transfers  throughout  the  day.  At  the  same  time,  the  delivery-versus-payment  securities  settlement
system will be unified and provide same-day settlement as part of the Relit Grande Vitesse Project
(RVG).
2.2.2. An  Attractive  Government  Debt  Market  that  will  Set  the  Pace  in  the  Euro
Area
The  French  government  securities  market  is  one  of  the  key  advantages  that  Paris  enjoys  in  the
run-up to the euro. It is based on a system of market-makers, where the primary dealers are known
as SVTs, and offers a very large pool of securities covering the whole spectrum of the yield curve.
It is one of the world’s most advanced and efficient bond markets.
It benefits from the Treasury’s issuance policy, which currently offers three key advantages: simple
products;  highly  liquid  lines  (many  of  which  are  fungible);  and  maximum  regularity  of  issuance.
The other advantages of the market include the group of specialized operators, who are the primary
dealers in Treasury securities and the transparency of its organized procedures that are open to all
investors.  The  market’s  leadership  is  based  on  the  high  credit  rating  of  the  French  State  and  the
highly developed MATIF futures and options market, which  is  one  of  the  top-ranking  markets  of
the world.
In  a  euro-denominated  government  debt  market,  where  the  yield  differentials  on  bonds  from  the
different sovereign issuers should be small, the advantages of the French debt market should attract
investors to French government securities and should  generate  a  great  deal  of  business  for  all  the
related products, including derivatives and bonds from other French public-sector issuers.
I  will  conclude  by  saying  that  the  changeover  to  the  euro  will  bring  sweeping  changes  to  the
competitive environment in financial markets. But it will not necessarily lead to  disruption,  if  the
markets  have  prepared  properly  for  the  transition.  The  ESCB,  with  its  multiple-based  operations,
will ensure equal treatment of the various financial centres.
A  key  differentiation  factor  will  be  the  skills  and  the  expertise  of  the  trading-room  teams.  This
means  Paris  has  everything  it  will  take  to  flourish  in  the  new  competitive  environment  resulting
from Monetary Union.
BIS Review   7/1997
