Mr.  Davies  looks  at  the  tasks  of  the  UK's  new  Securities  and  Investments
Board and how it will affect the business community   Speech by the Deputy Governor of the
Bank  of  England,  Mr.  Howard  Davies,  at  the  Futures  and  Options  Association  International
Derivatives Week Conference in London on 4/6/97.
Thank you for your invitation. And, particularly, thank you for not withdrawing it
when  you  discovered  that,  rather  than  having  on  your  platform  a  benign,  soft-centred  Deputy
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  you  found  yourself  face  to  face  with  the  all-seeing,
all-regulating head of super-SIB. This may have come as a surprise to you - but nothing like as
big a surprise as it was to me, I can assure you.
And I have to say that, in spite of the way I have been presented in some of the
newspapers, muscles rippling beneath a Superman T-shirt, I still feel rather more like Clark Kent
in  his  thick  specs,  stumbling  myopically  around  the  office.  I  haven’t  yet  found  a  phonebox  in
which to get changed.
I do not plan, this morning, to talk at length about my new responsibilities, partly
for the very good reason that I have not had the time to prepare a coherent plan of campaign. But
I might just say a word or two about the new SIB, and the way it will affect your business.
I have been quite encouraged, so far, by the market reaction to the proposed new
structure.  Warning  notes  have  been  sounded,  of  course,  about  the  need  to  avoid  a  lumbering,
slow-moving bureaucracy, and the need to ensure that regulation  is  appropriate  for  the  type  of
market.  I  understand  those  points  and,  particularly  as  far  as  you  are  concerned,  the  need  to
distinguish  between  professional  wholesale  markets  and  the  retail  sector.  There  are  some
interesting  developments  in  that  direction  in  the  US  at  present,  which  we  shall  certainly  look
carefully at as we decide our own new structures.
But,  overall,  I  sense  that  we  begin  the  task  with  some  goodwill  in  the
marketplace. I was particularly interested to see the summary of the views of members of your
Association  on  regulation  in  the  Price  Waterhouse  report  published  late  last  year.  That  is  a
helpful document which we will take into account. I was struck by the importance you attached
to a clear but flexible regulatory environment, which scored highly as a success factor as far as
the  London  market  was  concerned.  And  I  took  the  strong  point  made  about  the  need  for  cost
control, on the one hand, and to provide a framework which facilitates innovation.
When  it  came  to  structure,  your  views  were  divided.  But  I  was  encouraged  that
the option of an enlarged SIB incorporating the SROs was the one which received the strongest
favourable response. There was also quite a bit of support for taking banking supervision out of
the Bank of England. Unfortunately, I cannot readily assess the level of support for the particular
option which the Government have now chosen, since the researchers did not ask you to assess
it - which is certainly a tribute to the new Government’s ability to surprise the market.
But  in  these  surveys  I  am  always  fascinated  by  the  outlying  views  -  the  small
minorities who express a contrary opinion. For example, when asked about the most appropriate
regulatory  structure  2  per  cent  of  those  asked  said  they  thought  the  best  option  would  be  to
abandon the SIB and the SROs, and the Bank of England, and that regulation should be carried
out directly by the Treasury. I would be very grateful if that 2 per cent of you could stay behind
afterwards, assuming they have not been institutionalised since the study was conducted.
BIS Review   67/1997
- 2 -
The strongest message to emerge, though, was the need for regulators to consult
the market effectively on both structures and on rules. I am certainly prepared to undertake here
and  now  that  we  shall  do  so.  We  are  charged  by  the  Government  to  produce  an  over-arching
framework  pretty  quickly,  so  our  discussions  with  the  market  will  need  to  start  now.  But,
thereafter, we will consult intensively on the way in which the new structure will affect day to
day regulation. I give you my firm undertaking on that point.
But, as I said, today I am not speaking to you as the  Chairman  of  the  SIB.  And
you have asked me, particularly, as Deputy Governor of the Bank  to  talk  about  Economic  and
Monetary Union, and the way it will impact on your business. Let us, therefore, move  quickly
on to that point.
Whenever I have accepted an invitation to speak about EMU over the last couple
of  years,  I  have  done  so  with  the  hope  that  when  the  day  came  to  speak,  the  clouds  of
uncertainty surrounding the project would have cleared - both in terms of developments among
the countries committed to going ahead, and in terms of the UK’s position. But my hopes have
so  far  been  confounded,  and  indeed  the  events  of  the  last  couple  of  weeks  have  complicated
matters even further.
This is not the time or place to  talk  in  detail  about  the  Bundesbank’s  little  local
difficulty with Herr Waigel. And it is too early to assess the consequences for the project of the
results of the French election. But it is clear that new elements of uncertainty have entered the
scene, making it harder than ever to forecast the outcome next year.
Looking at the markets’ own assessment, our interpretation of movements in the
forward FX markets since the autumn is that the markets have become more persuaded that the
euro will begin, but that it will be  a  broader,  and  possibly  weaker  euro.  Until  last  summer  the
assumption appeared to be that only seven or eight countries  would  make  up  the  hard  core.  In
the  last  few  months  the  expected  future  correlation  of  the  deutsche  mark/dollar  and  lira/dollar
rates has strengthened, suggesting a stronger market expectation of those currencies being part of
the first wave. Very recently, a few doubts seem to have emerged about the project itself, though
it would seem that, according to the market, the most likely outcome remains that a euro of some
sort would start on time.
I  recognise  that  this  is  a  difficult  background  against  which  businesses  need  to
plan. Our own advice, which we have maintained for some time now, is that it is prudent to plan
on the basis that the euro will begin on 1 January 1999, as set out  in  the  Treaty.  As  far  as  the
position of the UK is concerned, the option  remains  open,  the  policy  remains  what  the  French
call  ‘le  wait  and  see’.  But  the  new  Chancellor,  like  the  old,  has  acknowledged  that  there  are
considerable difficulties to overcome if the UK is to be a first wave member. This is not a tidy
position  to  be  in,  perhaps,  but  against  the  uncertain  background,  it  nonetheless  has  a  certain
practical appeal.
But taking my prudent assumption - that EMU will go ahead - what  can  we  say
about the  impact  on  the  London  market  in  general,  and  on  the  futures  and  options  business  in
particular? I note  with  interest  that  your  own  assessment  is  that  the  best  option  for  the  futures
and options business in London would be for EMU to go ahead and for the UK to participate in
the  first  wave.  It  is  a  moot  point  as  to  whether  the  impact  on  the  profits  and  bonuses  of
derivatives traders will be the number one criterion in the minds of Labour MPs when they come
to reach a view on EMU, but I will certainly draw it to their attention if you would like me to do
so.
BIS Review   67/1997
- 3 -
By contrast, you are slightly, though not exaggeratedly pessimistic about business
opportunities in London if EMU goes ahead with the UK a ‘slow track’ country. I regard this as
a pessimistic assessment, and will attempt this morning to persuade you that you are wrong.
My  first  point,  and  perhaps  the  strongest,  is  that  uncertainty  about  UK
participation  in  EMU  has  persisted  now  for  a  considerable  number  of  years  -  perhaps  indeed
since  the  late  1970s  when  the  UK  government’s  response  to  the  original  EMU  plan  was
distinctly  lukewarm.  And  certainly  no  British  Prime  Minister  has  given  an  enthusiastic
endorsement  of  the  most  recent  Delors  Plan  for  EMU,  at  any  stage.  Yet  at  the  same  time,
London  has  remained  the  dominant  futures  and  options  market  in  Europe,  and  indeed  it  has
strengthened  its  position  in  many  markets  during  that  time  so  that,  as  far  as  on-exchange
business is concerned, London is by far the largest centre in Europe and second only to Chicago.
And  the  central  bank  survey  of  OTC  derivatives  markets  in  1995  demonstrated  London’s
position as the premier centre for the trading and booking of OTC derivatives with 27 per cent
of average daily turnover, pushing New York into second place.
I do not propose to follow the traditional gambit of Ministerial speakers at trade
conferences, reciting figures far better known to the audience than to the speaker, but the growth
of LIFFE, the LME, the IPE and OMLX in recent years has been striking, and the most recent
development  is  that  LIFFE  overtook  the  Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange  to  become  the  world’s
second  largest  exchange  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  So  if,  as  I  was  taught  at  Stanford
Business School, markets are  efficient  in  the  sense  that  they  react  in  advance  of  events,  in  the
light of an assessment of probabilities, then they appear not to have been particularly distressed
by the prospect that EMU may start without the UK in the first wave. Certainly we have not seen
an anticipatory flow of business away from London and towards Continental European markets.
We have recently asked ourselves why it is that LIFFE has retained its position in
the  three-month  euromark  contract  and  the  ten-year  Bund  contract  -  Europe’s  most  active
longer-term interest rate contract. And for those of you who like to go home with a reading list,
there is an interesting article on the subject of what makes for successful futures contacts in our
latest Quarterly Bulletin. (I am sure the restaurants and the bars of the West End will be empty
tonight  as  you  sit  in  your  hotel  rooms  poring  over  it.)  Frankfurt  has  recently  started  making
inroads  into  LIFFE’s  share  of  Bund  futures  business  -  but  the  level  of  activity  on  LIFFE
nonetheless continues to increase.
Our  assessment  is  that,  in  these  markets,  there  is  a  considerable  and  long-term
advantage  inherent  in  being  the  first  mover.  That  helped  LIFFE  to  achieve  a  very  broad  and
international membership, with only 27 per cent of members being UK-based. It has meant that
London has an established skill base and good support functions in law and accountancy. Also a
good telecommunications system - though fewer of those old telephone boxes, which may be a
problem  for  me  at  super-SIB.  London  also  has  a  strong  clearing  function  and  we  should  not
forget  the  advantage  of  the  English  language,  which  is  increasingly  the  lingua  franca  of  the
European  Union,  and  I  believe  that  even  some  Americans  can  now  speak  a  kind  of  pidgin
version which allows them to be understood.
But EMU will create change. This raises three interesting questions. What will be
traded in an EMU environment? How much will be traded? And where will the new instruments
be traded? Let me take these points in turn.
What will be traded when the euro makes its debut?
BIS Review   67/1997
- 4 -
Looking first at on-exchange markets, it seems likely that, in EMU, there will be
room for only one three-month euro short-term interest rate futures contract, although the greater
depth of the new euro market may allow other products at the short end of the yield curve, such
as a one-month euro contract, to co-exist with the three-month benchmark product.
In  the  bond  markets,  one  -  and  perhaps  the  most  likely  outcome  -  is  that  a
particular government’s  bonds  will  become  the  benchmark  for  the  new  euro  bond  market.  We
may all speculate idly on which that country might be. These issues would then anchor the euro
yield curve and futures contracts would follow naturally. The greater depth of the new euro bond
market may well mean that it can support a greater  range  of  futures  contracts  further  along  its
yield curve, as is the case now in the US. Five and two-year contracts, which do already exist in
the Bund market, may develop further. The  exchanges  themselves  recognise  this  point  and  are
seeking to fill in the yield curve in their various markets before the start of EMU.
Other national bond  markets  will  be  keen  to  run  alongside  the  main  market  and
futures contracts on those markets may also exist. But their number will depend on the basket of
deliverables of the futures contracts and how those baskets are defined. The alternative would be
for a group of different countries’ bonds to be traded interchangeably, but that seems an unlikely
outcome.
On the OTC markets, the last 18 months has seen the proliferation of trades based
on  changing  perceptions  of  the  likelihood  of  convergence  for  the  traditionally  high-yielding
countries and trades based on the differential yields of French and German government bonds.
If I might embark on a regulatory diversion here, just for one moment, we at the
Bank expect those banks involved in convergence trading to undertake rigorous stress testing of
their portfolios to assess the market risk they are running on open positions. That testing should
also shed light on the potential for changes in their credit risk - for example if an OTC contract
is  moving  further  in  the  money  due  to  a  market  movement,  the  bank  would  become  more
exposed  to  its  counter-party.  We  believe  that  the  credit  exposure  implications  of  stress  testing
should be taken seriously too and are encouraging banks as best practice to do that. In our view
not enough institutions do so yet.
After  EMU,  one  would  expect  to  see  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risk
narrowing yield differentials in the bond markets. With exchange rate risk removed and a single
monetary policy in operation, national bond yields will differ principally because of differential
default  risks  and  differences  in  market  liquidity.  That  should  leave  default  risk  more  readily
monitorable and more efficiently priced. We should therefore see an enhancement of banks’ and
investment houses’ credit analysis functions and more trading of credit differentials.
My second question was how much will be traded in a post-EMU world?
This  is  not  an  easy  question  to  answer.  Volumes  are  difficult  to  predict.  On  the
one hand, EMU may bring about a more stable interest rate environment, as well as eliminating
national interest rates and exchange rates, reducing the need for hedging mediums and hence for
derivative  products.  On  the  other  hand,  increased  liquidity  in  the  euro  bond  markets  could
encourage  business  and  we  could  well  see  new  participants  entering  the  capital  and  derivative
markets. My hunch is that the latter possibility is more likely. And that the market for carefully
constructed derivatives contracts, properly sold to customers with a genuine need for them, will
continue to expand.
BIS Review   67/1997
- 5 -
That brings me to my third question, where will the trading be done?
I do  not  think  that  there  is  a  determinist  answer  to  this  question.  Nor,  certainly,
should it be a matter of decision by politicians, central bankers or financial regulators. Certainly,
our predisposition is to think that competition will and should determine where business is done
and the outcome will depend on  the  imagination  and  effort  of  the  managers  and  controllers  of
the different markets. There will be lively competition between LIFFE, the DTB and Matif, I am
quite sure. And LIFFE do not need me to argue their case for them. I see from the programme
that they are sponsoring the coffee and the tea at this conference. As a regulator it will of course
be quite impossible for me to accept such lavish and unreasonable hospitality, but the rest of you
are welcome to do so.
For the moment, LIFFE has a dominant position in short-term interest rate futures
and is the leading contender to capitalise on that position, whether or not the UK elects to join
EMU in the first wave. It has already amended its contract specifications and from March 1999
onwards these contracts will settle against the three-month interest rate for euros, a move which
has been widely welcomed in the industry.
The new euro bond market is likely to  support  a  range  of  futures  contracts,  as  I
have  said,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  more  than  one  identical  contract  will  continue  to  exist
post-EMU, due to arbitrage opportunities, as happens now between the LIFFE’s and the DTB’s
Bund contract. That will be an interesting competitive arena to watch.
As far as OTC derivatives are concerned, there is little reason why London should
lose its pre-eminent position as a result of EMU. OTC markets by definition have no centralised
trading platform and their location will depend on, for example, the regulatory environment, the
availability of staff of sufficient quality and in sufficient numbers and the other success factors I
described earlier.
It is also worth noting that other changes are under way in the markets as well as
EMU. The most notable is the advances in technology which have enabled electronic trading to
start  to  challenge  traditional  open  outcry.  In  response,  open  outcry  exchanges  are  looking  to
automate  and  streamline  their  trading  through  technology  to  reduce  costs.  And  it  would  seem
that  the  exchange-traded  futures  industry  is  coming  under  some  pressure  from  the  OTC
derivatives  market,  which  appears  to  be  expanding  at  a  more  rapid  pace.  All  of  these  changes
will  run  in  parallel  with  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  and  as  far  as  competition  is  concerned,
success in those areas may well dominate the euro factor.
But  I  said  earlier  that  the  outcome  of  these  competitive  skirmishes  cannot  be
simply determined in advance by an analysis of existing competitive advantages. It will depend
on  the  efforts  of  the  different  players  and  on  the  extent  to  which  they  are  well  prepared  in
advance.
Here  I  found  your  own  survey  rather  depressing.  The  assessment  was  that
relatively  few  market  participants  in  London  had  made  serious  preparations  for  EMU,  and
seemed unsure of how to proceed. Only 6 per cent of brokers and own account traders had made
contingency plans for the introduction of EMU. But this survey was undertaken in April of last
year, and I am confident that the responses would be different today.
Certainly,  a  lot  of  work  has  been  done  in  the  London  market,  co-ordinated  and
steered  by  a  team  in  the  Bank,  to  ensure  that  London  is  as  well  prepared  as  other  European
BIS Review   67/1997
- 6 -
centres  for  EMU.  And  our  assessment  now,  which  I  believe  is  shared  by  the  EMI  and  the
Commission, is that London is as well prepared as most if not all European centres.
I  can  assure  you  that  the  Bank  of  England  itself  will  be  ready  for  EMU  on  1
January 1999, whether or not the UK is a member. We will be able to offer euro accounts and
euro settlement facilities. We have taken the lead in work on market conventions across Europe.
EMU is likely to bring harmonisation of conventions such as day count and frequency of coupon
payments among Europe’s bond markets, and the London market is ready to do that.
We have been in regular discussion with ISDA which is taking a leading role in
co-ordinating  preparations  of  those  involved  with  swaps  and  other  OTC  derivatives.  And  a
recent working group chaired by the Bank has examined the adaptations that may be needed in
the  gilt  market,  covering  re-denomination  of  gilts  into  euro,  whether  to  quote  in  decimals  or
fractions,  the  frequency  of  coupon  payments,  etc.  There  seems  a  reasonable  chance  that  the
dramatic move to abandon 30 seconds as the  basis  for  gilt  pricing  may  come  about  before  too
long. This could be the only unambiguously, incontestably good thing to come out of Economic
and Monetary Union.
We  have  also  conducted  some  really  exciting  discussions  on  the  issue  of
rounding -  a  subject  which  I  find  can  cause  great  excitement  among  accountants  and  lawyers.
And anything which brings excitement to their sad lives should clearly be welcomed by us all.
My general conclusion - and I will end here, you will be pleased to know - is that
while  EMU  will  significantly  affect  your  markets,  it  does  not  negate  the  usual  rules  of
competition and success. EMU changes the raw material which you work with to generate your
exotic, and sometimes dangerous  products.  But  it  does  not  change  the  rules  of  economics,  nor
does  it  alter  the  dynamics  of  competition.  It  closes  down  some  aspects  of  current  financial
market business, but opens up a big set of new opportunities at the same time. Those who seize
those opportunities will  be  the  most  innovative,  most  cost  effective,  and  most  fast  moving.  At
the  moment,  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic,  most  of  those  people  are  found  in  London.  I  see  no
reason why they should move.
BIS Review   67/1997
