Mr.  Heikensten  looks  at  the  consequences  for  Sweden  of  joining  EMU
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr.  Lars  Heikensten,  at  the  Baker  &
McKenzie’s EMU seminar held in Stockholm on 5/2/97.
First  a  word  of  thanks  for  the  invitation  to  talk  with  you  about  Sweden  and  the
European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  Today  I  have  chosen  to  consider  this  matter  from
three angles: general aspects of the issue of Sweden and EMU; the work we did last year in the
Union to prepare for EMU; and some consequences of EMU for Sweden’s financial sector.
The EU’s preparations for the economic and monetary union are continuing. The
member states are doing all they can to fulfil the economic criteria for participation in the euro
area. Along with this, intensive political work is being done to remove any remaining obstacles.
After the latest meeting of Heads of State or of Government, in Dublin last December, political
agreements  are  in  place  on,  for  example,  the  stability  and  growth  pact  and  the  relationship
between the euro and outside currencies.
Solutions are still required on a number of important issues. One is how the path
into EMU  is  to  be  arranged  for  countries  that  do  not  belong  to  the  first  group.  Then  there  are
many technical details to adjust in the course of the year. But the puzzle’s main pieces are now
in place.
EMU - an important part in EU cooperation
When  asked  about  the  likelihood  of  EMU  being  actually  established  on  time,
some observers declare that “the EMU process has reached a point of no return”. I neither can
nor  want  to  be  so  categorical.  But  that  EMU  will  be  realised  on  time  in  accordance  with  the
Treaty  does  seem  highly  probable.  The  political  determination  is  strong,  as  has  been
demonstrated time and again when conflicting views threaten the process.
I am glad the debate has now started in Sweden and that it is  concentrating  to  a
greater  extent  on  the  consequences  for  Sweden  of  joining  the  monetary  union  or  remaining
outside, rather than on whether the EMU project as such is good or bad. What I still lack in the
debate is an appraisal of EMU in a broader policy perspective.  The purpose of the economic and
monetary  union  is  the  same  as  for  the  European  Union:  closer  European  cooperation  on  such
areas as integration, growth, employment and prosperity.
The  European  Union  is  often  discussed  in  Sweden  in  terms  of  a  Brussels
bureaucracy that deals with the length of cucumbers or the curve of bananas. That is of course
both incorrect and unfortunate. The Union should be seen as an arena or, if you like, a playing
field.  For  some  years  now  Sweden  has  been  a  player,  which  involves  learning  the  rules  and
taking  initiatives  for  the  development  of  Europe  in  concert  with  other  countries.  But  this
presupposes  that,  instead  of  again  remaining  outside,  we  participate  in  the  contexts  where
developments are constructed.
Opportunities and risks
The idea behind a single currency in Europe is simple. One currency is better than
many  -  it  makes  things  work  more  efficiently.  Eliminating  the  need  to  exchange  currencies
reduces transaction costs. The exchange rate stability  facilitates  trade  and  investment.  A  single
currency  makes  price  comparisons  and  economic  estimates  easier,  not  least  for  small  and
BIS Review   14/1997
- 2 -
medium-sized  companies.  More  direct  price  comparisons  should  lead  in  turn  to  stronger
competition and downward pressure on prices, to the benefit of consumers.
But  risks  are  also  involved  when  a  single  currency  is  introduced  in  so  many
countries  with  geographical,  cultural  and  institutional  differences.  The  Calmfors  report  has
highlighted  the  insurance  argument.  I  agree  that  this  is  an  important  point  against  EMU  and
therefore warrants particular attention. Monetary and exchange rate policy can be used as a kind
of  insurance  against  major,  unforeseeable  shocks  in  a  single  country.  Without  it,  large
adjustments may be required in other parts of the economy.
However, when Calmfors and others claim that country-specific shocks have been
more  frequent  in  the  Swedish  economy  than  in  the  EU’s  core  countries,  they  are  on  uncertain
ground. There are many indications that the shocks in Sweden have been occasioned above  all
by  domestic  economic  policy  and  other  institutional  conditions,  in  the  labour  market  and  in
wage  formation.  Wage  costs  in  Sweden  rose  considerably  faster  than  in  other  countries  in  the
1970s and 1980s; competitiveness was restored by resorting to devaluations.
It  is  not  self-evident  that  shocks  generated  externally  would  hit  Sweden  more
seriously  than  countries  which  are  currently  taken  as  given  for  EMU.  So  the  risk  of  what
economists call asymmetric shocks in Sweden should not be exaggerated.
Moreover, when it comes to influencing production and employment in the event
of  major  shocks,  monetary  policy  has  a  limited  capability.  It  may  even  be  the  case  that
independence  in  monetary  policy  increases  the  risk  of  self-inflicted  shocks.  In  the  longer  run,
monetary policy is not a substitute for the changes that need to be made, for instance to improve
wage formation and the workings of the labour market.
The  Governing  Board  of  the  Riksbank  will  shortly  be  submitting  an  opinion  on
the Calmfors report. The arguments for and against EMU participation will be considered there
at greater length. A general theme in the report is that every kind of decision - to joint now, to
join  later  or  to  stay  outside  -  entails  risks  and  has  a  price.  Although  the  report  conclude  that
Sweden should wait  joining  EMU  for  the  time  being,  not  much  is  needed  to  tip  the  scales  the
other way, for example if EMU begins with more participants than the core countries or  if  the
alternative of remaining outside does not confer any substantial freedom in monetary policy. But
as I said, there will be occasion to return to this.
Preparatory work in the EU
The preparatory work is in full swing in all the EU institutions as well as in  the
member states. The EMU project will not founder on technical aspects.
In  May  1995  the  Commission  presented  a  green  paper  on  the  practical
arrangements  for  a  changeover  to  the  single  currency.  At  the  Madrid  meeting  that  year  the
European  Council  adopted  the  scenario  for  the  changeover,  specifying  dates  for  the  central
decisions. The Council confirmed that Stage Three of EMU is to start on 1st January 1999. The
decision on which countries will participate in the euro area is to be made as early as possible in
1998 (probably February--April) on the basis of which countries fulfil the convergence criteria
in  respect  of  statistics  for  1997.  Euro  banknotes  and  coins  are  to  be  in  circulation  by  January
2002 at the latest.
BIS Review   14/1997
- 3 -
The  preparatory  work  last  year  was  dominated  by  two  issues:  one  was  what  is
now called the growth and stability pact and the other was the nature of the relationship between
the  euro  and  the  currencies  outside  the  euro  area.  A  common  factor  in  these  matters  is  the
question of maintaining stability once EMU has been established.
1. Growth and stability pact
Without specific  restrictions,  participation  in  the  euro  area  would  make  it  easier
for a country to implement an expansionary budget policy. When national currencies disappear
and the interest rate largely reflects the single monetary policy, some of the immediate signals to
politicians and other decision-makers will disappear. Access to the large, uniform capital market
that will result  from  EMU  will  also  make  it  easier  to  borrow.  Up  to  a  point,  of  course,  this  is
good; it eases the tax burden in countries with a large government debt, for example. But it also
involves risks, above all that a country abuses the situation so that ultimately it is other countries
which may have to pay when failure threatens.
The Maastricht Treaty, as most people probably know by now, contains a number
of  conditions  that  member  states  have  to  fulfil  in  order  to  participate  in  the  euro  area.  Once
countries have joined the euro area,  however,  there  are  no  correspondingly  strict  rules.  This  is
where the growth and stability pact comes in.
The purpose of the pact is to get participating countries to strive for a cyclically
balanced  budget  or  a  surplus  position.  Deviations  from  this  target  are  to  trigger  alarm  signals
whereby the Council starts to take action in the form of examinations, advice, recommendations,
publication  and,  ultimately,  sanctions.  The  monitoring  of  economic  development  in  member
states  is  to  be  reinforced  with  a  mandatory  stability  programme,  similar  to  the  present
convergence programme. In the event of a country having an excessively large budget deficit, its
government must act. If adequate measures have not been taken within ten months, the country
will  be  required  to  deposit  a  no-interest  fee  with  the  EU  Commission.  If  the  deficit  is  still
excessive after two years, the fee is transformed into a fine. At most the fine can amount to the
equivalent of 0.5 per cent of GDP.
If the deficit is due to exceptional circumstances, sanctions are not to be imposed.
If GDP falls by 2 per cent, no sanctions are to be levied for an excessively large budget deficit.
The Council can also decide not to impose sanctions if GDP falls by between 0.75 and 2 per cent
and other “special circumstances” apply.
While the point of a system for preventing the abuse of fiscal policy in EMU has
always been clear, one cannot turn a blind eye to the risks inherent in rules such as those in the
stability  pact.  It  is  thus  a  matter  of  striking  a  reasonable  balance  between  different  interests,
which is why the discussion has been so protracted. The risks are mainly of two kinds:
- One has to do with the need of adjustment mechanisms. With no possibility of
using monetary and exchange rate policy at the national level, it may be important for the system
to provide other “buffers”. Therefore the pact ought not to be so strict that it might in practice
have a destabilising effect in a particular country with problems.
-  The  other  concerns  credibility.  What  would  happen  if  the  threat  of  sanctions
fails to act as a deterrent? Will the European political system be capable of punishing a member
state?
BIS Review   14/1997
- 4 -
The  main  features  of  the  growth  and  stability  pact  have  been  established.  It
remains to draw up specific rules about, for example, the monitoring of exchange rate stability,
the  construction  of  the  stability  programme  and  the  legal  framework.  Finally  it  may  be  worth
mentioning that the monitoring routine and the excessive deficit procedure will be essentially the
same for countries outside the euro area, except in one respect - the sanctions.
2. ERM 2
The Dublin meeting also decided that a new exchange rate arrangement, ERM 2,
is  to  be  set  up  as  the  dominant  mechanism  for  the  coordination  of  monetary  policy  and  other
economic policies between the member states in the euro area and those that remain outside. The
system  will  resemble  the  existing  ERM  except  that  this  is  a  multilateral  system  of  rates  for
conversion  between  all  the  member  currencies,  while  in  ERM  2  the  currencies  of  non-
participating countries will be linked directly to the euro.
The  risk  of  systemic  tensions  with  ERM  2  will  probably  be  smaller  than  it  has
been  earlier  with  ERM  because  the  degree  of  convergence  in  the  EU  area  is  now  greater.
Moreover,  the  band  on  either  side  of  the  central  rates  will  probably  be  relatively  broad.  The
experience gained in 1992-93 has also resulted in a greater readiness to adjust rates when this is
considered  necessary.  But  of  course  speculative  situations  cannot  be  ruled  out  either  in  the
present ERM or in ERM 2, as is clear from developments in Finland in recent months.
The  Swedish  position  has  been  to  avoid  making  the  new  exchange  rate
arrangement  mandatory.  Basically,  we  consider  it  would  be  better  to  achieve  coordination  in
Europe  with  a  single  inflation  target.  We  find  the  present  construction  of  Swedish  monetary
policy satisfactory. But we can get along with the system that has been chosen. Cooperation will
not be mandatory, which means that monetary policy can be conducted with an inflation target
as  well  as  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  with  the  euro.  Still  it  is  clear  that  there  will  be  strong
pressure on us to participate in ERM 2. It is also conceivable that a period of participation in the
exchange rate mechanism will prove to be a condition for EMU membership. In any event, as a
EU member state we have undertaken to conduct exchange rate policy as “a matter of common
interest”.
Changeover plan for the financial sector
It is the Riksdag (Sweden’s parliament) that decides if Sweden should join EMU.
The Riksbank has the task of helping to ensure that Sweden does in fact have a choice when the
time comes to decide, so that Sweden is ready to join if a Riksdag majority so requires.
The  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Riksbank  each  have  an  organisation  for  the
euro’s practical introduction. The scale of the systemic changeover is tremendous, roughly on a
par  with  our  earlier  change  to  driving  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  road.  A  fundamental
principle  for  the  work  is  that,  as  far  as  possible,  all  those  concerned  are  to  find  their  own
solutions to the problems posed by EMU.
The Riksbank is responsible for the changeover in the financial sector. To this end
we have set up a body called SIFS (the  Swedish  acronym  for  Consultation  and  Information  to
the Financial Sector). One result to date is a report, published a few days ago, on the situation as
regards the euro in Sweden’s financial sector.
Good  progress  has  been  made  in  the  preparatory  work.  Timetables  and  suitable
solutions have been established in a number of fields. The Riksbank considers that the financial
BIS Review   14/1997
- 5 -
sector can manage a changeover to the euro on 1st January 1999. Participation from a later date
can  facilitate  the  preparatory  work  in  certain  respects  and  complicate  it  in  others.  The  worst
alternative is  a  long  period  of  uncertainty;  that  would  entail  a  costly  duplication  of  systems  in
many fields.
I  should  like  to  end  with  some  examples  of  changes  that  will  occur  and  be  of
importance for the financial markets.
1. Monetary policy
A  single  currency  presupposes  a  single  monetary  policy.  In  EMU  this  will  be
implemented by the ECB. In this context the national central banks will function as “operative
arms”, acting on instructions from the ECB.
For  Swedish  banks  and  financial  institutions, 
the  difference  as  regards
participation in central bank monetary policy operations will probably not be all that great. The
Riksbank will no doubt continue to be the financial sector’s counterparty. The main differences
from today for Swedish banks are that the overnight market will be considerably larger and that
minimum reserves are likely to be required.
How monetary policy is to be constructed and implemented in detail has still to be
decided. These matters will not be finalised until the ECB has been established next year. Thus it
is the countries which participate from the start that will be in a position to influence the conduct
of policy as well as the organisation of the work in the new European bank. There are already
tendencies  for  countries  belonging  to  the  “presumed”  core  to  exercise  a  greater  influence  over
the process.
2. Payment system
A single monetary policy calls in turn for a common payment system in order to
handle the payments connected with the policy’s implementation. The arrangements whereby all
the national systems are interlinked is called the Target system.
In the new system, a cross-border payment will normally be made in a matter of
seconds, whereas at present in the best case it takes a whole day. The main objective of Target is
to  enable  the  ECB  to  implement  monetary  policy  but  the  new  system  will  also  provide  a  new
“highway” for commercial transactions. The extent to which banks and other enterprises use the
system will probably depend on the price.
All the national central banks in the EU area can join Target, whether or not their
country  is  in  the  euro  area.  But  there  is  a  considerable  risk  of  countries  outside  the  euro  area
being  in  a  worse  position,  for  instance  due  to  restrictions  on  intra-day  borrowing  in  euro  to
counter  fluctuations  in  the  payment  flows.  We  have  vigorously  opposed  this  threat  of
discrimination but the issue, along with others, has been deferred and will now be decided by the
countries that join the euro area from the start.
3. Legal framework
A clear legal framework for the euro is essential. Economic values, for instance in
contracts,  bank  accounts  and  pension  agreements,  must  be  guaranteed  during  the  changeover
period from 1999 to 2002, when the euro and national currencies will exist side by side. The so-
BIS Review   14/1997
- 6 -
called continuity of contracts is regulated in one of the euro statutes but amendments to national
laws will also be needed.
Another legal issue concerns the national central banks. As regards the Riksbank,
the Maastricht Treaty calls for a more independent statutory status. This means, for instance, that
the  status  of  the  Governor  must  be  clarified;  grounds  for  his  or  her  dismissal  will  have  to  be
explicit,  e.g.  serious  misconduct,  etc.  Neither  will  the  Riksbank  be  able  to  accept  directives,
except  of  a  statutory  nature,  from  others,  e.g.  the  Government.  The  composition  of  the
Governing  Board  may  be  a  problem;  the  appointment  of  members  of  Parliament  to  the
Governing Board runs counter to traditions in Central Europe.
4. Debt conversion and issues
The countries that join the euro area may - and it is also envisaged that they will -
issue treasury paper denominated in euro. A member state wishing to  convert  its  stock  of  debt
into  euro  will  be  allowed  to  initiate  the  appropriate  measures.  A  member  state  may  also  take
steps  whereby  private  issuers  and  marketplaces  (e.g.  the  Stockholm  Stock  Exchange,  OM  and
the  Securities  Register  Centre)  can  switch  to  euro  in  the  changeover  period.  Many  institutions
and agents are in fact planning to do this.
All private economic agents are to be free to choose between using euro from the
start of Stage Three and waiting until the changeover has been completed. However, the agents
in the Swedish securities market, banks, financial institutions, the Securities Register Centre, the
Stockholm Stock Exchange, OM and others are unanimously in favour of a “big-bang” solution,
that is, a quick, concerted changeover from kronor to euro right from the turn of 1998.
5. Banknotes and coins
Euro banknotes and coins will not be introduced until the beginning of 2002. For
a time, commerce will have to cope with two sets of prices, one in krona and the other in euro. A
timetable for the substitution of banknotes and coins is to be fixed by each country. For Sweden
the Riksbank hopes that the changeover can be arranged in an appreciably shorter time than the
allotted six months.
It  should  be  underscored,  finally,  that  EMU  is  likely  to  bring  about  notable
changes in the financial landscape. Some products will simply disappear: currencies, as well as
forward  and  option  instruments  derived  from  them.  With  a  single  monetary  policy  and  no
exchange  risk,  interest  rate  differentials  between  national  treasury  papers  will  arise  only  from
credit risk. The market for Swedish treasury paper will be more or less integrated in a market for
treasury  paper  in  euro.  Provided  the  debt  situation  in  the  countries  concerned  is  under  control
and reasonably similar, national T-bonds will become close substitutes. That will also do away
with a number of national forward and option products.
Certainly there will be new financial products; there has been no lack of creativity
in  this  field  in  the  past  decade.  There  will  clearly  be  increased  competition  between  financial
institutions as well as between financial markets in different locations.
There  is  nothing  new  about  the    globalisation  and  integration  of  the  world’s
financial markets but it is reasonable to suppose that EMU will accelerate the process.
BIS Review   14/1997
Summary and conclusions
- 7 -
Today  it  looks  for  the  most  part  as  though  economic  and  monetary  union  will
start as planned on 1st January 1999. For Sweden the question is whether we are to participate
from the start, wait a while or try to remain outside for ever. Recently the discussion of this issue
has finally got going. My view has been that it is not just a question of economics, though the
economic  arguments  do  point  to  participation.  EMU  is  one  important  component  of  the  EU
cooperation in which Sweden is now taking part.
From  the  debate  about  economic  aspects  of  EMU  one  sometimes  gets  the
impression  that  an  alternative  exists  which  is  much  simpler,  enabling  us  to  avoid  all  the
adjustments which Brussels imposes. That is not the case. Sweden  has  experienced  a  profound
economic  crisis  in  the  1990s  that  was  essentially  self-inflicted.  Development  in  the  rest  of
Europe  has  on  the  whole  been  better.  We  must  now  in  any  event  continue  to  consolidate
government  finance  and  establish  long-term  confidence  in  the  stability  of  Swedish  economy.
This will scarcely be easier outside EMU.
I find it hard to envisage that Sweden would ultimately want to remain outside a
functional EMU. Bit by bit the countries of Europe will grow together. This makes the question
not  whether  but  when  Sweden  ought  to  join.  Perhaps  this  perspective  can  help  to  make  the
question less dramatic.
In  our  efforts  to  prepare  the  financial  sector  for  EMU  we  can  see  that  the  work
has come a long way. We also meet a strong desire from the parties concerned to get going as
quickly  as  possible  so  as  not  to  fall  behind;  so  as  to  compete  on  the  same  terms  as  other
European enterprises and not lose business opportunities.
My own experience of EU cooperation prompts the same conclusion. As a “free
rider”  alongside  EMU  it  is  not  just  business  opportunities  that  we  lose  but  also  influence  on
European cooperation.
BIS Review   14/1997
