Mr. Stals reports on major economic developments in South Africa over the
past twelve months   Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr. C. Stals,
at the 77th Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of the Bank on 26/8/97.
Introduction
The turbulences in the South African market for foreign exchange from February
1996, and the subsequent destabilisation of the balance of payments, contributed to a weakening
of  overall  economic  growth  and  to  an  upturn  in  inflation.  The  major  task  for  monetary  policy
over  the  past  year  has  accordingly  been  to  restore  both  external  equilibrium  and  domestic
financial  stability  which  are  important  preconditions  for  sustained  investor  confidence  and
economic growth.
The  process  of  restoring  external  economic  equilibrium  had  to  begin  at  home.
Many  adverse  factors  converged  to  contribute  to  the  sudden  exchange  rate  shock  of  February
1996.  Some  were  of  a  non-economic  nature  while  others  were  rooted  in  macroeconomic
developments  over  the  preceding  two  years.  The  problems  caused  by  non-economic  factors
diminished as concern about the finalisation of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
the  delay  of  local  authority  elections  in  certain  provinces,  and  the  political  composition  of  the
Government  of  National  Unity  were  fortunately  allayed  during  the  course  of  the  past  year.
Equally important has been the fact that the Minister of Finance, newly appointed in April 1996,
has stood the test of the markets with acclaim and soon established himself as an effective leader
of the country’s overall financial policy.
Many  of  the  disturbing  economic  problems  which  emerged  last  year  were
addressed by appropriate policy responses, while the private sector has on the whole endured the
inevitable painful adjustments with much understanding. During both 1994 and 1995, growth in
real domestic expenditure by far outpaced growth in real domestic production. This was clearly
not a sustainable situation, and growth in domestic demand had to be curtailed to ensure a better
balance in the overall economy.
The  untenable  developments  in  domestic  economic  activity  created  a  widening
deficit in the current account of the balance of payments which was being financed by an inflow
of  volatile  short-term  foreign  capital.  When  these  short-term  capital  inflows  switched  into
outflows after February 1996, however, a downward adjustment in the rate of growth in overall
domestic expenditure, and therefore in the growing demand for imports, became imperative.
The  divergent  rates  of  expansion  in  domestic  production  and  expenditure,
respectively,  were  also  being  financed  to  an  increasing  extent  with  domestic  bank  credit,  or
simply the creation of additional money. With insufficient domestic saving and a sudden decline
in  the  inflow  of  foreign  capital  after  February  1996,  the  pressure  to  accelerate  the  creation  of
more money increased even further.
Assessed  against  this  background,  an  untenable  macroeconomic  disequilibrium
was rapidly being perceived to be developing at the then level of the exchange rate of the rand.
Large  foreign  capital  inflows  in  1995,  as  well  as  the  early  weeks  of  1996,  exerted  upward
pressure on the value of the rand. Within a floating exchange rate regime, the rand appreciated
in  real  terms,  despite  heavy  Reserve  Bank  intervention  to  absorb  part  of  the  excess  supply  of
foreign exchange. The appreciation of the rand at the time was clearly irreconcilable with South
Africa’s otherwise weak position in a very competitive world economic environment. A stronger
rand  could  not  be  sustained  in  the  long  term.  Also  instructive  in  this  regard  is  that  similar
BIS Review   77/1997
- 2 -
experiences  by  other  emerging  economies  over  the  past  year  proved  that  alternative  exchange
rate systems, based on fixed or managed floating exchange rates, could also not cope with such
divergent economic trends. In some of those countries, even more painful economic adjustments
were required to restore financial stability than in the case of South Africa.
The  monetary  policy  approach  adopted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  under  the
circumstances was to let market forces take their course,  with  some  short-term  intervention  by
the  Bank  only  to  support  an  orderly  process  of  adjustment.  The  exchange  rate  was  therefore
allowed to take its market-determined run while liquidity was drained from the domestic money
market,  interest  rates  were  guided  in  a  gradual  upward  path,  and  the  resultant  adverse
consequences  of  the  adjustment  in  real  economic  activity  were  accepted  as  essential  to  avoid
even  greater  disruption  later  on.  Domestic  financial  stability  had  to  be  restored  first  and  must
now be maintained in order to raise the production capacity of the economy to higher levels on a
sustainable basis.
These  developments  over  the  past  year  again  exposed  the  urgent  need  for
longer-term  structural  economic  reforms.  In  June  1996, 
the  Government  released  a
Macroeconomic  Strategy  for  Growth,  Employment  and  Redistribution  (GEAR).  The  full
implementation of this programme over the next few years will undoubtedly raise the potential
of the economy and enable South Africa to meet the vast basic social and economic needs of the
people of the country more adequately. It will also provide the economy with better armour to
withstand  with  more  vigour  similar  adverse  macroeconomic  developments  that  may  recur  in
future.
In  retrospect,  the  economic  policies  of  the  past  year  contributed  significantly
towards  improving  equilibrium  when  emerging  imbalances  threatened  to  frustrate  the  primary
objective  of  achieving  sustainable  optimum  economic  growth  and  development.  Recent
improvements in the current account of the balance of payments, the firmer exchange rate of the
rand, the increased inflow of foreign capital, and the rise in official foreign exchange reserves,
provide sufficient evidence to the effect that the serious danger of a collapse in South Africa’s
external  economic  relations  a  year  ago  has  been  successfully  averted.  Moreover,  there  are
encouraging, although as yet still only tentative, signs, emanating from both the production and
the expenditure sides, that the economy recovered slightly during the second quarter of 1997.
This  preliminary  indication  is  also  confirmed  by  some  hopeful  signs  that  the
inflationary pressures which arose from the economic imbalances experienced last year are now
subsiding.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  overall  financial  situation  still  provides  reason  for
concern, particularly in view of the continued high rates of increase in bank credit extension and
in broad money supply. For reasons that will be  explained  in  more  detail  below,  the  monetary
authorities must persist with their vigil against the threat of overall financial instability that can
only lead to stagflation in due course. There are many examples in the world today, both among
industrial  and  emerging  economies,  where  this  lesson  is  again  being  learnt  the  hard  way  after
years of reluctance to apply appropriate but unpopular short-term disciplinary monetary policies
in a timely fashion.
The  Reserve  Bank  is  not  prepared  to  consider  any  short-term  expediencies  and
implement  monetary  policies  that  will  in  the  long  term  lead  to  serious  disruption  of  financial
stability.  The  country  just  cannot  afford  unsound  monetary  policies  for  short-term  gain.  Such
policies would gradually undermine the value of the rand and lead to an eventual collapse of the
financial system, with serious adverse implications also for the level of real economic activity.
BIS Review   77/1997
Recent economic developments
- 3 -
The Reserve Bank’s  Annual  Economic  Report  released  this  morning  serves  as  a
background  to  the  following  brief  summary  of  major  economic  developments  over  the  past
twelve months:
A year of economic consolidation
The  pattern  of  developments  in  real  economic  activity  over  the  past  twelve
months can best be described as the outcome of a necessary process of consolidation after three
years of positive growth. The rate of expansion in gross domestic product reached a seasonally
adjusted and annualised rate of 31½ per cent in the second half of 1996, but then slowed down
to only 1 per cent in the first half of 1997, indicating a lower rate of growth for the full calendar
year of 1997 compared with that experienced during any one of the past two years.
During the first quarter of 1997, total gross domestic product actually declined by
1 per cent, setting off alarm bells of a pending recession. During  the  second  quarter,  however,
there  was  a  distinct  recovery  when  overall  economic  activity  again  turned  to  positive  growth,
equal to an annualised rate of 21½ per cent. With a continued decline in agricultural production
during the second quarter and only moderate growth in mining production, total value added by
the  primary  sectors  declined  by  a  further  1  per  cent.  Against  this  poor  performance,  however,
production  in  the  rest  of  the  economy  was  back  on  track  with  an  expansion  equal  to  31½  per
cent  on  an  annualised  basis.  With  growth  of  7  per  cent  in  manufacturing,  6  per  cent  in
electricity,  gas  and  water,  and  41½  per  cent  in  transport  and  communication,  together  with
positive growth in all the other sub-sectors, the fears of a pending recession must at least for now
have been allayed.
Gross  domestic  expenditure,  on  the  other  hand,  remained  fairly  depressed.  An
estimated  small  decline  in  total  expenditure  in  the  first  half  of  1997  contributed  to  the
consolidation  process  of  restoring  a  better  balance  between  total  domestic  production  and
effective demand. Further declines in the growth rates of  private  consumption  expenditure  and
gross domestic fixed investment, coupled with a substantial reduction in total inventories, were
partly  offset  by  a  continued  high  level  of  expansion  in  general  government  consumption
expenditure, particularly at the level of provincial and local government.
During the second quarter of  1997  there  was,  however,  a  noticeable  recovery  in
demand  when  total  gross  domestic  expenditure  expanded  again  by  2  per  cent,  after  having
declined by 1 per cent in the first quarter. Small increases from the first to the second quarter in
the  rates  of  growth  in  private  consumption  expenditure  as  well  as  domestic  fixed  investment
were  strongly  supported  by  a  further  rise  at  an  annualised  rate  of  more  than  51½  per  cent  in
general government consumption expenditure. Excluding the effect of a substantial reduction in
inventories, total domestic expenditure actually increased by 21½ per cent in the second quarter.
These  disparate  movements  in  real  economic  aggregates  between  the  first  and
second quarters of 1997 underline the importance of correctly interpreting short-term indicators
of current economic developments. The Reserve Bank will conscientiously analyse all economic
information  that  becomes  available  over  the  next  few  months  with  the  necessary  sensitivity  to
the pressing needs of the country.
BIS Review   77/1997
Better equilibrium in the balance of payments
- 4 -
The  salutary  effects  on  the  balance  of  payments  of  slower  growth  in  total
domestic  expenditure  are  clearly  reflected  in  the  rapid  decline  in  the  deficit  of  the  current
account. On a seasonally adjusted and annualised basis, this deficit declined from R13 billion in
the  second  quarter  of  1996  to  only  R3.5  billion  in  the  second  quarter  of  1997.  In  unadjusted
figures, the negative balance declined from R5.5 billion in the first half of 1996 to R3.0 billion
in the second half of last year, and R2.4 billion in the first half of 1997.
Both  imports  and  exports  of  merchandise  responded  to  the  depreciation  of  the
rand last year. In the second quarter of 1997, the level of merchandise exports at current prices
was  25  per  cent  higher  than  in  the  second  quarter  of  1996,  whereas  the  value  of  imports
increased  by  only  11  per  cent.  This  was,  however,  not  all  due  to  the  price  effect  of  the
depreciation of the rand. Growth in the volume of imports also slowed down as a result of the
decline in gross domestic expenditure. In the case of the value of exports, an increase of 25 per
cent  was  already  experienced  in  the  year  prior  to  the  depreciation,  partly  as  a  result  of  the
removal of international sanctions, which no doubt continued to affect exports in 1996 and the
first half of 1997.
The improvement in the current account was supported by a larger net inflow of
funds reflected in the capital account of the balance of payments. The pressure on the exchange
rate of the rand, which continued from February to October 1996, subsided again after October,
almost  as  suddenly  as  it  had  appeared.  During  the  first  three  quarters  of  1996,  the  net  capital
inflow amounted to only R585 million, but this was followed by a net inflow of R3.3 billion in
the fourth quarter, and by no less than  R16.7 billion in the first half of 1997.
After  the  rand  had  depreciated  by  as  much  as  23.5  per  cent  in  nominal  terms
between 14 February 1996 and the end of October 1996, it appreciated by 10 per cent over the
next five months. From the end of March to the end of July 1997, however, the rand depreciated
again by 3.6 per cent to give a net increase of 6.0 per cent in the external value of the currency
from November 1996 to the end of July 1997. It should be noted, however, that the average level
of the exchange rate of the rand over the first seven months of 1997, compared with its average
value over the same period in 1996, showed a depreciation in nominal terms of 8.4 per cent.
Although  the  initial  appreciation  after  October  1996  was  accepted  as  a  partial
correction  of  an  over-reaction,  the  Reserve  Bank  nevertheless,  already  in  November  1996,
started to intervene again in the market as a net buyer of foreign exchange. The country’s gross
foreign reserves held by the consolidated banking sector indeed increased by R17.2 billion over
the  past  three  quarters  to  reach  a  level  of  R31.1  billion  at  the  end  of  June  1997.  This  was
sufficient to cover about 91½ weeks of imports of goods and services.
Currency depreciation as a means to achieve greater international competitiveness
only  has  a  chance  to  succeed  in  countries  where  inflation  is  not  sensitive  to  depreciation.  The
events of the past year proved once again that in South Africa inflation reacts with a time lag of
only about  six months to major changes in the exchange rate. The quarter-to-quarter increase in
the seasonally adjusted and annualised rate of change in the production price index for imported
goods escalated from 6.0 per cent in the first quarter of 1996 to no less than 18.1 per cent in the
fourth quarter, before it declined again to 12.4 per cent in the first quarter of 1997. In the second
quarter  of  1997,  that  is  approximately  six  months  after  the  turnaround  in  the  trend  of  the
exchange  rate  in  November  1996,  the  production  price  index  for  imported  goods  actually
declined by 10.7 per cent.
BIS Review   77/1997
Monetary aggregates slow to respond
- 5 -
Over  the  past  two  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  on  various  occasions  advanced
reasons why changes in the M3 money supply may have lost some of its usefulness as a reliable
anchor for monetary policy. At this juncture, the Bank regards changes in M3 only as one among
several  important  financial  indicators.  It  no  longer  bases  its  monetary  policy  decisions
automatically  on  any  rigid  formula  linking  actual  changes  in  M3  to  the  predetermined  money
supply  guidelines  issued  by  the  Bank  at  the  beginning  of  each  year.  In  1996,  for  example,
monetary policy was aimed more directly towards the restoration of external financial stability.
More recently, the Bank has become more concerned  about  the  excessive  increase  in  domestic
bank credit extension, not only because of its influence on the money supply, but also for other
reasons. There has, for example,  been  growing  anxiety  about  the  over-extension  of  the  private
sector’s  indebtedness  relative  to  disposable  income,  and  the  increasing  vulnerability  of  the
banking  sector  to  adverse  developments  in  a  possibly  less  favourable  future  macroeconomic
environment.
No central bank can, of course, disregard developments in the money supply or in
bank  credit  extension,  even  if  such  developments  can  be  explained  as  temporary  distortions
caused  by  major  structural  economic  reforms.  Although  changes  in  M3  and  its  shorter-term
components  should  be  interpreted  with  circumspection  in  the  present  South  African
environment, they cannot be discarded or ignored. The relationship between  the  money  supply
and  nominal  production,  or  the  velocity  of  circulation  of  M3,  may  be  changing,  but  new
relationships  are  being  established  in  the  process  of  transformation.  Over  the  longer  term,  it
remains  true  that  inflation  cannot  be  sustained  indefinitely  unless  it  is  fuelled  by  continuous
excessive money creation.
Throughout 1996, the annual rate of increase in the M3 money supply fluctuated
within a narrow range of between 13.6 and 16.1 per cent. By January 1997 it reached a peak of
16.8  per  cent,  and  then  declined  gradually  to  12.7  per  cent  in  June  1997.  As  a  guideline  the
Reserve Bank currently regards a rate of increase of not more than 10 per  cent  per  year  in  the
M3  money  supply  as  consistent  with  the  prime  objective  of  reducing  inflation  gradually  to  a
level  that  will  be  more  in  line  with  the  average  rate  of  inflation  in  the  economies  of  South
Africa’s major trading partners.
The  increase  in  M3  has  now  consistently  exceeded  the  rate  of  growth  in  the
nominal value of gross domestic product for more than three years, with the result that the ratio
of the total amount of money in circulation to gross domestic product has risen to 58 per cent,
which is  the  highest  level  since  1980.  A  lack  of  availability  of  money  can  therefore  hardly  be
advanced as a reason for the slowdown in real economic activity over the past eighteen months.
The  relatively  high  level  of  the  money  supply  or,  inversely,  its  low  level  of
velocity of circulation, holds a potential danger for future inflation. Although a substantial part
of  the  excess  amount  of  money  in  circulation  may  at  this  stage  be  confined  to  the  financial
sector, possibly contributing to financial asset inflation, the Reserve Bank will have little control
over  the  situation  once  holders  of  financial  assets  decide  again  to  divert  their  spending  to  the
acquisition of goods and services. Central bank policy must therefore always be forward-looking
and  attempt  to  pre-empt  the  danger  of  overspending  or  rising  inflation  at  some  future
inopportune stage.
Total bank credit extended to the private sector likewise continued to increase at a
high rate throughout 1996, and fluctuated between a peak of 18.9 per cent in July and a low of
BIS Review   77/1997
- 6 -
16.1  per  cent  in  December.  During  the  first  six  months  of  1997,  it  peaked  at  17.4  per  cent  in
April, and then declined only marginally to 16.3 per cent over the twelve months up to June. As
in  the  case  of  the  money  supply,  the  total  amount  of  bank  credit  outstanding  has  risen  as  a
percentage  of  gross  domestic  product  over  the  past  few  years.  At  the  end  of  June  1997,  it
amounted  to  75  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product,  compared  with  67  per  cent  at  the  end  of
1993.
Bank  credit  is,  of  course,  not  only  extended  for  the  purpose  of  financing
purchases of goods and services. Indeed, particularly in recent months, a substantial amount of
the additional bank credit created may have been linked to the explosive increases in the volume
of  transactions  in  the  financial  markets,  particularly  in  the  equity  and  bond  markets.
Nevertheless, all forms of bank credit create money, and the initial  reason  for  which  money  is
created is only of limited significance for monetary policy purposes. Once the money has been
created, it becomes part of the amorphous pool of the total money supply and, depending on the
strength of the multiplier effect, is available  to  be  used  a  number  of  times  over,  and  for  many
purposes other than its first application.
Many  explanations  can  be  offered  for  the  persistently  high  rates  of  increase  in
bank credit extension and in the money supply, despite the slowdown in real economic activity
over  the  past  eighteen  months.  It  could  partly  be  linked  to  a  switching  of  international  trade
financing  from  foreign  to  domestic  sources,  or  partly  to  the  financing  of  summer  crops  in  the
agricultural  sector  that  are  being  harvested  late  this  year.  It  is  also  known  that  bank  credit
extended to local authorities increased by no less than R2.7 billion from 31 December 1996 to
30 June 1997. These explanations, however, do not detract from the need for a curtailment of the
excessive rates of increase in these important monetary aggregates at this juncture.
In light of the unfavourable experiences of a number of other countries in recent
years,  ranging  from  a  well-developed  country  such  as  Japan  to  an  emerging  economy  such  as
Thailand, central bankers elsewhere are increasingly concentrating on restricting the provision of
bank credit for investment in financial assets and property. In a bull market, even at high interest
rates,  borrowers  will  continue  to  borrow  funds  to  buy  assets  that  are  rapidly  appreciating  in
value; and banks will continue to lend because the value of their collateral is rising. This could
easily  cause  a  speculative  bubble  that,  should  it  burst,  can  create  major  difficulties  for  both
lenders and borrowers. In such a situation, it is not unusual for the money supply to continue to
rise, in conflict with the objectives of the monetary authorities, and often also in contrast to the
slowdown in real economic activity. South Africa is hopefully not yet in such a position. In the
implementation  of  monetary  policy  more  than  in  anything  else,  prevention  is  almost  without
exception less costly in terms of a possible  temporary  loss  of  production  and  employment  that
can in any case not be sustained, than the sacrifices that will eventually be required to fight high
inflation once it has become entrenched.
In  the  present  situation,  the  Reserve  Bank  feels  that  a  cautious  monetary  policy
stance remains justified. This has been the approach  throughout  the  past  year  and  undoubtedly
has had a major influence on developments in the money market. The shortage of funds in this
market, as reflected by the amount of accommodation required by banking institutions from the
Reserve  Bank,  first  increased  from  a  daily  average  of  R4.9  billion  in  January  1996  to  R10.6
billion  in  March  1997,  before  it  declined  to  R7.3  billion  in  July  1997.  As  the  recovery  in  the
balance of payments recently gained momentum, the Reserve Bank has been prepared to allow a
natural  downward  adjustment  in  the  money  market  shortage,  paving  the  way  for  a  gradual
decline in money market interest rates.
BIS Review   77/1997
- 7 -
The  Reserve  Bank  raised  its  lending  rate  to  banking  institutions,  the  Bank  rate,
from  15  per  cent  at  the  end  of  1995  to  16  per  cent  in  April  1996,  and  then  to  17  per  cent  in
November 1996. The rate on three-month bankers’ acceptances first increased sharply from 14.6
per  cent  at  the  end  of  December  1995  to  17.0  per  cent  a  year  later,  but  has  since  declined
gradually to 15.0 per cent in the middle of August 1997.
As  the  South  African  financial  markets  are  being  integrated  more  in  the  global
financial system, the comparison between South African and international interest rates takes on
greater  significance.  Too  low  a  level  of  interest  rates  locally  will  eventually  be  reflected  in  a
weak  currency,  and  lead  to  a  further  depreciation  of  the  rand.  Too  high  a  level,  on  the  other
hand,  will  attract  speculative  short-term  capital  from  abroad,  and  lead  to  an  undesirable
appreciation of the currency, and/or an unhealthy expansion of domestic liquidity.
The  sharply  inverted  shape  of  the  yield  curve  in  South  Africa  makes  the
comparison of the level of local interest  rates  with  the  international  markets  more  difficult.  At
the long end of the spectrum, the yield on long-term government bonds in South Africa seems to
be on the low side in real terms. Short-term interest rates, and particularly bank lending rates at
the  other  end  of  the  yield  curve,  seem  to  be  high  in  South  Africa,  reflecting  negative
expectations  on  inflation,  high  risks  involved  in  more  short-term  lending  to  an  already
overborrowed community, and a relatively high demand for funds.
The conservative monetary policy measures applied by the Reserve Bank over the
past eighteen months have paid off by containing the increase in inflation to below 10 per cent,
despite the pressures arising from the depreciation of the rand last year. Measured over a period
of  twelve  months,  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  overall  production  price  index  rose  from  5.3  per
cent in April 1996 to 9.6 per cent in March 1997, but then declined to 7.5 per cent in June 1997.
Movements in the consumer price index followed a similar path and the increase
in consumer prices, measured over twelve months, rose from 5.5 per cent in April 1996 to 9.9
per  cent  in  April  1997,  before  declining  to  8.8  per  cent  in  June  1997.  At  the  time  of  the
depreciation of the rand in 1996, a much higher rate of inflation was  predicted  on  the  basis  of
previous experience.
There is, however, no reason for complacency. As long as the South African rate
of  inflation  remains  significantly  higher  than  that  in  the  major  countries  of  the  world,  the
integration of South Africa into the global financial markets will be slow and turbulent. In view
of  the  complex  interaction  between  the  level  of  interest  rates,  the  rate  of  inflation,  and  the
exchange rate in the process of financial globalisation, disruptive adjustments will be demanded
from  time  to  time.  This  will  continue  to  complicate  decisions  for  investors  and  cross-border
traders. Participation in the process of financial globalisation ultimately requires a high degree of
convergence  between  countries  in  these  basic  financial  aggregates.  The  domestic  levels  for
interest  and  exchange  rates  can  no  longer  be  determined  by  governments  or  central  banks  in
isolation.  These  financial  prices  will  indeed  increasingly  be  driven  by  international  market
consensus.
At this stage, the international market imperative requires of South Africa to bring
its rate of inflation gradually in line with the rest of the world. Alternatively, the country’s drive
towards greater participation as an important borrower  of  funds  in  the  world  financial  markets
will be constrained.
BIS Review   77/1997
- 8 -
Furthermore,  what  is  even  more  important  is  that  the  existing  imbalances  of
income  and  wealth  in  the  domestic  economy  will  further  deteriorate  in  an  inflationary
environment.  It  is  relatively  easy  for  those  more  fortunate  members  of  society  to  protect
themselves  against  inflation  as  they  have  easy  access  to  credit  and  can  spend  more  in  today’s
terms, hoping to repay with depreciated money sometime in the future. Less fortunate members
of the society find that wage increases do not keep up with inflation, especially run-away rising
inflation, and their savings and buying power deteriorate continuously.
Financial market reforms pay dividends
The  major  reforms  in  South  Africa’s  financial  markets  over  the  past  few  years
paid good dividends in the form of substantial increases in the volume of business done through
these  various  markets.  Structural  improvements  introduced  by  the  Johannesburg  Stock
Exchange,  the  Bond  Exchange  of  South  Africa,  and  the  South  African  Futures  Exchange
(SAFEX), were also boosted by the further relaxation of exchange controls.
The value of bonds traded in the Bond Exchange of South Africa increased by 51
per cent in 1996 to exceed the R3,000 billion level. In the first half of 1997, the total turnover in
this market already exceeded R1,700 billion. These higher values included a substantial increase
in transactions effected by non-residents in the market.
The  value  of  shares  traded  in  the  secondary  share  market  increased  from  R63
billion in 1995 to R117 billion in 1996, and to R92 billion for the first half of 1997. As in the
case of the Bond Exchange, non-residents also made an important contribution to the increase in
business  transacted  through  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange.  The  turnover  in  options  and
futures contracts traded through SAFEX performed likewise,  showing  sharp  increases  over  the
past eighteen months.
The  importance  of  the  formal  capital  markets  for  the  economic  development  of
South Africa can be clearly illustrated by two basic statistics. Firstly, over the eighteen months
from the beginning of 1996 up to the middle of 1997, the amount of new capital raised through
issues on  the  Stock  Exchange  and  net  issues  of  fixed  interest-bearing  securities  in  the  primary
bond  market  amounted  to  approximately  R50  billion.  Secondly,  over  the  same  period,  net
purchases  by  non-residents  of  South  African  securities  listed  on  the  exchanges  amounted  to
about R34 billion.
Supportive fiscal policies
The  Minister  of  Finance  applied  further  disciplines  in  his  Budget  proposals  for
1997/98  with  a  commitment  to  reduce  both  government  dissaving  and  the  deficit  before
borrowing during the current fiscal year. In the preceding year net dissaving by government was
equal to 3.1 per cent, and the budget deficit equal to 5.6 per cent of gross domestic product. The
deficit  for  the  current  fiscal  year  is  expected  to  be  reduced  to  4.0  per  cent  of  gross  domestic
product.
The  Government  also  made  an  important  contribution  to  the  official  foreign
reserves of the country by way of two bond issues in international capital markets during  June
1997. The total proceeds from these two loans amounted to R3.8 billion.
A few smaller and one major privatisation transaction – the sale of an equity stake
of 30 per cent in Telkom – raised more than R6 billion over the past year.  Part  of  these  funds
BIS Review   77/1997
- 9 -
was  used  to  contain  total  government  debt  to  a  level  of  about  56  per  cent  of  gross  domestic
product.
The better harmonisation of monetary and fiscal policies over the past year made
a  major  contribution  to  the  success  achieved  with  the  objective  of  restoring  overall  financial
stability after the foreign exchange market disruption of February last year.
Financial co-operation in Southern Africa
The Committee of Governors of the Central Banks of the twelve members of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) met twice during the past twelve months to
discuss matters of financial co-operation. The Secretariat of  the  Committee  within  the  Reserve
Bank  has  made  good  progress  in  the  compilation  of  a  computerised  data  base  of  financial
statistics  of  the  region  and  information  on  the  functions  and  responsibilities  of  the  twelve
participating central banks.
Officials from all the central banks participated in a number of courses presented
by the Reserve Bank’s Training Institute, and a course was again presented for bank regulators
and supervisors in the East and Southern Africa Banking Supervisors Group (ESAF). A special
study is being undertaken with  the  support  of  the  World  Bank  on  the  development  of  national
payment  and  clearing  systems  with  a  view  to  the  eventual  establishment  of  a  cross-border
payment and settlement system for all SADC countries.
Over the next year, the co-ordination of financial co-operation in the region will
be extended also to include the activities of commercial (private) banks and stock exchanges.
A need for more flexible monetary policy operations
Developments  over  the  past  year  revealed  a  need  for  greater  flexibility  in  the
market  for  short-term  funds.  The  transformation  in  the  South  African  financial  markets  since
1994,  and  in  particular  the  further  integration  into  the  global  financial  system,  will  in  future
require  more  prompt  action  and  decisive  direction  for  movements  in  financial  asset  prices,
interest rates and exchange rates.
Part of the explanation for the rigidities in the South African  money  market  lies
with  the  present  system  used  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  provide  accommodation  to  banking
institutions at the discount window. Banking institutions have unlimited access at the Bank rate
to  overnight  loans  from  the  discount  window,  provided  they  have  at  their  disposal  acceptable
collateral. The Bank accepts Treasury bills, Land Bank bills, South African Reserve Bank paper
and  Government  bonds,  all  with  an  outstanding  maturity  of  less  than  91  days,  as  security  for
such  overnight  loans.  A  second-tier  facility  is  also  available,  but  at  a  penalty  rate  of  75
percentage  points  above  the  Bank  rate  against  similar  securities  as  collateral,  but  with
outstanding maturities of between 91 days and three years.
The  Bank  rate  is,  of  course,  changed  from  time  to  time  to  adapt  to  changes  in
underlying financial market conditions. To make the system work effectively, the  market  must
react  with  sensitivity  to  changes  in  underlying  demand  and  supply  conditions,  and  must  also
emit clear and comprehensible signals to the authorities. For example, a rise  in  market  interest
rates for interbank funds, various maturities of negotiable certificates of deposit, or for bankers’
acceptances  to  the  Bank  rate  level  or  above,  will  provide  a  clear  indication  of  a  need  for  an
increase in the Bank rate. Alternatively, when a Bank rate increase is regarded as undesirable at
BIS Review   77/1997
- 10 -
that point in time, the Reserve Bank will have to use other means at its disposal to create more
liquidity (money) in order to reduce the pressure on interest rates.
Over the past year, major changes took place in South Africa’s underlying money
market conditions, but money market interest rates were slow to react to these changes at a time
when the Bank was looking for signals from the market, while the market sought guidance from
the  Bank  on  the  direction  of  interest  rates.  It  is  clearly  necessary  to  find  a  way  out  of  this
uncertain situation and to ensure that greater flexibility will be introduced in the working of the
money  market.  Inflexible  markets,  be  they  for  goods,  services,  labour  or  financing,  invariably
lead  to  incorrect  pricing,  inefficient  allocation  of  resources  and,  ultimately,  unnecessary  and
costly losses in output and employment.
In  March  1998,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  start  introducing  a  new  upgraded
electronically-driven  National  Payment  System  to  provide  for  a  daily  automated  settlement  of
outstanding  interbank  positions.  The  system  is  planned  to  be  extended  by  September  1998  to
effect intraday  settlements  on  a  gross  basis  for  large  transactions.  The  introduction  of  the  new
versatile  payment  and  settlement  system  will  also  provide  a  good  opportunity  for  the  Reserve
Bank  to  reconsider  the  existing  accommodation  arrangements  between  the  Bank  and  private
banking institutions.
At this stage, the Bank would like to give notice of the proposed introduction of a
new,  more  flexible  accommodation  facility,  to  be  created  in  the  form  of  regular  repurchase
transactions between the Reserve Bank and its banking sector clients. The private banks will be
offered the opportunity to tender on a regular basis for central bank funds through the repurchase
facility, and accordingly be given more scope to manage their own liquidity positions better.
Furthermore, the purpose of the minimum cash reserve accounts that banks must
maintain with  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be  extended  to  serve  also  as  operational  accounts  for  the
regular  settlement  of  clearing  account  balances.  An  averaging  principle  will  be  introduced,  in
terms of which each bank will have to ensure that the average daily balance in its account over a
monthly  period  will  comply  with  the  prescribed  minimum  cash  reserve  requirements.  This
should enable the banks, during the course of the month, to use their minimum reserve balances
for settlement purposes.
The present discount window facility will still be retained to provide banks with a
further source of funds for the management of their liquidity positions. It is envisaged, however,
that  the  Bank  rate  for  such  loans  will  be  at  a  substantial  premium  to  the  fluctuating  effective
interest rate as established in the regular repurchase transactions.
The  Department  of  Finance  is  planning  to  implement  new  arrangements  for  the
primary  issue  of,  and  the  secondary  market-making  in,  Government  bonds  through  appointed
private  market  securities  dealers.  The  transfer  of  these  functions  from  the  Reserve  Bank  to
securities  dealers  will  strengthen  the  Reserve  Bank’s  ability  to  pursue  open-market  operations
more vigorously for monetary policy purposes.
The  Bank  is  now  in  the  process  of  preparing  a  discussion  document  on  the
proposed  new  accommodation  procedures.  This  document  will  be  distributed  to  the  banking
community  and  to  other  interested  parties  before  the  end  of  October  for  comments  and
participation in the preparation of the new system.
BIS Review   77/1997
- 11 -
It  must  not  be  expected,  however,  that  the  introduction  of  the  new  system  will
lead  to  a  permanently  lower  level  of  interest  rates.  The  Reserve  Bank  may  well  in  future  use
interest rates more frequently and extensively to pursue its overriding objective of protecting the
value  of  the  currency.  The  Bank  will  nevertheless  have  to  ensure  that  interest  rates  will  be
maintained at a level that will be consistent with all the other objectives of monetary policy, and
with developments in other economic aggregates.
Internal administration of the Bank
With  the  appointment  of  Mr.  James  Cross  as  Deputy  Governor  from  1  January
1997, all vacancies in the top management of the Bank have now been filled again for the first
time  since  July  1995.  The  total  staff  complement  of  the  Bank  varied  around  1,800  during  the
year  ended  31  March  1997.  At  the  same  time,  further  progress  was  made  with  the  Bank’s
transformation  process  when  more  than  70  per  cent  of  the  136  new  appointments  to  the  Bank
was drawn from previously under-represented groups.
The  Bank’s  international  activities  were  affected  to  an  important  extent  by  the
currency  turmoils  of  last  year.  The  International  Banking  Department,  in  particular,  was
frustrated  by  these  developments,  which  temporarily  disrupted  the  longer-term  programme  of
increasing  the  country’s  foreign  reserves  and  reducing  the  role  of  the  Bank  in  the  forward
foreign exchange market. These programmes are, however, now back on course, and the recent
successful conclusion of a syndicated loan facility for a total amount of US$ 1.75 billion served
to strengthen the Bank’s foreign liquidity position further.
Good progress was made by the Information Technology  Department  to  prepare
the  way  for  the  introduction  of  a  new  real-time  gross  settlement  system  within  the  banking
sector.  The  substructures  for  this  ambitious  new  programme  are  now  in  place,  and,  as  already
indicated, the first phase will go live in March next year. Precautions were also taken to ensure
that  all  the  Bank’s  electronic  data  processing  systems  will  be  able  to  cope  with  the  technical
“Year 2000” problem with the change-over to the next millennium.
The  Economics  Department  is  likewise  involved  in  guiding  the  Bank  into  the
fast-expanding, worldwide electronic-communication system. South Africa was one of the first
countries to subscribe to the Special Data  Dissemination  Standard  (SDDS)  of  the  International
Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  in  August  1996,  and  is  now  one  of  only  eight  countries  that  provide
electronic  links  (hyperlinks)  from  the  IMF’s  SDDS  to  the  more  comprehensive  sites  of
important South African economic data and information. In March 1997, the Quarterly Bulletin
of the Reserve Bank was released for the first time in its entirety with text, graphs and statistical
tables on the Internet.
The  Exchange  Control  Department  is  continuing  with  the  task  of  gradually
phasing out all the remaining exchange controls. The concessions made to private individuals to
invest  limited  amounts  abroad  as  from  1  July  1997,  and  all  the  other  exchange  control
relaxations  over  the  past  year,  were  implemented  smoothly  and  efficiently.  Subject  to  the
approval  of  the  Minister  of  Finance,  the  phasing  out  of  the  remaining  exchange  controls  will
continue in an orderly manner.
During 
the  former  Management  Services  and  Administration
Departments  were  merged  into  a  new  Corporate  Services  Department  as  part  of  an  internal
rationalisation  programme.  A  new  Organisation  Development  Department  was  created  to  give
the  year, 
BIS Review   77/1997
- 12 -
more  specialised  attention 
development, and the co-ordination of strategic planning and development.
the  Bank’s 
transformation  programme,  human  resource
to 
With the rapid increase in the number of foreign banks operating in South Africa,
and with the establishment in many other countries of branches, subsidiaries and representative
offices of South African banks, the resources of the Bank Supervision Department came under
pressure. The Office of the Registrar nevertheless also gave special attention to specific problem
areas  such  as  illegal  deposit-taking  operations,  micro-lending  activities,  deposit  insurance
schemes and regional co-operation in Southern Africa.
Other  administrative  functions  of  the  Bank,  such  as  note  and  coin  distribution,
protective  services  and  the  branch  network  are  being  taxed  by  the  ever-increasing  need  for
greater vigilance against fraud, burglaries and violent criminal attacks.
The Bank relies heavily on its Internal Audit  Department  for  the  early  detection
of any possible irregular activities, as well as for sound risk management. A major contribution
is made in this area by the Audit Subcommittee of the Board, and also by the external auditors.
In  retrospect,  the  Bank  can  be  grateful  for  the  quality  of  its  staff,  and  for  their
loyalty  to  the  task  of  the  Bank  as  demonstrated  again  by  the  excellence  of  services  rendered
during the past year.
Concluding remarks
In its Macroeconomic Strategy for Growth,  Employment  and  Redistribution,  the
Government defined the role of monetary policy as follows:
“The  main  objective  of  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  be  the  maintenance  of
financial  stability  and  the  reduction  of  the  inflation  rate.  Positive  real  interest  rates  are  a
minimum condition for overall financial stability. Low inflation is an important requirement for
higher  economic  growth,  the  creation  of  employment  opportunities  and  a  more  equitable
distribution of income.”
Looking  back,  the  past  year  was  particularly  challenging  for  macroeconomic
management. The Reserve Bank can be satisfied that it has been relatively successful in making
its specialised contribution to the attainment of the Government’s overall economic objectives as
set  out  in  GEAR.  After  major  disturbances  in  the  market  for  foreign  exchange  early  in  1996,
stability has been restored. The rate of inflation, which accelerated to nearly 10 per cent by April
1997, is now abating. To achieve these results required a consistent restrictive monetary policy
with relatively high interest rates. As the monetary policy objectives are being consolidated and
other  programmes  of  GEAR,  for  example  to  increase  total  saving  in  the  economy,  are  being
implemented  with  greater  effect,  the  way  will  be  paved  for  lower  interest  rates  on  a  more
durable basis.
The  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  towards  the  attainment  of
maximum  economic  development  and  the  creation  of  more  employment  opportunities  is,  after
all, limited to the intermediate goal of maintaining a stable  financial  environment.  Attempts  to
use monetary policy for wider purposes or, more directly, to solve problems in the real economic
sphere are bound to lead to an inflationary dead end. However sincere intentions might be, the
inevitable result will eventually be lower growth and even less employment.
BIS Review   77/1997
- 13 -
The policy of persisting with essential monetary disciplines in South Africa at this
difficult stage of general transformation is understandably being opposed in some circles, due to
adjustment  fatigue  and  frustrated  expectations.  It  is  imperative,  however,  for  the  sake  of
attaining higher economic growth of a more durable nature, to ensure overall financial stability
that  will  also  make  access  to  the  world  financial  markets  easier  for  South  African  borrowers.
This  task  demands  the  continuous  implementation  of  monetary  policies  that  will  create  a
financial  environment  with  low  inflation,  a  sound  banking  system,  and  well-functioning
financial markets.
I  wish  to  place  on  record  my  appreciation  to  Minister  Trevor  Manuel,  Deputy
Minister Gill Marcus, Ms. Maria Ramos, Director-General of Finance, and also all the officials
in the Department of Finance, for their continued support  and  close  co-operation  over  the  past
year. I thank my colleagues on the Board of the Bank for their undivided loyalty during difficult
times.  Finally,  thanks  are  also  due  to  the  three  Deputy  Governors  and  staff  of  the  Bank  for
keeping  the  many  activities  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  at  a  level  where  the  Bank  has
come to be respected as one of the most efficient institutions of its kind in the world today.
BIS Review   77/1997
