Mr. Yam looks at Asian banking in a regional and global context  Address by
the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Mr.  Joseph  C.K.  Yam,  at  the
ADB-IIF Forum on Developing Asian Financial Markets held in Fukuoka, Japan, on 10/5/97.
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  this  morning  to  address  you  on  the  subject  of  Asian
banking in a regional and global context. I will be speaking particularly about banks in the East
Asia region.
The importance of banking stability
2.  There  is  increasing  international  recognition  of  the  importance  of  a  sound
banking  system  in  promoting  macroeconomic  stability,  sustainable  economic  growth  and  the
efficient intermediation between savings and investment. The last few months have seen a series
of initiatives by international financial institutions and groupings to devise principles, standards
and strategies for the promotion of financial stability. While these initiatives have been directed
principally  at  emerging  markets,  they  also  have  application  to  the  more  developed  markets
which  have  been  by  no  means  immune  from  banking  problems  in  recent  years.  A  number  of
Asian  economies,  including  Hong  Kong,  have  participated  in  this  work.  This  is  a  practical
recognition  that  the  setting  of  international  regulatory  standards  must  be  a  broadly-based
process, in keeping with the global nature of today’s financial markets.
3. I do not need to belabour the point about the debilitating and disruptive effects
which banking problems can have on economic and monetary management. The need to restore
the capital of failed banks can impose a heavy fiscal burden. In many cases this has amounted to
10%  or  more  of  GDP.  Monetary  policy  may  be  side-tracked  by  the  need  on  the  part  of  the
authorities  when  determining  interest  rates  to  take  account  of  the  possible  implications  on
banking stability and on other, often more political, policy objectives.
4. Furthermore, in nursing weak banks, the main priority for these banks is likely
to  be  to  repair  the  damage  to  their  balance  sheets  and  they  may  have  little  appetite  for  new
lending. This leads to the “credit crunch” phenomenon where even good-quality borrowers find
it  more  difficult  to  obtain  loans  when  banking  stability  has  been  undermined.  As  the  Japanese
experience has shown, this weakened ability of banks to lend can frustrate the authorities’ efforts
to get the economy moving again after a downturn.
The role of bank borrowing in funding growth
5.  This  possible  impairment  of  the  intermediation  role  of  banks  would  be  a
particular cause for concern in Asia where the banks have played a substantial role in financing
economic  growth.  By  the  standards  of  developed  economies,  this  role  for  banks  in  Asia  is
significantly more important than that of other channels of financial intermediation. This partly
reflects  the  lack  of  highly  developed  bond  markets  in  the  region,  which  in  itself  is  also  a
reflection of the predominance of the banks.
6. Let me digress a little in this connection. There is clear consensus on the need
for encouraging the development of bond markets in Asia. Like a number of other central banks,
we in the Hong Kong Monetary Authority have taken a number of initiatives in this direction in
Hong Kong in recent years. We now have a fairly liquid bond market  with  a  sophisticated  but
user-friendly market infrastructure. We have also taken initiatives in  the  regional  dimension  to
promote the  networking  of  Asian  bond  markets  through  encouraging  bilateral  linkages  of  debt
clearing systems.
BIS Review   55/1997
- 2 -
7. It is hoped that these efforts could help the expansion of the role of the Asian
bond  markets  and  hence  facilitate  more  effective  financial  intermediation  in  the  domestic,
regional and global context. The region’s investment needs over the next decades are huge. The
World Bank has estimated that private gross domestic fixed investment will amount to a total of
US$ 5 trillion over the ten years to the year 2004, a large part of it associated with infrastructural
development1. The share of bonds in financing these needs is projected to grow from only 9% to
26% by 2004.
8.  I  hope  this  can  be  realized  for  this  would  enable  the  banks’  role  in  Asia  to
consolidate into more prudent proportions at least in the eyes of the regulators. It would help to
achieve a more diversified and therefore a more stable framework for financial intermediation.
Indeed,  on  the  World  Bank’s  projections,  the  share  of  bank  borrowing  is  expected  to  decline
commensurately from 40% to 30% over the same period.
9. But turning back to banking in the region, even if this scenario is realized, and
there must of course be much uncertainty on this, the amount that banks would be called upon to
finance  would  remain  very  substantial  in  absolute  terms.  For  the  foreseeable  future,  therefore,
the banks will still be playing a key role in mobilizing savings in the region and channeling this
into  investment.  And  this  makes  it  even  more  important  that  banking  systems  in  the  region
remain  healthy.  Of  course,  foreign  banks  will  play  an  important  financing  role,  in  particular
those  based  in  Hong  Kong  which  is  the  major  centre  in  the  region  for  the  arranging  of
syndicated  loans.  But  within  most  of  the  banking  systems  of  the  region  it  is  the  local  banks
which predominate in terms of share of assets.
The position of Asian banks
10. So  let  us  take  a  look  at  the  current  position  of  the  Asian  banks.  It  is  in  fact
very difficult to generalize because the banking systems in the region are not homogeneous. But
certainly  if  we  look  at  what  the  World  Bank  has  called  the  eight  “high  performing  Asian
countries”, the Asian banks have been at the heart of the Asian success story2. This is partly due
to  the  emphasis  laid  by  governments  on  trying  to  ensure  the  stability  of  banks,  through
prudential  supervision  and  other  means,  to  encourage  confidence  among  savers.  While  there
have been periods of financial distress in individual banking systems in the region in past years,
such incidents have generally been fewer and less severe than in other emerging markets. Asian
banks  were  able  to  meet  the  Basle  Committee’s  recommended  8%  minimum  capital  adequacy
ratio with comparative ease. Moreover, despite the fact that barriers to entry in some economies
have  protected  the  Asian  banks  from  the  full  forces  of  competition,  they  have  managed  to
survive on lower interest  margins  and  achieve  a  higher  level  of  operating  efficiency  than  their
counterparts in other regions.
11.  The  Asian  banks  have  of  course  benefited  from  operating  in  the  fastest
growing region in the world, and one where the macroeconomic environment in terms of GDP
growth, inflation and exchange rates  has  been  much  less  volatile  than  in,  say,  Latin  America3.
More  recently,  however,  growth  in  some  economies  in  the  region  has  slowed.  I  hope  that  this
will turn out  to  be  a  cyclical,  rather  than  a  structural,  phenomenon.  At  any  rate,  the  economic
environment is currently somewhat less benign, and this has brought into sharper focus some of
the challenges which banks in the region are now facing.
                                                  
1
2
3
The Emerging Asian Bond Market, World Bank 1995.
The East Asian Miracle, World Bank 1993.
BIS Annual Report 1996.
BIS Review   55/1997
The challenges faced by Asian banks
- 3 -
12.  Let  me  attempt  to  describe  what  these  challenges  are.  There  are  obviously
many, but I will focus on four main categories, namely:
global integration of financial markets;
financial liberalization and increased competition;
maintenance of asset quality;
innovation and technological change.
Global integration of financial markets
13. The trend of global integration of financial  markets  is  clear.  The  increase  in
capital  flows  into  the  emerging  markets  has  been  one  of  the  dominant  features  of  the  1990s.
During  the  period  1990-95,  inflows  into  the  Asian  economies  amounted  to  US$  360  billion4.
The  effect  of  this  has  been  to  bind  individual  economies  even  more  tightly  into  the  global
market  place.  While  this  has  brought  major  benefits  to  the  recipient  economies  in  terms  of
encouraging increased investment and development of capital markets, it has also left them more
exposed  to  external  shocks  and  loss  of  confidence.  The  macroeconomic  instability  caused  by
large-scale inflows and by their subsequent reversal will clearly have an adverse impact on the
banking system. The risk of this is less if inflows take the form of more stable longer-term direct
investment. To a significant extent, this has been the case for the Asian economies. But for some
economies  short-term  inflows  have  been  relatively  large,  and  there  are  doubts  about  their
sustainability.
14. Inflows of hot money also create more direct problems for the banks as well
as affecting the macroeconomic environment. In particular, they will tend to add to the liquidity
of the banking system and encourage expansion of lending. Rapid growth in lending such as we
have  witnessed  in  a  number  of  Asian  economies  can  be  a  warning  sign  because  it  tends  to  be
associated with a lowering of credit standards as banks lend to customers whose creditworthiness
is more marginal. Moreover, much of this lending may find its way into the property market and
stock market, adding to the upward pressure on asset prices arising from the inflows themselves.
Reversal of inflows or a slowing down of the economy, as in Thailand, thus exposes the banks to
both credit risk and market risk as asset prices fall.
15.  With  large  capital  inflows,  banks  may  also  find  themselves  incurring
substantial net foreign currency liabilities. They will thus additionally be exposed to substantial
foreign exchange risks if the domestic currency weakens.
Financial liberalization and increased competition
16. Associated with, and leading to the global integration of financial markets is
the trend of financial liberalization and increased competition. The trend has increasingly freed
banks  from  direct  controls  on  interest  rates  and  on  their  permitted  business  activities  in  many
Asian economies. We can see this in banking systems as far apart as those in  China  where  the
process  of  commercialization  of  the  banking  sector  is  now  underway  and  in  Japan  which  is
planning  its  own  version  of  Big  Bang  in  the  next  few  years.  This  new  freedom  can  bring
increased opportunities for the banks and can be a powerful incentive to increased efficiency in
                                                  
4
International Capital Markets, IMF 1996.
BIS Review   55/1997
- 4 -
the banking sector. But it can also bring new risks if the  banks  do  not  use  their  new  freedoms
well - in particular if they do not develop the credit skills and risk management techniques which
are required in the kind of lending boom that may develop after deregulation.
17.  The  pressures  on  the  existing  banks  is  increased  if  liberalization  also  allows
new entrants into the market. Competition in some Asian economies has already intensified as a
result  of  the  granting  of  new  domestic  banking  licences  and  more  liberal  policies  on  the
admission of foreign banks. The need to meet WTO obligations will give further impetus to this
process.  But  while  the  long-term  impact  on  the  efficiency  of  the  banking  system  may  be
favourable, the short-term impact can be to narrow interest margins and erode  franchise  value.
This can drive the local banks to take on more high risk business.
18.  I  should  stress,  however,  that  the  answer  to  this  dilemma  is  not  to  stop  or
reverse the process of deregulation. There are examples around the region of bad debt problems
embedded  in  banks  which  are  either  owned  by  the  government  or,  even  if  they  are  privately
owned,  have  been  granting  policy  loans  on  behalf  of  the  government.  Such  banks  should  be
encouraged to develop their own credit judgment in order to play an effective role in the process
of credit allocation in the economy. So liberalization is the right approach. It must, however, be
properly handled if the problems of the banking sector are not to intensify during the transition
to  a  more  commercialized  system.  In  particular,  the  supervisory  framework  should  be
strengthened in advance of liberalization.
Maintenance of asset quality
19. Let me turn to the challenge of the maintenance of asset quality. This applies
across a wide  spectrum  in  Asia  from  banks  that  are  emerging  from  tight  state  control  to  those
that  operate  on  a  fully  commercial  basis.  A  particular  focus  of  concern,  as  I  have  already
indicated, is that banks in some economies may have lent too freely to booming property sectors
which  are  now  suffering  from  over-supply.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  fears  will  be
realized. A number of supervisory authorities around the region have tried  to  take  measures  to
limit their banks’ exposure to the property sector. This is a sensible move, though the difficulties
of enforcing limits should not be underestimated.
20.  However,  property  lending  is  not  the  only  problem  area.  In  Korea,  for
example, the slowdown in export demand in industries such as semiconductors and in economic
growth has exposed fragility in those companies which have over-extended themselves by taking
on too much debt. Banks which have become used to years of buoyant economic growth may be
ill-equipped  to  deal  with  these  problems.  There  is  also  a  perception  that  in  some  Asian
economies  the  accounting  rules  and  loan  classification  systems  are  not  telling  the  whole  story
about the scale of the bad debt problem. Lack of transparency can result in delay in tackling the
problem and erode public confidence in the soundness of the banking system.
Innovation and technological change
21.  Asset  quality  is  thus  one  main  issue  which  Asian  banks  have  to  tackle.  But
one of the results of globalization is that even banks in relatively undeveloped banking systems
are now having to cope with the challenge of product innovation and new technology. This can
accelerate  the  transformation  of  such  banking  systems:  modern  computer  systems  can  be
installed and banks can make the jump straight from cash to smart cards. The downside is that
banks may have less time to build up the skills properly to use the new technology and the new
products  which  their  counterparts  in  developed  banking  systems  have  taken  many  years  to
BIS Review   55/1997
- 5 -
acquire. Derivatives are a case in point. While the derivatives markets in the  region  other  than
Tokyo are still quite small, these products are certainly being sold to, and in some cases  being
traded by, local banks in the region; and a number of them have suffered losses as a result.
22.  Looking  further  ahead,  the  opportunities  provided  by  new  technology  will
pose  important  strategic  challenges  for  the  banks.  To  what  extent,  for  example,  should  they
invest in new delivery mechanisms such as telephone or internet banking? These channels offer
the potential to  bring  down  dramatically  the  cost  of  transactions  compared  with  the  traditional
branch network. Obviously this will depend on the availability  of  telephone  lines  and  personal
computers.  There  is  also  the  crucial  issue  of  public  acceptance  of  the  new  technology.  Such
issues  mean  that  a  wholesale  shift  to  electronic  banking  will  not  happen  overnight.  However,
banks would be unwise to ignore the longer-term opportunities as well as the threats. If the new
delivery  mechanisms  do  develop,  this  will  result  in  increased  competition  including  from  new
entrants as barriers to entry are reduced. The potential for foreign banks to provide cross-border
banking services, such as private banking, through the internet will also increase. In other words,
foreign banks may no longer need to be physically located in a particular country in order to tap
its market. This will pose interesting challenges to regulators as well as the banks.
The response to the challenges
23.  What  then  should  be  the  response  of  banks  to  these  challenges?  Despite  the
diversity of banking systems around the Asian region, I think it is possible to draw some broad
conclusions.
24.  The  key  point  is,  I  think,  for  banks  to  realize  that,  even  if  they  are  state-
owned, they are ultimately responsible for their own destiny. The Commercial Banking Law of
the  People’s  Republic  of  China  sums  up  the  point  well  in  its  Article  4.  To  quote  an  English
translation:
“A commercial bank operates independently, takes up responsibility  for  all  risks
that it may encounter and for its own profits and losses it may bear, and exercises self-regulating
mechanisms on the management principle of economic efficiency, safety and liquidity.”
25.  What  this  means  is  that  the  board  of  directors  and  senior  management  of
banks have the main responsibility to ensure that effective systems of internal governance are in
place to plan for the future, to identify and manage the risks to which they are exposed and to
control the operations of the bank on a day-to-day basis. I believe that this point is appreciated
around the region - from our contacts with  fellow  supervisors,  we  know  that  in  many  banking
systems there is a heightened  awareness  of  the  importance  of  sound  risk  management.  But  the
difficulty is in turning this into actual changes  in  behaviour,  which  requires  great  efforts  to  be
devoted to the training of staff, for example in credit skills, as well as more fundamental changes
in culture in some banks.
26.  This  change  in  culture  may  require  some  banks  to  wean  themselves  off
property lending which is sometimes seen as an easy option, given that it is based on collateral
and  on  expectations  of  ever-rising  property  values.  This  can  prove  to  be  a  fallacy,  as  the
Japanese example shows only too well. Banks need therefore to develop a broadly-based lending
business where the borrower’s ability to repay is the first consideration and collateral is there as
the  second  line  of  defence.  More  generally,  it  will  usually  be  sensible  for  banks  to  try  to
diversify their business into areas which offer the ability to earn fee income and thus reduce their
BIS Review   55/1997
- 6 -
dependence on the interest-rate cycle. I hasten to add, however, that this should only be done if
the necessary systems and controls are in place.
27. In some cases, the changes required by banks to meet the challenges of a more
competitive  environment  may  be  too  great  for  them  to  meet  on  their  own.  Mergers  may  be
required to produce fewer and stronger banks, and I am aware that in some countries this process
is being given official encouragement.
28.  This  points  to  the  fact  that  the  regulators  also  have  their  part  to  play  in
encouraging  the  process  of  change  in  banks.  While  the  prime  responsibility  for  prudent
management of banks does rest with the banks themselves, the authorities do have a role to play
in ensuring that effective systems of supervision are in place. These should include incentives to
discourage  the  excessive  taking  of  risk  by  banks,  including  that  owners  should  be  required  to
have  a  significant  amount  of  capital  at  risk  and  to  bear  the  losses  should  a  bank  fail.  The
infrastructure of business laws, accounting rules and public disclosure requirements must also be
conducive  to  prudent  management  and  market  transparency.  Payments  systems  must  be
enhanced to reduce the risk of systemic instability.
29.  These  are  all  areas  where  progress  is  being  made  throughout  the  region.  I
detect  few  signs  of  complacency  among  my  fellow  regulators  or  of  a  tendency  to  rest  on  past
successes. We all recognize that banking stability is something that requires constant attention to
keep  up  with  changes  in  the  economic  environment  and  with  market  developments.  There  is
also, I believe, a strong appreciation of  the  need  to  work  together  to  promote  stability.  This  is
shown by the regional initiatives, through groupings such as EMEAP, to promote cooperation in
supervision  and  in  other  financial  sector  issues.  International  institutions  such  as  the  Asian
Development  Bank  also  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  encouraging  financial  market
development.  I  am  sure  that  this  Forum  will  be  helpful  in  addressing  some  of  the  issues
involved, and I am grateful to the ADB and the IIF for organizing the event and for giving me
the opportunity to speak.
BIS Review   55/1997
