Mr.  Heikensten  talks  about  monetary  policy  and  the  Swedish  economy
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Lars Heikensten, on the occasion
of the 1997 Money and Capital Markets Day arranged by The Association of Local Authorities
and the Federation of County Councils on 13/3/97.
Today I shall be considering this field in terms of three topical issues:
- First there is the path of inflation in recent years. In this context I shall dwell on
the  significance  of  transitory  effects,  not  just  for  recent  price  tendencies  but  also  more  in
principle.
-  Next  comes  the  issue  of  employment.  What  can  monetary  policy  do  to  help
create new jobs in Sweden?
-  The  third  matter  is  the  rule  system  for  monetary  policy.  What  is  the  point  of
delegating  the  management  of  monetary  policy  and  the  task  of  establishing  low  inflation  to  a
central bank? In this connection I will also look at various proposals that are being discussed at
present for amending the rules for the Riksbank.
Inflation and monetary policy
Price  stability  is  the  Riksbank’s  paramount  objective,  specified  in  the  target  of
keeping the increase in the consumer price index to 2 per  cent,  with  a  tolerance  interval  of – 1
percentage point. There is a time lag of one to two years before a monetary policy measure has
its full effect on inflation. Our discussion should therefore focus on future inflation. But first I
want to say something about inflation in the past year.
Inflation and the transitory effects
The CPI is used by the Riksbank to target inflation mainly because it is familiar,
published monthly with a short time lag and seldom has to be revised. However, using the CPI
as a target variable is liable to face monetary policy with explanatory problems. The past year is
a  case  in  point.  The  low  rate  of  inflation  stemmed  mainly  from  transitory  effects;  the
consolidation  of  government  finance  and  increased  confidence  in  economic  policy  helped  to
strengthen  the  exchange  rate.  During  1996  it  proved  possible  to  lower  the  instrumental  rates
almost 5 percentage points.
Altogether, in 1996 decreased interest costs and the stronger exchange rate had a
downward effect on the CPI of around 1 percentage point.
In some countries the inflation target is assessed in terms of the CPI with various
components excluded, for example indirect taxes and subsidies or mortgage interest costs. It may
then  be  asked  whether  the  CPI  is  the  most  appropriate  target  variable  and  whether  some
measurement of underlying inflation might be preferable.
An advantage of focusing on a single underlying indicator is that it might help the
Riksbank  in  its  contacts  with  the  general  public  and  make  monetary  policy  more  transparent.
Analysis and debate would be concentrated on factors that monetary policy influences.
BIS Review   32/1997
- 2 -
This, however, presupposes the existence of an underlying yardstick that can take
every  conceivable  transitory  effect  into  account.  Such  measurements  are  difficult  to  construct.
Specifying  all  the  circumstances  that  have  to  be  considered  so  as  to  obtain  the  best  picture  of
underlying inflation and doing this in advance is not a simple matter. Using underlying inflation
also has the drawback that essential information about the inflation process may be overlooked.
For example, changes in import prices are a part of the domestic inflation process because they
affect price setting in trade.
In  the  present  state  of  our  art,  the  drawbacks  of  changing  to  a  measure  of
underlying  inflation  for  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  are  greater  than  the  advantages.  As  I
have indicated, however, the CPI may be markedly affected by transitory effects. It is therefore
important to monitor measurements of underlying inflation that have been stable over time. The
path of the underlying inflation process is an important factor in the Riksbank’s monetary policy
decisions.
Gradual recovery
In  growth  terms,  1996  was  weaker  than  1994  and  1995.  The  slowdown  mainly
came from marked stock reductions and a contraction of public sector operations. But even the
growth  of  final  demand  in  the  private  sector  tended  to  slacken  in  1996.  There  are  now  clear
signs  of  an  economic  recovery;  the  volume  growth  of  exports  remains  high,  along  with
indications that a stronger increase in private consumption is on the way.
What, then, will  be  inflation’s  path  in  the  years  ahead?  The  Riksbank  considers
that at present the Swedish economy has unutilised  resources  and  even  if  growth  does  pick  up
during 1997 and 1998, it is unlikely that these resources will be activated to such an extent that
the inflation target is in danger.
The scenario in the December inflation report involves a gradual increase in  the
rate of inflation in the coming years. The main explanation for this upward movement is that the
transitory effects - from lower interest rates and a stronger exchange rate - which kept inflation
down in 1996 will be fading. The registered rate of CPI inflation is then expected  to  approach
inflation’s underlying trend, which in the years ahead is judged to be more or less in line with
the inflation target.
Lower inflation propensity
The  new  price  and  other  economic  information  in  recent  months  reinforces  the
impression  that  price  pressure  is  low.  To  this  extent,  the  conditions  for  fulfilling  the  inflation
target have improved. On the other hand, a weaker exchange rate has already tended to stimulate
activity.
The  outlook  for  inflation  and  the  rapid  progress  in  consolidating  government
finance  suggest  that  there  is  room  for  a  fall  in  long  bond  rates.  Underlying  economic  factors
indicate, moreover, that the recent depreciation has left the krona undervalued, so that it should
appreciate.
How  should  the  exchange  rate  be  assessed  in  connection  with  monetary  policy
decisions?  According  to  experience  in  recent  years,  the  impact  of  a  depreciation  on  domestic
prices is limited. But domestic demand has been weak. Provided there is stable confidence in the
policy  for  price  stability,  price  effects  from  a  weakening  of  the  exchange  rate  are  generally
BIS Review   32/1997
- 3 -
transitory.  A  depreciation  is  a  problem  for  monetary  policy  only  when  it  has  a  lasting
expansionary effect or if inflation expectations rise.
The  economy’s  inflation  propensity,  which  seems  to  have  decreased  in  recent
years,  is  an  important  factor  to  consider  when  assessing  the  threat  from  future  inflation.  The
term inflation propensity stands here for the structure of the inflation process, which is liable to
be changed by various factors. If stronger competition, for example, in certain segments of trade
results in lower price increases than before when consumption is rising, then the economy has a
lower  inflation  propensity.  Examples  of  factors  that  may  have  helped  to  reduce  the  inflation
propensity  are  the  fall  in  market  expectations  of  inflation  and  the  higher  acceptance  of  the
Riksbank’s  inflation  target.  Another  cause  of  a  decreased  inflation  propensity  can  be  lower
inflation as such. Price comparisons are easier for households and firms when  inflation  is  low.
Price increases are more visible and producers have more  difficulty  in  raising  prices  without  a
relative price shift. The situation in this respect is one of the main issues that the Riksbank will
have to evaluate. We shall be returning to this later in the year.
All  in  all,  the  picture  that  emerges  of  the  Swedish  economy  suggests  that  the
monetary stance is well balanced. Major changes have occurred in the past year, for instance in
the  repo  rate.  Time  is  needed  to  assess  their  effects.  This  also  motivates  a  cautious  line  in
monetary policy.
2.  Employment and what monetary policy can do
The  low  inflation  in  the  past  few  years  has  been  accompanied  by  respectable
growth. Since 1994 economic growth has averaged 2.7 per cent a year, which is higher than the
normal  rate  in  recent  decades.  Given  the  low  capacity  utilisation  initially,  the  high  growth  as
such  is  not  remarkable.  What  is  more  surprising  -  and  alarming  -  is  that  a  recovery  of
employment seems to be considerably more sluggish than the upswing in total production.
The  problem  of  generating  new  jobs  is  by  no  means  peculiar  to  Sweden  but
something  we  have  in  common  with  much  of  Europe.  The  situation  in  this  respect  contrasts
markedly with the United States. There are also exceptions in Europe, one being the Netherlands
in the past decade. This suggests  that  cures  for  the  high  unemployment  exist,  though  naturally
the solutions in other countries may not apply as a whole to Swedish conditions.
The  high  unemployment  in  Sweden  is  now  a  subject  of  intensive  discussion.
Today I shall try to describe in principle what monetary policy is capable of doing and what it is
not in a position to achieve.
Restricted potential in the longer run
In  an  analysis  of  monetary  policy’s  potential  for  influencing  employment  it  is
natural  to  make  a  distinction  between  the  short  and  the  longer  run.  It  is  generally  agreed  that
monetary policy can be used to affect production and employment in the short run. An important
reason why monetary policy is capable, at least in principle, of influencing employment in this
time perspective is the existence of rigidities in price and wage formation. Suppose, for example,
that  low  wage  settlements  are  concluded  with  a  certain  rate  of  inflation  in  mind.  If  monetary
policy  becomes  more  expansionary  and  inflation  takes  off,  wage  costs  will  be  lower  than
expected in real terms. It will pay firms better to take on additional labour and employment will
rise. In the short run, then, one can expect a trade-off between inflation (or the extent to which
monetary policy is expansionary) and employment (or unemployment).
BIS Review   32/1997
- 4 -
The existence of such a short-term trade-off does not mean, however, that it will
serve  to  raise  employment  permanently.  This  is  because  when  actual  inflation  changes,
economic agents (firms, employees, etc.) normally adjust their  expectations  of  future  inflation.
So in the next round  of  wage  agreements,  for  example,  employees  may  demand  compensation
for a  higher  expected  rate  of  inflation.  Changing  expectations  mean  that  the  trade-off  between
inflation and unemployment ceases to be stable.
This  is  intuitively  intelligible.  If  the  normal  rate  of  inflation  is,  say,  5  per  cent,  it  seems
reasonable that employment will rise if inflation moves up  to  10  per  cent  because  this  reduces
wage costs in real terms. In the figure this amounts to moving from A to B. In time, however, 10
per cent inflation will be regarded as normal and wage demands will be based on this level. With
higher nominal wage increases, real wage costs will move up again and unemployment will tend
to  return  to  its  initial  level.  In  the  figure  this  means  moving  from  B  to  C.  In  order  to  boost
employment in this situation, inflation would have to rise to say 15 per cent and the procedure
will be repeated. All that is ultimately achieved is higher average inflation.
The  level  of  unemployment  to  which  an  economy  returns  when  inflation
expectations have adjusted is usually referred to as equilibrium unemployment. It is determined
by structural factors such as demographic changes, technology and the institutional set-up in the
labour  market,  factors  that  are  immune  to  monetary  policy.  The  important  conclusion  to  draw
from this is that permanently low unemployment cannot be achieved by accepting permanently
high inflation. Under favourable circumstances, to which I will shortly return, monetary policy
can  promote  an  economic  recovery;  but  an  appreciable  improvement  in  the  unemployment
situation calls for measures in many other fields, above all in the workings of the labour market
and wage formation.
What should monetary policy aim for?
If a central bank is incapable of “creating jobs” on a permanent basis, what should
be its primary task? By means of an appropriately balanced monetary policy a central bank can
determine, or at least  strongly  influence,  the  rate  of  inflation  that  prevails  in  the  economy  and
underlies  economic  decisions  by  firms  and  households.  Price  increases  are,  of  course,
conditioned  by  many  other  factors,  such  as  the  economic  situation,  the  fiscal  stance,  wage
formation  and  so  on.  But  inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon  and  in  the  longer  run  the
Riksbank, by controlling the supply of money in a wide sense, can also control its value in terms
of inflation.
The perception that the primary task of a central bank should be to maintain price
stability  can  be  said  to  have  won  general  acceptance.  In  that  low,  stable  inflation  helps  to
improve  the  functioning  of  markets,  it  seems  reasonable  that,  indirectly,  monetary  policy  also
promotes economic growth and employment. In their economic decisions, households and firms
have one less source of uncertainty - inflation - to worry about.
The inability of monetary policy to affect long-term employment and the fact that
it  should  focus  on  maintaining  price  stability  does  not  mean  that  its  capacity  to  condition
production and employment in the short run can not sometimes be used for stabilising activity.
Monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  an  economic  recovery  in  so  far  as  this  is  feasible  without
jeopardising  price  stability.  Problems  may  arise,  however,  if  monetary  policy  is  perceived  as
BIS Review   32/1997
- 5 -
The Phillips curve
T h e  P h illip  c u r ve
Inf latio n
BB
 AA
 Inf latio n
U n e m p lo ym e nt
BB
 CC
 U n e m p lo ym e nt
BIS Review   32/1997
- 6 -
focusing primarily on the stabilisation of employment. As we have seen, people’s  expectations
play a major part in the inflation process. If people expect monetary policy to concentrate in the
first  place  on  stabilising  employment,  then  firms  and  employees  will  not  regard  unduly  high
wage increases as all that serious because they will count on measures being taken to stimulate
demand if employment is in danger.
Sweden  in  the  1970s  and  ’80s  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  problems  that  may
arise. Wage and price increases in that period were systematically higher than in other countries,
which led to recurrent cost crises and problems with  competitiveness.  An  important  reason  for
the lack of adjustment to wage increases in the rest of the world was that employees and firms
reckoned  that  the  government  and  the  Riksbank  would  ultimately  bail  them  out  with
devaluations, which is what actually happened. In this way inflation expectations were adjusted
in advance to an anticipated pattern of economic policy reactions, whereby high price and wage
increases  were  accepted  or  accommodated  by  devaluing  the  krona.  As  a  result,  strong
inflationary  mechanisms  were  built  into  the  economy.  As  we  have  seen  in  recent  years,  once
such mechanisms have been established, they are difficult to change.
3.  Monetary policy’s rule system
Experience has shown that more is needed than proud declarations from political
decision-makers that they will safeguard a stable value of money and are not prepared to adapt
policy  to  excessively  high  wage  increases.  We  heard  plenty  of  that  in  the  1980s.  One  way  of
enhancing credibility that has been found to work well and is supported by economic theory is
for the democratically elected body to delegate monetary policy to a central bank with a  clear,
specified obligation to safeguard the value of money. The central bank is given full control over
the  instruments,  principally  the  short  interest  rate,  for  fulfilling  the  stipulated  objective.  This
arrangement  limits  both  the  room  for  short-run  attempts  to  boost  employment  and  the  risk  of
inflationary mechanisms taking root in the economy. That also lessens the risk of a repetition of
what happened in the early 1990s when the inflation bubble burst and unemployment rose.
Credibility provides greater manoeuvrability
It  may  be  worth  underscoring  that  a  system  where  price  stability  is  credibly
delegated to the central bank can confer greater freedom of action in economic policy. This may
seem paradoxical but if people feel they can rely on the central bank, in an economic slowdown
it may be possible to ease the  monetary  stance  without  triggering  higher  inflation  expectations
and  bond  rates,  because  everyone  counts  on  policy  being  tightened  before  inflation  moves  up.
We have experienced something of this sort in Sweden in the past year.
In a system with poor credibility, a monetary easing may be perceived as a sign of
a  lasting  upward  shift  in  inflation.  This  in  turn  may  generate  self-fulfilling  expectations,  with
future problems when efforts are made to control inflation once more. It is understandable that
the risk of this is seen as particularly great in economies where inflation has been high for a long
time.  A  more  independent  central  bank  is  thus  in  a  better  position  not  only  to  maintain  low
inflation  but  also  to  operate  at  times  with  a  policy  that  includes  an  element  of  stabilisation
(though  the  problems  of  fine  tuning  stabilisation  policy  should  not  be  underestimated).  The
German  central  bank  is  one  example;  over  a  series  of  decades,  economic  slowdowns  could  be
parried by lowering the short interest rate fairly rapidly and markedly.
It may be in place to point out that credibility and, for that matter, independence
can be achieved in various ways. Some countries have recently clarified their regulations so as to
BIS Review   32/1997
- 7 -
bring them into line with the arrangement I have just advocated. One example is New Zealand.
In  other  countries,  for  instance  the  United  States,  policy  has  been  conducted  so  that  it  has
gradually earned increasing confidence within the time-honoured system. In my opinion the rule
system  is  important;  it  reflects  the  general  commitment  to  monetary  policy  and  can  provide  a
short cut to credibility. In a democratic society, however, monetary policy is ultimately founded
on popular support. That is one reason why it is important for the Riksbank to operate in such a
way that confidence is created in the policy of price stability. Among other things, this calls for a
clear intellectual framework that can be evaluated and for an open discussion about the direction
of monetary policy.
Delegates accountable to a democratic body
An argument that is heard from time to time in the monetary policy debate is that
the  delegation  of  monetary  policy’s  construction  to  an  independent  central  bank  would  be
undemocratic. In my view that is incorrect. The Riksbank is an agency of the Riksdag (Sweden’s
parliament),  which  clearly  can  stipulate  the  objective  which  the  Riksbank  is  to  aim  for.  It  is
worth emphasising, however, that it would naturally be inappropriate for the Riksdag to set up
objectives  that  the  Riksbank  is  not  in  a  position  to  fulfil,  like  that  -  as  we  saw  earlier  -  of
“creating jobs” on a permanent basis. When, but only when, the Riksbank’s objective has been
established,  will  it  be  possible  to  monitor  operations  effectively.  It  should  be  realised  that  the
delegation of monetary policy to an independent central bank is a way of generating confidence
that the declared policy of the Riksdag and the government will in fact be implemented.
In the coming years the rule system for monetary policy will be changed. As  an
adherent to the Maastricht Treaty, Sweden has undertaken to make changes in, for example, the
status of the Riksbank’s governor. He or she shall not be dismissed except on explicit grounds of
serious misconduct, etc. Neither is the Riksbank to be given instructions from third parties, e.g.
government, except in a statutory form. It also looks as though the objective of the Riksbank is
to  be  formulated  in  law  and  will  be  price  stability.  The  question  of  eligibility  to  serve  on  the
governing  board  will  have  to  be  reviewed.  Active  members  of  parliament  are  delegates  in
Sweden, which is entirely contrary to traditions in central Europe.
The Riksbank differs from most central banks in Europe in that we are formally
responsible for exchange rate policy. The Government sees this as a problem in EU cooperation
and  has  therefore  instituted  an  enquiry  into  exchange  rate  competence.  In  the  light  of  what  I
have  just  said,  these  conclusions  are  not  sound.  The  proposal  to  transfer  responsibility  for
exchange  rate  policy  from  the  Riksbank  to  the  government  makes  it  more  difficult  for  the
Riksbank  to  safeguard  the  value  of  money  effectively  and  thereby  contribute  to  a  favourable
level  of  interest  rates  and  also  -  when  this  does  not  endanger  price  stability  -  to  stimulate  the
economy and employment.
In  a  world  with  free  capital  flows  there  is  a  direct  link  between    monetary  and
exchange  rate  policies.  The  two  policy  fields  may  have  conflicting  goals.  Moreover,  if  the
government,  via  exchange  rate  decisions,  can  affect  the  ability  of  the  Riksbank  to  fulfil  the
inflation target, there may be misunderstandings about where responsibility for the operation of
monetary policy lies.
In  my  opinion  it  may  be  reasonable  -  though  this,  too,  is  questioned  by  some
economists - for the government to decide the type of exchange rate system Sweden is to have in
relation  to  other  EU  countries,  whether  the  krona  should  join  the  European  exchange  rate
mechanism  or  remain  flexible.  There  is  a  close  connection  here  with  the  rules  and  regulations
BIS Review   32/1997
- 8 -
that apply in the rest of the EU and the matter is very much a political issue. But within a given
exchange rate system, it is the Riksbank that should decide an appropriate rate for the krona or
the  band  within  which  it  may  move.  Such  decisions  can  be  made  after  an  exchange  of
information  with  the  government  but  in  the  final  analysis  it  should  be  up  to  the  Riksbank  to
determine whether or not they are compatible with price stability. With a flexible exchange rate,
policy  should  operate,  as  today,  with  an  inflation  target,  and  the  government  should  have  no
possibility of influencing the construction of exchange rate policy.
Democratic  control  is  important.  But  it  should  be  exercised  via  the  Riksbank’s
principal, the Riksdag, on whose behalf monetary policy is conducted. It should be noted that in
exceptional situations, when the price stability objective may have to be suspended for the time
being  (e.g.  a  major  oil  price  shock),  both  the  government  and  the  Riksbank  may  call  on  the
Riksdag  to  amend  the  Riksbank’s  statutory  objective.  In  that  way  the  democratic  control  of
monetary policy can be clearly ensured.
BIS Review   32/1997
