Dr.  Stals  looks  at  the  options  and  strategies  for  monetary  policy  in  South
Africa      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  Dr.  C.S.  Stals,  at  the
Twentieth  Annual  Investment  Conference  of  Société  Générale  Frankel  Pollak  (Pty)  Ltd.  in
Johannesburg on 18/2/97.
1. A sharp decline in the net capital inflow from abroad set the financial scene for 1996
The most important change in the financial situation in South Africa last year was
the sudden decline in the net inflow of capital from abroad that occurred in the first quarter. A
number  of  adverse  developments  at  the  time  combined  to  trigger  an  outflow  of  short-term
capital.  Coming  after  three  years  of  rather  strong  rises  in  total  domestic  expenditure  and  a
growing deficit in the current account of the balance of payments, the deterioration in the capital
account  led  to  an  overall  balance  of  payments  deficit  that  created  immediate  shortages  in  the
market for foreign exchange.
After  a  record  net  capital  inflow  of  more  than  R6  billion  occurred  in  the  fourth
quarter of 1995, to bring the total net inflow for the year close to R20 billion, there was a small
net outflow in the first quarter of 1996. The current account deficit was no longer covered by a
net capital inflow and the exchange rate of the rand came under immediate pressure. With a low
level  of  official  foreign  reserves,  a  growing  deficit  in  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of
payments  and  deteriorating  prospects  for  a  renewed  inflow  of  capital  into  the  country,
participants  in  the  market  for  foreign  exchange  became  very  nervous  and  reacted  wildly  to
rumours, adverse political developments and negative news about the balance of payments, the
foreign reserves, and domestic economic developments.
The  initial  depreciation  of  the  rand  created  negative  expectations  which  became
self-fulfilling,  particularly  as  leads  and  lags  in  short-term  trade  financing  also  moved  strongly
against  South  Africa,  and  South  Africans  became  more  reluctant  to  enter  into  new  foreign
currency denominated commitments.
The  exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  which  in  nominal  terms  showed  an  effective
appreciation of 4.4 per cent from May 1995 up to the end of December 1995, then depreciated
by 8 per cent in the first quarter of 1996, by 7.2 per cent in the second quarter, and by a further
9.5 per cent in the four months up to the end of October 1996. Over the first ten months of 1996,
the effective depreciation of the rand in nominal terms exceeded 22 per cent. In real terms, this
represented a depreciation of about 15 per cent.
An ex post analysis of the composition of the capital in- and outflows of last year
provides  interesting  information  for  a  better  understanding  of  the  changes  that  took  place.
Initially,  it  was  mainly  a  sudden  reversal  in  the  inflow  of  short-term  capital  in  the  form  of
inter-bank and trade related financing arrangements that triggered the shortages in the market for
foreign  exchange.  As  the  exchange  rate  depreciated  and  South  African  residents  became  more
concerned  about  possible  losses  on  foreign  currency  exposures,  long-term  foreign  loans  were
repaid  without  replacement  or  extensions.  South  Africans  with  existing  short-  and  long-term
foreign currency commitments covered their positions forward, and the Reserve Bank’s forward
exchange book showed a sharp increase of the net oversold position. In the fourth quarter of last
year, when short-term capital began to flow back again, there was a net outflow from the private
sector  of  R6  billion  in  the  form  of  longer-term  capital,  mostly  for  the  repayment  of  maturing
loans.
BIS Review   19/1997
- 2 -
Another  interesting  feature  of  the  international  capital  flows  last  year  was  that
foreigners remained important net portfolio investors in South African securities. Non-residents
increased their holdings of South African equities listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange by
R5.3 billion, and added a net amount of  R3.4  billion  to  their  holdings  of  South  African  bonds
acquired  through  the  South  African  bond  market.  This  ostensibly  “volatile”  element  of  the
capital flows was therefore not responsible for the problems that developed in the South African
balance of payments last year.
2.  Monetary  policy  faced  with  new  challenges  in  a  situation  of  a  deteriorating  balance  of
payments
The abrupt decline in the capital inflows from abroad in the first quarter of 1996
confronted the monetary policy authorities with an  unexpected  new  challenge.  Since  1994,  the
Reserve Bank’s policy on international financial relations was to rebuild the country’s depleted
official foreign reserves gradually, to relax the exchange controls on a step-by-step basis, and to
restructure  the  market  in  foreign  exchange  gradually  with  the  objective  of  enabling  a  more
efficient  market  to  determine  not  only  the  spot  foreign  exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  but  also  the
forward rate.
Good progress was made on this road during 1994 and 1995, but the country was
surely not yet in a position to withstand  the  adverse  developments  of  early  1996,  or  to  protect
the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  against  a  series  of  determined  attacks  in  a  rather  vulnerable
situation. The Reserve Bank realised that it was not in a position to defend the exchange rate of
the rand by providing large amounts of foreign exchange from the official foreign reserves. At
the  time  of  the  dramatic  decline  in  the  net  capital  inflow  in  February  1996,  the  Reserve  Bank
held  about  R15  billion  in  official  foreign  reserves,  while  the  private  banking  sector  held  an
additional amount of about R4 billion in liquid foreign assets. The total of R19 billion was the
equivalent  of  about  8  weeks’  imports.  Taking  account  of  the  growing  deficit  in  the  current
account  of  the  balance  of  payments,  the  Bank  could  only  make  limited  amounts  of  foreign
exchange  available  to  ensure  that  no  serious  shortage  of  liquidity  would  develop  that  could
create a panic on its own.
The  longer-term  objectives  of  building  up  the  foreign  reserves  to  a  more
comfortable  level,  of  reducing  the  role  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  the  forward  foreign  exchange
market, and of phasing out the remaining foreign exchange controls were temporarily forced on
the  backburner,  whilst  monetary  policy  had  to  be  directed  more  decisively  towards  an
adjustment programme that would gradually restore stability in the market for foreign exchange.
3. The monetary policy adjustment programme
Three basic deficiencies in the underlying economic fundamentals were identified
at the time that contributed to the lack of confidence in the South African economy, and in the
ability of the South African authorities to restore stability in the market for foreign exchange.
Firstly, the growing deficit in the current account of the balance of payments had
to  be  reversed,  particularly  after  it  became  evident  that  the  country  could  not  rely  on  a
permanent  and  sustainable  large  capital  inflow  from  the  rest  of  the  world  to  cover  an  ever-
increasing current deficit.
Secondly,  the  imminent  danger  of  escalating  inflation,  particularly  after  some
depreciation in the exchange rate of the rand, had to be avoided. There was a real and perceived
BIS Review   19/1997
- 3 -
danger  that  South  Africa  was  destined  for  a  new  vicious  circle  of  depreciation-inflation-
depreciation  that  would  unavoidably  lead  to  a  further  erosion  of  the  country’s  competitive
position in the world markets.
Thirdly, the escalating growth rates in the domestic monetary aggregates, such as
the  money  supply  and  bank  credit  extension,  had  to  be  reversed.  By  accommodating  the  new
inflationary  pressures  emanating  from  the  depreciation  of  the  rand  on  a  continuous  basis,
monetary policy would obviously aggravate the situation.
With  only  limited  means  at  its  disposal  to  finance  the  external  deficit,  South
Africa had no alternative but to adjust the disequilibrium, mainly by reducing or eliminating the
current  account  deficit.  To  achieve  this  objective,  the  following  monetary  policy  strategy  was
followed:
Not  being  in  a  position  to  fix  the  exchange  rate  at  any  predetermined  level,  a
depreciation of the rand was unavoidable  and  had  to  be  accepted  as  part  of  the  solution  to  the
problem. The Bank sold some foreign exchange from its official reserves, not with the intention
to  fix  the  exchange  rate,  but  rather  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  market  and  to  smooth  the
adjustment process.  As the Reserve Bank sold foreign exchange to the market to partly finance
the  overall  balance  of  payments  deficit,  domestic  rand  liquidity  was  drained  from  the  banking
system. It was imperative for the effective  working  of  the  adjustment  process  that  the  Reserve
Bank  would  not  replace  the  lost  liquidity  through,  for  example,  purchases  of  financial  assets
from  the  banks  through  more  active  open-market  operations.    The  decline  in  the  domestic
liquidity  had  to  be  reflected  in  the  level  of  interest  rates.  Higher  interest  rates  would  not  only
serve to discourage the outflow of capital, but would also reduce the domestic demand for bank
credit. The market trend for interest rates to rise could not be resisted.
Monetary  policy  was  therefore  directed  towards  a  reinforcement  of  and  active
support for a market adjustment process that would eventually restore equilibrium to the balance
of payments. It was well understood that this process would not be painless, that the depreciation
of the currency, the drainage of liquidity and the rising interest rates would all demand costs and
sacrifices that would not be popular, and that the monetary authorities would be blamed by some
ill-disposed  observers  for  the  dilemma.  Any  country  that  had  established  a  good  economic
performance in one year on the basis of net capital inflow of R20 billion, and is then in the next
year forced to perform on a net inflow of only R4 billion, is bound to go through some painful
adjustment. South Africa was no exception.
4. The success of the monetary adjustment programme
Important changes took place towards the end of last year, and particularly  after
October, in the underlying economic conditions that contributed to the financial disturbances of
the preceding nine months.
There  was  a  marked  slow-down  in  the  rate  of  increase  in  real  gross  domestic
expenditure. Official national accounts statistics for the fourth quarter are not yet available, but
preliminary  indications  are  that  all  the  major  components  of  gross  domestic  expenditure
increased  at  lower  rates  in  the  second  half  than  in  the  first  half  of  last  year.  Total  real  gross
domestic expenditure indeed declined somewhat from the first half to bring the rate of increase
for  the  year  more  or  less  in  line  with  the  established  growth  rate  of  about  3  per  cent  in  gross
domestic product.  The deficit in the current account of the  balance  of  payments  progressively
BIS Review   19/1997
- 4 -
declined  from  a  seasonally  adjusted  annualised  peak  of  R13  billion  in  the  second  quarter  to
about  R9  billion  in  the  third,  and  R5  billion  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  the  year.    The  rates  of
increase in both bank credit extension to the private sector and in the  money  supply  peaked  in
October  1996,  before  declining  marginally 
in  both  November  and  December.  The
quarter-to-quarter  growth  in  credit  extension  to  the  private  sector  (at  seasonally  adjusted  and
annualised rates), decelerated from 22.4 per cent in the second quarter of 1996 to 16.6 per cent
in the third quarter, and 11.8 per cent in the fourth quarter. In the case of the M3 money supply,
the deceleration was from 21.2 per cent in the second, to 18.6 per cent in the third, and a mere
7.6  per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Not  only  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments
improved, but also the capital account. In the first nine months of the year, capital inflows and
outflows  almost  cancelled  out,  to  leave  a  small  net  inflow  of  less  than  R1  billion  for  the  nine
months’  period.  In  the  fourth  quarter,  however,  the  net  capital  inflow  increased  again  to  an
estimated  R3  billion.  This  capital  inflow  once  again  exceeded  the  unadjusted  current  account
deficit with the result that the country’s net foreign reserves recovered some of the losses of the
first nine months of the year.  The pressure in the foreign exchange market receded slightly and
the  rand  started  appreciating  in  November  last  year.  Over  the  two  months  November  and
December 1996, the effective nominal exchange rate of the rand appreciated by 1 per cent, and
during the first six  weeks  of  1997  by  a  further  9.2  per  cent.  This  appreciation  therefore  partly
neutralised the adverse effects of the sharp depreciation of last year.
It  will,  of  course,  not  only  be  premature  but  also  preposterous  to  claim  the
successes  achieved  in  this  process  so  far  for  monetary  policy  alone.  Many  other  changes  also
took place in South Africa over the past year. There is now more political stability than a year
ago; much progress has been  made  with  the  framing  and  implementation  of  the  Government’s
Macroeconomic Strategy for Growth, Employment and Redistribution (GEAR); the Minister of
Finance  has  confirmed  and  showed  his  determination  to  continue  with  the  required  policy  of
financial discipline that will gradually reduce the deficit in the Budget as a percentage of gross
domestic product.
There  is,  however,  still  the  danger  of  escalating  inflation  that  cannot  be  swept
under the carpet at this juncture. After reaching an acceptable low level of only 5.5 per cent over
the twelve months up to April 1996, the rate of increase in the consumer price index escalated to
9.4  per  cent  in  December  1996.  Inflation,  however,  lags  behind  changes  in  the  monetary
aggregates and is, at this stage, still stimulated by the depreciation of the rand last year, and the
relatively  large  increases  in  the  money  supply  during  the  1995/96  period.  It  is  of  the  utmost
importance, however, that a restrictive monetary policy shall now be retained to make sure that
the rate of inflation will also gradually be tamed again.
5. Monetary policy options for 1997
It remains the main task and priority of monetary policy in South Africa to fight
against  inflation.  During  1996,  the  disturbances  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  temporarily
diverted the attention from this prime objective of monetary policy. Indeed, in the longer term,
greater  stability  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  will  only  become  sustainable  once  the  rate  of
inflation has been brought more or less in line with the average rate of inflation in the economies
of our major trading partners and international competitors.
Despite the periodic efforts  of  media  reporters  to  extort  a  commitment  from  the
authorities  to  a  certain  pre-defined  exchange  rate  for  the  rand,  it  remains  our  view  that  in  the
contemporary complex market for foreign exchange, it is not possible to define an equilibrium
exchange  rate  a  priori,  or,  in  the  case  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  with  the  limited
BIS Review   19/1997
- 5 -
amount  of  foreign  exchange  at  its  disposal,  to  manipulate  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand
permanently in any direction against market forces.
As far as the Bank’s policy on foreign exchange is concerned, it is hoped that the
more favourable conditions now experienced in the market will continue throughout 1997, and
will enable us to pursue the longer-term objectives of:
building up the total foreign reserves to a more comfortable  level;    reducing  the
Reserve  Bank’s  role  in  the  forward  foreign  exchange  market;  and    gradually  phasing  out  the
remaining exchange controls.
To  the  extent  that  these  three  objectives  provide  conflicts  within  themselves,
important policy decisions will have to be taken between the Bank and the Minister of Finance
on the relative importance that should be attached to each one of the objectives in an appropriate
policy matrix.
With the attention now being refocused on domestic policy objectives, the rising
rate  of  inflation  has  become  a  matter  of  major  concern.  In  this  situation,  the  Reserve  Bank
regards it as a minimum precondition for arresting this imminent threat to financial stability that
the rates of increase in bank credit extension and in the money supply will be reduced soon  to
more acceptable levels.
With the prospects for real growth in  the  economy  at  a  rate  of  between  2  and  3
per  cent,  and  the  desire  to  keep  inflation  to  below  10  per  cent,  the  money  supply  should
obviously not increase by more than about 10 per cent during the current calendar year. This will
require  the  Reserve  Bank  to  persist  with  a  relatively  restrictive  monetary  policy  for  the  time
being.
BIS Review   19/1997
