Herr  Gaddum  gives  his  views  on  the  challenges  facing  European  central
banks  in  the  light  of  EMU      Address  by  the  Vice-President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,
Herr Johann  Wilhelm  Gaddum,  to  the  32nd  Conference  of  the  Governors  of  South-East  Asian
Central Banks in Bangkok on 13/2/97.
I
I  consider  it  a  great  honour  to  be  invited  to  speak  at  the  Conference  of  the
Governors  of  South-East  Asian  Central  Banks.  Professor  Tietmeyer  was  glad  to  receive  your
invitation and took it up with pleasure. He regrets very much that he is unable to be here.
We regard the contacts and dialogue within the global central bank community as
being most important and valuable. In addition, I would rate your invitation as being a reflection
of your interest in Europe, and in economic and monetary developments there. Conversely, I can
assure you that European interest in Asia has increased tremendously in recent years.
We  are  full  of  admiration  for  your  cultural  and  economic  achievements.  We
Germans, in particular, are well aware that economic progress is neither a miracle nor a matter
of luck. Economic success has to do with wise policy decisions. And it also has to do with the
capabilities and industry of human beings.
The present day and age is distinguished by progressive economic integration. It
is taking place on two levels. The one level is regional integration. In many parts of the world
the regions are moving more closely together. This is mostly due to economic factors: creating
larger  markets  and  free-trade  areas,  and  structuring  the  division  of  labour  more  effectively.  In
Europe  the  economic  motives  are  combined  with  political  ones.  The  peoples  of  Europe  have
learned from past conflicts.
Besides the economic merging, European integration is designed to help forestall
tensions between countries and reconcile diverging interests. Incidentally, regional integration is
celebrating anniversaries this year, both here in South-East Asia and in Europe. ASEAN will be
thirty years old this year, and the European Union forty.
The  other  level  of  integration  is  globalisation,  which  is  galloping  ahead.  Here,
several factors are combining and mutually reinforcing one another:
 the internal decisions many countries have taken to open up their markets,
the easing of restrictions on multilateral trade and,
in particular, the huge technological advances in telecommunications and
data processing.
Undoubtedly, one of the major challenges facing policy makers worldwide is that
of fostering regional and global integration side by side, rather than in opposition to one another.
It is a matter  -  as  we  say  in  German  -  of  doing  the  one  without  failing  to  do  the  other.  In  the
triangular  global  political  relationship  between  Asia,  North  America  and  Europe,  the
transatlantic community between the European Union and North America, on the one hand, and
Asia-Pacific  Economic  Cooperation  (APEC),  on  the  other,  already  have  an  important  part  to
play. I hope and confidently expect  that  in  future  the  Asian-European  link  in  this  triangle  will
increase in significance. An important initial step in this direction was the first European-Asian
Summit Meeting of Heads of State and Government here in Bangkok just under a year ago.
BIS Review   18/1997
- 2 -
II
The two levels of integration are currently determining to a very large extent the
work  of  European  central  banks.  The  challenges  posed  by  the  global  markets  are  affecting  all
central banks worldwide in much the same way. But  the  tasks  faced  in  the  context  of  regional
integration in Europe are unique.
After  all,  under  the  Treaty  of  Maastricht  Europe  has  set  itself  the  target  of  a
monetary union before the end of this century. The present year will be of crucial importance on
the road to that goal. The timetable envisaged is as follows: the countries that will participate in
the monetary union from the start will be ascertained in spring 1998. The participating countries
will have to fulfil the following criteria, in particular:
  stable  monetary  conditions  as  regards  the  value  of  money,  the  exchange
rate and the longer-term interest rate level,
lastingly sustainable public finance, and
an independent national central bank.
Which  countries  that  will  be,  will  become  manifest  after  the  examination  and
decision next spring. To date, there have been forecasts, as well as some wishful thinking. But
decisions or preliminary decisions have not been taken yet.
Monetary union  is  due  to  begin  in  1999.  At  that  date  the  participating  countries
will irrevocably fix the exchange rates of their currencies and introduce the euro. From the first
day  onwards,  the  European  Central  Bank  will  assume  full  responsibility  for  monetary  policy.
National central banks will become members of the European System of Central Banks. On the
basis of the decisions taken by the European Central Bank, they will then implement monetary
policy decentrally (insofar as that is possible).
Whereas the financial markets are expected to use the euro from as early as 1999,
retail business is likely to go on using national currencies at first. This is because banknotes and
coins  denominated  in  euros  are  not  due  to  be  issued  until  the  beginning  of  the  year  2002.
Without  any  doubt,  the  monetary  union  is  an  ambitious  project.  It  implies,  from  the  first  day
onwards,  irrevocably  fixed  exchange  rates  between  the  participating  countries  and  a  single
monetary  policy;  that  is  to  say,  a  common  central  bank,  identical  central  bank  rates  for  all
countries,  a  virtually  uniform  arsenal  of  policy  instruments  and  much  more  besides.  The  euro
will be a supranational currency. The single monetary policy will apply - unlike the situation in
most other monetary areas - to several states that in other respects remain sovereign.
On the one hand, the introduction of the euro will present new  opportunities  for
integration.  The  economies  of  the  participating  countries  will  be  able  to  grow  more  closely
together. The Common Market will be afforded a new dimension. On the other hand, in order to
realise the benefits, the euro area will have to fulfil two main conditions: First, the participating
countries  will  have  to  be  able  (both  economically  and  in  terms  of  anti-inflation  policy)
permanently  to  relinquish  the  instrument  of  exchange  rate  adjustment  relative  to  one  another.
And,  second,  the  differing  national  traditions  and  structures  which  the  countries  bring  into  the
monetary  union  will  have  to  grow  into  a  single  whole.  For  instance,  some  countries  have
different policy traditions on issues such as:
 what part can and should monetary policy play in the real economy?
BIS Review   18/1997
- 3 -
 which target has priority in the event of a conflict between domestic price
stability and external exchange rate stability?
In  addition,  national  central  banks  have  divergent  backgrounds  as  regards  their
relations with the government and their standing in the eyes of the general public. In some cases,
they  also  have  different  policy  instruments,  deployed  in  different  ways.  By  such  means,  they
have taken due account of the differing structures of the domestic banking system.
Establishing  a  monetary  union  implies  building  sustainable  bridges  across  these
differences.  The  single  currency  calls  for  joint  answers  to  the  underlying  issues  of  monetary
policy. The prerequisites are being elaborated at three levels: First, the choice of the participants
at the start of monetary union is vitally important. This is to ensure that the range of countries
remains  fairly  homogeneous  overall  with  respect  to  their  maturity  for  anti-inflation  policy.
Second, the Treaty of Maastricht laid down the independence of the European Central Bank and
of  all  the  central  banks  participating  in  monetary  union.  The  statute  of  the  European  Central
Bank  defines  ensuring  price  stability  as  its  priority  target.  In  this  way  the  Treaty  gives  an
unambiguous  answer  to  the  question  of  the  fundamental  orientation  of  the  future  monetary
union. It is designed as a community of stability. And third, the European Monetary Institute, as
a forerunner of the European Central Bank, has been working in Frankfurt for three years now.
III
Under  the  auspices  of  the  European  Monetary  Institute,  we  are  preparing  the
organisational  and  technical  framework  for  the  decision  on  the  single  monetary  policy  and  its
implementation.
The preparatory work makes up a long list:
   First of all, a strategy for harmonised monetary statistics was drawn up.
Central banks are working together with the European Monetary Institute
on the introduction of a real time gross settlement system (TARGET).
The  EMI  Council  has  already  decided  on  the  design  of  the  future  euro
banknotes.
In  its  Framework  Report,  the  European  Monetary  Institute  has  recently
mapped out a framework for the future strategy and the arsenal of policy
instruments.
The  policy  instruments  will  be  geared  to  market  conditions,  transparent  and
efficient.  Open  market  operations  will  be  at  the  centre  of  refinancing  policy.  Two  standard
tenders  are  envisaged:  one  tender  running  for  two  weeks  (that  will  be  the  most  important
instrument),  accompanied  by  a  second  tender  running  for  three  months.  In  the  case  of  the
longer-term  tender,  national  central  banks,  when  assessing  the  eligibility  of  collateral,  are  to
have  the  option  of  taking  national  financing  patterns  into  account.  Two  standing  facilities  are
available  for  providing  or  absorbing  overnight  liquidity.  They  form  a  corridor  for  the  rate  for
day-to-day money and signal the prevailing monetary policy stance.
In  the  shape  of  the  Framework  Report,  the  European  Monetary  Institute  has
already  laid  down  a  number  of  benchmarks  for  future  European  monetary  policy.  However,  it
cannot  take  all  decisions  away  from  the  European  Central  Bank.  This  is  because  the  ultimate
decision on the strategy and the actual deployment of the policy instruments remains, of course,
BIS Review   18/1997
- 4 -
in the hands of the European Central Bank. After all, it bears the responsibility and must take the
final decision. Hence, where there is still no consensus on the EMI Council, the decision remains
pending  for  the  time  being.  That  applies,  for  instance,  to  the  strategy.  The  Framework  Report
provides  for  an  alternative  between  a  two-tier  strategy,  with  a  monetary  aggregate  as  the
intermediate target, and the single-tier strategy of a direct inflation target.
The Bundesbank strongly advocates the monetary targeting approach. Needless to
say, we also recognise that managing a monetary aggregate is becoming more difficult under the
conditions  presented  by  current  financial  markets.  But  the  European  Central  Bank  could
demonstrate  its  responsibility  more  clearly  and  more  transparently  by  means  of  the  monetary
targeting  strategy.  And  the  virtual  adoption  of  the  strategy  of  the  erstwhile  anchor  currency
Deutsche Mark would be a token of continuity.
Another unresolved question, for example, is the issue of minimum reserves. The
European Monetary Institute is preparing the option. Then the European Central Bank will have
to  decide  at  a  later  date  whether  minimum  reserves  will  be  adopted,  and  in  which  form.  In
future, a great deal will depend  on  the  European  Central  Bank.  Many  people  are  pinning  their
hopes and expectations of a stable euro on its independence and steadfastness.
The  biggest  challenge  facing  the  European  Central  Bank  lies  in  its  need  to  earn
the requisite reputation and credibility as quickly as possible. This is in order to justify people’s
hopes  of  a  stable  euro.  And  to  enable  it  to  weather  the  test  to  be  expected  from  the  global
financial markets.
The environment in which central banks (and other economic policy makers, too)
operate has undergone a radical change in the last decade.
IV
   are  witnessing 
economic  developments 
We 
professionalisation of investors, globalisation of financial markets.
We are witnessing political reforms: deregulation of the domestic markets,
liberalisation of border-crossing capital movements.
We  are  witnessing  technological  breakthroughs  in  information  and
communications technology.
the  markets:
in 
All these changes are interacting, reinforcing one another and constituting a new
real  world.  This  upheaval  presents  great  opportunities.  The  international  capital  markets  can
operate  more  efficiently.  Market  transparency  is  increasing.  Greater  diversification  of
investment may help to allocate capital more effectively, in line with its marginal productivity.
Risk management is becoming more efficient. The financial markets are better able to perform
their  transformation  function.  The  markets  are  better  able  to  reconcile  savers’  and  investors’
preferences with respect to maturities, batch sizes and risks.
Nowadays  the  financial  markets  perform  a  monitoring  function  all  around  the
clock. Those markets test countries’ policies. They scrutinise the lasting sustainability of public
finance. They scrutinise the gearing of monetary policy to stability. Where they register doubt,
they  are  able  to  penalise  massively  by  siphoning  off  capital  and  imposing  high  capital  market
rates.  Hence  the  financial  markets,  in  their  monitoring  and  sanctionative  capacity,  figure  as
valuable allies of a monetary policy geared to stability.
BIS Review   18/1997
- 5 -
At the same time, however, the  financial  markets  often  appear  to  give  cause  for
concern. Many people are suspicious of the financial markets’ power. For the financial markets
increasingly seem to be divesting themselves of the “subservient role” they are supposed to play.
Such  fears  apply,  for  one  thing,  to  the  relations  of  the  global  financial  markets  with  national
monetary,  economic  and  fiscal  policy.  Anonymous  market  forces  constrict  policy  makers’
national  room  for  manoeuvre.  This  may  lead  to  tensions  because  domestic  policy-making
normally claims to be sovereign. But, at least insofar as the financial markets thereby lessen the
scope for a monetary policy that is detrimental to stability and a fiscal policy that inflates debt,
the  economist  will  not  deplore  that  fact  unduly.  For  a  policy  that  fosters  inflation  and
exacerbates national debt widens scope, at the most, for a temporary period; in  the  longer  run,
any such scope is narrowed.
But there is a  second  dimension  to  the  misgivings  that  the  financial  markets  are
no longer duly performing their subservient function. That relates to the relations with the real
economy.  In  itself,  a  high  volatility  of  financial  market  prices  may  affect  real  economic
decisions.  For  example,  enterprises  may  increasingly  switch  to  hedging  against  the  risk  of
sharply  fluctuating  exchange  rates  not  only  by  means  of  financial  contracts  such  as  currency
futures, but also by diversifying the locations, in terms of different currency areas.
Prolonged distortions, such as misalignments of exchange rates or bubbles in asset
prices,  are  all  the  more  problematic.  It  is  not  only  that  the  financial  markets  distort  real
relationships.  The  relevant  adjustments  are  often  sudden  and  violent,  as  in  the  case  of  the
European  Monetary  System  early  in  the  nineties,  or  of  Mexico.  It  is  precisely  such  crisis-like
upheavals  that  prompt  the  question  of  whether  and,  if  so,  to  what  extent  today’s  financial
markets have become more unstable, and whether systemic risk has increased?
Some people fear that the advance of professionalism among fund managers and
institutional investors, in particular, might increase the incidence of such dangers. Their thinking
is  determined  primarily  by  the  short-term  performance  of  their  portfolio.  In  certain  situations,
that  may  intensify  the  “herd  instinct”,  triggering  a  “rush  to  the  exit”.  At  the  same  time,  new
financial instruments make it easier for them to incur higher risk positions. Swings in sentiment
may then lead all the more easily to precarious situations.
On the other hand, the greater international diversification of investments makes
the  markets  fundamentally  more  resilient  today.  Furthermore,  owing  to  the  increased
significance  of  the  funds,  relative  to  that  of  the  banks,  the  creditor  pattern  is  nowadays  much
more heterogeneous and more diversified. That reduces the risk of chain reactions. If the banks
are less heavily involved, the danger of a liquidity crisis impairing the viability of the payment
and settlement system decreases. After all, not every liquidity crisis poses a systemic risk.
V
Central  banks  -  like  other  economic  policy  makers  -  must  adjust  to  the  reality
represented  by  the  global  financial  markets.  That  applies  to  all  policy  areas:  monetary  policy,
exchange  rate  policy,  banking  supervision.  Problematic  developments  in  the  financial  markets
are not as a rule exclusively inherent in those markets. They often also have to do with current or
earlier  policy  decisions.  Monetary  policy  itself  must  not  be  an  uncertainty  factor  that  fosters
volatility.  It  must  focus  on  continuity,  must  build  confidence.  Continuity,  consistency,
credibility - the three Cs denote the right direction.
BIS Review   18/1997
- 6 -
To  be  sure,  a  medium-term  monetary  policy  geared  to  continuity  is  not  always
easy  to  pursue,  with  the  present-day  financial  markets  and  their  frequent  volatility  as  a
counterpart. But there is no alternative. By and large, a steady, sound policy stance is easier for
an  independent  central  bank,  which  is  at  least  spared  the  turmoil  of  day-to-day  politics.  Its
guiding principle for exchange rate policy must be: it must not set unrealistic objectives. It must
take great care not to provide the markets with triggering points; that is to say, points on which
the entire credibility of a system or a policy hinges. Then, the markets can undertake a test.
And 
its  guiding  principle  for  banking  supervision  must  be: 
financial
conglomeration and market globalisation, in particular, call for closer cooperation in the field of
banking supervision  between  the  responsible  national  authorities  and  between  the  international
supervisory  bodies  for  banking,  insurance  and  securities  operations.  This  applies  even  if  a
complete  restructuring  of  a  supervisory  regime  outside  the  existing  patterns  of  supervision  is
unlikely to be implemented in the  foreseeable  future.  Present-day  supervision  does  not  seek  to
push  the  market  into  the  background,  but  rather  to  reinforce  it.  Competition  is  meant  to
discipline. Supervision is not intended to get bogged down in details, but to draw up a few key
rules. Risks must be covered. A minimum of transparency must be present.
Above  all,  the  sanctionative  mechanism  of  the  markets  must  continue  to  work.
There  must  not  be  any  bailing-out  that  fosters  moral  hazard.  Banking  supervision  seeks  to
enhance competition. It is therefore not merely a matter  of  lessening  systemic  risk.  It  is  also  a
matter of identical competitive conditions, along the lines of “same  business,  same  risks,  same
rules”.  I  am  glad  that  the  banking  supervisory  authorities  are  now  working  together  in  Basle
beyond the range of the G-10 countries alone. Although the responsibility will remain at national
level in future, the closer international cooperation among  national  supervisory  authorities  will
improve mutual information, in addition to devising common standards.
VI
Information and communication: these are the keywords for the interaction of the
markets  and  for  the  globalisation  of  business.  To  my  mind,  information  and  communication
must also be the keywords for collaboration among central banks; naturally at the regional level,
and particularly at the global level, too. In this context, I continue to believe that the G-10 is a
forum that is useful and has proved its worth. But, needless to say, global collaboration must be
much more broadly based. It should encompass all major players.  It  is  this  conviction  that  has
recently prompted the BIS to invite a number of central banks from South-East Asia to become
new members.
Furthermore,  the  G-10  working  parties  -  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision,  the  Euro-Currency  Standing  Committee,  and  the  Committee  on  Payment  and
Settlement Systems - have invited representatives of non-G-10 countries, in order increasingly to
address questions connected with the emerging markets. At the same time, the Governors have
enlarged their meetings in Basle. Non-members of the BIS are also being invited to take part in
the informal discussions and make their views known.
The discussions in Basle cover a wide variety of topics:
 the instruments, strategy and environment of monetary policy,
questions of foreign exchange reserve policy,
BIS Review   18/1997
- 7 -
  recent  developments  in  the  markets,  such  as  changes  in  financial
intermediation or electronic money,
and much else besides.
I am sure that such exchanges of views will enhance mutual understanding of the
problems and the approaches to solutions. Needless to say, the conditions for central banks are
heterogeneous all over the world. But even so - or precisely for that reason - collaboration at a
global level may be fruitful. In any case, the globalised markets are pushing all central banks -
regardless  of  their  regional  affiliation  -  in  the  same  direction.  Not  in  the  sense  that  all  central
banks are forced to think or act in the same way. But no matter which actual policies a central
bank may pursue, the globalised markets demand a  high  degree  of  solidarity.  This  is  a  current
and future challenge facing every central bank in the world.
BIS Review   18/1997
