Mr.  Carse  reviews  the  progress  being  made  towards  global  regulation
Address  by  Mr.  David  T.B.  Carse,  a  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Aurthority,  at  the  Bankers’  Association  for  Foreign  Trade  75th  Anniversary  Annual  Meeting
held in Florida on 6/5/97.
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  this  morning  to  talk  to  you  about  the  Hong  Kong
perspective on the trends in global regulation.
I  have  been  asked  particularly  to  talk  about  our  experience  of  being  a  host
supervisor - in other words, what it is like to be on the receiving end of consolidated supervision.
This  is  quite  appropriate  because,  although  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  is  the  home
supervisor for a number of local banks with overseas operations, the distinguishing characteristic
of Hong Kong is that it is the host to almost 500 banks from over 40 different countries. This is
in keeping with its role as one of the leading international financial centres in the world with the
third largest representation of foreign banks and the fifth largest total of external assets.
Hong Kong after 1997
Of  course,  Hong  Kong’s  other  distinguishing  characteristic  is  that  it  will
experience a reversion of sovereignty to China in less than two months’ time. This has naturally
aroused much interest and speculation among the foreign banks based in Hong Kong about the
legal  and  regulatory  environment  which  will  apply  after  the  handover  on  30  June,  and  I  will
therefore  try  to  explain  to  you  briefly  the  main  features  of  the  arrangements  that  will  apply.
These arrangements are laid down in the Basic Law which establishes the post-1997 constitution
for Hong Kong. It is based on the “one country, two systems” concept under which Hong Kong
shall  enjoy  a  high  degree  of  autonomy  as  a  Special  Administrative  region  of  China.  In  the
banking and monetary areas, this means that:
Hong  Kong  shall  retain  the  status  of  an  international  financial  centre.  The
Government of Hong Kong shall be responsible for monetary policy and practice in Hong Kong
and  for  regulation  of  financial  markets  and  institutions.  There  shall  be  free  flow  of  capital
within, into and out of Hong Kong. The HK dollar,  as  the  local  legal  tender,  shall  continue  to
circulate  and  remain  freely  convertible.  It  must  be  backed  by  a  100%  reserve  fund.  The
Exchange Fund which holds the foreign currency reserves of Hong Kong shall be managed and
controlled by the Government of Hong Kong, primarily for regulating the exchange value of the
HK dollar.
The  framework  that  will  apply  after  1997  is  therefore  quite  clear.  The  question
which then follows is whether the framework will be applied in practice. I think that there are a
number of good reasons to believe  that  it  will  be.  In  the  first  place,  we  now  have  institutional
arrangements in Hong Kong to put the financial sector provisions of the Basic Law into practice.
In  particular,  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  which  I  represent,  has  the  legal  powers,
monetary  instruments  and  financial  resources  -  including  US$  63  billion  of  foreign  currency
reserves - to fulfill its role as the central bank of Hong Kong and to maintain the value of the HK
dollar.  During  the  four  years  of  its  existence,  the  HKMA  has  built  up  a  good  working
relationship with the People’s Bank of China which has made it clear in  public  that  it  will  not
take  over  the  role  of  the  Monetary  Authority  in  Hong  Kong  after  1997.  The  separate  role  for
Hong  Kong  after  1997  is  underscored  by  its  separate  membership  alongside  China  of
international  organizations  such  as  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  the  Asian
Development Bank, and its participation in the IMF’s New Arrangements to Borrow.
BIS Review   55/1997
- 2 -
Of  course,  what  matters  is  not  what  I  say  but  what  the  market  actually  thinks.
Judged  by  this  criterion,  there  is  genuine  confidence  about  the  future.  This  is  shown  by  the
consistent stability of the HK dollar; the strength of the stock market, though it has its ups and
downs  in  line  with  expectations  about  US  interest  rates;  the  growth  in  HK  dollar  deposits  of
about 20% over the last year; and the decline in the margin of our 10-year Exchange Fund Notes
over US Treasuries  to  around  50bp  compared  with  90bp  at  the  end  of  1996.  So  far  as  foreign
banks operating in Hong  Kong  are  concerned,  Hong  Kong  political  risk  largely  seems  to  have
disappeared  as  an  issue.  We  have  seen  no  exodus  of  banks  from  Hong  Kong;  rather,  we  have
seen  an  increased  appetite  among  the  foreign  banks  to  take  on  long-term  HK  dollar  assets,
including residential mortgage loans and syndicated credits. Although the margin on these have
come down significantly over the last year, they  are  still  attractive  compared  with  the  margins
available to foreign banks in their home countries.
The importance of international regulatory standards
We  do  not  anticipate  any  radical  changes  in  Hong  Kong’s  system  of  banking
supervision after 1997, nor in its attitude to the entry of foreign banks. No doubt, however, these
will  evolve  in  line  with  trends  in  global  regulation.  This  reflects  the  guiding  principle  of  our
supervision  in  Hong  Kong  which  is  to  follow  international  standards.  There  are  a  number  of
practical  reasons  for  wanting  to  do  so.  First,  it  is  in  keeping  with  Hong  Kong’s  role  as  an
international financial centre. Reputable foreign banks will only want to do business in a market
where the rules of the game are familiar and credible. Their home supervisors will certainly feel
the same way. There is thus absolutely no advantage for centres such as Hong Kong to compete
on  laxity  or  to  market  themselves  as  places  where  dubious  transactions  can  be  conducted  and
concealed.  Second,  when  trying  to  enforce  new  supervisory  guidelines  and  rules  on  our  local
banks,  one  of  the  first  questions  they  will  ask  is  what  is  being  done  elsewhere.  It  is  thus  very
helpful to be able to point to the relevant international standard in order to confer legitimacy on
what we are trying to achieve.
Of course, this presupposes that international standards are relevant to individual
countries and territories. The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision has played a major role
in setting standards which do have such relevance. In particular, the Basle capital adequacy ratio,
which is still called the “Cooke ratio” in parts of Asia in deference to our chairman here today,
has become the de facto capital standard in most supervisory systems around the world despite
the fact that it was originally intended to apply only to internationally active banks. Despite this
enormous  achievement,  however,  it  can  be  argued  that  the  subsequent  work  of  the  Committee
did  become  somewhat  too  narrowly  focused  on  issues  which  are  of  principal  interest  to
supervisors from G-10 countries. This is only  natural  since  these  are  the  people  who  comprise
the Basle Committee but it perhaps left something of a vacuum in the setting and promulgation
of standards with more global relevance.
In  particular,  much  of  the  work  of  the  Basle  Committee  has  been  dominated  in
recent years by the formulation of its recommendations to extend the capital adequacy regime to
cover  the  market  risk  arising  from  trading  in  derivatives  and  other  financial  instruments.  I  am
not  denying  that  a  capital  regime  to  cover  market  risk  is  necessary,  particularly  for  those
countries like the United States whose banks are heavily  involved  in  trading  activities.  We  are
intending  to  introduce  the  regime  in  Hong  Kong  by  the  end  of  this  year,  and  a  number  of
countries in the Asian region are intending to do the same. However, they are doing so largely to
be  seen  to  be  adhering  to  international  standards,  rather  than  because  their  banks  are  running
substantial  trading  risks.  Even  in  Hong  Kong,  which  has  the  fifth  largest  foreign  exchange
BIS Review   55/1997
- 3 -
market in the world and the seventh largest derivatives market, the incorporation of market risk
will have only a minor impact on most banks’ capital adequacy ratios.
The  concentration  on  market  risk  has  perhaps  led  to  other  supervisory  areas  not
receiving the attention which they  deserve.  In  particular,  credit  risk  still  remains  the  main  risk
facing most banks, and it is therefore disappointing that there are still no internationally agreed
guidelines in areas such as loan classification, bad debt provisioning and non-accrual of interest
on  non-  performing  loans.  Most  countries  in  Asia,  including  Hong  Kong,  do  have  their  own
rules  in  these  areas  but  the  lack  of  an  agreed  standard  makes  it  difficult  to  undertake
cross-country comparisons of asset quality. I  hope,  therefore,  that  this  is  an  area  which  can  be
addressed by the Basle Committee in the near future.
I am encouraged by the fact that the Basle Committee has recently intensified its
efforts to reach out  beyond  the  G-10  countries  and  to  take  a  more  proactive  leadership  role  in
helping  to  strengthen  banking  supervision  in  all  countries.  In  particular,  the  recently  issued
consultative  paper  on  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision  is  an  important
milestone.  The  Core  Principles  are  intended  to  establish  minimum  requirements  which  would
apply  in  all  supervisory  systems.  It  is  intended  that  supervisory  authorities  around  the  world
should use them as an agenda against which to assess the adequacy of their own systems and to
press for changes to address any deficiencies. The Core Principles will also increasingly become
the standard by which outside commentators, including other supervisors, judge the supervisory
framework  of  individual  countries.  This  external  discipline  will  help  to  provide  an  additional
incentive to improve supervisory systems.
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority is proud to have been one of the supervisory
authorities which participated in the drafting of the Core Principles. We were also members of
the  Working  Party  of  both  G-10  and  non-G10  countries  which  recently  prepared  a  report  on
measures  to  foster  financial  stability  which  was  submitted  to  the  meeting  of  G-7  Finance
Ministers last month in Washington. This includes recommendations not only on the formulation
of  sound  principles  and  practices,  but  also  on  how  these  can  be  effectively  implemented,
including the role of international financial institutions in this respect.
Regulatory cooperation in Asia
These initiatives are being supplemented in Asia by regional cooperation on both
a  bilateral  and  multilateral  basis.  There  have  been  a  number  of  factors  driving  this.  The
aftermath of the Mexican crisis in January 1995, which saw speculative attacks on a number of
Asian  currencies,  encouraged  the  view  that  there  was  a  need  for  countries  in  the  region  to
strengthen  their  defences  in  this  area.  We  have  thus  seen  the  arrangement  of  an  interlocking
series of bilateral repo agreements using US Treasuries between Asian central banks, including
the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority.  These  agreements  are  intended  to  provide  additional
liquidity for exchange rate stability purposes.
More generally, there has also perhaps been a feeling among the Asian countries
that  the  existing  arrangements  for  central  bank  cooperation  were  somewhat  “euro-centric”  and
did not take adequate account of the growing importance of the Asian region where over 40% of
the  world’s  foreign  currency  reserves  are  now  held.  This  feeling  has  to  some  extent  been
addressed  by  the  more  participative  approach  now  being  adopted  by  the  Basle  Committee  and
the BIS. But there is nonetheless a view that greater regional cooperation among Asian central
banks  is  both  necessary  and  desirable.  This  has  been  summed  up  in  the  concept  of  an  “Asian
BIS”, though this is somewhat misleading as there are no immediate plans to move towards the
BIS Review   55/1997
- 4 -
institutional  structure  which  the  name  would  imply.  Rather,  the  current  emphasis  is  on
promoting an informal grouping of central banks called EMEAP (“Executives’ Meeting of East
Asia and Pacific Central Banks) which is exploring opportunities for cooperation in areas such
as  payment  systems,  reserves  management  and  banking  supervision.  Among  other  things,  this
may provide the opportunity over time to develop a more distinctive and focused regional voice
on international supervisory issues.
Consolidated supervision
I will now return to the topic which I raised at the beginning of my speech, which
is how we view consolidated supervision from the receiving end. I suppose that it goes without
saying  that  we  are  in  favour  of  the  concept  of  consolidated  supervision.  As  an  international
financial centre, we are vulnerable to adverse developments in banks abroad and we rely heavily
on  the  consolidated  supervision  of  the  supervisors  of  those  banks.  The  ability  to  conduct
consolidated  supervision  is  a  key  factor  in  whether  we  regard  the  home  supervision  of  a
particular bank as adequate - which is one of the criteria for granting a banking licence in Hong
Kong. Within the legal framework in Hong Kong we try to cooperate with overseas regulators to
ensure  that  they  can  effectively  undertake  consolidated  supervision.  In  particular,  we  allow
home supervisors to carry out on-site examinations of their institutions in Hong Kong subject to
obtaining our prior consent - which we have not hitherto withheld. In addition, the Hong Kong
Monetary  Authority  itself  has  the  power  to  pass  on  information  to  foreign  regulators  to  assist
them  in  the  exercise  of  their  functions.  At  present,  however,  this  power  to  disclose  does  not
extend to information about individual customers, though this is an area which we are intending
to review in the light of the recommendations of the Basle Committee. In the meantime, we do
not impose constraints on access to customer information in the course of on-site examinations
in Hong Kong by overseas regulators.
What reservations I have about consolidated supervision therefore relate mainly to
how the system operates in practice:
first,  it  may  of  course  be  difficult  in  practice  to  assess  the  adequacy  of
consolidated supervision by a home supervisor and how much reliance should be placed on it by
the  host  supervisor.  As  mentioned  above,  the  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking
Supervision will provide a useful checklist in this respect, but there will still be the problem of
whether the Principles are being effectively implemented. A more active monitoring role by the
International Monetary Fund may help in this respect. But in some cases the best judgment that
it may be possible to make is that the supervisory authority is actively working to establish the
necessary capability - which is essentially the view that we have taken in relation to the People’s
Bank of China in licensing banks from the Mainland;
second, it is important to realize that, in undertaking consolidated supervision, the
primary  responsibility  of  the  home  supervisor  will  be  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  the  parent
bank.  While  this  should  hopefully  help  to  promote  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking
group  as  a  whole,  including  overseas  banking  subsidiaries,  the  interests  of  home  and  host
supervisor may not necessarily coincide. Despite  this,  the  various  regulators  should,  of  course,
try  to  cooperate  to  the  maximum  extent  possible;  third,  and  related  to  the  previous  point,
cooperation will only be possible if there is an adequate two-way flow of information. However,
the main focus of consolidated supervision sometimes appears to be for the home supervisor to
obtain  information  from  the  host  supervisor.  There  is  less  emphasis  on  reciprocal  flows.  For
example, in the recent paper prepared jointly by the Basle Committee and the Offshore Group of
Banking  Supervisors  on  Supervision  of  Cross-Border  Banking,  only  four  paragraphs  out  of
BIS Review   55/1997
- 5 -
forty-three  are  devoted  to  information  flows  from  home  supervisor  to  host  supervisor.  In  our
experience, home supervisors can be reluctant to share information with us, either at the time of
authorization or, more particularly, if serious problems arise in the parent bank. In some cases,
however,  the  situation  is  improving  and  the  recent  more  proactive  approach  of  the  Japanese
supervisory authorities deserves a commendable mention in this respect.
I stress  again  that  I  am  not  intending  to  cast  doubt  on  the  value  of  consolidated
supervision,  but  rather  to  point  out  that  the  reality  does  not  always  match  the  rhetoric.  The
answer  can  only  be  for  individual  supervisory  authorities  to  build  up  a  relationship  of  trust
which  allows  for  a  free  flow  of  information  in  both  directions,  adequate  safeguards  on  the
confidentiality  of  information  received  and  an  avoidance  of  over-hasty  and  disruptive
supervisory action based on that information. At the end of the day  the  effectiveness  of  global
regulation depends in large measure on cooperation among regulators. As a major international
financial centre, Hong Kong will continue, after 30 June 1997 as it has done before, to play its
part in fostering such cooperation.
BIS Review   55/1997
