Dr. Brash explains the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s new inflation target, and
New  Zealander’s  expectations  about  inflation  and  growth      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  Dr.  Donald  T.  Brash,  to  the  Canterbury  Employers’  Chamber  of
Commerce in Christchurch on 23/1/97.
Introduction
As perhaps you know, this is the fourth time on which I have been invited to address
the Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce at your first luncheon meeting of the New Year
and I want to use the occasion to talk about two issues.
First, I want to talk about the new Policy Targets Agreement, amending the inflation
target from 0 to 2 percent to 0 to 3 percent, signed last month. And secondly, I want to talk about the
expectations  which  we  New  Zealanders  have  about  both  inflation  and  economic  growth.  In  some
The new inflation target
First, the new Policy Targets Agreement. There have been two changes made in the
new PTA, but I suspect that to the general public the only difference between the new Agreement and
all of the earlier ones is that the new Agreement has changed the ‘definition’ of price stability from 0
to 2 percent to 0 to 3 percent, while making it  clear  that  delivering  that  price  stability  remains  the
single  objective  of  monetary  policy  and  constitutes  the  best  way  in  which  the  Reserve  Bank  can
contribute to New Zealand’s economic development.
Some will ask in anger why the inflation target is still so low, and why the Bank will
continue to focus monetary policy on delivering that target, when there are other objectives - such as
economic growth, employment, and export competitiveness - which are at least as important and in
many respects more so. Others will feel betrayed that the ceiling of the inflation target has been raised
from 2 to 3 percent, or that the mid-point of the target has been raised from 1 percent to 1.5 percent,
particularly given the fact that the two largest parties in Parliament were both strong advocates of a
mid-point of 1 percent during the last election campaign. I want to try to respond to both groups of
critics.
In  many  ways  the  easiest  critics  to  respond  to  are  those  who  feel  that  the  inflation
target  is  still  too  low,  or  that,  given  the  extent  to  which  the  economy  has  been  slowing  in  recent
months and the extent of the pressures on the export sector, the Bank’s objectives should have been
widened to include those other objectives. For there is in fact no evidence that monetary policy can,
by  tolerating  a  little  more  inflation,  engineer  a  sustainably  higher  rate  of  growth,  or  a  sustainably
higher  level  of  employment,  or  a  sustainable  improvement  in  export  competitiveness.  To  be  sure,
monetary  policy  can  engineer  faster  growth,  higher  employment  and 
improved  exporter
competitiveness  in  the  short  term  -  by  tolerating  a  bit  more  inflation  right  now,  there  is  not  much
doubt that growth and employment would be a little higher in 1997 than otherwise, and that exporters
would enjoy the benefits of a lower exchange rate. Most of that faster growth and higher employment
would be bought at the cost of tricking working New Zealanders into accepting a reduction in their
real wages, as prices rose ahead of wages. However, it would not last. Before too long, people would
recognise the deception and would demand compensation in the form of higher wages and salaries.
Within a very short time, inflation would be rising, growth would be back to its previous, lower, level
and we would be left contemplating the cost of reducing inflation again - and nobody should forget
the very substantial one-off costs,  in  terms  of  unemployment  and  lost  output,  incurred  in  reducing
inflation from levels above 15 percent in the mid-1980s to our current situation of price stability in
the early and mid-1990s.
BIS Review   23/1997
- 2 -
Not only is there no evidence that tolerating more inflation can engineer sustainably
faster  real  growth,  there  is  now  overwhelming  evidence  that  high  inflation  positively  damages  the
way  in  which  the  economy  works  -  reduces  the  capacity  for  sustainable  growth  and  higher
employment,  and  of  course  also  does  huge  social  damage,  through  the  arbitrary  redistribution  of
income and wealth which it creates.
There  is  also  very  considerable  evidence  that  even  quite  low  rates  of  inflation  do
damage  to  growth  and  employment,  and  virtually  no  evidence  that  inflation  actually  helps  those
objectives. This is why the second of the two changes in the Policy Targets Agreement makes clear
that  it  is  precisely  in  order  to  enable  monetary  policy  to  make  its  maximum  contribution  to
sustainable ‘growth, employment and development opportunities’ that the Bank is directed to focus
on maintaining a stable general level of prices.
But  isn’t  there  some  concern,  fostered  in  the  popular  media  by  the  American
economist Paul Krugman, that if inflation is too low it may actually damage growth? In other words,
even if we accept that high or even moderate inflation is damaging, isn’t it possible that central banks
which are excessively obsessive about achieving no inflation might actually be harming the economy
and the society they claim to be helping?
This  brings  me  to  the  second  group  of  critics,  who  are  concerned  that  in  changing
from  0  to  2  percent  to  0  to  3  percent  we  have  betrayed  the  intention  of  the  Reserve  Bank  Act,
requiring  that  monetary  policy  focus  exclusively  on  delivering  ‘stability  in  the  general  level  of
prices’.
There is quite intense debate going on at the moment around the world among central
bankers and academic economists about what the best specification of a low inflation target should
be. There are two broad schools.
The  first  school  accepts  that  monetary  policy  should  be  focused  on  delivering
predictably low inflation but argues that for several reasons that target is best expressed as inflation in
a range of 1 to 3 percent. The best known advocate of this ‘low positive inflation’ school is probably
Stanley  Fischer,  formerly  of  MIT  and  now  Senior  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  the  International
Monetary Fund. He is visiting New Zealand next month, and it is likely that his views will receive
appropriately wide media coverage at that time. He argues for this ‘low positive’ inflation target for
various reasons, of which three are particularly important: The way in which inflation  is  measured
results in quite a significant over-statement of actual inflation. Estimates of this over-statement in the
United  States  have  suggested  that,  in  that  country,  the  ‘bias’  in  the  measurement  of  inflation  is
between 0.7 and 2.0 percent, with bias of 1.1 percent very recently estimated by a group chaired by
Michael Boskin on behalf of the United States Senate  Finance  Committee.  For  this  reason,  central
banks should target measured inflation of at least 1 percent, because to target anything lower than that
would be to target de facto deflation.
Because  at  some  stage  in  the  cycles  through  which  all  economies  go  it  may  be
necessary in the interests of maintaining a high level of employment for there to be some reduction in
inflation-adjusted  (or  real)  wages,  having  a  low  positive  level  of  inflation  is  more  desirable  than
having  absolutely  no  inflation.  This  is  because,  with  some  inflation,  real  wages  can  be  slightly
reduced  by  simply  giving  no  increase  in  nominal  wages,  whereas  with  no  inflation  reducing  real
wages involves having to actually reduce nominal wages. Real wages can still be reduced, even with
no inflation, but only at the expense of higher unemployment.
Similarly, it is argued that at some stage in the economic cycle it may be desirable for
inflation-adjusted interest rates to fall below zero to provide a strong stimulus to demand and, since it
BIS Review   23/1997
- 3 -
is not generally practical for nominal interest rates to fall below zero, it is helpful if inflation is some
low positive number to make negative real interest rates possible.
The second school of thought argues for a lower inflation target, often characterised
by 0 to 2 percent but sometimes expressed as the level of average prices remaining stable over time.
Those  who  favour  this  view  discount  the  arguments  advanced  by  the  ‘low  positive’  school.  They
acknowledge that there is an upward bias in the way in which inflation is measured, but argue that in
most countries outside the United States that bias is almost certainly less than 1 percent and certainly
could not justify a target with a mid-point of 2 percent. (The New Zealand Government Statistician is
strongly convinced that there is less bias in the measurement of the New Zealand CPI than there is in
the  measurement  of  the  US  CPI.)  They  acknowledge  that  it  has  not  been  easy  to  adjust  nominal
wages downwards in recent years, but argue that in substantial part that is a result of the persistently
high inflation most countries have experienced in recent decades, so that that should be no more than
a transitional problem. Moreover, even though it may be difficult to reduce the wages of an individual
employee,  that  does  not  prevent  a  significant  reduction  in  unit  labour  costs  as  a  result  both  of
unchanged wages and positive productivity, and of natural turnover in the labour force. Critics of the
‘low positive’ school challenge the assertion that monetary policy occasionally needs to reduce real
interest  rates  below  zero,  and  note  other  ways  in  which  monetary  policy  can  stimulate  demand,
particularly in very open economies where movements in the exchange rate play an important role in
influencing aggregate demand in the short term.
Those favouring very low inflation (0 to 2 percent) argue that not only are there no
advantages in tolerating a ‘low positive’ rate of inflation there are also significant disadvantages of
even  quite  low  rates  of  inflation.  Thus  for  example  Martin  Feldstein  of  Harvard  University  (and
current president of the National Bureau of Economic Research in the US) argues strongly that even
very  low  levels  of  inflation  significantly  exacerbate  the  biases  in  the  tax  system  which  encourage
consumption,  discourage  saving,  and  encourage  excessive  investment  in  residential  property.  In  a
recent paper he  argued  that  reducing  measured  inflation  from  3  percent  to  1  percent  in  the  United
States would result in a permanent increase in the level of US GDP of 1 percent, a very large gain in
economic well-being even if there is some temporary loss of output required to  reduce  inflation  to
that level. Others have also argued that the interaction between inflation on the one hand and tax and
financial reporting systems geared to historical cost accounting on the other creates a significant bias
against capital-intensive investment projects and all investment with a long pay-back  period,  and  a
bias in favour of highly-geared companies and investments with a short pay-back period.
This debate is by no means concluded. At a major conference I attended last August
in the United States, it seemed to me that a majority of those who expressed an opinion favoured a 0
to  2  percent  target,  and  that  has  been  my  own  clear  predilection.  But  given  that  there  are  very
experienced  central  bankers  and  monetary  economists  in  both  schools,  it  is  at  this  stage  quite
inappropriate to be dogmatic, and in my own view a target which involves doing our utmost to keep
measured inflation between 0 and 3 percent is certainly consistent with the intention of the legislation
within which monetary policy is operated.
Indeed, irrespective of where the mid-point of the target range should be, there may
be some advantage in having a slightly wider inflation target than the original 0 to 2 percent target. A
number of observers have suggested that a target with a width of only 2 percentage points requires an
excessive degree of activism on the part of the central bank, and that a slightly wider band, whatever
its  mid-point,  would  be  sensible.  This  has  been  argued,  for  example,  by  David  Turner,  an  OECD
economist.  The  tension  is  between,  on  the  one  hand,  choosing  a  target  range  which  effectively
anchors inflation expectations at a low level but which is so narrow that it provokes excessive policy
activism and risks loss of credibility by being frequently exceeded; and on the other, a target range
which  does  a  less  effective  job  of  anchoring  inflation  expectations,  but  which  requires  less  policy
BIS Review   23/1997
- 4 -
activism and protects credibility by being rarely breached. A 0 to 3 percent range seems a reasonable
compromise.
But whether there is any benefit at all from a wider target band depends significantly
on how a wider band, with a higher ‘ceiling’, affects the public’s expectations of future inflation. If
people understand the new target as meaning that the Bank, under Government instructions, is now
willing  to  accept  1  percent  more  inflation  than  previously,  then  nothing  positive  will  have  been
achieved at all - and indeed there  will  almost  certainly  be  net  cost  involved  in  the  change.  This  is
because  any  increase  in  inflationary  expectations  would  tend  to  feed  into  slightly  higher  pricing
decisions,  slightly  higher  wage  settlements,  slightly  greater  eagerness  to  borrow,  slightly  less
enthusiasm  for  saving.  If  the  Bank  were  willing  to  accept  this  behaviour,  ‘accommodate’  it  in  the
jargon, we would end up with somewhat higher inflation but no other result (though of  course  the
higher inflation would have all the negative consequences for the real economy referred to earlier). If
the Bank were in fact not prepared to accommodate this increase in inflationary expectations - which
it  would  not  be  I  hasten  to  emphasise  -  then  the  end  result  of  increased  inflationary  expectations
would simply be higher real interest rates, somewhat lower economic growth, and somewhat higher
unemployment. If that were the end result, the widening of the inflation target would not only provide
no benefit it would be positively damaging.
So I think it is crucially important that nobody misunderstand what the Reserve Bank
is doing. Let me be absolutely clear. The Reserve Bank has not gone soft on inflation. We will not be
targeting an inflation rate of 3 percent, or even an inflation rate close to 3 percent. The Reserve Bank
will be striving to keep inflation well inside the 0 to 3 percent range, and we best do that by trying to
have inflation as close to the middle part of the range as possible.
That does not mean, of course, that we will always hit the target, any more than we
always hit 0 to 2 percent. But it does mean that we will be constantly implementing monetary policy
with the intention of having inflation as defined around the middle part of the target. If we do this, the
number of occasions on which we miss the target should be minimised. Indeed, given the wider target
range, there should be fewer breaches than in the past.
Inflation and growth expectations
And this leads naturally into the second major theme of my address today, about New
Zealanders’ expectations about inflation and growth. It is my contention that expectations about both
need to become a lot more realistic.
First,  let’s  look  at  expectations  of  inflation.  Yes,  there  are  some  encouraging  signs
that New Zealanders’ expectations of future inflation have fallen substantially over the last decade as
actual  inflation  has  fallen.  Surveys  of  inflation  expectations  currently  suggest  that,  on  average,
householders now expect year-ahead inflation to be around 3.9 percent, well down on the levels of
the late  1980s  (year-ahead  inflation  expectations  were  12.5  percent  on  average  towards  the  end  of
1987, and were still 8.3 percent near the end of 1989), while 10 year bond yields are slightly lower
than 10 year bond yields in Australia and less than 1 percent higher than 10 year yields in the US.
Wage settlements in recent years have also been one of the areas where inflation expectations seem to
have  been  subdued,  with  a  great  many  wage  settlements  concluded  at  levels  which  have,  until
recently at least, put little upward pressure on prices.
However,  other  indications  are  not  nearly  as  encouraging  and  suggest  that  New
Zealanders’ inflation expectations are still showing the effects of the two decades of high inflation we
endured in the 1970s and 1980s.
BIS Review   23/1997
- 5 -
Look at New Zealanders’ saving behaviour for example. Among those with financial
assets,  how  many  are  locking  in  the  high  real  interest  rates  they  purport  to  see  by  investing  in
long-term  fixed  interest  instruments,  such  as  term  bank  deposits  or  government  bonds?  The  short
answer is ‘very few’. To be sure, our bond yields are now comparable to international bond yields,
and I used to deduce from that that the new monetary policy  framework  had  produced  a  profound
reduction in inflationary expectations. I now believe that I was unjustifiably optimistic, because it is
foreign  savers  who  have  bought  our  bonds  in  huge  volumes,  thereby  reducing  bond  yields  to
international  levels.  More  than  half  the  New  Zealand  government  bonds  on  issue  are  now  held
overseas,  and  the  proportion  of  some  of  the  longer-dated  bonds  held  overseas  is  even  higher.  (In
recent  months,  for  example,  more  than  70  percent  of  the  longest-dated  nominal  bond  held  by  the
market has been held by overseas investors.) If we look at the term structure of the New Zealand-
sourced deposits of any major bank, we will see that overwhelmingly New Zealanders are holding
their cash and fixed interest investments at very short term, the great bulk with a maturity of less than
12 months. Indeed, most banks have close to 90 percent of their total deposits maturing within six
months, and very few have more than 5 percent of their deposits maturing beyond 12 months. By and
large, most New Zealanders do not invest their savings in long-term fixed interest  securities  at  all,
despite what are, on the face of it, very attractive inflation-adjusted interest rates.
What are we doing with our savings? Though the data on saving behaviour in New
Zealand  is  not  very  good,  anecdotal  evidence  strongly  suggests  that  New  Zealanders  invest  any
available saving in some form of equity investment, most typically property: a bigger house to live in,
another  house  to  rent  out,  a  bigger  farm,  another  piece  of  farmland,  perhaps  a  block  of  flats,  a
beach-side  section,  an  industrial  property,  a  commercial  building,  perhaps  a  forest  block,  anything
which, the best-selling books and advertisements constantly tell us, will protect us against inflation.
Protect us against inflation? But we’ve hardly had any inflation for the last six years and, despite the
biggest change in New Zealand’s constitutional arrangements this century, we have just had the new
Coalition Government re-affirm the strong commitment to price stability. True, but we’ve certainly
had two decades of high inflation in the memory of  all  adult  New  Zealanders  and  we  all  know  of
people who lost most of their life’s savings over that period by ‘making the mistake’ of investing in
‘secure’ fixed-interest investments.
I’ve told the true story of my uncle so many times that I am almost embarrassed to tell
it again, but in my view it contains the explanation of much of the current approach to saving in New
Zealand, so I will tell it again. After a life-time of orcharding in the Nelson area, he sold his orchard
in 1971 and invested the sale proceeds ‘safely’ to provide income and security for his retirement. To
be absolutely safe, he invested the entire proceeds in 18-year government stock, at the then-interest
rate of 5.4 percent. Perhaps fortunately, he did not live until those bonds matured in 1989, but if he
had done the $30,000 he received from selling his orchard in 1971 and which matured in 1989 would
have bought him by that time just one  Toyota  Corolla  car  (with  a  little  change).  In  1971,  $30,000
would have bought him 11 Toyota Corollas. In the space of just 18 years, he had lost some 90 percent
of  his  retirement  nest  egg,  all  by  making  the  mistake  of  assuming  that  inflation  would  stay  at  the
relatively low level of 1971.
As I say, most adult New Zealanders know stories similar to that one. Or they know
stories which tell the same message in another way. Stories about people who bought a property with
borrowed money in the early 1970s and watched the price of the house increase perhaps eight- or ten-
fold over the next 20 years, with the value of the equity actually invested in the house (after allowing
for the money borrowed to help finance the purchase) increasing perhaps 30 times. Perhaps we have
had  an  experience  like  that  ourselves.  Even  if  we  have  not,  we  are  assailed  by  books  and
advertisements on all sides which assure us that property investment is the best way of ‘protecting
you against inflation’, to say nothing of making the most effective use of the tax system. Even if we
are  not  familiar  with  the  detail  of  the  statistics,  we  know  that  in  recent  years  residential  property
prices have risen hugely in much of the country, most obviously in Auckland. According to REINZ
BIS Review   23/1997
- 6 -
data, the median price of house sales in the Auckland district rose by 53 percent over the three years
to December 1996, by 36 percent in the Southland district (including Queenstown), and by 29 percent
in  the  Waikato/Bay  of  Plenty  district.  Even  rural  land  prices,  which  have  come  back  markedly  in
some  areas  in  recent  months,  rose  by  45  percent  over  the  three  years  to  the  first  half  of  1996,
according to Valuation New Zealand data. Is it any wonder therefore that New Zealanders who claim
to  believe  that  consumer  price  inflation  is  more  or  less  under  control  continue  to  borrow  money
enthusiastically at 9, 10, and 11 percent to acquire property?
Lest there be any misunderstanding, I am assuredly not against investing in property,
let alone against home ownership. I own a home and a small amount of other property myself. I am
merely saying that inflationary expectations are alive and well in the minds of most New Zealanders
and that, until that situation changes, we will inevitably be looking at interest rates which look high in
comparison to current consumer price inflation. Conversely,  of  course,  as  inflationary  expectations
abate, and particularly as expectations of property price inflation abate, the overall level of interest
rates will tend to be lower also.
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US central bank, has on several occasions suggested
that price stability obtains when economic agents - businesses and private individuals - no longer take
account of the prospective change in the general price level in their economic decision-making. It is
clear that we still have a little way to go.
What about New Zealanders’ expectations for economic growth? Are these too quite
unrealistic? I believe that they are, at least based on current policies and attitudes.
In  the  early  1990s,  New  Zealand  achieved  real  economic  growth  of  more  than  5
percent per annum for two years in succession. We were told that we were growing faster than any
other OECD economy, and at growth rates comparable to those achieved by the East Asian ‘tiger’
economies. We began to believe that, as a result of the economic reforms of the last decade, we too
were capable of 5 or 6 percent growth indefinitely and all of us wanted to believe that. Sadly, we can
not, or at least there is no evidence yet that we can. The very fast growth of 1993 and 1994 was the
result in part of the one-off productivity gains resulting from the micro-economic reforms of the late
1980s  and  early  1990s,  and  in  a  greater  part  of  the  economy  having  available  a  large  number  of
unemployed and underemployed people, and unutilised industrial capacity, as a result of the recession
of 1991 and early 1992. As these people and this capacity were brought back into productive work,
the rate of growth of real output jumped well above its sustainable rate. The rate of unemployment
fell very sharply from almost 11 percent to just  over  6  percent  in  little  more  than  three  years  and,
while everybody hopes that unemployment falls further, it is clearly impossible to reduce the rate of
unemployment by 5 percentage points every three years indefinitely.
As I told the members of the Auckland Chamber last year, economic growth depends
primarily not on monetary policy but on real factors - on how fast the labour force is growing,  on
how  skilled  the  labour  force  is,  on  how  much  capital  that  labour  force  has  to  work  with,  on  the
technology embodied in the capital, on the efficiency of the price system in signalling where capital
can  be  most  productively  invested,  on  the  nature  of  regulations  and  restrictions  which  inhibit  the
effective working of the price system, and a host of other factors. Prices which are, on average, stable
assist the pricing system to work effectively, and thereby help to ensure that investment takes place in
the most economically sensible places. Prices which are, on average, stable tend to encourage saving,
and thereby help to finance additional investment. But stable prices won’t make the labour force grow
more  quickly,  or  make  the  labour  force  more  skilled,  or  improve  the  technology  embodied  in  the
capital equipment which the labour force uses, let alone make public sector enterprises more efficient;
or improve the quality of the education system; or move resources out of highly protected sectors into
those  which  can  be  competitive  on  international  markets;  or  improve  the  marketing  of  commodity
exports; or even give us East-Asian-type savings rates.
BIS Review   23/1997
- 7 -
I  would  argue  strongly  that  price  stability  has  been  helpful  to  the  improved
performance of the New Zealand economy in recent years, but I have never claimed for a moment
that  price  stability  has  been  the  sole  reason  for  our  better  performance,  nor  that  price  stability
guarantees  us  strong  growth  in  the  future.  In  addition  to  our  ability  to  bring  back  into  productive
work people and capital equipment that had become unemployed during the recession, our very much
improved growth performance in recent years has been the result of a whole range of policy changes
-  of  reduced  protection  and  regulation  in  the  private  sector,  of  corporatisation  and  privatisation  of
many formerly inefficient public sector enterprises, of a vastly  less  distorting  tax  structure,  of  port
reform, of labour market reform, and all the rest.
If we  want  to  build  on  that  achievement  in  the  years  ahead,  we  must  constantly  be
seeking areas where productivity can be further improved. At this stage, the aggregate numbers for
the economy as a whole have led the Reserve Bank to base its economic projections on trend labour
productivity growth of no more than 1.25 percent per annum. If that turns out to be the case (and 1.25
percent is  close  to  productivity  growth  in  other  mature  economies,  such  as  the  United  States1  and
Australia), total growth in GDP could well be around 3 percent per annum because of growth in the
labour  force.  But  growth  in  real  income  per  head,  which  must  surely  be  the  real  objective  of
economic policy, will not exceed 1.25 percent annually. If we want faster growth in spending than
that, we can in the short term borrow to supplement our income but, as we learned in the 1970s and
1980s, that is ultimately futile. In the longer term, higher incomes per head, and the higher spending
that that can bring, can only come from finding ways to accelerate productivity growth.
And how do we  do  that?  Certainly  not  by  debasing  the  currency  through  tolerating
inflation. The very rapid growth of the countries of East Asia is in part simply the result of their being
able to pick up ‘off the shelf’ modern technologies, which have taken decades to develop elsewhere.
In other words, there is a substantial element of ‘catch-up’ in the fast growth of East Asia. But the
growth  which  has  occasioned  so  much  envy  on  the  part  of  some  New  Zealanders  has  also  been
achieved  in  a  particular  cultural  environment  -  a  cultural  environment  which  places  enormous
emphasis  on  family  self-reliance,  which  abjures  reliance  on  the  state,  which  as  a  consequence
generates a savings rate roughly double the New Zealand rate, which pursues education and training
with a passion, which regards material affluence as  a  highly  desirable  goal.  New  Zealanders  have,
implicitly at least, chosen a slower growth path, by placing little emphasis on saving, by placing  a
more modest value on education and training, by valuing other goals more highly than affluence.
I recall seeing a television programme three or four years ago about Asian students in
our schools. The programme included comments from two New Zealand children that they resented
the  fact  that  the  Asian  children  worked  much  harder  than  they  did.  I  don’t  think  New  Zealand
children should be forced to work as hard as Asian children do, but  I  think  it  is  important  for  our
children  to  realise  that  they  live  in  a  world  where  those  who  work  hard  will  end  up  with  higher
incomes and more wealth than those who choose to work less hard. If we are only prepared to pay for
beer, we won’t be drinking a lot of champagne. The sooner we acknowledge that reality the better for
all concerned. By not doing so, the risk is not only that private spending will constantly be running up
against  income  constraints,  but  also  that  successive  governments  will  be  under  considerable  and
unreasonable  pressure  to  satisfy  demands  for  increased  public  expenditure.  Both  will  have  serious
implications for our ability to finance development from our own savings.
                                                  
1
Indeed, over the period from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the second  quarter  of  1996  overall  business
sector productivity in the United States grew by only 0.3 percent per annum.
BIS Review   23/1997
Conclusion
- 8 -
Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by summarising my main points.
First, I am confident that the new inflation target set me by Government is consistent
with the legislation under which the Bank operates and consistent with monetary policy continuing to
make the best contribution of which it is capable to New Zealand society and the development of the
New Zealand economy.
Secondly, whether the slightly wider target band enables the economy to operate with
slightly less central bank activism depends heavily on how the change affects the expectations which
people have of future inflation. If people assume that, on average, inflation will be 1 percent higher
than they assumed previously, there is a real danger that, far from providing additional flexibility, the
wider target will actually harm the way in which the economy works. Let it be clearly understood,
therefore, that the Bank will be implementing monetary policy with the intention of having inflation
as defined in my agreement with the Minister around the middle part of the 0 to 3 percent target. If
we  do  this,  the  number  of  occasions  on  which  we  miss  the  target  should  be  minimised.  It  would
clearly  be  very  damaging  if  the  impression  were  created  that  we  might  be  content  with  inflation
outcomes near the top of the target.
Thirdly, we still have some work to do in convincing New Zealanders that our money
is a predictably safe store of value for the relevant future. Until that is achieved, the interest rate at
which the willingness to save in the form of financial assets is matched by the willingness to borrow
will  continue  to  look  high  by  international  standards,  and  our  companies  will  continue  to  seek
unrealistically high rates of return on investment projects. That will tend to mean that investment is
lower than it might otherwise be, and that the exchange rate will be higher than otherwise.
Fourthly,  it  is  important  that,  while  constantly  aspiring  to  improve  our  national
growth  performance,  we  all  have  realistic  expectations  about  the  speed  at  which  the  New
Zealand economy can actually grow. Recent reforms have undoubtedly increased our sustainable
growth  rate  above  that  which  was  possible  in  the  past:  after  several  decades  of  growing  much
more slowly than other developed economies, we now seem capable  of  growth  comparable  to,
and probably a  little  higher  than,  growth  in  many  other  mature  economies,  such  as  the  United
States and  the  United  Kingdom.  But  we  will  probably  never  be  able  to  equal  the  growth  rates
achieved recently by the ‘catch-up economies’, while growing faster than we currently can will
depend  not  on  the  central  bank  being  a  little  more  tolerant  of  inflation  but  on  continuing
improvement in many other policy areas and on sustained productivity growth.
The  Reserve  Bank  makes  its  greatest  contribution  to  New  Zealand  society  by
achieving  and  maintaining  public  confidence  in  the  stability  of  the  unit  of  value,  predictably,
dependably, reliably.
BIS Review   23/1997
