Mr. Stals looks at the role of central banks in today’s economies and discusses
the  experience  of  South  Africa      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,
Dr. Chris Stals, given at a Conference on Current Economic Policy Issues arranged by the Economics
Department of the University of Durban-Westville and The Mercury in Durban on 25/4/97.1. The objective of monetary policy
There  is  fairly  general  consensus  in  the  world  of  central  banking  today  that  the
objective of monetary policy should be to protect the value of the currency. There was a time up to
the late ’seventies when economists and central bankers advocated a much wider role for monetary
policy  in  the  management  of  the  macroeconomy.  Under  the  influence  of  the  Keynesian  demand
management approach, monetary policy was seen as a useful instrument to be used by the authorities
to depress demand in times of an excessive rise in total real expenditure on goods and services, or to
stimulate real demand in times of recessionary conditions.
Monetary policy may  have  been  an  effective  instrument  for  the  purpose  of  demand
management in the global system of fixed par values, or in the times of Keynes’ General Theory of
Employment,  Interest  and  Money,  (1936),  when  a  lack  of  overall  demand  caused  production
resources to remain under-utilised. During the 1970’s, however, the Bretton Woods System of fixed
par values was replaced with the global system of floating exchange rates and over-stimulation with
expansionary  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  created  inflationary  pressures  and  persistent  balance  of
payments crisis situations.
The  emphasis  in  macroeconomic  policy  gradually  shifted  from  demand-side
management  to  supply-side  expansion  in  which  monetary  policy  was  assigned  a  different  role.
Monetary policy was no longer accepted as a useful short-term  anti-cyclical  policy  instrument,  but
was tasked with the responsibility of creating on a continuous basis a financial environment that will
be conducive to sustainable optimum economic growth in the longer term. This environment can be
characterised by stable overall financial conditions in which the rate of inflation will at all times be
low.
In  this  new  approach,  central  banks  focused  their  attention  on  major  financial
developments such as changes in the money supply and in bank credit extension, the level and the
structure of interest rates, changes in the official foreign reserves of the country, and movements in
the exchange rate. The ultimate objective of monetary policy became the value of the currency, and
whatever strategies were followed with the implementation of monetary policy, the success or failure
of the policy was measured by the level of inflation.
The major industrial countries were extremely successful with this new approach, and
during  the  eighties  most  major  economies  succeeded  in  reducing  inflation  to  relatively  low  levels,
that  is,  in  general  to  about  1  to  2  per  cent  per  annum.  This  left  but  little  choice  for  the  smaller
economies of the world to follow suit, particularly as the drive towards global financial integration
gained more momentum during the ninety- nineties.
The odd old-time economist who believes that contemporary monetary policy is on a
wrong  track,  particularly  in  the  developing  economies,  still  surfaces  from  time  to  time.  The
counter-argument  is  often  based  on  the  so-called  Phillips  Curve  or  an  assumed  trade-off  that  is
perceived to exist between inflation and economic growth. There is sufficient evidence to  confirm,
however,  that  in  the  longer  term,  maximum  economic  growth  is  invariably  attained  at  the  lowest
possible  rate  of  inflation.  The  development  of  the  theory  of  rational  expectations  questions  the
validity of the existence of a Phillips Curve trade-off, even in the short term.
BIS Review   49/1997
- 2 -
Be that as it may, a country such as South Africa with its open economy can hardly
maintain  overall  financial  stability  unless  its  rate  of  inflation  stays  more  or  less  in  line  with  the
average rate of inflation in the economies of its major international trading partners and competitors.
2. The South African experience
On  recommendation  of  the  De  Kock  Commission  of  Inquiry  into  the  Monetary
System  and  Monetary  Policy  in  South  Africa,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  adopted  money
supply targets as the anchor for its monetary policy model in 1986. After the money supply increased
by 27 per cent in 1988, and the rate of inflation at one stage rose over 20 per cent, the new monetary
policy model of the Reserve Bank was implemented with more vigour, and the rate of increase in the
money supply was gradually reduced to below 10 per cent in 1992. For two years in succession, the
M3 money supply rose by about 8 per cent.
Almost as if by magic, the rate of inflation also declined to below 10 per cent in 1993,
and stayed in single- digits for the next four years. In 1996, the average rate of inflation was only 7.4
per cent, the lowest level for any calendar year since 1972.
The Reserve Bank seems to have lost some of its tight  grip  over  the  money  supply
over the past three years, when the rate of increase in M3 accelerated to a level of about 15 per cent
during each of the years 1994, 1995 and 1996. These were, however, extremely difficult years with
major  political  and  social  reforms  and  the  gradual  reintegration  of  South  Africa  in  the  global
economy. The liberalisation of the foreign exchange market in South Africa, the access of more than
fifty  foreign  banks  to  the  South  African  financial  market,  and  the  easier  access  of  South  African
banks  to  foreign  sources  of  liquidity,  brought  major  changes  to  the  pattern  of  financial  flows  and
banking activities. The consequences of these changes for monetary policy must still be digested and
analysed in more detail, and some adjustments to the monetary policy model applied by the Reserve
Bank may be necessary.
Initially, the acceleration in the rate of increase in the money supply had little effect
on inflation. The rate of inflation indeed continued to decline to reach a lower turning point of 5.5 per
cent over the twelve months up to April 1996.
A sharp depreciation in the exchange rate of the rand after February 1996 provided a
new  shock  stimulus  for  inflation  in  South  Africa  and,  assisted  by  a  continuous  excessive  rate  of
increase in the money supply, the rate of increase in overall consumer prices accelerated to 9.8 per
cent over the twelve months up to February 1997.
The Reserve Bank is greatly concerned about these latest trends in the rate of increase
in the money supply, the rate of increase in bank credit extension, and in the rate of inflation. It is
accepted that the depreciation of the rand last year must inevitably lead to some price rises, but there
is a real danger that these price adjustments (of internationally tradable versus non-tradable goods and
services) will become embedded in a permanently higher rate of inflation.
3. The monetary policy model
The South African experience with the “monetarist” approach applied since 1986 was
relatively successful. The present threat of a new surge in inflation should not be seen as a failure of
the policy approach, but rather as a result of an external shock -- the currency depreciation -- and a
severe testing of the monetary policy model in light of the changing macroeconomic environment.
Central  bankers  may  concur  in  general  on  the  main  objective  of  monetary  policy,
namely to protect the value of the currency, but they do not all follow the same strategy in pursuing
BIS Review   49/1997
- 3 -
this objective. The  South  African  model,  which  is  also  used  by  many  other  countries,  is  primarily
linked to the growth in the M3 money supply, and predetermined guidelines for an acceptable rate of
growth  in  M3  should  be  seen  as  an  intermediate  objective  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  based  on  the
assumption that, over time, there is a  link  between  the  rate  of  expansion  in  the  money  supply  and
inflation. If the real economy, for example, expands by 3 per cent per annum, and the current rate of
inflation is 7 per cent, a continuous increase in the nominal money supply at rates of more than 10 per
cent per annum will eventually exert upward pressure on inflation. Increases in the money supply of
less than 10 per cent will drag inflation downwards.
Over the past few years, the Reserve Bank had indicated that an appropriate rate of
increase for the South African money supply would be between 6 and 10 per cent. The realised rates
of increase were, however, around the level of 15 per cent during each of the years 1994, 1995 and
1996.  Initially,  the  Bank  was  less  concerned  about  this  excessive  rate  of  increase  in  the  money
supply,  particularly  also  in  light  of  the  relatively  low  rates  of  increase  of  well  below  10  per  cent
established in 1992 and 1993. Inflation also remained  on  a  downward  path  up  to  April  1996.  It  is
only over the past twelve months therefore that inflation started moving up again, triggered  by  the
depreciation of the rand last year.
The persistently high rates of increase in M3 were partly caused by structural changes
in the South African economy. More people were absorbed in the market economy, earned regular
incomes, and opened bank accounts for the first time. More banks were established in South Africa,
particularly  foreign  banks,  and  offered  more  banking  services  to  the  South  African  public.  South
African banks found easier access to foreign sources of credit, and made the conventional Reserve
Bank instruments to control overall liquidity in the banking sector less effective.
The  main  reason  for  the  larger  than  desirable  increases  in  the  money  supply  was
concentrated in relatively large increases of almost 20 per cent per annum in the total amount of bank
credit extended to the private sector. The monetary policy model based on the control of increases in
the money supply, requires some effective control over the amount of bank credit extension, because
this is the main source of money creation in the South African market-oriented economy.
Control  over  bank  credit  extension  requires  not  only  a  restriction  on  the  amount  of
liquidity available in the banking sector, but also the acceptance of realistic interest rates. Despite the
maintenance of relatively high interest rates in South Africa, and a series of increases in interest rates
since November 1995, the demand  for  bank  credit  remained  relatively  strong.  This  may  indicate  a
less  interest-rate  sensitive  demand  for  credit  in  South  Africa  that  may  be  associated  with  the
socio-political changes over the past few years already referred to above.
The  Reserve  Bank  remains  concerned  about  the  excessive  rates  of  growth  in  the
money supply, and remains committed to reducing this monetary stimulation of inflation during the
course  of  1997.  Recent  trends  in  the  money  supply  and  bank  credit  extension  beg  the  question,
however,  whether  monetary  policy  at  this  juncture  is  restrictive  enough  and  whether  even  more
stringent measures may not be required to reduce  overall  liquidity  further,  which  could,  of  course,
lead to even higher interest rates and hopefully also a decline in the demand for credit.
4. Other functions of the central bank
Restricting the functions of the central bank to the monetary  objective  of  creating  a
stable  overall  financial  environment,  vests  a  further  important  responsibility  with  the  monetary
authorities,  and  that  is  to  encourage  and  support  the  development  of  sound  and  well-managed
banking institutions. Banking institutions replace the central bank as the major supplier of money to
the public, and therefore have become important conduits for the implementation of monetary policy.
BIS Review   49/1997
- 4 -
The South African Reserve Bank has therefore been vested also with the task of bank
regulation and supervision. This task is becoming increasingly more difficult as banking institutions
become more multi-national, and as cross-border financial operations increase. The Reserve Bank’s
Bank Supervision Department works very closely with their counterparts in many other countries to
ensure  that  uniform,  compatible  and  effective  prudential  directives  are  complied  with  by  all  banks
operating in South Africa, and also by the foreign branches and subsidiaries of South African resident
banking institutions.
The defined objective for monetary policy also requires of the central bank to accept
some  leading  role  in  the  development  and  administration  of  an  efficient  functioning  national
payments, settlement and clearing system. The Reserve Bank is now working with the other banking
institutions to upgrade  the  South  African  payments,  settlement  and  clearing  system.  Provision  will
soon  be  made  for  real-time  on-line  settlement  of  large  transactions,  and  for  the  daily  netting  and
settlement of smaller payment transactions done through the banking system.
Efficient  monetary  policy  in  a  market-oriented  economy  finally  also  requires
well-functioning  financial  markets.  The  Reserve  Bank  therefore  has  a  vested  interest  in  the
development of the money, capital and foreign exchange markets. In the case of the South African
foreign exchange market, the Reserve Bank is working closely with the Minister of Finance gradually
to  phase  out  exchange  controls,  and  to  integrate  the  South  African  financial  markets  with
international markets.
5. Conclusion
The  South  African  experience  ratifies  the  international  experience  that  monetary
policy should primarily be aimed at financial objectives and should at all times be used to promote
overall financial stability. This is the best contribution monetary policy can make to the promotion of
economic growth and development in the interest of all the people of the country.
In pursuing its strictly defined financial objectives, the central bank should have some
autonomy  from  Government  and  should  be  enabled  to  take  quick  and  objective  decisions  on  the
implementation  of  monetary  policy.  There  must,  however,  always  be  close  co-  operation  with  the
Minister  of  Finance,  and  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  should  be  closely  co-ordinated.  In  the  final
situation, the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the Reserve Bank are jointly responsible for
maintaining overall financial stability in the country.
BIS Review   49/1997
