Mr. Heikensten considers inflation and the interest rate in Sweden   Speech given by
the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sweden,  Mr.  Lars  Heikensten,  at  the  Sweden  Financial  Forum,
Örebro, on 15/10/97.
What I have to say is based in the main on the Riksbank’s latest inflation report, which
was published less than a month ago. In some respects, I shall be developing what we said there about
the outlook for inflation, though our assessment of the situation is essentially unchanged. I shall begin,
however,  with  some  remarks  about  why  monetary  policy  is  constructed  as  it  is,  with  the  objective  of
safeguarding the value of money.
1.  Monetary policy’s foundations
Experience advocates a stable environment
The reason why the Riksbank’s objective is to safeguard the value of money is basically
simple:  low,  stable  inflation  contributes  to  a  good  environment  for  the  growth  of  production  and
employment.
Support  for  this  view  is  readily  found  in  the  pattern  of  economic  developments  in
different  industrialised  countries.  In  those  countries  where  inflation  has  been  allowed  to  accelerate,
growth  has  normally  been  weaker  and  more  erratic.  We  have  seen  this  in  Sweden.  In  the  first
two-to-three post-war decades Swedish economic policy was characterised by stable rules  and  inflation
was low. Economic growth in those years was good and new jobs were created to a greater extent than in
the past two decades, when inflation shot up and there was a series of devaluation cycles.
There is really nothing odd about this. We all know that stable conditions make it easier
to arrive at wise economic decisions. When wages and prices chase each other in an unpredictable way,
and both interest rates and the exchange rate fluctuate widely as a result of this, with a certain amount of
luck or smartness it is sometimes possible to do good business. But most people surely realise that this is
not the best setting for either long-term investment or for those who have to live on an earned income or
a  pension.  The  head  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  Alan  Greenspan,  has  formulated  his  view  of  what
monetary policy’s objective should be in roughly these words: inflation should be so low that economic
agents do not have to worry about it.
Limited room for employment policy
Why, then, are there those who still argue that higher inflation would be a good thing? I
believe  this  is  mainly  because  they  perceive  a  conflict  between  price  stability  and  low  unemployment.
This perception in turn has its roots in a short-run, cyclical perspective. When economic activity is rising
or  falling  on  account  of  transitory  demand  fluctuations  around  a  long-term  trend,  this  negative
relationship does exist. Rising demand for goods and services generates increased demand for labour and
lower unemployment; this tends to be accompanied by rising wages and  higher  inflation.  The  opposite
also applies.
But this  does  not  mean  that  higher  inflation  results  in  permanently  higher  employment
and lastingly lower unemployment. On  the  contrary,  as  a  result  of  the  economic  setback  that  normally
follows  a  return  to  an  inflation  economy,  unemployment  is  liable  to  rise  even  higher.  Against  this  it
might  be  argued  that  it  is  not  a  matter  of  giving  inflation  its  head,  but  of  allowing  just  a  little  more
inflation.  Nor  is  it  a  matter  of  doing  this  as  a  systematic  policy,  but  just  for  once.  Once  again,  the
Swedish experience in the 1970s and 1980s is both instructive and representative of what has happened
in many other countries. A little more inflation over a short period can very easily become inflation that
is high and persistent.
BIS Review   96/1997
- 2 -
In any event, in the longer run the level of unemployment is determined by factors other
than the demand situation, factors such as institutions, rules and conventions in the economy and above
all in the labour market and wage formation. If the causes of unemployment were in fact solely or even
mainly cyclical, then unemployment would not differ so greatly as it does between countries that are in
the same cyclical phase and have had much the same growth rate for a long time.
Targeting inflation
The  Riksbank  has  the  objective  of  safeguarding  the  value  of  money.  In  practice,  the
Riksbank targets inflation. The target rate is 2 per cent (with a tolerance interval of – 1 percentage point),
assessed in annual terms. As there is a time lag of 1 to 2 years before an interest rate adjustment has its
full effect on the rate of price increases, the Riksbank has to work with forecast inflation. When we have
reason to fear that inflation is rising above the targeted rate, it will soon be time to raise the instrumental
rate and vice versa.
Assessments  of  future  inflation  are  presented  by  the  Riksbank  four  times  a  year  in  the
series  of  inflation  reports.  The  assessments  are  published  as  a  guide  to  economic  agents  in  their  own
deliberations about what the future level of interest rates is likely to be. The reports also provide a basis
for the discussion of monetary policy’s construction that the Riksbank is interested in encouraging.
Simplifying somewhat, inflation is determined by  two  factors:  the situation  concerning
demand  and  supply  and  economic  agents’  expectations  of  future  inflation.  The  first  factor  is  fairly
straightforward; when demand tends to exceed what the economy is capable of producing, the resultant
shortages and bottlenecks will normally push prices and wages up. The part played by expectations may
be  less  evident.  If  firms  and  employees  expect  increased  inflation,  they  will  tend  to  raise  prices  and
demand higher wages, respectively. This may be sufficient to start and continue an inflationary process.
Another  factor  of  importance  for  inflation  is  the  value  of  the  krona,  both  because  it  directly  affects
pricing and demand and because it can serve as an indication of expected inflation.
2.  Economic activity and inflation expectations
Now for the assessment in our latest inflation report. First let me say something about the
Riksbank’s appraisal of the economic situation.
Demand and supply
The statistics from recent months clearly  point  to  an  upswing  in  the  greater  part  of  the
economy. This largely confirms the Riksbank’s assessments  last  spring.  Developments  to  date  in  1997
have  been  more  balanced  than  before.  Demand  growth  is  now  coming  not  only  from  exports  and
investment, but to an increasing extent from private consumption as well.
The growth of household income has been held back for some years by the programme
for  fiscal  consolidation.  Activity  has  been  further  depressed  by  the  need  to  cut  spending  on  public
activities. The fiscal withdrawal of household purchasing power is continuing both this year and next, so
disposable income is largely unchanged in 1997, but will rise in 1998. After that, when the consolidation
programme has been completed, fiscal  policy  is  not  expected  to  be  as  restrictive  on  households.  Some
increase in public activities can also be expected in the coming two years.
After rising for some years at a rather modest rate, private consumption has picked up in
the past year. Households’ expectations concerning their own as well as the national economy improved
in September after a minor setback in August. Households are also more optimistic about the outlook in
the labour market. Moreover, the August survey by the National Institute of Economic Research shows
that firms in both everyday and infrequent trade are optimistic about sales trends in the near future.
BIS Review   96/1997
- 3 -
It is not just disposable income that determines private consumption. The appreciation of
wealth in the past year is probably important, too. Since the turn of 1996, house prices have risen 9 per
cent and share prices 28 per cent. This suggests that in 1997 households could realise capital gains that
may reach the equivalent of about 25  per  cent  of  disposable  income.  It  would  be  surprising  if  such  an
increase in wealth did not contribute to stronger consumer demand.
To sum up, most signs point to a good development of demand in the years ahead. In an
expanding world market, export growth should continue to be relatively high. The Riksbank also counts
on an accelerating increase in private consumption and at least an end to the fall in public consumption.
The broad increase in all the major demand components  naturally  exerts  some  pressure
on  the  available  resources.  This  implies  rising  capacity  utilisation  and  a  decreased  availability  of
unutilised resources. The business tendency surveys for manufacturing, which provide information about
capacity there, consistently indicate that unutilised resources fell from the first to the second quarter. An
increased proportion of firms reported that output was being restricted by production factors rather than
demand. This was accompanied by rising shortages of skilled workers and salaried technicians.
An important, though elusive, indicator of inflationary pressure is the gap between total
demand  and  total  output.  Most  indicators  suggest  that  this  gap  has  become  somewhat  smaller.  In  the
inflation  report,  however,  the  Riksbank  judges  that  the  supply  of  unutilised  resources  is  still  relatively
good. It is not least the high level of total unemployment that indicates this. A high rate of investment
and rapid increases in productivity have contributed, at least to date, to an expansion of potential output
to meet the growing demand. This has eased inflationary pressure during the upswing.
Inflation expectations
Another  important  indicator  of  inflationary  pressure  is  the  expectations  of  economic
agents  about  future  inflation.  Along  with  actual  inflation,  these  expectations  have  declined  in  recent
years. They also show a tendency to converge around the 2 per cent inflation target. If this is the case, it
is a good sign because it can be seen as increased confidence in the inflation target. This means that to a
greater  extent,  economic  agents  are  basing  their  own  plans  on  expectations  of  low  inflation,  which
provides better conditions for monetary policy to fulfil the inflation target.
In  recent  months  the  expectations  of  future  inflation  have  tended  to  move  up,  but  this
seems to be mainly an adjustment to the increase in registered inflation. The tendency, however, must be
closely watched; a clear increase in inflation expectations above the inflation target would give cause for
concern.
3.  Inflation in the coming years
In  the  course  of  1996  CPI  inflation  decreased  markedly  and  the  annual  level  was
somewhat  below  the  lower  limit  of  the  tolerance  interval.  Transitory  factors  partly  explain  the  drop.
Falling house mortgage interest costs, occasioned in part by the Riksbank’s own interest rate cuts, played
a large part in the low inflation figures. The trend has now turned and the rate of inflation is beginning to
move up. But the main reason for this is that the transient downward factors are no longer at work to the
same degree; the increase in underlying inflation is therefore more subdued.
In the light of the assessments of economic activity and other factors that affect inflation
(e.g. inflation expectations), in the inflation report the Riksbank forecast that annual CPI inflation would
be  around  1  per  cent  in  1997  and  around  2  per  cent  in  both  1998  and  1999.  Some  acceleration  was
envisaged in the latter two years.
The  assessment  carried  some  reservations.  Matters  discussed  in  the  report  included  the
risks associated with rising activity, the difficulties in knowing how the supply side would react and the
BIS Review   96/1997
- 4 -
coming  round  of  wage  negotiations.  There  may  be  reasons  for  elaborating  on  that  discussion  in  some
respects.
Output gap closing by degrees
In the inflation report the Riksbank considers that Sweden’s gross domestic product will
grow  by  around  2  per  cent  in  1997  and  around  3  per  cent  in  1998.  In  1999  the  GDP  growth  rate  is
expected to be rather more than 3 per cent.
This implies that in 1998 and 1999 growth will be stronger than the increase in potential
output, for which the annual trend is estimated to be just over 2 per cent. That means that today’s surplus
capacity will be activated by degrees. It is difficult to tell how quickly this will happen. The Riksbank
considers  that  the  output  gap  --  a  way  of  attempting  to  gauge  unutilised  capacity  in  the  economy  as  a
whole -- is  currently  about  2  per  cent  of  GDP.  With  the  growth  rates  envisaged  above,  the  gap  would
then close some time in 1999.
Other information with a bearing on when inflation might be likely to accelerate was also
included in the inflation report. Estimates of structural unemployment and thereby, indirectly, of the level
of  unemployment  that  can  be  combined  with  stable,  low  inflation,  suggest  that  risks  of  inflation  also
exist less than two years ahead. The rate at which capacity utilisation rises may likewise play a part. A
rapid reduction of unutilised resources might generate inflationary impulses even though there is still a
capacity surplus at total level.
Risks in the wage negotiations
Wage formation is particularly relevant at present because the settlements that are due in
the coming six months will cover a large part of the labour market. Labour shortages are not yet being
reported from more than a few sectors, but experience shows that the domino effects can be substantial.
The Riksbank’s assessment of inflation in the latest report is based on an assumption that
the rate of wage increases will be lower than in recent years. Support for this assumption can be found,
for example, in recent  wage  statistics.  The  report,  however,  does  not  envisage  a  downward  shift  to,  or
even below, the level that has prevailed in the European Union in recent years, a shift that would make it
easier for Sweden to tackle unemployment.
Wage formation is primarily a matter for the labour market organisations to arrange. The
level of wage increases that different segments of the economy can cope with depends, for example, on
the initial profit level, together with the development of that segment’s productivity, costs and prices. For
the  economy  as  a  whole  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that,  if  an  effective  reduction  of
unemployment is to be feasible, a rate of wage increases which equals the inflation target plus expected
long-term  productivity  growth  represents  a  ceiling.  Lower  wage  increases  would  make  labour  cheaper
relative to capital investment and would thereby stimulate employment.
It  is  important  to  understand  today’s  rules  for  economic  policy.  In  keeping  with  the
situation a quarter of a century ago, when Sweden was participating in the Bretton Woods system, which
was a functional and efficient arrangement with fixed exchange rates, for some years now the rules of the
game have been clear. If the Riksbank judges that inflation will rise above the 2 per cent target, it is up to
us to raise interest rates. Consequently, excessively high wage increases will not lead, except possibly in
the  very  short  run,  to  higher  inflation.  Instead  they  will  result  in  weaker  economic  activity  and  lower
employment in the years ahead. In the earlier situation with a fixed exchange rate, excessively high wage
increases  primarily  affected  manufacturing  and  other  parts  of  the  economy  that  are  exposed  to
international  competition.  Today  the  effects  will  be  felt  in  particular  by  sectors  that  are  sensitive  to
interest rates, such as distributive trades and a debt-burdened public sector.
BIS Review   96/1997
4.  Conclusions for monetary policy
- 5 -
The  overall  assessment  in  the  inflation  report  is  that  the  monetary  stance  is  well
balanced.  Today  there  is  no  reason  to  modify  that  conclusion.  In  the  past  month  there  has  been  no
appreciable change in the outlook for inflation.
After the interest rate increases in Germany and other countries almost a week ago, many
people have asked how this  affects  the  Riksbank’s  actions.  As  stated  already  on  several  occasions,  the
answer  is:  not  much  as  long  as  the  conditions  for  inflation  have  not  changed.  The  Riksbank  targets
inflation and it is this target that guides policy.
In view of what has happened in the past month, there is reason, finally,  to  highlight  a
couple of points in the report. The first is that monetary policy is being conducted against the background
of an economic upswing. A gradual  increase  in  capacity  utilisation  is  therefore  probable.  Sweden  does
not  differ  from  Germany  in  that  particular  respect.  The  other  point  is  the  diminished  risk  of  a
development that  is  appreciably  weaker  than  in  the  main  scenario;  this  assessment  is  supported  by  the
latest statistics.
In the light of the rising activity, the main difficulty in assessing future inflation currently
lies in an uncertainty about developments on the supply side, wage formation in particular. It is difficult
to foresee how the Swedish economy will react to a broad economic upswing. It is therefore important,
not least on that account, to analyse incoming information.
BIS Review   96/1997
