Ms.  Phillips'  testimony  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial  Institutions  and
Consumer  Credit  of  the  Committee  on  Banking  and  Financial  Services  of  the  U.S.  House  of
Representatives     Testimony  of  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve
System, Ms. Susan M. Phillips in Washington, on 8/10/97.
Madam  Chairwoman  and  members  of  the  Subcommittee,  I  am  pleased  to  be  here
today to discuss the Federal Reserve’s efforts in recent years to strengthen its supervisory processes
and also to share with you the Board’s views about what challenges lie ahead, both for the banking
system and the supervisory process. As you know, the U.S. economy and its banking system have
enjoyed half a decade of improving strength in which U.S. banks have become better capitalized and
more  profitable  than  they  have  been  in  generations.  Moreover,  in  the  past  13  months  not  a  single
insured bank has failed, and the Bank  Insurance  Fund  is  now  capitalized  at  a  level  requiring  most
banks to pay only nominal fees for their insurance. While we can take comfort and, to some degree,
satisfaction  in  these  events,  experience  has  demonstrated  that  at  times  like  these  --  if  we  are  not
vigilant -- risks can occur that set the stage for future problems.
As  I  begin  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  no  system  of  supervision  or
regulation can provide total assurance that banking problems will not occur or that banks will not fail.
Nor  should  it.  Our  goal  as  regulators  is  to  identify  weak  banking  practices  early  so  that  small  or
emerging problems can be addressed before they become large and costly -- either to the insurance
fund or the financial system as a whole. We believe that progress made in recent years to focus our
examinations on the areas of highest risk at banking organizations places us in  a  better  position  to
identify problems early, control systemic risk, and maintain financial stability. That goal and the need
to  adapt  the  supervisory  process  to  the  potentially  rapidly  changing  conditions  in  banking  and
financial markets underlies our decision to pursue a more risk-focused supervisory approach.
We are well underway in implementing this new supervisory framework, and initial
indications  about  that  process  from  both  the  Federal  Reserve’s  supervisory  staff  and  the  banking
industry, itself, have been favorable. The risk-focused approach reflects our supervisory response to
the  effects  that  technology  and  financial  innovation  have  had  on  the  pace  of  change  in  banking
organizations,  the  nature  of  U.S.  and  world  financial  markets,  and  the  techniques  employed  for
managing and controlling risk. As banking practices and markets continue to evolve, our emphasis on
risk-focused supervision will be even more necessary in the years to come.
The Federal Reserve’s Oversight Role
As  the  primary  federal  supervisor  of  U.S.  bank  holding  companies,  state  member
banks,  and  most  U.S.  offices  of  foreign  banks,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  sought  to  apply  effective
supervision  and  contain  excessive  risks  to  the  federal  safety  net,  while  also  ensuring  that  banks
adequately  serve  their  communities  and  accommodate  economic  growth.  As  the  nation’s  central
bank, the Federal Reserve brings a different, important perspective to the supervisory process through
its attention to the broad and long-term consequences of supervisory actions on the financial system
and the economy. Significantly, the practical, hands-on involvement which the Federal Reserve gains
through  its  supervisory  function  supports  and  complements  our  other  central  bank  responsibilities,
including  fostering  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system  and  ensuring  the  stability  of  the  financial
system.
Past studies of bank failures have cited a number of contributing factors including, but
certainly not limited to, inadequate supervisory staffing and antiquated examination procedures. Over
the  years,  as  it  has  supervised  and  regulated  banking  organizations,  the  Federal  Reserve  has
emphasized  periodic,  on-site  examinations  that  entail  substantive  loan  portfolio  reviews  and
significant transaction testing to identify emerging problems. In that connection, the Federal Reserve
has  sought  to  maintain  a  sufficient  number  and  quality  of  supervisory  personnel  to  conduct
BIS Review   93/1997
- 2 -
examinations with appropriate frequency and depth. That approach appears to have provided us with
some consistent success.
As  conditions  within  the  industry  have  substantially  improved,  the  Board  has  been
mindful of the cost of conducting its supervisory activities and has worked to contain those costs in
the  face  of  increased  responsibilities.  Throughout  this  period  we  have  recognized  the  need  to
maintain  stability  in  our  work  force,  and  have  sought  to  avoid  excessive  build-ups  or  periods  of
disruptive  retrenchment.  That  approach  has  enabled  us  to  maintain  what  we  believe  has  been  an
adequate  and  consistent  level  of  oversight  of  banking  organizations  under  our  supervision  during
both good times and bad.
Developments Driving Change
During  the  past  decade,  the  U.S.  banking  system  has  experienced  a  great  deal  of
turmoil, stress, and change. Ten years ago, many of the country’s largest banks announced huge loan
loss  provisions,  beginning  the  process  of  reducing  the  industry’s  overhang  of  doubtful  developing
country  loans.  At  the  same  time,  many  of  these  institutions  and  smaller  regional  banks  were
struggling  with  oil  and  agriculture  sector  difficulties  or  accumulating  commercial  real  estate
problems.  These  and  other  difficulties  took  a  heavy  toll.  By  the  end  of  the  1980s,  more  than  200
banks were failing annually, and there were more than 1,000 other problem banks.
This experience provided important lessons and forced supervisors and bankers, alike,
to reconsider the way they approached their jobs. For their part, bankers recognized the need to build
their  capital  and  reserves,  strengthen  their  internal  controls,  and  improve  practices  for  identifying,
underwriting and managing risk. Supervisors were also reminded of the need to remain vigilant and
of the high costs that bank failures can bring, not only to the insurance fund but to local communities
as well. The FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 emphasized that point, requiring frequent examinations
and prompt regulatory actions when serious problems emerge.
Beyond these largely domestic, institutional events, banks and businesses throughout
the  world  were  dealing  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  with  new  technologies  that  were  leading  to  a
multitude of new and increasingly complex financial products that changed the nature of banking and
financial  markets.  These  technologies  have  brought  many  benefits  that  facilitate  more  efficient
markets and, in turn, greater international trade and economic growth.
They  may  also,  however,  have  raised  macro-stability  concerns  by  concentrating  the
growing  volume  and  complexity  of  certain  activities  within  a  small  number  of  truly  global
institutions.  It  is  essential  that  these  largest  firms  adequately  manage  the  related  risks  of  these
activities and that they remain adequately supervised. For it is these institutions that have the potential
to disrupt worldwide payment systems and contribute most to systemic risk. In addition to the formal
supervisory  oversight  exerted  by  regulators,  concerns  may  be  eased  somewhat  by  the  strong
counterparty  discipline  being  brought  to  bear  world  wide  on  banks  and  other  financial  institutions
dealing  in  these  new  products.  The  scrutiny  among  counterparties  in  the  global  market  place  has
contributed to improvements in capital positions and in overall risk management practices.
In  many  ways,  U.S.  banks  have  been  in  the  vanguard  in  applying  technological
advances to their products, distribution systems, and management processes, with such applications
and  innovations  as  ATMs,  home  banking,  securitizations  and  credit  derivatives.  Such  efforts,
combined with greater attention to pricing their services and measuring their risks, have had material
effects on the increased strength and profitability that our banks have seen.
Within  the  United  States,  our  banking  system  has  also  experienced  a  dramatic
consolidation  in  the  number  of  banking  institutions,  with  the  number  of  independent  commercial
BIS Review   93/1997
banking organizations declining from 12,400 in 1980 to 7,400 in June of this year.1 That structural
change  has  also  contributed  to  industry  earnings  by  providing  banks  with  greater  opportunities  to
reduce costs.
The challenge going forward for many of these institutions may be in managing the
growth  and  the  continuing  process  of  industry  consolidation.  This  challenge  may  be  greatest  as
banking organizations expand, particularly through acquisitions, into more diverse or nontraditional
banking activities. That growth into a wider array of activities is especially important if banks are to
meet the wide-ranging needs of their business and household customers while competing effectively
with other  regulated  and  unregulated  firms.  However,  the  managerial  implications  of  rapid  growth
and  growth  into  new  activities  should  not  be  overlooked,  either  by  the  institutions  or  their
supervisors.
Supervisory Challenges Ahead
There is also no shortage of  tasks  facing  the  Federal  Reserve  as  a  bank  supervisor,
despite the virtually unprecedented strong condition of the U.S. banking system today. We, too, must
deal  with  the  evolving  financial  markets  and  advances  in  technology.  At  the  same  time,  we  must
ensure  that  our  own  supervisory  practices,  tools,  and  standards  take  advantage  of  technological
improvements  and  financial  techniques  so  that  our  oversight  is  not  only  effective,  but  also  as
unobtrusive  and  appropriate  as  possible.  These  tasks  are  wide  ranging,  extending  from  our  own
re-engineering of the supervisory process to the way supervisors approach issues such as measuring
capital adequacy and how we seek convergence on bank supervisory standards worldwide.
Risk-focused examinations
Constructing  a  sound  supervisory  process  while  minimizing  regulatory  burden  has
been a long-standing and on-going effort at the Federal Reserve and an objective we have sought to
advance with our emphasis on  risk-focused  examinations.  Particularly  in  the  past  decade,  we  have
found that the increased range of products  and  the  greater  depth  and  liquidity  of  financial  markets
permit  banking  organizations  to  change  their  risk  profiles  more  rapidly  than  ever  before.  That
possibility  requires  that  we  strike  an  appropriate  balance  between  evaluating  the  condition  of  an
institution at a point in time and evaluating the soundness of the bank’s processes for managing risk.
Recognition of the need for that balance is at the heart of the risk-focused examination approach.
The  risk-focused  approach,  by  definition,  entails  a  more  formal  risk  assessment
planning phase that identifies those areas and activities that warrant the most extensive review. This
pre-planning process is supported by technology, for example, to download certain information about
a bank’s loan portfolio to our own computer systems and target areas of the portfolio for review.
Once  on-site,  examiners  analyze  the  bank’s  loans  and  other  assets  to  ascertain  the
organization’s current condition, and also to evaluate its internal control process and its own ability to
identify and resolve problems. As a result, the Federal Reserve is placing greater reliance than before
on  a  bank’s  internal  auditors  and  on  the  accuracy  and  adequacy  of  its  information  systems.  The
review of the information flow extends from top to bottom, and with the expectation that bank senior
management  and  boards  of  directors  are  actively  involved  in  monitoring  the  bank’s  activities  and
providing sufficient guidance regarding risk assumption.
 1 “Independent commercial banking organizations” is defined as the sum of all bank
holding companies and independent banks. Multi-bank holding companies are, therefore, considered
as a single organization.
BIS Review   93/1997
- 4 -
As  in  the  past,  performance  of  substantive  checks  on  the  reliability  of  a  bank’s
controls  remains  today  a  cornerstone  of  the  examination  process,  albeit  in  a  more  automated  and
advanced form. For example, automated  loan  sampling  is  performed  for  the  purpose  of  generating
statistically  valid  conclusions  about  the  accuracy  of  a  bank’s  internal  loan  review  process.  To  the
extent we can validate the integrity of a bank’s internal controls more efficiently, we can place more
confidence in them at an earlier stage and can also take greater comfort that management is getting an
accurate  indication  of  the  bank’s  condition.  Toward  that  end,  Board  staff  is  working  to  refine
loan-sampling  procedures  that  should  further  boost  examiner  productivity  and  accomplish  other
supervisory goals. Moreover, as examiners are able to complete loan reviews more quickly, they will
have more time to review other high-priority aspects of the institution’s operations.
A significant benefit of the risk-focused approach is its emphasis on ensuring that the
bank’s internal oversight processes are sound and that communication between the bank and senior
examiners is ongoing between examinations. That approach is generally supported by institutions we
supervise  and  provides  a  more  comprehensive  oversight  process  that  complements  our  annual  or
18-month examinations. Such an approach strengthens our ability to respond promptly if conditions
deteriorate.
Another benefit of the risk-focused approach has been a greater amount of planning,
analysis, and information gathering at Reserve Banks prior to the on-site portion of the examination.
Far from reducing our hands-on knowledge of the institution, this approach has ensured that when we
are on-site, we are reviewing and analyzing the right areas, talking to the right  people  and  making
better use of our time and that of the bank’s management and employees. In addition to improving
productivity, it has also reduced our travel costs and improved employee morale.
Examination  staff  at  the  Reserve  Banks  indicate  that  this  process  may  be  reducing
on-site  examination  time  by  15-30  percent  in  many  cases  and  overall  examination  time  of  Federal
Reserve personnel by perhaps 10 percent. While those results are tentative, partial, and unscientific,
they are certainly encouraging in terms of resource implications.
Complementing  the  risk-focused  approach  to  supervision  are  enhancements  to  the
tools  we  use  to  grade  a  bank’s  condition  and  management.  Since  1995,  we  have  asked  Federal
Reserve  examiners  to  provide  a  specific  supervisory  rating  for  a  bank’s  risk  management  process.
More  recently,  the  CAMEL  rating  system,  too,  has  been  revised  by  the  banking  agencies  to  place
more emphasis on the adequacy of a bank’s risk management practices and was expanded to include
a  specific  “S”  rating  for  an  institution’s  sensitivity  to  market  risk.  As  you  may  know,  the  Federal
Reserve has also, for some time, used a rating scheme that focuses heavily on managerial procedures
and controls in its oversight of U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks.
How  effective  is  the  risk-focused  process?  Since  economic  and  industry  conditions
have been generally favorable for the past  several  years,  there  has  not  been  a  sufficiently  stressful
economic downturn to test fully bank risk management systems or supervisory practices. The market
volatility beginning in 1994 did, however, provide some tests for the risk management systems of the
larger  banks  with  active  trading  desks.  Nevertheless,  there  are  many  indications  that  bank  and
supervisory practices are materially better than they were in the 1980s and early 1990s.
For  example,  the  risk-focused  approach  is  helping  to  identify  certain  deficiencies
before they show up in a bank’s financial condition. These are evidenced by instances where ratings
for  the  quality  of  bank  management  are  lower  than  those  for  capital,  asset  quality,  or  earnings.
Because managerial weaknesses eventually show up in a bank’s financial condition, it is important to
identify and resolve those weaknesses early. In that regard, the risk-focused approach endeavors to
prevent  problems  from  developing  to  the  point  that  they  cause  unnecessary  losses  that  impair  the
institution’s capital and require resolution under the Prompt Corrective Action mandate.
BIS Review   93/1997
One  example  of  how  the  risk-focused  approach  is  helping  to  identify  and  address
deficiencies is our supervisory experience with the U.S. branches of foreign banks. Subsequent to the
enactment  of  the  Foreign  Bank  Supervision  Enhancement  Act  of  1991,  which  gave  the  Federal
Reserve greater supervisory authority over foreign branches, our examinations uncovered a number
of entities with internal control and audit weaknesses. This result was not completely unexpected, as
these foreign banking organizations were not previously subject to the same level of oversight as our
domestic organizations.
Recognizing  the  seriousness  of  these  weaknesses  and  their  potential  for  causing
problems in the future, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps to ensure that practices are
materially  upgraded  at  foreign  branches  and  that  any  weaknesses  continue  to  be  uncovered.  In
addition  to  identifying  and  addressing  internal  control  and  audit  weaknesses  through  examinations
and supervisory follow-up, these efforts include ensuring that the foreign bank provides the necessary
managerial support to its U.S. branches, including adequate systems of controls and audit. To place
even  more  emphasis  on  internal  controls  and  audit  systems,  the  foreign  branch  rating  system  was
revised  in  1994.  Furthermore,  in  1996  additional  steps  were  taken  to  ensure  that  internal  control
weaknesses  are  corrected  and  will  not  cause  financial  harm  by  adopting  requirements  for  audit
procedures in situations where significant control weaknesses are detected.
These efforts to detect problems at their early stages and resolve  them  appear  to  be
having positive effects. After peaking in 1993, there has been a steady decline in the number of U.S.
branches and agencies with an overall examination rating of fair or lower and a rating of fair or lower
in  an  examination  component  substantively  affected  by  internal  control  and  audit  weaknesses.  We
believe that our continued efforts in this area will lead to further improvements in the internal control
and audit practices of foreign banking organizations
Implementing the risk-focused approach has not been an easy task. It has required a
significant  revision  of  our  broad  and  specialized  training  programs,  including  expansion  of  capital
markets, information technology, and global trading activities, as well as courses devoted exclusively
to  internal  controls.  These  education  programs  will,  of  course,  need  to  be  continually  updated  as
industry activities and conditions evolve.
With the greater discretion provided to examiners  to  focus  on  areas  of  highest  risk,
ensuring the consistency and quality of examinations has increased in importance. Fortunately, new
training  courses  and  improved  examination  platforms,  tools,  and  programs  that  guide  examiners
through  the  appropriate  selection  of  examination  procedures  will  help.  In  addition,  our  ability  to
evaluate  more  thoroughly  the  quality  of  an  examination  has  improved  with  the  greater  depth  of
analysis  provided  in  supporting  examination  materials  such  as  the  written  risk  assessments  and
analysis  of  exam  findings.  Those  materials  are  allowing  us  to  perform  comparative  reviews  of
examinations  across  institutions  of  similar  size,  risk  profile  and  complexity,  to  ensure  quality  and
consistency.
So far we have been able to evaluate the effectiveness of our examination programs
by identifying whether problems are identified early and resolved in a timely fashion, by evaluating
whether examination reports and findings provide clear feedback to management and identify areas
of highest risk, and by monitoring the extent to which our examinations are complying with statutory
mandates  for  the  frequency  of  examinations.  Based  on  those  criteria,  I  believe  our  examination
program has been generally successful.
Application of technology to supervisory process
BIS Review   93/1997
- 6 -
The Federal Reserve has also done much to increase its own use of technology in an
effort to improve examiner productivity, enhance analyses, and reduce burden on banks. Much of this
effort has been  conducted  on  an  inter-agency  basis,  particularly  in  cooperation  with  the  FDIC  and
state banking departments with whom we share supervision of state-chartered banks. Specific results
include the development of a personal computer, lap-top workstation that provides examiners with a
decision tree framework to assist them through the necessary procedures. The workstation also helps
them document their work and prepare exam reports more efficiently. In addition, a software program
has  also  been  developed  for  receiving  and  analyzing  loan  portfolio  data  transmitted  electronically
from  financial  institutions.  This  process  not  only  saves  time  but  also  improves  the  examiner’s
understanding of the risks presented by individual portfolios.
The  Federal  Reserve  is  also  developing  an  electronic  examination  tool  for  large
domestic and foreign banking organizations that enhances our ability to share examination analysis
and findings and other pertinent supervisory information among our Reserve Banks and with other
supervisory  authorities.  This  platform  should  substantively  improve  our  ability  to  provide
comprehensive oversight to those firms that are most prominent  in  the  payment  system  and  global
financial markets.
In addition to examination tools, the Federal Reserve has for many years maintained a
comprehensive  source  of  banking  structure,  financial,  and  examination  data  in  its  National
Information Center. By year-end, we will have completed significant enhancements to the tools that
provide examiners and analysts at the federal and state banking agencies with access to those data.
The Year 2000
One of the clearest reminders that managing technology is a challenge of its own is
the need for banks to resolve the “Year 2000” problem. U.S. banks appear to be taking this matter
seriously and are generally well underway toward identifying their individual needs and developing
action plans. The Federal Reserve and the other federal bank supervisors are reviewing the relevant
efforts of every insured depository institution in order to determine whether adequate progress on this
issue is being made. This process should be complete by the middle of next year so that any detected
deficiencies  may  be  addressed  in  time.  Meeting  the  demands  of  this  review  and  ensuring  proper
remedies both before and after the year 2000 will be a significant and costly task to both the industry
and the banking agencies.
However,  even  within  the  context  of  banking,  the  scope  of  the  Year  2000  problem
extends  far  beyond  U.S.  banks  to  foreign  banks,  bank  borrowers,  depositors,  vendors,  and  other
counterparties.  Through  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  other  international  forums,  the
Federal  Reserve  and  other  U.S.  banking  agencies  have  emphasized  the  need  for  all  institutions  to
recognize this issue and to address it actively. Importantly, century date compliance is gaining more
attention internationally, and the Basle Supervisors Committee is taking steps to address this matter.
Banks and others need to address year 2000 system alterations, not only because of
the  potential  effects  on  overall  markets,  but  also  as  a  threat  to  individual  firm  viability.  At  a
minimum,  banks  should  be  concerned  about  their  ability  to  provide  uninterrupted  service  to  their
customers into the next millennium. If nothing else, it is simply good business.
Efforts to Accommodate Industry Growth and Innovation
Another goal of the Federal Reserve’s supervisory approach is to remove unnecessary
barriers that might hinder the industry’s ability to grow, innovate, and remain competitive. Recently,
the  Board  refined  its  application  process  to  ensure  that  well-run,  well  capitalized  banking
organizations  may  apply  to  acquire  banks  and  nonbanks  in  a  more  streamlined  fashion  and
BIS Review   93/1997
commence certain types of new activities without prior approval. The Board also significantly revised
various rules for section 20 companies and scaled back or removed many redundant firewalls. While
these refinements require some changes to the supervisory process, we firmly believe that removing
barriers  to  these  lower  risk  activities  is  essential  to  maintaining  the  industry’s  health  and
competitiveness and its ability to serve its customers and the community.
Supervising nationwide and international institutions
The  consolidation  and  transformation  of  the  U.S.  banking  system  resulting  from
evolving market, statutory, and regulatory changes are also requiring the Federal Reserve to adapt to
new  conditions.  As  previously  noted,  we  are  working  closely  with  the  FDIC  and  state  banking
agencies to deal with the challenges presented by interstate banking and branching to ensure that the
dual banking system remains viable in future years.
To  address  that  goal,  the  FDIC,  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  the  state  banking
departments  began  on  October  1  a  common  risk-focused  process  for  the  examination  of
state-chartered community banks. Another initiative has been the State/Federal Supervisory Protocol,
which  commits  the  various  banking  agencies  to  work  toward  a  “seamless”  and  minimally
burdensome oversight process. In short, it sets forth a process in which state banking supervisors will
accept the supervisory reports of other agencies for banks operating in their states through branches,
but  headquartered  elsewhere.  The  fact  that  the  plan  has  been  accepted  by  all  involved  parties  is
encouraging. We now need to ensure that it is implemented as intended, as banks make use of their
broader branching powers.
Similar coordination efforts are necessary and underway in an international  context.
Through the Bank for International Settlements, for example, the Federal Reserve and the other U.S.
banking  agencies  participate  with  supervisors  from  other  G-10  countries  to  develop  not  only
prudential capital and other regulatory standards, but also to promote sound practices over  a  broad
range of banking issues.
In this regard, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, with the approval of the
central bank Governors of the G-10 countries, recently issued three documents: one dealing with the
management of interest rate  risk  by  banks,  one  dealing  with  the  Year  2000  problems,  and  another
identifying  25  “core  principles”  of  effective  supervision  that  is  directed  at  bank  supervisors
worldwide. The Basle Committee is also working to improve international risk disclosure practices of
banks,  and  has  created  the  new  market  risk  capital  standard  that  is  based  on  banks’  internal
value-at-risk models. That standard goes into effect in January of next year.
Beyond  the  work  of  the  Basle  Committee  and  the  banking  agencies,  we  are  also
meeting  with  the  SEC  and  international  securities  and  insurance  regulators  to  identify  common
issues, and to bring about greater convergence in our respective regulatory frameworks. That effort
also has links to the Committee’s efforts and should prove helpful in strengthening the oversight and
regulation  of  financial  institutions  throughout  the  world  that  provide  a  broad  range  of  financial
products. Successful groundwork from this effort could also have implications for moving forward
domestically in an era of financial reform.
Guidance  as  well  as  supervisory  and  regulatory  standards  such  as  these  --  whether
developed in a domestic or international context -- are soon incorporated into examination procedures
and  help  examiners  in  their  reviews  of  many  of  the  more  complex  activities  of  global  banking
organizations. These global institutions are perhaps the most challenging to supervise. Since it is not
feasible for supervisors to review all locations of a global banking organization, emphasis is placed
on  the  integrity  of  risk  management  and  internal  control  systems,  coordination  with  international
supervisors, strong capital standards, and improved disclosures.
BIS Review   93/1997
- 8 -
Staffing the Supervisory Process
A  final  supervisory  challenge  relates  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  need  to  continue
attracting,  training,  and  retaining  expert  staff.  Retaining  sufficient  numbers  of  individuals  with  the
expertise to evaluate fully the risks in a rapidly changing banking industry is a major priority for the
Federal  Reserve  and  figures  prominently  in  the  bank  supervision  function’s  strategic  plan.
Particularly  challenging  is  attracting  and  retaining  specialists  in  the  areas  of  capital  markets  and
information technology where we have experienced increased turnover. We will continue efforts to
attract and retain both specialists and generalists who are qualified to address issues as the industry
evolves.
As I have outlined in my testimony, the Federal Reserve’s supervisory strategy is to
maintain  staff  who  can  adequately  evaluate  the  general  soundness  of  banking  activities  by  placing
strong  emphasis  on  the  bank’s  management  processes,  systems,  and  controls.  I  believe  such  an
approach will serve us well as the industry continues to evolve either by expanding the scope of its
activities  or 
legislation.
Nevertheless, developing the supervisory techniques, and attracting and training the personnel to do
the job will pose a continuing challenge in the years ahead.
through  broader  structural  changes  from  financial  modernization 
Conclusion
The  history  of  banking  and  of  bank  supervision  shows  a  long  and  rather  close
relationship between the health of the banking system and the economy, a connection reflecting the
role of banks in the credit intermediation process. We can expect that relationship to continue and for
bank earnings and asset quality to fluctuate as economic conditions change. As supervisors, we must
prepare for such developments.
In many ways, however, the banking and financial system have changed dramatically
in the past decade both in terms of structure and diversity of activities. Risk management practices
have  also  advanced,  helped  by  technological  and  financial  innovations.  I  believe  that  both  bank
supervisors and the banking industry have learned important lessons from the experience of the past
ten years specifically about the need to actively monitor, manage and control risks.
Nevertheless, conditions can always change, and the risk-focused approach will be continually
challenged to anticipate and avoid new kinds of problems. We must recognize that a risk-focused
approach to supervision is a developing process and however successful it may be, there will again be
bank failures. Indeed, having no bank failures may suggest inadequate risk-taking by banks and less
economic growth. Through our supervisory process, the Federal Reserve seeks to maintain the proper
balance -- permitting banks maximum freedom, while still protecting the safety net and maintaining
financial stability. Devoting adequate attention to banking practices and conditions and responding
promptly as events unfold is the key. We intend to do that now and in the years ahead.
BIS Review   93/1997
