Mr.  Kelley's  testimony  to  the  US  House  of  Representatives  Committee  on
Banking and Financial Services   Testimony by Mr. Edward W. Kelley Jr., a member of the Board
of Governors of the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking  and  Financial
Services of the US House of Representatives, in Washington DC, on 4/11/97.
I am pleased to appear before the Committee today to discuss the Federal Reserve’s
efforts to address the Year 2000 computer systems issue. The Federal Reserve System has developed
and  is  executing  a  comprehensive  plan  to  ensure  its  own  Year  2000  readiness  and  the  bank
supervision function is well along in a cooperative, interagency effort, to promote timely remediation
and testing by the banking industry. This afternoon I will focus on actions being taken by the Federal
Reserve  System  to  address  our  internal  systems,  coordination  with  the  industry,  and  contingency
planning.Background
The  Federal  Reserve  operates  several  payments  applications  that  process  and  settle
payments and securities  transactions  between  depository  institutions  in  the  United  States.  Three  of
these  applications  are  the  Fedwire  funds  transfer,  Fedwire  securities  transfer,  and  Automated
Clearing House (ACH) applications. The first two applications are large-value payments mechanisms
for  U.S.  dollar  interbank  funds  transfers  and  U.S.  government  securities  transfers.  Users  of  the
applications are primarily depository institutions and government agencies.
The Fedwire funds transfer system is a real-time credit transfer system used primarily
for payments related to interbank funds transfers such as Fed funds transactions, interbank settlement
transactions,  and  “third-party”  payments  between  the  customers  of  depository  institutions.  Funds
transferred over Fedwire are immediately final; they cannot be revoked after they have been accepted
and processed by the Federal Reserve. About 10,000 depository institutions use  the  Fedwire  funds
transfer system to transfer each year approximately 86 million payments valued at over $280 trillion.
The current average total daily value of Fedwire funds transfers is approximately $1.1 trillion.
The  Fedwire  securities  transfer  system  supports  the  safekeeping,  clearing,  and
settlement  of  U.S.  government  securities  in  both  the  primary  and  secondary  markets.  It  provides
custody  of  U.S.  government  securities  in  book-entry  form,  as  well  as  the  transfer  of  securities
ownership among market participants. On the custody side, the system calculates and credits interest
and principal  payments  to  the  holders  of  securities,  reconciles  outstanding  securities  balances  with
issuers, and performs other record keeping and collateral safekeeping functions. On the transfer side,
the 
called
delivery-versus-payment,  thus  reducing  the  settlement  risks  of  market  participants.  About  8,000
depository institutions use the Fedwire securities transfer service to transfer each year approximately
13 million securities valued at over $160 trillion. The average total daily value of Fedwire securities
transfers is about $650 billion.
system  delivers  book-entry 
simultaneous  payment, 
securities 
against 
a 
The  ACH  is  an  electronic  payment  service  that  supports  both  credit  and  debit
transactions and is used by approximately 14,000 financial institutions, 400,000 companies, and an
estimated  50  million  consumers.  Typical  credit  transactions  include  direct  deposit  of  payroll  and
corporate  payments  to  suppliers.  Typical  debit  transactions  include  the  collection  of  mortgage  and
loan  payments  and  corporate  cash  concentration  transactions.  The  ACH  processes  transactions  in
batches  one  or  two  days  before  they  are  scheduled  to  settle.  ACH  transactions  are  settled  through
depository  institutions’  accounts  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks.  Approximately  4  billion  ACH
transactions were processed in 1996 with a total value of approximately $12 trillion. About 3.3 billion
of  these  payments  were  commercial  transactions;  625  million  payments  were  originated  by  the
Federal government.
BIS Review   104/1997
- 2 -
The  Reserve  Banks’  critical  applications,  such  as  Fedwire  funds  and  securities
transfer, ACH, and supporting accounting systems, run on mainframe computer systems operated by
Federal  Reserve  Automation  Services  (FRAS),  the  internal  organizational  unit  that  processes
applications  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks  and  operates  the  Federal  Reserve’s  national
network. These critical applications are “centralized”, that is, one copy of the application is used by
all  twelve  Reserve  Banks.  In  addition  to  centralized  applications  on  the  mainframe,  the  Federal
Reserve Banks operate  a  range  of  applications  in  a  distributed  computing  environment,  supporting
business  functions  such  as  cash  distribution,  banking  supervision  and  regulation,  research,  public
information,  and  human  resources.  The  Reserve  Banks  also  operate  check  processing  systems  that
provide  check  services 
the  U.S.  government.  A  national
communications network, called FEDNET, supports the exchange of information among the Reserve
Banks, FRAS, and external organizations. The scope of the Federal Reserve’s Year 2000 activities
includes all of these processing environments and the supporting telecommunications network.
institutions  and 
to  depository 
Year 2000 Readiness
It is crucial that the Federal Reserve provide reliable services to the nation’s banking
system  and  financial  markets.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  giving  the  Year  2000  its  highest  priority,
commensurate  with  our  goal  of  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  nation’s  financial  markets  and
payments systems, preserving public confidence, and supporting reliable government operations.
We  are  taking  a  comprehensive  approach  to  our  preparedness  which  includes
assessments of readiness,  remediation,  and  testing.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  completed  application
assessments and internal test plans, and we are currently renovating and testing software. We are also
updating  proven  plans  and  techniques  used  during  other  times  of  operational  stress  in  order  to  be
prepared to address potential century date change difficulties. All Federal Reserve computer program
changes, as well as system and user-acceptance testing, are scheduled to be completed by year-end
1998. Further, critical financial services systems that interface with the depository institutions will be
Year  2000-ready  by  mid-1998.  This  schedule  will  permit  approximately  18  months  for  customer
testing, to which we are dedicating considerable support resources.
A large cadre of top personnel in the Federal Reserve System have been assigned to
this task. Our staff is putting in many extra hours to prepare for testing with customers, planning for
business continuity in the event of any unanticipated problems with internal systems, and enhancing
our  ability  to  respond  to  possible  Year  2000-related  operating  failures  of  depository  institutions.
Assuring  compliance  internally  is  requiring  review  of  approximately  90  million  lines  of  computer
code. While there are challenges and a great deal of work before us, I can report that we expect to be
fully prepared for the century date change.
The Federal Reserve recognized the potential problem with two-digit date fields more
than five years ago when we began consolidating our mainframe data processing operations. Our new
centralized mission-critical applications, such as Fedwire funds transfer, Fedwire securities transfer,
and  ACH,  were  designed  from  inception  with  Year  2000  compliance  in  mind.  The  mainframe
consolidation  effort  also  necessitated  extensive  application  standardization,  which  required  us  to
complete a comprehensive inventory of our mainframe applications, a necessary first step to effective
remediation.  Like  our  counterparts  in  the  private  sector,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  still  faces
substantial challenges in achieving Year 2000 readiness. These challenges include managing a highly
complex  project  involving  multiple  interfaces  with  others,  ensuring  the  readiness  of  vendor
components,  ensuring  the  readiness  of  applications,  thorough  testing,  and  establishing  contingency
plans. We are also  faced  with  labor  market  pressures  that  call  for  creative  measures  to  retain  staff
who are critical to the success of our Year 2000 activities.
BIS Review   104/1997
CDC Project Management
According  to  industry  experts,  up  to  one-quarter  of  an  organization’s  Year  2000
compliance efforts are devoted to project management. Managing preparations for the  century  date
change  is  particularly  resource-intensive  given  the  number  of  automated  systems  to  be  addressed,
systems interrelationships and interdependencies, interfaces with external data sources and customers,
and  testing  requirements.  In  addition,  Year  2000  preparations  must  address  many  computerized
environmental  and  facilities  management  systems  such  as  power,  heating  and  cooling,  voice
communications, elevators, and vaults. Our Year 2000 project is being closely coordinated among the
Reserve  Banks,  the  Board  of  Governors,  numerous  vendors  and  service  providers,  approximately
13,000 customers, and government agencies.
In  1995,  a  Federal  Reserve  System-wide  project  was  initiated,  referred  to  as  the
Century Date Change (CDC) project, to coordinate the efforts of the Reserve Banks, FRAS, and the
Board  of  Governors.  Our  project  team  is  taking  a  three-part  approach  to  achieve  its  objectives,
focusing on planning, readiness, communication, and monitoring. Our planning began with a careful
inventory of all applications and establishment of schedules and support mechanisms to ensure that
readiness objectives are met. The readiness process involves performing risk assessments, modifying
automated systems, and testing both internally and with depository institutions, service providers, and
government agencies. We are stressing effective, consistent, and timely communication, both internal
and external,  to  promote  awareness  and  commitment  at  all  levels  of  our  own  organization  and  the
financial  services  industry,  more  generally.  Some  of  our  most  senior  executives  are  leading  the
project, and the Board and senior Bank management are now receiving formal, detailed status reports
at least every 60 days. Any significant compliance issues will be reported to the Board immediately.
The  Reserve  Banks’  internal  audit  departments  and  the  Board’s  oversight  staff  are  also  closely
monitoring progress.
A significant challenge in meeting our Year 2000 readiness objectives is our reliance
on  commercial  hardware  and  software  products  and  services.  Much  of  our  information  processing
and communications infrastructure is comprised of hardware and software products from third-party
vendors.  Additionally,  the  Federal  Reserve  utilizes  commercial  application  software  products  and
services  for  certain  administrative  functions  and  other  operations.  As  a  result,  we  must  coordinate
with numerous vendors and manufacturers to ensure that all of our hardware, software, and services
are  Year  2000-ready.  In  many  cases,  compliance  will  require  upgrading,  or  even  replacing,
equipment and software. We have a complete inventory of vendor components used in our mainframe
and distributed computing environments, and vendor coordination and system change are progressing
well.  These  preparations  also 
the  Year  2000  readiness  of
telecommunications providers.
include  careful  attention 
to 
Testing
As we continue to assess our systems for Year 2000 readiness, we are well along in
preparing  a  special  central  environment  for  testing  our  payment  system  applications.  We  are
establishing  isolated  mainframe  data  processing  environments  to  be  used  for  internal  testing  of  all
system components as well as for testing with depository institutions and other government agencies.
These environments will enable testing for high-risk dates, such as the rollover to the year 2000 and
leap year processing. Testing will be conducted through a combination of future-dating our computer
systems to verify the readiness of our infrastructure, and testing critical future dates within interfaces
to  other  institutions.  Our  test  environments  will  be  configured  to  provide  flexible  and  nearly
continuous  access  by  customers.  Network  communications  components  are  also  being  tested  and
certified in a special test lab environment at FRAS.
BIS Review   104/1997
- 4 -
The  testing  effort  for  Year  2000  readiness  within  the  Federal  Reserve  will  be
extensive and complex. Industry experts estimate that testing for readiness will consume more than
half  of  total  Year  2000  project  resources.  To  leverage  existing  resources  and  processes,  we  are
modelling our Year 2000 testing on proven testing methods and processes. Our customers are already
familiar  with  these  processes  and  the  testing  environment.  We  shared  our  testing  strategy  with
depository  institutions  in  October  of  this  year,  and  we  are  currently  developing  a  coordinated  test
schedule. As I noted earlier, the Reserve Banks  are  targeting  June  1998  to  commence  testing  with
their  depository  institution  customers,  which  allows  an  18-month  time  period  for  depository
institutions to test their systems with the Federal Reserve.
All of these activities require that we retain highly skilled staff critical to the success
of the project. As I mentioned earlier, we have placed the highest priority on our CDC project, and, as
such, have allocated many of the best managers and technical staff in the Federal Reserve System to
work on the project. The information technology industry is already experiencing market pressures
due to the increased demand for technical talent. As the millennium draws closer, the global market
requirements for qualified personnel will intensify even further. We are responding as necessary to
these  market-induced  pressures  by  implementing  programs  to  retain  staff  members  in  critical,
high-demand positions.
Our focus at the Board goes beyond the immediate need to prepare our systems and
ensure  reliable  operation  of  the  payments  infrastructure.  We  are  also  working  hard  to  address  the
supervisory issues raised by Year 2000 and are developing contingency plans which I  will  discuss
later.
Bank Supervision
As  a  bank  supervisor,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  worked  closely  with  the  other
supervisory agencies that are part of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)
to  alert  the  industry  to  our  concerns  and  to  monitor  Year  2000  preparations  of  the  institutions  we
supervise so that we can identify early and address problems that arise. Comptroller of the Currency
Ludwig  is  testifying  today  as  Chairman  of  the  FFIEC  to  describe  the  interagency  Year  2000
supervisory initiatives of all of the five member agencies (Federal Reserve, OCC,  FDIC,  OTS  and
NCUA), so I will limit my comments on the Federal Reserve’s supervisory efforts.
In May of this year, the Federal Reserve and the other regulatory agencies developed
a uniform Year 2000 assessment questionnaire to collect information on a national basis. Based on
the  responses  and  other  information,  we  believe  the  banking  industry’s  awareness  level  improved
substantially during 1997 and is reflected in the intensified project management, planning, budgeting,
and renovation efforts that have been initiated.
Generally  speaking,  the  nation’s  largest  banking  organizations  have  done  much  to
address the issues and have devoted significant financial and human resources to  preparing  for  the
century  date  change.  Many  larger  banks  are  already  renovating  their  operating  systems  and  have
commenced  testing  of  their  critical  applications.  Large  organizations  seem  generally  capable  of
renovating  their  critical  operating  systems  by  year-end  1998,  and  will  have  their  testing  well
underway by then.
Smaller banks, including the U.S. offices of foreign banks and those dependent on a
third party to provide their computer services, are generally aware of the issues and are working on
the  problem;  however,  their  progress  is  less  measurable  and  is  being  carefully  monitored.  We  are
directing significant attention to ensure that these banks intensify their efforts to prepare for the Year
2000.
BIS Review   104/1997
Major third-party service providers and software vendors serving the banking industry
are  acutely  aware  of  the  issue  and  are  working  diligently  to  address  it.  Most  of  these  suppliers
consider their Year 2000 capability to be a business survival issue, as it is of critical importance to
their ability to remain competitive in an aggressive industry.
By  mid-year  1998  we  will  have  conducted  a  thorough  Year  2000  preparedness
examination of every bank, U.S. branch and agency of a foreign bank, and service provider that we
supervise.  Our  examination  program  includes  a  review  of  each  organization’s  Year  2000  project
management plans in order to evaluate their sufficiency, to ensure the direct involvement of senior
management and the board of directors, and to monitor their progress against the plan. As we proceed
through  the  examination  process,  we  are  identifying  any  institutions  that  require  intensified
supervisory attention and establishing our priorities for subsequent examinations.
International Awareness
With regard to the international aspects of the Year 2000 issue, U.S. offices of foreign
banks pose a unique set of challenges. We are concerned about the possibility that some offices may
not have an adequate appreciation of the magnitude and ramifications of the problem, and may not as
yet  have  committed  the  resources  necessary  to  address  the  issues  effectively.  This  is  a  particular
concern  for  foreign  bank  offices  that  are  dependent  on  their  foreign  parent  bank  for  information
processing  systems.  In  addition,  we  are  increasingly  concerned  that  the  foreign  branches  of  U.S.
banks may be adversely affected if counterparties in foreign markets are not ready for the Year 2000.
Therefore,  we  are  working  through  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements’  (BIS)
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  composed  of  many  of  the  international  supervisory  agencies
responsible  for  the  foreign  banks  that  operate  in  the  United  States.  Through  formal  and  informal
discussions,  the  distribution  of  several  interagency  statements  and  advisories,  and  the  Federal
Reserve’s Year 2000 video (see below) to the BIS supervisors committee, we have sought to elevate
foreign bank supervisors’ awareness of the risks posed by the century date change.
The  G-10  governors  issued  an  advisory  in  September  that  included  a  paper  by  the
bank supervisors committee on the Year 2000 challenge to banks and bank supervisors around  the
world to ensure a higher level of awareness and activity on their part. The BIS supervisors committee
has  developed  a  survey  sent  to  about  40  countries  to  collect  better  information  on  the  state  of
readiness of banks in those countries and the extent of the efforts of the bank supervisors to address
the issues locally and internationally. The surveys will be evaluated and the findings distributed early
next  year.  Also  on  the  international  front,  William  McDonough,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  in  a  keynote  address  to  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Institute  of  International
Finance in Hong Kong,  emphasized  the  importance  of  planning  for  the  century  date  change  on  an
international basis and the significant risk to financial markets posed by the Year 2000.
We  also  participated  in  the  BIS  meeting  sponsored  by  the  Committee  on  Payments
and Settlement Systems and the Group of Computer Experts for G-10 and major non-G-10  central
banks in September which provided a forum to share views on and approaches to dealing with Year
2000 issues, and we have been active in various private sector forums. The majority of foreign central
banks are confident that payment and settlement applications under their management will be Year
2000-ready.  Like  the  Federal  Reserve,  however,  the  operation  of  foreign  central  bank  payment
systems is dependent on compliant products from hardware and software suppliers and the readiness
of telecommunication service providers. The approach of foreign central banks toward raising bank
industry  awareness  varies  widely.  Information  garnered  from  this  meeting  and  similar  meetings
planned for the future will assist the BIS Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, as well as
the Federal Reserve, in understanding the state of preparedness of payment systems on a global level.
BIS Review   104/1997
Public Awareness
- 6 -
We  are  mindful  that  extensive  communication  with  the  industry  and  the  public  is
crucial to the success of century date change efforts. Our public awareness program concentrates on
communications  with  the  financial  services  industry  related  to  our  testing  efforts  and  our  overall
concerns  about  the  industry’s  readiness.  We  continue  to  advise  our  bank  customers  of  the  Federal
Reserve’s plans and time frames for making our software Year 2000-ready. We have inaugurated a
Year 2000 industry newsletter and have just published our first bulletin addressing specific technical
issues. We would be glad to provide you with copies of our recent newsletter and the bulletin. We
have  also  established  an  Internet  Web  site  to  provide  depository  institutions  with  information
regarding  the  Federal  Reserve  System’s  CDC  project.  This  site  can  be  accessed  at  the  following
Internet address: http://www.frbsf.org/fiservices/cdc.
On behalf of the FFIEC, the Federal Reserve has developed a Year 2000 information
distribution system, including an Internet Web site and a toll free Fax Back service (888-882-0982).
The Web site provides easy access to policy statements, guidance to examiners, and paths to  other
Year 2000 Web sites available from numerous other sources. The FFIEC Year 2000 Web site can be
accessed at the following Internet address: http://www.ffiec.gov/y2k.
The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  produced  a  ten-minute  video  entitled  “Year  2000
Executive Awareness” intended for viewing by a bank’s board of directors and senior management.
The video presents a summary of the Year 2000 five-phase project management plan outlined in the
interagency  policy  statement.  In  my  introductory  remarks  on  the  video,  I  note  that  senior  bank
officials should be directly involved in managing the Year 2000 project to ensure that it is given the
appropriate  level  of  attention  and  sufficient  resources  to  address  the  issue  on  a  timely  basis.  The
video can be ordered through the Board’s Web site.
Contingency Planning
While we will continue our public outreach efforts, our main focus is preparedness.
Because  smooth  and  uninterrupted  financial  flows  are  obviously  of  utmost  importance,  our  main
focus is on our readiness and the avoidance of problems. But we know from  experience  that  upon
occasion,  things  can  go  wrong.  Given  our  unique  role  as  the  nation’s  central  bank,  the  Federal
Reserve has always stressed contingency planning -- for both systemic risks as well as  operational
failures.
In this regard, we regularly conduct exhaustive business resumption tests of our major
payment  systems  that  include  depository  institutions.  Moreover,  as  a  result  of  our  experience  in
responding  to  problems  arising  from  such  diverse  events  as  earthquakes,  fires,  storms,  and  power
outages, as well as liquidity problems in institutions, we expect to be appropriately positioned to deal
with  similar  problems  in  the  financial  sector  that  might  arise  as  a  result  of  CDC.  However,  CDC
presents  many  unique  situations.  For  example,  in  the  software  application  arena,  the  normal
contingency of falling back to a prior release of the software is not a viable option. We are, of course,
developing  specific  CDC  contingency  plans  to  address  various  operational  scenarios,  and  our
contingency  planning  includes  preparation  to  address  unanticipated  problems  when  we  bring  our
systems into production as Year 2000 begins. Key technical staff will be ready to respond quickly to
problems with our computer and network systems. We are establishing procedures with our primary
vendors to ensure direct communication and appropriate recourse should their products fail at Federal
Reserve installations during Year 2000 date processing. Our existing business resumption plans will
be updated to address date-related difficulties that may face the financial industry.
We already have arrangements in place to assist financial institutions in the event they
are unable to access their own systems. For example, we are able to provide financial institutions with
BIS Review   104/1997
access to Federal Reserve computer terminals on a limited basis for the processing of critical funds
transfers. This contingency arrangement has proven highly effective when used from time to time by
depository  institutions  experiencing  major  hardware/software  outages  or  that  have  had  their
operations disrupted due to natural disasters such as the Los Angeles earthquake, hurricane Hugo in
the  Carolinas,  and  hurricane  Andrew  in  south  Florida.  In  these  cases  we  worked  closely  with
financial institutions to ensure that adequate supplies of cash were available to the community, and
we arranged for our operations to function virtually without interruptions for 24 hours a day during
the crisis period. We feel the experience gained from such crises will prove very helpful in the event
of  similar  problems  triggered  by  the  century  date  change.  We  are  formulating  responses  for
augmenting  certain  functions,  such  as  computer  help  desk  services  and  off-line  funds  transfers,  to
respond to short-term needs for these services.
Beyond  reliance  on  a  sound  plan  and  effective  execution  of  the  plan,  the  Federal
Reserve  provides  several  different  payment  services,  such  as  Fedwire,  ACH,  check,  and  cash;
therefore,  the  banking  industry  is  not  totally  dependent  upon  any  single  system  for  executing
payments.  Alternatives  are  available  in  the  event  of  a  disruption  in  a  segment  of  the  electronic
payment system.
We  recognize  that  despite  their  best  efforts,  some  depository  institutions  may
experience operating difficulties, either as a result of their own computer problems or those of their
customers, counterparties, or others. These problems could be manifested in a number of ways and
would  not  necessarily  involve  funding  shortfalls.  Nevertheless,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  always
prepared to provide information to depository institutions on the balances in their accounts with us
throughout the day, so that they can identify shortfalls and seek funding in the market. The Federal
Reserve  will  be  prepared  to  lend  in  appropriate  circumstances  and  with  adequate  collateral  to
depository institutions when market sources of funding are not reasonably available. The terms and
conditions of such lending may depend upon the circumstances giving rise to the liquidity shortfall.
Our  preparations  for  possible  liquidity  difficulties  also  extend  to  the  foreign  bank
branches  and  agencies  in  the  U.S.  that  may  be  adversely  affected  directly  by  their  own  computer
systems  or  through  difficulties  caused  by  the  linkage  and  dependence  on  their  parent  bank.  Such
circumstances  would  necessitate  coordination  with  the  home  country  supervisor.  Moreover,
consistent with current policy, foreign central banks will be expected to provide liquidity support to
any of their banking organizations that experience a funding shortfall.
Closing Remarks
As I indicated at the outset, the Federal Reserve views its Year 2000 preparations with
great seriousness. As such, we have placed a high priority on the remediation of date problems in our
systems  and  the  development  of  action  plans  that  will  ensure  business  continuity  for  the  critical
financial  systems  we  operate.  While  we  have  made  significant  progress  and  are  on  schedule  in
validating our internal systems and preparing for testing with depository institutions and others using
Federal  Reserve  services,  we  must  work  to  ensure  that  our  efforts  remain  on  schedule  and  that
problems are addressed in a timely fashion. In particular, we will be paying special attention to the
testing  needs  of  depository  institutions  and  the  financial  industry  and  are  prepared  to  adjust  our
support  for  them  as  required  by  experience.  We  believe  that  we  are  well-positioned  to  meet  our
objectives and will remain vigilant throughout the process.
As  a  bank  supervisor,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  address  the  industry’s
preparedness, monitor progress, and target for special supervisory attention those organizations that
are most in need of assistance. Lastly, we will continue to participate in international forums with the
expectation  that  these  efforts  will  help  foster  an  international  awareness  of  Year  2000  issues  and
provide for the sharing of experiences, ideas, and best practices.
BIS Review   104/1997
