Mr. Macfarlane draws some conclusions about the direction in which monetary
policy regimes are likely to evolve   Talk given by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia,
Mr. I.J. Macfarlane, to the 26th Conference of Economists in Hobart on 29/9/97.
Introduction
It is a pleasure to be speaking at this year’s Conference of Economists on a subject
which has been central to my own career. I thought of calling the speech “Monetary Regimes I Have
Known”, but that would have given too historical an emphasis. While history is extremely important,
and  provides  a  useful  antidote  to  excessively  abstract  thinking,  more  is  needed  to  satisfy  the
Conference theme of “policy challenges of the new century”. I have therefore attempted to respond in
a forward-looking way, by drawing some conclusions about the direction in which monetary policy
regimes are likely to evolve.
Historical overview
In  broad  outline,  Australia’s  post-war  monetary  policy  experience  has  much  in
common with that of other countries in the developed world. Certainly the starting point -- a fixed
exchange rate under the Bretton Woods system -- was the same, and several of the subsequent phases
have  been  common  to  a  significant  number  of  countries.  We  can  usefully  divide  the  post-war
monetary policy experience in Australia into four main parts:
the fixed exchange rate period, which lasted until the early 1970s;
a period of monetary targeting between 1976 and 1985;
a transitional period which followed the demise of monetary targeting and lasted until
the early 1990s; and
the inflation-targeting regime, in place since around 1993.
While  every  country  has  its  own  particular  story  to  tell,  something  similar  to  this
four-part schema, with suitable adjustments as to timing, could probably be applied to quite a wide
range of other countries over the same period. In making this classification of policy regimes, it is
wise to avoid being overly precise about dates. Sometimes regime shifts are quite dramatic and can
be precisely dated -- for example, the  ending  of  US  dollar  convertibility  into  gold,  and  the  United
Kingdom’s exit from the European exchange rate mechanism -- but this is not invariably the case. In
Australia, the movement between regimes has tended to be evolutionary, and it is not always possible
or helpful to date them precisely.
How did these four regimes perform, and what were the critical factors that led to the
move from each regime to its successor? To answer these questions we need to have in mind some
criteria  against  which  the  performance  of  a  monetary  policy  regime  can  be  assessed.  Most
practitioners and theorists would, I think, agree on two desirable characteristics of a monetary policy
regime. First, policy needs to provide a nominal anchor for the economy: the policy regime must have
the characteristic that it systematically resists excessive inflation or deflation, and thereby delivers a
satisfactory degree of price stability in the long run. The second objective is to provide a degree of
stabilisation  in  the  short  to  medium  term  in  response  to  shocks,  which  includes  resisting  adverse
shocks  to  output  and  employment.  This  objective  might  be  met  either  through  the  capacity  of  a
regime to undertake deliberate policy responses when shocks occur, or through automatic stabilisers
inherent in the regime.
BIS Review   90/1997
The fixed exchange rate period
- 2 -
The longest  lasting  of  the  four  regimes,  by  a  large  margin,  was  the  fixed  exchange
rate,  also  known  as  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  or  the  gold  exchange  standard.  At  the  start  of  the
post-war period, the Australian currency had already been fixed to sterling at an unchanged rate since
1931. Subsequently, there were only two major changes to Australia’s international parities until the
1970s:  the  first,  in  1949,  when  Australia  followed  a  sterling  devaluation  against  gold  and  the  US
dollar,  and  the  second,  in  1967,  when  sterling  was  further  devalued,  but  Australia  did  not  follow.
Thus, Australia’s exchange rate against sterling remained unchanged from 1931 to 1967, while the
rate against the US dollar -- which is more important for  current  purposes  --  was  unchanged  from
1949  to  1971.  As  was  the  case  for  most  other  countries,  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  “fixed  but
adjustable”  exchange  rates  was  operated  in  practice  in  Australia  in  the  1950s  and  1960s  as  a  firm
commitment to fixed parities. The fixed exchange rate was effectively the linchpin of the monetary
policy regime.
While it is not possible to pinpoint an exact date at which this ceased to be the case,
parity adjustments became much more frequent after the next Australian dollar realignment occurred
in 1971. Rather than  being  the  anchor  of  policy,  the  exchange  rate  henceforward  was  increasingly
viewed as an adjustable policy instrument. There were six parity changes in the years from 1971 to
the adoption of the crawling peg system in November 1976; and this more flexible system, in turn,
gave  way  to  the  float  in  December  1983.  The  history  can  thus  be  characterised  as  involving
essentially fixed parities up until 1971, followed by a gradual transition to greater  flexibility  and  a
stronger internal policy focus in the years that followed.
An  important  characteristic  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  system,  of  course,  is  that  it
provides a nominal anchor, as long as the monetary policy of the country to which the exchange rate
is fixed is itself conducted in a way that is consistent with reasonable price stability. This was indeed
the  case  for  most  of  the  period  up  to  around  1970.  Under  the  Bretton  Woods  or  gold  exchange
standard, most currencies were pegged to the US dollar, whose value was in turn tied to gold. The
central role of the US dollar in the system placed a strong discipline on the macro-economic policies
of  other  countries.  Unless  countries  were  prepared  to  make  significant  unilateral  exchange  rate
adjustments,  which  happened  only  rarely,  their  inflation  performances  in  the  longer  run  were
effectively determined by US monetary policy.
Private Consumption Deflator
Four-quarter-ended percentage change
OPEC I
(Oct-73)
Australia
United States
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
 15
10
5
0
-5
 15
10
5
0
-5
As I have argued elsewhere, this system worked reasonably well until the second half
of the 1960s. The United States for the most part conducted conservative monetary and fiscal policies
that kept budgets close to balance and inflation low, and this underpinned a period of sustained low
BIS Review   90/1997
inflation  in  other  countries.  In  Australia,  apart  from  some  periods  influenced  by  sharp  commodity
price movements, inflation was generally low and close to US rates.
This situation began to change from around the mid 1960s. Tax cuts in the 1964 and
1965  budgets,  and  subsequent  increases  in  defence  spending  associated  with  the  Vietnam  War,
shifted US fiscal policy to an expansionary position. Inflation began to increase, albeit from very low
levels,  after  about  1965,  and  balance  of  payments  deficits  run  by  the  United  States  meant  that  a
number  of  other  countries  began  accumulating  substantial  dollar  reserves.  This  fed  the  process  of
money  creation  in  these  countries  and  relaxed  the  constraints  on  their  domestic  macro-economic
policies,  with  the  result  in  many  cases  that  inflation  rates  increased.  Causes  of  the  eventual
breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in the face of these pressures have been much debated, but
the core of most explanations is that the system lost its capacity to provide effective policy discipline.
This, in turn, reflected the loss of suitability of the US dollar as the system’s nominal anchor, the role
it had played so effectively over the two previous decades.
It is interesting to note that the policy debate in Australia in the 1950s and 1960s paid
little  or  no  explicit  attention  to  the  nominal  anchoring  role  of  the  monetary  regime.  That  is  not
because the problem of inflation was thought to be unimportant -- on the contrary, the need to control
inflation was well recognised. Nonetheless the main focus, both of practitioners and of the economics
profession more widely, was on the second of the two roles of monetary policy that I outlined earlier,
namely its role in responding to shorter-term shocks. In fact, many commentators talked of monetary
policy as though it was totally discretionary and free to pursue whatever domestic objective it thought
most worthy (see next section on Phillips curve).
Perhaps the most important reason for this misapprehension was that the existence of
the long-run anchor was simply taken for granted. Policy did not need to focus on achieving a good
longer-run  inflation  performance  because  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  delivered  this  result  in  a
semi-automatic fashion. In this environment it was natural to focus on shorter-term objectives, with
the balance of payments serving as an important barometer of the need for policy action: whenever
domestic demand was too strong, this would quickly show up in a payments deficit which needed to
be  corrected  by  tighter  policy,  and  vice  versa.  In  this  way,  the  policy  regime  ensured  that  actions
taken in response to short-term demand pressures had the effect of consistently tying the economy in
to the long-run anchor.
The  eventual  failure  of  the  fixed  exchange  rate  system  to  ensure  continued  good
macro-economic  performance  reflected  a  combination  of  circumstances.  The  expansionary  shift  in
US policy, to which I have  already  referred,  meant  that  the  external  anchor  became  increasingly  a
source of inflationary pressure rather than of price stability. This was the case not just for Australia,
but  worldwide.  In  Australia’s  case,  however,  the  effect  was  amplified  in  the  early  1970s  by  the
related  phenomenon  of  rising  commodity  prices,  which  had  a  disproportionate  effect  on  Australia,
given  our  high  commodity  export  exposure.  The  effect  was  to  relax  the  balance  of  payments
constraint and allow a further loosening of domestic policy discipline, with the result that the rise in
Australia’s inflation rate soon overtook that in the United States. The role of the 1973 oil shock in all
of  this  was  also  important,  but  it  should  be  remembered  that  inflation  in  Australia  had  already
reached double-digit rates before the oil shock occurred.
The rise and fall of the Phillips curve
The  early  to  mid  1970s  was  a  period  of  re-evaluation  of  the  earlier  conventional
thinking about monetary policy, prompted by the experience of a number of years of rising inflation.
It  is  interesting  to  focus  on  the  nature  of  that  re-evaluation  because  it  remains  relevant  to  policy
today.
BIS Review   90/1997
- 4 -
In  the  1960s,  the  conventional  thinking  was  summed  up  in  the  widely-influential
notion  of  a  stable  downward-sloping  Phillips  curve.  Inflation  was  thought  of  in  terms  of
demand-driven  processes  that  would  move  the  economy  along  the  curve,  so  that  high  levels  of
demand would produce a combination of  high  inflation  and  low  unemployment,  and  low  levels  of
demand the reverse. The role of policy was to manage aggregate demand so as to achieve a preferred
combination of outcomes, taking the position of the Phillips curve as given.
Of course, not all economists subscribed to this simplistic world view, but I think it is
a fair representation of the consensus among those economists who were most influential and among
a broad range of other policy makers, politicians and journalists. There was considerable confidence
for a time that policy could effectively manage the trade-off. Policy before about 1970 had been quite
successful: periods of clearly excessive inflation had been rare, and were quickly reversed when they
occurred. But there developed a general tendency among policy-makers in the late 1960s and early
1970s  to  try  to  exploit  the  trade-off  to  extract  more  growth,  in  the  belief  that  the  cost  in  terms  of
inflation would not be too great.
The experience of the 1970s -- the simultaneous rise in inflation and unemployment,
and their persistence at high levels -- proved this understanding of the economy to be too simplistic
and an inadequate guide for policy. To a mindset based on the stable Phillips curve, the combination
of  high  inflation  and  high  unemployment  could  not  be  readily  explained.  Indeed,  it  appeared
internally contradictory, since inflation was thought of as a symptom of excess demand while high
unemployment signalled that demand was deficient.
Two factors needed to be brought into the conventional model in order to understand
the 1970s experience. The first, which had been emphasised both by Friedman and by Phelps, was
the  role  of  expectations.  The  short-run  Phillips  curve  was  to  be  thought  of  not  as  a  permanent
trade-off, but as conditional on the expected rate of inflation. Expansionary demand conditions were
associated with higher-than-expected inflation, rather than high inflation per se, so the  trade-off  of
higher inflation for lower unemployment  could  only  be  exploited  over  the  limited  period  in  which
inflation expectations did not fully adjust to the new higher rate. In the longer run, when expectations
had adjusted, high inflation would have no stimulatory impact. In Friedman’s words, “a rising rate of
inflation  may  reduce  unemployment,  a  high  rate  will  not”.  The  operation  of  this  principle  had  not
previously been observable because inflation had never stayed high for long enough to be built into
expectations.
The  second,  and  related,  factor  to  be  brought  into  the  conventional  model  was  the
importance  of  supply  shocks.  These  could  be  thought  of  as  shocks  which  reduced  the  sustainable
levels  of  output  and  employment  consistent  with  steady  inflation.  For  much  of  the  world  the
quintessential supply shocks were rises in oil prices but, for Australia, the real wages shock of 1974
was  probably  at  least  as  important.  Recognition  of  the  importance  of  supply  shocks  implied  a
corresponding  recognition  of  the  limitations  on  what  could  be  achieved  through  conventional
demand-management policies.
Although economic thinking has advanced in a number of ways since the 1970s, these
two basic lessons from the period remain relevant,  and  often  need  repeating.  While  the  economics
profession was quick to take up the stable Phillips curve, it was also quick in dropping it as a policy
prescription. But there are still some in the policy debate -- particularly among politicians, lobbyists
and journalists -- who think of the economy in terms of a stable Phillips curve, and who would like us
to choose a higher inflation rate on the assumption that this would produce a sustained lift in growth
and  employment.  But  that  is  not  the  choice  we  face.  Higher  inflation  can  deliver  at  best  only  a
temporary stimulus to growth and, in the longer run, is more likely to be detrimental.
BIS Review   90/1997
The move to monetary targeting
In  the  light  of  the  early  1970s  experience,  economists  stopped  assuming  a  stable
Phillips  curve  and  started  looking  for  ways  to  anchor  monetary  policy  decisions.  The  Friedman
suggestion  of  a  steady  growth  of  the  money  supply  sufficient  to  accommodate  normal  economic
growth  and  low  inflation  found  favour  in  a  number  of  countries.  Several  had  been  focusing  on
monetary  aggregates  since  the  early  1970s  and,  by  1975,  a  number,  including  the  United  States,
Germany,  the  United  Kingdom  and  Switzerland  were  announcing  monetary  targets.  Australia
followed  suit  in  1976  by  beginning  to  announce  forecasts  for  the  growth  of  M3.  These  were
subsequently announced each year in the federal budget until the practice was discontinued in 1985.
The  nature  of  the  targets  was  somewhat  different  to  what  is  often  assumed  in  the
textbooks  or  in  the  somewhat  idealised  notions  of  monetary  theorists.  In  no  country  were  targets
adhered  to  with  the  sort  of  mechanical  precision  envisaged  in  Friedman’s  Program  for  Monetary
Stability, the classic statement of the case for monetary targeting. They were usually seen as guides to
policy,  and  as  vehicles  for  explaining  the  rationale  of  policy  actions,  rather  than  being  binding
constraints on the policy-maker.
Monetary  targeting  regimes  had  a  moderate  degree  of  success  in  achieving  their
intermediate monetary objectives, and somewhat greater success in terms of the ultimate objective of
reducing inflation. In the heyday of monetary targeting around the world, roughly from 1975 to 1985,
some substantial reductions in inflation were achieved. Australia’s inflation rate was reduced during
this period, but was still a lot higher than the OECD average by the mid 1980s.
It  would  be  a  mistake  to  attribute  the  differences  in  inflation  performance  across
countries primarily to differing degrees of rigour in the pursuit of monetary targets. The countries that
brought  inflation  under  control  most  quickly  were  not  particularly  more  successful  in  hitting  their
monetary  targets  than  the  rest.  The  general  pattern,  summarised  in  Table  1,  was  that  countries
achieved their targets about half the time. Australia’s success rate was  a  bit  less  than  that,  about  a
third. On another measure -- the average deviation from the target midpoint -- Australia’s record was
quite similar to that of several other countries.
Table 1: Monetary Targets and Projections
Country
Period
Australia
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States M2
United States M3
1977-1985
1976-1982
1977-1996
1975-1996
1975-1996
1975-1996
1976-1996
1975-1996
1975-1996
Source: Edey (1997)
Average absolute
deviation from
target mid-point
Proportion of years
within target range (%)
2.6
1.3
2.5
1.8
2.7
2.6
2.7
1.5
1.8
33.3
71.4
50.0
54.5
31.8
47.6
52.4
63.6
40.9
The  achievement  of  inflation  reduction  was  a  product  not  so  much  of  the  technical
merits of monetary targeting as of the general shift in the policy-making consensus towards inflation
control. What was critical was the willingness of the authorities to run policies that put a consistent
downward pressure on inflation over a period of time. But, that said, the targets did serve a useful
purpose.  They  focused  policy  on  the  need  to  anchor  the  nominal  magnitudes  in  the  economy,  and
they  helped  in  communicating  the  anti-inflation  strategy  to  the  public  and  marshalling  public
BIS Review   90/1997
- 6 -
acceptance of the required policy actions. The Volcker disinflation period in the United States was a
good example of how useful targets could be in this role. Alan Blinder described the monetary target
as a “heat shield” which enabled the Fed to maintain a much tougher disinflationary stance than the
public  would  normally  have  found  acceptable.  As  a  result  the  United  States  was  able  to  make  a
definitive transition to low inflation at an early stage.
Monetary targeting was always subject to two well-known problems, both of which
were important in the  Australian  experience.  The  first  was  the  problem  of  controllability.  The  fact
that targets were often missed was an indication that close control was either not possible, or would
have required undesirable movements in the policy instruments. The second was the instability of the
relationship between money supply and the ultimate objective of policy such as inflation or nominal
GDP. It was this second problem that was decisive in causing most countries to abandon monetary
targeting as the basis of their monetary policies.
By the mid 1980s, the problem of instability was coming to the fore. The relationship
of money to ultimate objectives had always been imprecise, but had been judged to be sufficiently
stable  to  serve  as  a  useful  guide  to  policy.  But  the  structural  changes  in  the  financial  system  that
followed deregulation were sufficiently large that this was no longer the case. In Australia, in the mid
1980s, the newly deregulated banks were able to win back market share from other institutions, and
the financial system as a whole began to grow more rapidly. To some extent, this was to be expected,
but  it  meant  a  lengthy  period  in  which  the  behaviour  of  the  monetary  and  financial  aggregates
diverged from inflation or nominal income. In 1985, growth of M3 reached 17.5 per cent, at a time
when domestic inflation had been falling.
The problem was not unique to Australia. By the time our targets were suspended in
February  1985,  many  other  countries  had  downgraded  or  abandoned  them,  for  much  the  same
reasons. In the words of Canadian central bank Governor Bouey, “we didn’t abandon the monetary
aggregates, they abandoned us”.
The transitional period
The move away from monetary targets was followed by a period of transition when
policies  became  more  pragmatic  and  there  was  a  search  for  alternative  guiding  principles.  Once
again,  Australia’s  experience  was  by  no  means  unique.  Virtually  all  countries  were  downgrading
their monetary targets to one degree or another, and there was no immediately clear direction as to
what should be put in their place. Theory offered little help. Some of the alternatives being put up by
critics either had already proven unsatisfactory for us -- like a return to fixed exchange rates or forms
of monetary targeting -- or were unrealistically radical. Most countries with floating exchange rates
developed a pragmatic approach that, broadly speaking, tried to resist excessive inflation and to have
some stabilising influence on economic activity in response to shorter-term shocks.
Policy  in  Australia  through  this  transitional  period  has  been  criticised  for  lacking  a
clear  conceptual  framework  and  allowing  too  much  scope  for  central  bank  discretion,  and  there  is
some validity in these criticisms. In Australia, the policy “checklist”, which entered the discussion for
a  few  years  following  the  abandonment  of  monetary  targets,  comprised  a  wide  range  of  variables
which were to be consulted in assessing economic conditions and making policy decisions. The list of
variables included interest rates, the exchange  rate,  the  monetary  aggregates,  inflation,  the  external
accounts,  asset  prices  and  the  general  economic  outlook  --  in  short,  an  amalgam  of  instruments,
intermediate  and  final  policy  objectives,  and  general  macro-economic  indicators.  The  checklist
conveyed the idea -- sensible as far as it goes -- that policy needs to look at all relevant information.
What  was  missing  was  some  framework  for  evaluating  that  information  and  converting  it  into  an
operational guide for policy.
BIS Review   90/1997
Another  way  of  expressing  this  is  to  say  that  monetary  policy  needed  a  “nominal
anchor”. Pure pragmatism was not enough because it could lead to monetary policy aiming to achieve
a desired result for a “real variable”, which in the long run would be self-defeating. For example, if
monetary policy was solely designed to achieve a given unemployment rate (as to some extent it was
in the late 1960s/early 1970s in many countries), it would be continually eased whenever the actual
unemployment rate was above the desired rate. But if the desired rate was too ambitious, this would
be a recipe for continued easing and, in time, continuously rising inflation. At the same time, there
would  be  no  guarantee  that  monetary  policy  alone  would  be  able  to  achieve  the  desired
unemployment  rate  if  structural  factors  were  important.  Similarly,  indeterminacy  would  arise  if
monetary policy was directed at the current account of the balance of payments, as a lot of discussion
in the late 1980s seemed to suggest. If the current account was too large, should monetary policy be
tightened to reduce domestic demand (and imports), or should it be loosened to lower the exchange
rate and hence increase competitiveness?
These sorts of discussion led policy-makers and academics to again ask the question
about what monetary policy could achieve in the long run. The nearly unanimous answer was that it
could achieve a desired rate of inflation, but could not, of itself, achieve desired outcomes  for  real
variables like the unemployment rate, the rate of growth, or variables like the balance of payments.
Monetary policy can have an influence for good or bad on real variables, particularly in the short run,
but it was not appropriate to target it at these variables. As a long-run target, what was needed was a
nominal variable like inflation, nominal GDP or the money supply.
With  the  money  demand  function  recognised  as  being  unstable,  and  nominal  GDP
being too abstract a concept for easy public perception, attention turned to monetary policy regimes
that centred on inflation. Two main alternatives presented themselves:
a system where the instrument of monetary policy was operated to achieve a desired
result for inflation, without the need for an intermediate target; or
a system where the exchange rate was fixed to that of another country which  had  a
good record of maintaining low inflation.
In  short,  the  two  alternatives  which  satisfied  the  condition  of  providing  a  “nominal
anchor”  were  inflation  targeting  or  fixing  the  exchange  rate  (sometimes  called  the  hard  currency
option). Australia went down the first path, while most of Europe (including the United Kingdom for
a time) went down the second path by tying their currencies to the Deutschemark.
Some would argue that this two-way classification of the options is too narrow  and
that monetary targeting remains a viable third option, at least for some countries. Germany is often
cited as an example. This view ignores the reality that the Bundesbank has moved a long way away
from  strict  monetary  targeting  in  recent  years,  as  is  evident  from  the  way  they  move  their  policy
instrument. There is evidence to suggest that prospective inflationary developments are more likely to
trigger a monetary policy move than is a deviation of money supply from its target.
Inflation targeting
Unlike  the  experience  in  some  other  countries  like  the  United  Kingdom  or  New
Zealand, where inflation targets came into force in dramatic regime shifts, the elements of Australia’s
inflation-targeting  regime  were  put  in  place  gradually.  There  were  a  number  of  reasons  for  this.
While  inflation  targets  had  considerable  conceptual  appeal,  the  models  adopted  in  the  pioneering
countries - New Zealand and Canada - seemed to us excessively rigid with their narrow bands and
low target mid-points. The fact that these were the only working models available at the time tended
to polarise debate, and it took some time for the Bank to develop its own more flexible version. Also
BIS Review   90/1997
- 8 -
important was the need to build public support, including political support, for a target, and again this
happened gradually rather than in a single, decisive act.
Some of the key elements of the inflation-targeting approach were in place quite early.
The  conceptual  basis  of  such  an  approach,  with  a  focus  on  inflation  as  the  policy  objective,  no
intermediate objective, interest rates as the instrument, and a transmission process that works via the
effect  of  interest  rates  on  private  demand,  had  been  analysed  in  a  number  of  pieces  that  the  Bank
published in 1989, including its conference volume. What we now consider one of the key elements
of the policy framework, the explicit announcements of cash rate changes, with explanations of the
reasons for each change, began in January 1990. Over time, the Bank’s published commentaries on
monetary  policy  and  the  economy  became  more  detailed  and  developed  a  stronger  inflation  focus.
The numerical objective of 2-3 per cent inflation began appearing in public statements by Governor
Fraser  in  1992  and  1993.  The  cumulative  effect  of  all  these  developments  was  to  establish  an
inflation-targeting  regime  broadly  comparable  to  those  being  developed  in  a  number  of  other
countries  around  the  same  time.  While  there  was  no  individual  decisive  event,  international
comparative tables such as those published by the BIS date the change in Australia from 1993.
A final element was added with the joint statement on the conduct of monetary policy,
made  by  myself  and  the  Treasurer  on  my  appointment  as  Governor.  The  statement  gave  the
Government’s formal endorsement to the independence of the Reserve Bank as contained in its Act
and  to  the  2-3  per  cent  target.  It  also  provided  for  enhanced  accountability  through  semi-annual
statements and parliamentary appearances.
Several other countries adopted inflation targets around the same time as Australia. A
recent survey by the BIS counts seven inflation targeters, making this currently the most numerically
popular regime among medium-sized OECD countries (Table 2). As had been the case with previous
regime  changes,  the  immediate  reason  for  change  in  many  cases  was  either  a  breakdown  of  a
previous  regime  or  dissatisfaction  with  its  performance.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  Sweden  and
Finland, the trigger was the collapse of fixed exchange rate commitments in 1992. New Zealand and
Canada adopted their targets in a deliberate strategy of inflation reduction. Australia was somewhat
different in that there was no crisis that needed to be responded to, and the target was developed to
cement in place an inflation reduction that had already been achieved.
Table 2: Inflation Targets
Current target
Country
0-3%
New Zealand
1-3%
Canada
2½%
United Kingdom
1-3%
Sweden
2%
Finland
2-3%
Australia
Spain
0-3%
Source: BIS 1996 Annual Report, updated to incorporate recent changes to targets in the United
Kingdom and New Zealand
Target adopted
March 1990
February 1991
October 1992
January 1993
February 1993
1993
Summer 1994
The  move  to  inflation  targeting  completed  a  significant  conceptual  leap  from  the
regimes that had prevailed in the earlier decades. Instead of a focus on intermediate objectives, like
the exchange rate or the money supply, the operational framework of policy was now built around a
final objective, inflation. In describing inflation as the final objective in this context, I should make
clear that inflation control is viewed as a  means  to  an  end  rather  than  an  end  in  itself.  The  reason
monetary  regimes  have  been  set  up  to  aim  for  low  inflation  is  that  this  is  the  best  contribution
monetary policy can make in the longer run to growth in output, employment and living standards.
BIS Review   90/1997
In  principle,  this  approach  re-establishes  a  clear  nominal  anchor  while  avoiding  the
main problem of the intermediate-targeting regimes -- namely, that the target variables did not have a
sufficiently  stable  relationship  with  the  final  objectives.  The  approach  also  preserves,  from  the
transitional period that I described earlier, the common-sense notion of using all relevant information:
the  difference  is  that  there  is  now  a  clear  criterion  --  the  impact  on  the  inflation  outlook  --  for
assessing what the information means for policy.
Another property of inflation targets, not always well-recognised, is that they provide
scope for counter-cyclical action. This is  automatically  built  into  the  policy  framework  if  a  central
bank takes seriously, as we do, both the upper and lower  bounds  of  the  target.  When  the  inflation
forecast is above the target, the framework requires policy to be tightened, as was the case a couple of
years ago, and, when it is below target, policy has to be more expansionary, as at present. In this way
the  policy  framework  incorporates  a  systematic  resistance  to  cyclical  demand  pressures.  I  have
described  this  previously  by  saying  that  the  policy  aims  to  allow  the  economy  to  grow  as  fast  as
possible, consistent with low inflation, but no faster.
Aside from these operational characteristics, an important dimension of the economic
rationale for inflation targets is their role as a discipline on the policy process. The academic literature
lays great store on this -- particularly in the time inconsistency literature -- although it tends to focus
rather too narrowly on the idea of constraining the policy-makers. The targets are seen as correcting
an  inflationary  bias  that  would  otherwise  arise  from  the  temptation  of  central  bankers  to  go  for
short-term  expansion.  In  this  literature,  rule-based  regimes  are  said  to  be  superior  to  discretion
because they allow pre-commitment to non-inflationary policies, and thereby overcome the assumed
short-termism of the policy-makers. Central bankers are very sceptical of this line of analysis because
we do not see ourselves as inherently inflation-prone.
But while I think this particular argument for a rule-based approach somewhat misses
the point, the ability to specify policy in terms of a relatively simple rule does have some important
advantages.  In  particular,  simple  rules  provide  a  ready  vehicle  for  accountability  and  for  public
communication: they require policy actions to be explained in terms of a clear target, and they help
central banks to resist calls for excessively expansionary policies. Also important is that, over time, a
simple rule like an inflation target can provide a focal point for inflation expectations by making clear
what the central bank is aiming at.
One of the reasons that inflation targets have proven attractive to so many countries is
that they seem to strike a workable balance, between having these advantages of a simple rule, and
retaining  a  necessary  degree  of  flexibility.  The  framework  has  simplicity  in  terms  of  an  easily
communicated  objective,  at  the  same  time  as  having  flexibility  in  the  interpretation  of  information
and operation of the policy instrument -- a combination of characteristics that Mishkin  refers  to  as
“constrained discretion”.
While  the  essential  characteristics  of  inflation  targets  are  common  to  all  the
practitioners,  there  are  some  interesting  variations  across  countries  in  the  detailed  design  features.
These  involve  characteristics  like  the  target  mid-point,  the  width  of  fluctuation  bands  and  the
timeframe for evaluating performance. Australia’s system differs from the early models (particularly
New Zealand) by focusing on a midpoint of 2-3 per cent (which really means “about 2½”) rather than
a  range.  The  most  common  target  mid-point  is  2  per  cent:  Australia  and  the  United  Kingdom  are
slightly  higher  at  2½  and  New  Zealand  lower  at  1½  (having  originally  been  at  1).  There  is  also  a
difference concerning the meaning of the upper and lower bounds. In the original New Zealand and
Canadian  models,  inflation  was  meant  to  be  always  within  the  band,  but  in  our  variation  that  was
never the intention.
BIS Review   90/1997
- 10 -
At this level of detail there is no single consensus model as to how an inflation target
should  be  designed.  To  some  extent,  the  variations  reflect  the  different  historical  circumstances  of
each country. For example, New Zealand, which had the first and the most tightly specified system,
also  had  one  of  the  poorest  track  records  on  inflation  and  therefore  the  clearest  need  to  signal  a
regime shift. Notwithstanding these differences, the essentials -- a numerically specified target linked
to procedures of public explanation and accountability -- are common to all the inflation targets.
The future
To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  inflation  targeting  was  not  seriously  canvassed  as  a
monetary  policy  option  until  the  1980s.  By  the  end  of  that  decade,  however,  as  I  have  described
earlier, there were only two monetary policy regimes that held out the promise of being achievable
and of providing a nominal anchor -- the first was the hard currency option and the second was an
inflation target. It is my view that, as we approach the next century, the field will narrow further, and
that  inflation  targeting  will  become  the  dominant  monetary  policy  regime.  This  would  be  a
remarkable change for a system that was virtually unheard of until the second half of the 1980s.
The reason for this change is that the biggest group of countries that have chosen the
hard currency option -- the members of the European Monetary System (EMS) -- are scheduled on
1 January 1999 to achieve monetary union. On that date, there will be one European currency -- the
Euro  --  and  one  European  Central  Bank  --  the  ECB.  What  will  be  the  monetary  policy  regime
pursued  by  the  ECB?  It  cannot  be  the  hard  currency  option  because  the  Euro  will  be  a  floating
currency.  My  guess  is  that,  whatever  the  ECB  chooses,  it  will  rather  closely  resemble  inflation
targeting.  An  alternative  view  is  that  in  order  to  impress  markets  that  the  Euro  is  as  sound  as  the
Deutschemark, the ECB may follow something akin to the German practice of monetary targeting.
As I said earlier, this would not alter the picture very much, as current German practice seems to be at
least as much like inflation targeting as it is like monetary targeting.
In this new world, there will be three major currencies, which will float against each
other -- the US dollar, the yen and the Euro. Of course, none of these are in the group of countries
that has an explicit inflation target, but I have argued elsewhere that if you had to fit the United States
into one or the other of the formal monetary policy regimes, the one that comes closest is inflation
targeting. The target is not explicit, but the Fed makes no secret of the fact that it is its assessment of
inflationary  pressures  and  the  outlook  for  inflation  that  is  the  major  determinant  of  whether  US
monetary policy is adjusted. The Fed’s behaviour over the last month has made that abundantly clear.
Japan is a more difficult case to classify, but the evidence is that with inflation virtually non-existent,
interest rates have been reduced to about the lowest conceivable level (the cash rate is ½ per cent).
Thus,  among  the  traditional  OECD  countries,  we  have  a  group  of  explicit  inflation
targeters and another group -- the big three -- who have systems which could most appropriately be
called implicit inflation targeters. Outside the OECD area, there is still room for countries to choose
the hard currency option - Hong Kong for the past 13 years and Argentina (for a considerably shorter
time)  --  fit  this  description.  But  recent  events  in  Asia  as  well  as  in  other  regions  such  as  Eastern
Europe in recent years may have made the fixed exchange rate option less attractive in many cases.
If we take an even longer sweep of history, we can see that we entered this century
with the most irrevocably fixed exchange rate system yet devised, namely the gold standard. As we
enter the next century, we enter a world where floating exchange rates are the norm, and where the
role  of  nominal  anchor  will  be  predominantly  played  by  an  inflation  target,  whether  it  is  explicit,
much as our own, or implicit as is the case in the United States.
BIS Review   90/1997
 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bernanke, Ben S. and F.S. Mishkin (1997), “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary
Policy?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, No. 2 (Spring), 97-116
Blinder, Alan S. (1987), Hard Heads, Soft Hearts, Addison-Wesley
Blinder, Alan. S (1995), Central Banking in Theory and Practice, Marshall Lectures presented at the
University of Cambridge
Clarida,  R.  and  M.  Gertler  (1996),  “How  the  Bundesbank  Conducts  Monetary  Policy”,  NBER
Working Paper No. 5581
Coombs,  H.C.  (1959),  “A  Matter  of  Prices”,  Presidential  Address,  Thirty-fourth  Congress,
ANZAAS,  reproduced  in  Coombs,  H.C.  Other  People’s  Money,  Australian  National  University
Press, 1971
Duisenberg, W.F. (1997), “Strategies for Monetary Policy in EMU”, address on the occasion of the
Board meeting of the Banking Federation of the European Union, Maastricht, March 1997
Edey,  M.L.  (1997),  “The  Debate  on  Alternatives  for  Monetary  Policy  in  Australia”,  in  Monetary
Policy and Inflation Targeting, P. Lowe (ed), Reserve Bank of Australia, October 1997
Friedman, Milton (1968), “The Role of Monetary Policy”, American Economic Review, 58:1-17
Goodhart, C.A.E. (1989), “The Conduct of Monetary Policy”, Economic Journal, 99(396), 293-346
Grenville,  S.A.  (1989),  “The  Operation  of  Monetary  Policy”,  presented  at  the  First  Annual
Melbourne Money and Finance Conference, November 1989
Laubach,  T.  and  A.S.  Posen  (1997),  “Disciplined  Discretion:  The  German  and  Swiss  Monetary
Targeting Frameworks in Operation”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Research Paper No. 9707
Leeson, R. (1996), “The Rise of the Natural Rate of Unemployment Model”, History of Economics
Review, 25:249-264
Macfarlane,  I.J.  and  G.R.  Stevens  (1989)  (eds),  Studies  in  Money  and  Credit,  Proceedings  of  a
Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, October 1989
Macfarlane,  I.J.  (1989b),  “Policy  Targets  and  Operating  Procedures:  The  Australian  Case”,  in
Monetary Policy Issues in the 1990s, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri,
143-159
McCallum,  B.T.  (1995),  “Two  Fallacies  Concerning  Central  Bank  Independence”,  American
Economic Review, 85(2), 207-211
Mishkin, F.S. (1997), “Strategies for Controlling Inflation”, Monetary Policy and Inflation Targeting,
P. Lowe (ed), Reserve Bank of Australia, October 1997
Mishkin, F.S. and A.S. Posen (1997), “Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries”, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, August 1997
Phelps,  E.S.  (1967),  “Phillips  Curves,  Expectations  of  Inflation  and  Optimal  Unemployment  Over
Time”, Economica, 34:254-81
Zarnowitz, Victor (1972) (ed), “The Business Cycle Today”, NBER, NY
BIS Review   90/1997
