Mr.  McDonough  gives  a  US  perspective  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in
Europe      Remarks  by  the  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Mr.  William
J. McDonough, before the Association of German Mortgage Banks in Frankfurt, on 17/11/97.
I am honored to be invited by the German Mortgage Banks to be the keynote speaker
tonight at the Association’s annual Pfandbrief Forum. It is a great pleasure to be here in  Frankfurt
among so many distinguished representatives of the German banking and financial community and
members of the Bundesbank Council.
In  my  remarks  to  you  this  evening,  I  would  like  to  offer  a  few  thoughts  on  the
implications of Economic and Monetary Union in Europe from my  perspective  as  President  of  the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Many in the United States today are following developments in
Europe’s move toward monetary union with considerable interest. I am certainly among them.
There can be no doubt about the magnitude and economic importance of the historic
event that will take place on January 1, 1999, when the currencies of up to 15 member countries of
the European Union are scheduled to be unified. It is a goal toward which Europe has been working
ever  since  the  Treaty  of  Rome  was  signed  in  1957  creating  the  European  Economic  Community.
While some might claim that this historic development will have little impact on the U.S. economy,
nothing could be further from the truth.
The United States will be directly affected in several important ways by the start of
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  Europe,  or  EMU.  I  would  like  to  review  some  of  the  main
channels through which EMU is likely to affect American business and policymaking over the next
several  years.  Further,  I  think  it  may  be  useful  to  highlight  some  of  the  important  similarities  and
differences between the currency union that exists in the United States today and the currency union
that you are in the process of creating in Europe.
The most obvious implication of the start of EMU for the United States -- as well as
for  the  world  community  --  is  the  coming  into  existence  of  a  new  currency,  the  euro,  which  is
intended to function as a major international currency alongside the U.S. dollar. I should make clear
at  the  outset  that  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  think  that  the  United  States  looks  at  this  prospect  with
concern, as if the introduction of the euro could somehow compromise the ability of the United States
to continue to conduct trade and financial transactions with the rest of the world.
As you well know, the dollar is currently used in roughly 50 percent of world trade
transactions and in at least one side of 80 percent of world financial transactions. The introduction of
another major international currency will neither harm the depth and liquidity of the dollar market nor
hinder the ability of the United States to conduct its external transactions smoothly. On the contrary,
to the extent that the birth of the euro fosters deeper trade and financial markets globally and a more
efficient  international  monetary  system,  all  countries  stand  to  benefit,  particularly  an  active
participant such as the United States.
Let  me  be  more  specific.  In  my  view,  for  the  United  States  and  the  international
monetary  system,  the  implication  of  a  growing  international  role  for  the  euro  over  the  foreseeable
future will be most significant with respect to financial rather than trade transactions.
It  is  quite  true  that  the  euro  may  quickly  become  the  currency  of  choice  in  the
invoicing  of  trade  between  companies  in  the  European  Union  and  their  foreign  counterparts.
Companies in regions with strong links to the European Union, such as those in eastern and central
Europe, North Africa, and the CFA French franc  zone,  may  also  choose  to  invoice  trade  in  euros.
BIS Review   109/1997
- 2 -
More  generally,  the  euro  may  well  expand  its  importance  in  world  trade  beyond  the  relative  trade
weight  of  the  European  Union  countries,  following  a  path  similar  to  that  taken  by  the  U.S.  dollar
and -- before that -- by the pound sterling.
Nevertheless,  I  would  argue  that  the  economic  effects  of  these  potential  changes  in
invoicing practices are likely to be limited. Why do I say this?
First, to a large extent, the re-denomination of a significant share of world trade into
euros will mainly represent a shift in invoicing practices from the use of former European currencies
to euros. Moreover, third-country effects are unlikely to be major, because the European currencies as
a whole are already somewhat over-represented in their share of world trade transactions relative to
their countries’ weights in world trade -- not as much so as the dollar, but certainly more so than the
yen.
Finally, changes in trade invoicing practices have a direct economic impact only  on
the two parties involved in the transaction, and these effects are limited to determining who ultimately
bears the exchange rate risk. In fact, because of the wide variety of risk-hedging instruments that are
available to traders exposed to exchange rate fluctuations, the impact of exchange rate risk on trade
patterns is likely to be secondary. This conjecture is confirmed by a substantial amount of empirical
research.
In short, the economic impact of the euro in international trade transactions is likely to
be limited. The same cannot be said of the euro’s potential role in international financial transactions.
Partly  because  of  their  sheer  magnitude  --  some  estimates  place  the  volume  of
international  capital  transactions  at  more  than  40  times  the  volume  of  international  trade
transactions -- growth in the use of the euro as the currency of choice in global capital markets will
have much more significant repercussions for the United States than will increasing use of the euro in
global product markets. To a large extent, these repercussions reflect the well-known gains that stem
from  increasing  returns  in  the  use  of  a  currency  as  a  store  of  value.  As  the  market  for  a  currency
becomes  more  liquid,  the  costs  of  carrying  wealth  denominated  in  that  currency  fall,  raising
investors’ preferences for denominating their portfolios in that currency. These increased preferences
in turn lead to a further deepening and broadening of the market for that currency, costs of holdings
are reduced further, and the process continues.
As  in  trade  transactions,  the  dollar  is  the  predominant  means  of  exchange  in
international  financial  transactions.  Its  predominance  is  especially  apparent  with  respect  to  large
issues  of  international  bonds  --  a  clear  reflection  of  the  low  cost  of  covering  exchange  rate  and
interest rate risk for long-term dollar instruments.
I would suggest, however, that the current role of the dollar should not be taken for
granted.  Once  the  euro  comes  into  existence,  the  simple  conversion  of  the  EMU  countries’
outstanding  securities  into  euros  will  contribute  to  the  immediate  creation  of  a  major  securities
market.
This development alone will create a critical mass for a market in euro-denominated
securities.  It  will  give  the  market  depth  and  liquidity,  and,  in  so  doing,  bring  down  the  costs  of
conducting transactions, issuing loans, and trading securities below those currently seen for European
national currencies -- possibly to levels comparable to those for dollars. The development of such a
virtuous cycle could well feed upon itself and lead to the continuous growth of the market for euros.
In this context, I would like to suggest that the experience the United States has had
with a large, unified capital market may point to ways in which a unified  European  capital  market
BIS Review   109/1997
may evolve after the advent of EMU. If the U.S. experience is of any relevance, we may expect to see
a decreasing use of bank loans in favor of a growing use of securities in Europe after 1999.
Repo markets would also likely grow, potentially along the lines we have seen in the
United States, where institutional investors such as mutual funds and pension funds, state and local
governments,  and  insurance  companies  have  become  the  largest  providers  of  capital  under  repo
arrangements  --  in  contrast  with  Europe’s  experience,  where  these  types  of  investors  tend  to  hold
bank deposits. A growing role for repurchase arrangements is already apparent in Europe, and this
growth may be expected to accelerate once the European central bank starts to operate in this market,
accepting -- and fostering -- the use of a wide range of government paper as collateral.
It  is  useful  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  move  to  a  single-currency,  highly  securitized
European capital market cannot be expected to be completely painless. Clearly, since banks are the
main intermediaries of cross-border transactions, the banking sector will bear the brunt of the costs
associated  with  the  changeover  to  a  common  currency.  For  example,  it  will  suffer  losses  from
reduced foreign exchange trading and transfer revenues. It will also have to pay for the retooling of
information  management  and  delivery  systems,  as  well  as  face  increased  uncertainties  in  its  core
deposits.
At the same time, however, the larger single market will create new opportunities for
banks, particularly in the areas of investment banking and the cross-border sale of deposits, mutual
funds, and other savings products. On balance, it seems fair to conclude that the commercial position
and  earnings  of  many  European  banks  are  likely  to  come  under  pressure.  This  may  accelerate  the
ongoing  restructuring  of  Europe’s  banking  industry,  a  process  that  has  been  confined,  to  date,
primarily to developments within each country.
More  broadly,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  implications  of  the  growth  of  a  more
efficient and cost-effective market for euro-denominated capital would extend well beyond Europe.
The availability of a new, low-cost channel for portfolio investment, for example, could help reverse
the  traditional  reluctance  of  households  and  many  institutional  investors  worldwide  to  invest
internationally -- a reluctance that has long puzzled academics and policymakers.
Moreover,  a  well-developed  market  for  euro-denominated  capital  would  encourage
institutional  investors  from  the  United  States  and  elsewhere  to  acquire  diversified  European
portfolios  offered  in  a  single  currency.  In  fact,  this  development  could  be  accelerated  if  member
governments chose to deepen the euro market by increasing the available range of bond maturities,
which in some countries is somewhat limited at the short and long ends. In addition, capital might
also  flow 
the
euro-denominated  capital  market  as  an  efficient  source  of  funds,  in  the  same  way  as  European
businesses and governments have chosen to borrow dollars in recent decades.
the  opposite  direction,  as  non-European  firms  and  governments 
tap 
in 
While the potential benefits of a more integrated European capital market in the long
run are apparent, a number of observers have suggested that the economics of EMU -- as well as its
plain  mechanics  --  may  have  unwelcome  consequences  for  the  dollar  and  world  trade.  More
specifically, some have argued, EMU may cause a short-run glut of dollars in the international capital
markets, leading the dollar to depreciate and the euro to appreciate, with resulting undesirable effects
on trade flows.
The reason there could be a dollar glut, these observers maintain, is that EMU would
eliminate  the  need  for  intra-European  intervention,  reduce  the  importance  of  exchange  rate
management,  and  allow  national  central  banks  to  pool  reserves  for  external  intervention,  thus
generally reducing the European central banks’ need for dollar reserves. Moreover, if the euro were
BIS Review   109/1997
- 4 -
to  become  an  attractive  reserve  currency  for  non-European  central  banks,  the  dollar  glut  could
become even more severe.
While some decline in the reserve role of the  dollar  is  certainly  plausible  over  time
with the creation of EMU, I believe that the risk of a dramatic shift in official dollar reserve holdings
both in and outside Europe in the wake of EMU has been exaggerated in terms of both its potential
scope and effects.
I  would  suggest  that  it  will  take  some  time  before  the  objectives  and  operating
procedures of the European central bank become clearly understood by market participants. Although
low inflation will be the ultimate objective of the new European central bank, markets will have to
understand precisely how that objective will be pursued: What price aggregate will be the focus of
monetary policy? How will intermediate instruments such as monetary aggregates be used to achieve
the ultimate objective? What channels will the central bank choose to signal and implement changes
in its policy stance?
As these longer-term questions are  addressed,  the  policy  importance  of  the  external
value of the euro, particularly the euro/dollar exchange rate, will certainly be watched carefully. Both
market  participants  and  foreign  central  banks  are  likely  to  focus  on  the  euro  exchange  rate  as  a
high-frequency and widely available -- if somewhat noisy -- indicator of the current and likely future
stance of European monetary policy. Given its need to instil confidence in the markets and to ensure
the stability of the euro exchange rate, the European central bank is likely to want to be perceived as
ready and able to operate effectively in the dollar market, for which substantial dollar reserves may be
required.
In the short term, the response of non-European central banks to the introduction of
the euro is also likely to be cautious. Ultimately, the desired euro holdings of these central banks will
largely  depend  on  the  decisions  they  make  about  their  exchange  rate  regime.  A  number  of
countries -- including  the  central  European  countries  that  have  applied  for  membership  in  the
European Union and other countries in Africa -- may decide to peg their currency to the euro. Yet
these  countries  may  well  wait  for  the  newly-formed  European  central  bank  to  establish  its  policy
record and clarify its operating procedures before they commit their currencies to a euro peg.
Indeed, history suggests that a currency’s role  as  an  international  reserve,  means  of
exchange, and store of value is slowly gained and slowly lost -- as the examples  of  the  dollar  and
pound sterling illustrate. The dollar, in particular, may have seemed on the way to losing much of its
international prominence after the demise of the Bretton Woods system in 1973. After declining as a
share of international reserves and a means for international transactions from 1974 to the mid-1980s,
however, the dollar’s relative use has not changed significantly during the past decade. Indeed, as the
U.S.  economy  has  grown  more  efficient  and  internationally  competitive  in  the  past  ten  years,  the
dollar  has  retained  its  strong  role  in  the  international  monetary  system.  In  short,  it  seems  safe  to
assume  that  significant  changes  in  the  international  role  of  the  dollar  and  the  functioning  of  the
international  monetary  system  would  occur  only  gradually,  and  surely  in  a  manner  that  could  be
easily coped with, given the turnover in capital markets we observe today.
But should a different international monetary system ultimately emerge in which other
currencies, such as the euro, play an increasingly important role alongside the dollar, there would be
benefits  for  the  United  States  as  well.  Such  a  development  would,  for  example,  impose  greater
market-led  discipline  on  the  United  States  and,  in  the  process,  help  us  address  our  chronic
low-savings problem.
There is another indirect -- although potentially more important -- way in which EMU
may affect U.S. business and policymaking. This implication of EMU has to do with the contribution
BIS Review   109/1997
a currency union is likely to make to increasing the efficiency and flexibility of the economies that
join  it.  At  least  since  the  publication  of  the  “One  Market,  One  Money”  study  by  the  European
Commission in 1990, observers and analysts of EMU have paid significant attention to the decline in
transaction costs that can be achieved by unifying up to 15 different currencies, and to the resulting
gains in efficiency for Europe’s economies.
The experience of the United States is useful in this respect. The fact that 50 states in
the United States share a common currency -- and have done so for  over  130 years -- provides  the
critical foundation for an integrated and efficient capital market that extends from Maine to California
and  on  to  Alaska  and  Hawaii.  In  this  market,  capital  flows  smoothly  from  high-saving  to
high-investment areas, as required by changing business conditions, without any thought of exchange
rate risk.
A common U.S. currency, it is important to note, has many advantages beyond simply
reducing  transaction  costs.  It  also  simplifies  choices  for  households  and  corporate  management,
enhances  the  efficiency  with  which  financial  institutions  and  the  payments  system  function,  and
promotes competition across the whole productive spectrum.
While  a  common  currency  in  Europe  can  be  expected  to  lead  to  similar  efficiency
gains, the economies of the United States and Europe differ in several important dimensions, so that a
common currency is likely to work in substantially different ways in the two regions. The ways in
which Europe  and  the  United  States  differ  most  have  to  do  with  the  degree  of  integration  of  their
labor markets and their fiscal systems.
The  United  States  enjoys  a  very  mobile  labor  force -- across  sectors  and  states  --
which  allows  job  losses  arising  during  sector-specific  or  state-specific  recessions  to  be  rapidly
absorbed  where  jobs  are  growing  faster.  This  contributes  to  aggregate  unemployment  being  kept
reasonably in check. This willingness of American workers to move themselves and their family is a
cultural characteristic of our people, no doubt based in the history of the United States as a nation of
immigrants.
To complement its high degree of labor mobility, the United States also has in place a
federal fiscal system that allows the federal government to channel large transfers from fast-growing
regions  to  slow-growing  regions.  Progressive  income  taxation,  a  high  elasticity  of  corporate  tax
profits  to  changes  in  income,  and  an  integrated  federal  budget  are  the  main  components  of  this
system.
In contrast to the United States, Europe is characterized by a more segmented labor
market and very limited integration of its national fiscal systems. Both these characteristics limit the
ability not only of Europe’s private sector to shift resources in response to regional recessions, but
also  of  Europe’s  public  sector  to  compensate  for  this  rigidity.  This  lack  of  flexibility  is  widely
acknowledged  to  be  one  of  the  root  causes  of  the  high  unemployment  rates  that  Europe  has
experienced during the last decade.
But, we may well ask, does it necessarily follow that because of the greater rigidity of
its  labor  markets  and  the  lack  of  a  federal  fiscal  system,  Europe  cannot  accommodate  a  common
currency and instead needs to rely on periodic exchange rate adjustments as surrogates for productive
flexibility?  I  do  not  think  so.  While  less  flexible  labor  markets  and  the  absence  of  a  federal  fiscal
system will certainly pose constant challenges for the management of a common European currency,
a fluctuating exchange rate need not be the optimal way to respond to these shortcomings.
The  argument  that  Europe  --  even  a  core  component  of  Europe  --  can  ill  afford  to
renounce  exchange  rate  flexibility  rests  crucially  on  the  view  that  Europe  is  significantly  more
BIS Review   109/1997
- 6 -
heterogeneous than the United States and, therefore, more vulnerable to country-specific shocks that
can best be corrected by exchange rate changes. I do not support this view. Rather, I believe that in
many respects differences among the European economies have been over-emphasized in the public
debate.
It is possible to suggest, for example, that the economies of some European countries
have more in common today than do  those  of  some  individual  states  in  the  United  States,  such  as
New  York  and  Michigan  or  California  and  Idaho.  Moreover,  as  a  result  of  the  convergence  of
economic policy objectives, the economic cycles among many European countries have become more
synchronized over the last ten years, a trend that is likely to be reinforced by monetary unification.
Furthermore, when shocks are mainly at the industry level -- for instance, when a recession hits the
automobile  or  steel  industry  in  Germany  and  France  --  the  German  and  French  economies  would
hardly benefit from an exchange rate change. Such a change, in this case, simply would not affect the
appropriate relative prices.
By contrast, American policymakers might have found it helpful to devalue the dollar
in Texas when oil prices collapsed in the mid-1980s or the dollar in New England at the end of the
defense-led  growth  of  the  late  1980s.  These  options,  however,  simply  were  not  available.  In
retrospect, it was the discipline fostered by the absence of the opportunity to alter regional exchange
rates that forced our firms, local governments, and workers to reorganize, become more efficient, and
grow in what are now some of the most productive areas of the United States.
Similarly, if national labor markets in Europe become more flexible and efficient in
the presence of a common currency and firms learn to count only on their own resources -- with no
help  from  an  occasional  exchange  rate  adjustment  --  European  capital  and  labor  markets  may
themselves  become  more  integrated.  And  if  greater  integration  of  labor  markets  can  only  proceed
slowly -- given persistent and unavoidable cultural and language differences -- this need not be the
case for financial markets, where the disappearance of exchange rate risk will cause capital to move
in response to interest rate differentials of only a very few percentage points.
In this context, I would like to make clear that I do not view as ideal the U.S. model
where the burden of recessions tends to fall heavily on the shoulders of workers, who may be obliged
to move across regions and industries in response to the business cycle. How to deal with the reality
of  the  business  cycle  is  an  area  where  Europe -- with  its  tradition  of  social  safety  nets  --  and  the
United States -- with its tradition of flexible work arrangements -- can perhaps learn something from
each  other.  To  date,  neither  of  us  seems  yet  to  have  found  the  optimal  way  to  cope  with  the
unavoidable reality of the business cycle to enable us to avoid both high unemployment rates and too
skewed a distribution of income.
My last general observation about the implications of EMU for the United States has
to  do  with  the  dramatic  changes  in  macroeconomic  policies  that  will  accompany  the  creation  of
monetary union in Europe. Naturally, the main change will concern monetary policy, and it is in this
area that the similarities between Europe and the United States will ultimately be the greatest.
The  first  similarity  is  that,  with  EMU,  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy  in  both
Europe and the United States will be highly centralized and the European central bank will enjoy, as
the  Federal  Reserve  does,  a  considerable  degree  of  independence.  These  institutional  features  will
reduce the scope for national governments to bend monetary policy to the needs of  their  country’s
business cycle and will help keep the focus of the European central bank on the objective of  price
stability.
The second similarity we may expect to see between Europe and the United States is
that,  with  EMU,  external  considerations  --  such  as  the  trade  balance  or  the  value  of  the  exchange
BIS Review   109/1997
rate -- will over time impinge less and less on the conduct of monetary policy, as now is the case in
the  United  States.  Once  monetary  union  is  in  place  for  all  15 countries,  the  openness  of  Europe’s
unified economy -- as measured, for example, by the share of exports in relation to GDP -- is likely to
be quite similar to that of the U.S. economy, on the order of 10 percent.
While the conduct of monetary policy in Europe may increasingly resemble that in the
United  States,  the  conduct  of  fiscal  policy  will  continue  to  differ  significantly  in  the  two  regions,
largely reflecting the different paths Europe and the United States have taken to monetary unification.
In  the  United  States,  political  union  came  well  ahead  of  a  common  monetary  policy.  The  Federal
Reserve was not created until 1913, when political unification had been long in place. The situation
is,  of  course,  quite  different  in  Europe,  where  EMU  member  countries  plan  to  retain  substantial
political and fiscal independence.
Despite  this  independence,  EMU  may  well  foster  fiscal  coordination  among  the
member countries. This may happen in part because the EMU countries have chosen to subscribe to a
set of common guidelines on the magnitude of their fiscal deficits, and in part because these countries
will compete for a common pool of savings in an integrated capital market.
The prospect of market-based  discipline  on  the  fiscal  policies  pursued  by  the  EMU
countries  is  not  so  different  from  the  situation  faced  by  individual  states  and  municipalities  in  the
United  States.  The  need  for  these  entities  to  tap  a  common  capital  market  to  finance  their  deficits
places  their  actions  under  a  stricter  market  test  than  they  would  face  if  they  could  rely  mainly  on
captive  local  savings.  The  municipal  bond  market  in  the  United  States  is  today  a  very  active  and
competitive market, where yield differences on public debt reflect investors’ perceptions of  default
risk, and inefficient state and local administrations are quickly penalized for fiscal profligacy.
Similar  markets  are  likely  to  evolve  in  Europe  after  1999.  In  fact,  the  major  rating
agencies  are  already  planning  for  European  issues  of  government  debt  following  the  creation  of
EMU.  By  all  accounts,  the  agencies  expect  these  ratings  to  mirror  those  currently  assigned  to
countries’ foreign currency debt, with fiscal factors driving rating changes once EMU is well under
way.
As I hope I have made clear in my remarks this evening, we in the United States, as
elsewhere,  have  been  observing  the  progress  toward  monetary  unification  in  Europe  with  great
interest.  In  the  process,  I  think  we  have  learned  to  appreciate  the  complexity  of  this  enormous
undertaking. One conclusion I have drawn from my observations over the years is that many of the
reforms  Europe  is  pursuing  on  its  path  to  monetary  unification -- including  fiscal  stabilization,  tax
harmonization, welfare and labor market reform, trade liberalization, and capital market integration --
are goals that are worth pursuing in their own right and for which EMU provides a consistent frame
of reference.
Continued  progress  toward  furthering  these  broad-based  goals  is  in  the  interest  not
only  of  Europe  but  also  of  the  United  States.  There  can  be  no  question  that  the  United  States  has
benefited greatly in the past two decades from Europe’s deepening integration. Europe has provided a
steady opening of markets for American products and served as a source of an increasingly efficient
supply of goods to U.S. households and firms. Europe’s growing participation in international capital
markets, which a successful EMU and a strong euro are intended to further, has also encouraged an
increasing  flow  of  savings  between  Europe  and  the  United  States  in  response  to  changing
macroeconomic  conditions  in  our  two  regions.  We  in  the  United  States  have  much  at  stake  in
Europe’s and EMU’s future and we stand ready to work with you and support you in the furtherance
of your historic efforts.
BIS Review   109/1997
