Mr. Brash looks at the implications  of  the  global  financial  marketplace  for
New Zealand        Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  Dr.  Donald
Brash, to the Single Financial Services Market Conference in Wellington, on 19/11/97.
Introduction
It’s  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  share  some  thoughts  with  you  on  the
global  financial  marketplace,  and  its  implications  for  New  Zealand.  We  have  recently  had  a
dramatic  example  of  how  events  in  one  country  can  spread  rapidly.  The  recent  share  market
collapse  that  began  in  Hong  Kong  and  spread  to  equity  markets  around  the  world,  including
New  Zealand,  illustrates  just  how  integrated  global  financial  markets  have  become.  Designing
and implementing an effective financial policy in pursuit of national goals, in a world of highly
integrated  capital  markets,  is  one  of  the  most  topical  and  challenging  tasks  in  central  banking
today.
To  keep  my  presentation  today  within  manageable  bounds,  and  reflecting  my
professional interest, I will constrain my comments to one of the important functions of a central
bank,  namely,  the  preservation  of  stability  in  the  financial  system.  Our  focus  at  the  Reserve
Bank is on promoting the maintenance of a sound and efficient financial system in New Zealand.
This focus involves establishing a policy environment to counteract the possibility of contagious
spread of financial distress, and in particular is aimed at encouraging prudent bank behaviour.
I will begin by sketching  out  some  of  the  key  trends  in  global  finance,  and  will
then describe the international regulatory response to these developments. Along the way, I will
tease out the implications for New Zealand, and test our approach to banking supervision against
these global developments. I will conclude with some crystal ball gazing.
Trends in the global financial marketplace
Let  me  begin  then  with  some  observations  on  the  rapidly  changing  global
financial marketplace.
It is now a commonplace that barriers between countries and financial markets, at
least  in  developed  countries,  have  largely  disappeared,  and  this  fact,  together  with  new
technologies,  new  financial  instruments  and  new  funding  techniques,  means  that  financial
intermediation is increasingly global.
Fundamental to this trend  has  been  the  way  in  which  advances  in  computer  and
communications technology have reduced the costs of cross-border transactions by lowering the
costs of collecting and analysing data, undertaking transactions, clearing  and  settling  payments
and  monitoring  financial  flows.  And  the  cost  reductions  have  been  very  dramatic.  A  recent
article in The Economist noted that “the cost of a three-minute telephone call between London
and  New  York  has  fallen  from  US$300  (in  1996  dollars)  in  1930  to  US$1  today”.  The  same
article  stated  that  “the  cost  of  computer  processing  power  has  been  falling  by  an  average  of
30 percent a year in real terms over the past couple of decades”. Such trends allow both the users
of  financial  services  and  financial  institutions  themselves  to  look  to  global  solutions  to  meet
their financial needs. Funds can now be raised and invested, currencies exchanged, and financial
risk positions changed around the world at almost anytime.
BIS Review   108/1997
- 2 -
Contributing  to  the  globalisation  of  finance  has  been  the  rapid  trend  towards
financial  market  liberalisation.  This  has  seen  country  after  country  freeing  up  their  financial
system. In that  process,  exchange  controls  (that  had  been  intended  to  isolate  domestic  markets
from  global  influences)  have  been  dismantled.  In  the  increasingly  integrated  global  capital
market  that  has  resulted,  global  financial  firms  with  often  complex  financial  and  corporate
structures have emerged as dominant players. These firms are to be found operating around the
globe  --  relatively  low  transaction  costs  and  the  application  of  new  technologies  allow  such
firms to be active players in whichever of the world’s financial markets they want to participate
in. Distinctions between different types of financial institutions are breaking down as a result of
the growth of these conglomerate structures, the relaxation in regulatory constraints, and the way
in which derivatives can be used to transform the risk characteristics of institutions’ portfolios.
A  related  development  is  that  the  risk  management  practices  of  global  financial
increasingly  centralised  as  competitive  pressures  drive  financial
firms  are  becoming 
organisations  seeking  the  highest  risk-adjusted  returns  for  shareholders.  With  the  processing
power of modern computers, it is now possible for the risk and return characteristics of large and
complex portfolios to be managed centrally and, if not real time, at least on an intra-day basis.
Virtually all large  bank  holding  companies  are  now  operated  and  managed  as  integrated  units.
This trend towards centralised risk management raises some fundamental policy issues as to how
best to regulate and supervise such large and complex banking organisations.
Product  innovation  has  gone  hand  in  hand  with  liberalisation.  One  of  the  more
significant developments has been the emergence of derivatives such as financial futures, swaps
and  options.  The  total  risk  of  more  traditional  financial  products  has  been  broken  into
component parts and repackaged into synthetic products that have risk profiles similar to  other
financial  instruments.  The  synthetic  products  can  then  be  sold  to  those  domestic  and  global
investors willing and able to bear the associated risks. Such products are now used extensively
throughout  the  world  to  help  firms  manage  the  exposure  to  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate
movements that occur in liberalised financial markets. And innovation is ongoing, as is evident
with the increasing application of derivatives to credit risk.
The rapid globalisation of finance is well illustrated by the phenomenal growth in
cross-border financial activity. An April 1995 survey by the Bank for International Settlements
estimated  that  an  average  of  US$1.2  trillion  flowed  through  the  world’s  foreign  exchange
markets  each  day,  up  45%  on  three  years  earlier.  Estimated  turnover  of  over-the-counter
derivatives  on  an  average  day  was  US$880  billion,  70%  of  which  involved  transactions  with
counterparties in different countries. An article in Institutional Investor in August 1997 provides
another  illustration  of  the  magnitude  of  cross-border  finance  --  “nearly  US$150  billion  of  net
new private capital poured into the main Latin American and Asian economies in 1996, almost
double the 1995 level”. These numbers are enormous however you want to look at them.
New sources of systemic risk
The  globalisation  of  finance,  the  liberalisation  of  financial  markets  and  rapid
technological change have opened up new opportunities in commerce  for  achieving  economies
of  scale,  and  facilitating  the  international  rationalisation  of  production  and  distribution.  The
resulting benefits include productivity growth and improving living standards. Innovations  like
derivatives  improve  the  efficiency  of  financial  markets.  New  technology  allows  sophisticated
BIS Review   108/1997
management information and control systems, and the application of complex analytical models
to help institutions manage risks more effectively.
But  while  considerable  benefits  flow  from  such  developments,  they  also
inevitably  bring  with  them  new  risks.  One  of  the  most  important  from  a  central  banker’s
perspective is the introduction of new sources of risk to the stability of the financial system:
• Liberalisation and globalisation bring competition,  which  squeezes  out  the  rents  created  by
previously protected markets. This produces efficiency gains but it also means that financial
institutions  in  the  new  environment  have  less  of  a  buffer  of  protected  profits  and  are
therefore more vulnerable to distress caused by either mismanagement or misfortune.
• Derivatives bring new risks in that they can expose financial institutions to greater leverage,
thereby allowing for shocks to be amplified. In addition, they increase the linkages between
national financial markets, which means that adverse events are quickly transmitted from one
market to another.
• Furthermore,  market  participants  can  now  react  very  rapidly  to  a  problem  in  a  particular
country, or even a perceived problem. Capital can move rapidly and in large volumes. Again,
a  disturbance  in  one  country  can  now  flow  rapidly  to  other  countries  with  the  result  that
other countries’ financial systems, and the international financial system more generally, are
arguably more exposed to disturbance than before globalisation.
In  the  light  of  these  increased  risks,  it  is  worth  recalling  that  there  have  been
relatively  frequent  episodes  of  national  financial  instability  over  the  past  couple  of  decades.
Since  1980,  over  two-thirds  of  IMF  member  countries  have  experienced  at  least  one  serious
banking-sector difficulty.  And,  in  more  than  65  emerging  country  cases,  bank  losses  nearly  or
completely  exhausted  the  banking  system’s  capital.  In  more  than  a  dozen  countries  in  the
emerging markets of Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe, financial collapses have required
budgetary expenditure of more than 10% of GDP to resolve. Some industrial countries have also
experienced major financial problems over the same period. The list includes the United States,
Japan, France, Sweden, Finland, Norway and Spain. In Sweden, for example, 18% of bank loans
were  lost  between  1990  and  1993  with  two  of  the  largest  banks  being  bailed  out  by  the  state.
These  and  more  recent  episodes  of  bank  distress,  such  as  Mexico  and  Thailand,  suggest  that
there is no evidence that financial sector fragility is reducing with time.
While  New  Zealand  has  not  experienced  bank  problems  of  the  magnitude  that  I
have just described, there have nevertheless been occasions of serious bank distress. In 1989-90,
the Bank of  New  Zealand  (which  was  government-owned  at  the  time)  had  to  be  re-capitalised
twice  by  the  Government,  at  a  total  cost  of  about  3%  of  government  expenditure.  NZI  Bank
would  certainly  have  failed  had  it  not  been  re-capitalised  by  its  parent  in  Scotland.  A  very
significant non-bank financial institution, the DFC, was placed in statutory management in 1989
when it became insolvent.
A  national  financial  crisis  can  not  only  have  a  severely  adverse  impact  on  the
economy of the country directly concerned, it may also threaten the stability of the international
financial  system.  A  recent  example  was  Mexico  in  early  1995.  A  build  up  of  short-term  US
dollar-linked debt, combined with the devaluation of the peso and a sharp rise in interest rates,
undermined  the  solvency  of  most  of  the  Mexican  banking  system  and  resulted  in  a  liquidity
crisis. International investors shifted their claims away not just from Mexico, but also from other
countries where similar weaknesses were suspected.
BIS Review   108/1997
- 4 -
Instability  in  the  international  financial  system  can  arise  not  only  from  the
transmission  of  a  national  problem  but  also  from  a  breakdown  in  the  normal  functioning  of
critical financial interconnections between countries. What I have in mind here are the payments
and settlements processes that link national financial systems. This is not a new source of risk,
and  the  best  known  illustration  of  the  problem  was  the  failure  of  Bankhaus  Herstatt  in  1974.
This small German bank was active in the foreign exchange market. It defaulted after receiving
Deutsche Marks from international banks but before the matching US dollar leg was processed
later  in  the  day.  This  left  its  counterparties  exposed  to  the  full  value  of  the  Deutsche  Marks
delivered. This event severely disrupted CHIPS, the main clearing system for US dollars, led to
a collapse in trading in the US dollar/Deutsche Mark market and even resulted in disorder in the
inter-bank  money  markets.  The  circumstance  that  led  to  Herstatt  risk  is  still  present  today,
namely  the  time  lapse  between  the  payment  and  receipt  of  currencies  in  foreign  exchange
transactions.  What  is  different  now  is  the  exponential  growth  that  has  occurred  in  foreign
exchange transactions since 1974. In the late 1990s, if a major international bank were unable to
meet  its  obligations  in  settling  an  average  day’s  foreign  exchange  transactions,  it  would  have
serious ramifications for the stability of the international financial system, as well for domestic
financial markets.
Globalisation of finance to date has been most marked in wholesale business. But
technology  in  the  form  of  the  Internet  is  now  beginning  to  allow  for  retail  products  to  be
advertised  and  sold  from  anywhere  in  the  world,  and  paid  for  electronically  by  anyone  in  any
other country. There seems  little  doubt  that,  when  our  next  conference  on  financial  services  is
held, this trend to the globalisation of retail financial services will be an important theme.
In any event, there is no doubt that finance is now global. Nor is there any doubt
that  new  sources  of  systemic  risk  have  emerged  from  the  liberalisation  of  financial  markets,
from  the  increased  size  and  greater  complexity  of  institutions,  from  the  greater  complexity  of
some of the new financial instruments, from the greater volume and speed of transactions, and
from the increased involvement in the global financial system of national banking systems which
are themselves suffering considerable strains. It is probably fair to conclude that, while the threat
of  serious  disruption  to  the  international  financial  system  remains  relatively  small,  should
serious  disruption  occur  it  could  have  disastrous  consequences  for  living  standards  around  the
world.
Regulatory response
Faced with these new sources of risk, the objective of safeguarding the soundness
of financial systems has become a top policy priority both nationally and internationally.
Most obviously, the trend towards large and complex global financial institutions,
centralised risk management and the blurring of boundaries between different types of financial
institutions is leading to a change in regulatory structures.
Generalising  somewhat,  the  traditional  approach  to  regulating  the  financial
industry  was  for  there  to  be  a  bank  regulator,  a  securities  industry  regulator,  an  insurance
industry  regulator  and  so  on.  This  decentralised  approach  to  regulation  was  seen  as  being
appropriate  when  institutions  were  clearly  delineated  and  decision-making  was  decentralised.
However,  in  today’s  world  of  conglomerate  financial  institutions  where  decision-making  and
risk management are centralised, the traditional regulatory approach is seen as being inadequate
BIS Review   108/1997
by  many  countries.  Exposure  of  a  bank  to  potential  risk,  for  instance,  cannot  be  evaluated
independently of the condition and management policies of any conglomerate to which the bank
belongs.
Whereas  efforts  have  been  made  in  some  countries  to  co-ordinate  and  exchange
information between different kinds of supervisors, in other countries the supervisory  structure
has  been  changed  so  that  all  financial  institutions  are  supervised  by  one  “umbrella-type”
supervisory  body.  Recent  developments  in  this  direction  have  been  seen  in  Australia,  with  the
Australian Government adopting  the  recommendations  of  the  Wallis  Inquiry.  This  will  see  the
establishment  of  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  to  oversee  all  financial
institutions  in  Australia.  Similarly,  the  new  United  Kingdom  Government  has  decided  to
establish  a  new  “super-regulator”  that  will  bring  together  nine  financial  regulators  in  one
organisation.
New Zealand’s regulatory approach
Given  that  the  banking  industry  in  New  Zealand  has  always  been  dominated  by
foreign-owned  banks,  particularly  from  Australia  and  the  United  Kingdom,  any  development
that makes supervision of the parent bank more effective is welcomed by us. From the Reserve
Bank’s perspective, though, we have not seen a pressing need to change our regulatory structures
in a similar way. The reasons for this are two-fold.
First, we take a rather different approach to promoting financial system stability,
an approach which relies less on direct regulation and more on the use of market disciplines and
the internal incentives for banks to behave prudently (I will return to this shortly).
Secondly, we see our present regulatory structure as being effective. Over recent
years,  our  regulatory  structure  has  been  closely  aligned  to  a  public  policy  approach  that
recognises that open and competitive financial markets are desirable. Within this, all of the key
areas  where  private  sector  failure  may  occur  have  been  covered  in  a  way  that  meets  our
circumstances.  Hence,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  responsible  for  the  maintenance  of  the  financial
system’s soundness and efficiency, with our attention focused on the banking sector, where any
systemic  problems,  if  they  were  to  occur,  would  arise.  The  Commerce  Commission  has
responsibility  for  protecting  the  consumer  against  exploitation  and  unfair  trading.  And  the
Securities  Commission  is  focused  on  improving  the  efficiency  and  fairness  of  the  markets  for
securities (widely defined) of entities that raise funds in New Zealand. This approach recognises
that in New Zealand systemic issues are central in the supervision of banks, whereas in non-bank
financial services consumer-protection issues are more important.
There  has  been  a  strong  presumption  in  economic  policy  development  in  New
Zealand  over  the  last  decade  or  so  that  market  forces  generally  produce  better  outcomes  than
those  arising  from  bureaucratic  rules  and  regulations.  Our  approach  to  banking  supervision
reflects this.
We  start  with  the  presumption  that  financial  markets  contain  powerful  and
flexible  disciplinary  mechanisms  for  rewarding  good  bank  performance  and  penalising
imprudent  bank  behaviour.  Given  the  widespread  public  belief  in  most  countries  that
“governments never allow banks to fail”, we do not argue that market forces alone will do  the
job, but we do see the disciplines of the market as being the dominant and most effective means
BIS Review   108/1997
- 6 -
for  promoting  a  robust  financial  system.  There  are  three  key  elements  in  our  market-based
approach to banking supervision.
• The first is to ensure that the marketplace has sufficient and reliable information on banks on
which  to  base  financial  assessments  and  decisions.  This  is  achieved  through  a  public
disclosure  regime  which  requires  banks  to  publish  a  comprehensive  range  of  financial,
corporate  and  risk-related  information  for  the  bank  and  its  banking  group  at  quarterly
intervals.
• The second important element is to promote market discipline by ensuring that government
policy supports, or at least does not impede, the  development  of  active  inter-bank  markets,
the  diversification  of  funding  instruments  and  sources,  the  development  of  institutional
investors and the entry of sophisticated foreign players to the financial market. The rationale
is that professional players are the market’s strongest disciplinary force.
• The  third  key  element  has  been  to  strengthen  the  incentives  for  the  directors  and
management of banks to manage their banks’ affairs in a sound and responsible manner. An
important aspect of this is a requirement for the directors of banks to attest to the accuracy of
the  information  in  the  quarterly  disclosure  statements,  to  the  fact  that  their  banks  have
satisfactory risk management policies and to the fact that these are being properly applied.
This  approach,  of  harnessing  market  forces  and  using  improved  internal
governance to promote financial system soundness, is gaining some support in the international
supervisory  community,  and  among  academics.  This  can  be  highlighted  by  recent  comments
from three prominent and highly respected individuals.
   “As  financial  transactions  become  increasingly  rapid  and  complex,  I  believe  we  have  no
choice but to harness market forces, as best we can, to reinforce our supervisory objectives.
The appeal of market-led discipline lies not only in its cost effectiveness and flexibility, but
also  in  its  limited  intrusiveness  and  its  greater  adaptability  to  changing  financial
environments. Measures to enhance market discipline involve providing private investors the
incentives and the means to reward good bank performance and penalise poor performance.
Expanded  risk  management  disclosures  by  financial  institutions  is  a  significant  step  in  this
direction.” Alan Greenspan, May 1997.1
“For major banks in industrial countries ..... there needs to be a shift of emphasis towards the
re-inforcement of internal managerial risk-control mechanisms, and a recasting of the nature
and  functions  of  external  regulation,  away  from  generalised  rule-setting  and  towards
establishing incentives/sanctions which reinforce such internal control mechanisms.” Charles
Goodhart, June 1997.2
“Much recent thinking has focused on incentive-compatible regulation -- using the market’s
own internal forces -- as the promising next step for strengthening the financial system. It is
                                                  
1  Remarks by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, Mr Alan Greenspan, at
the Conference on Bank Structure and Competition of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago on 1 May 1997.
2  From “Financial Regulation: Why, How and Where Now?” Charles A.E. Goodhart et al, 6 June 1997. (Charles
Goodhart was for many years at the Bank of England and is now Deputy Director and Norman Sosnow Professor
of Banking and Finance at the London School of Economics.)
BIS Review   108/1997
banks’  shareholders  and  management  that  have  the  strongest  interest  to  measure  risk
accurately.” Andrew Crockett, September 1997.3
To  illustrate  the  evolution  that  is  taking  place  in  supervision,  let  me  cite  one
example.  In  a  recent  initiative  by  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  to  amend  the
Capital  Accord  to  include  market  risk,  a  greater  role  has  been  given  to  banks’  own  internal
models in the measurement of market risk. This reflects a move away from regulation that relies
on  detailed  rules  to  an  approach  that  places  more  emphasis  on  the  adequacy  of  internal  risk
control mechanisms. Such an approach recognises that it is bank directors and management that
have the strongest interest and ability to measure risk accurately, and that an internally-generated
measure  of  risk  should  be  better  than  one  derived  from  that  imposed  by  supervisors.  The
ongoing  challenge  to  regulators  is  to  ensure  that  incentive  structures  are  conducive  to  this
outcome.
My  own  perspective  is  that  a  paradigm  shift  in  supervision  towards  harnessing
market  forces  will  make  a  more  significant  contribution  to  promoting  sound  and  efficient
financial systems than simply changing regulatory structures within the same external regulation
paradigm.
Although  it  is  far  too  early  to  make  conclusive  assessments  of  the  success  or
otherwise  of  our  new  supervisory  approach  (which  has  now  been  in  operation  for  nearly  two
years),  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  encouraging  prudent  behaviour  by  banks  in  New  Zealand,  and
thereby is reducing  the  likelihood  of  financial  system  instability  in  the  future.  Moreover,  I  am
confident  that  it  is  doing  this  at  lower  efficiency,  compliance  and  taxpayer  costs  than  other
supervisory options might be expected to achieve.
Payments system reform
So far, I have discussed the regulatory response to the globalisation of finance in
terms  of  the  health  of  the  individual  institutions  that  make  up  the  financial  system.  Of  equal
significance  to  financial  stability  in  this  new  environment  is  how  resilient  payment  and
settlement systems are, both domestically and internationally.
In  common  with  most  central  banks  around  the  world,  we  have  been  devoting
considerable attention to payments system reform. Our main focus to date has been developing a
real  time  gross  settlement  system  for  large-value  transactions  between  banks.  Until  quite
recently,  the  standard  form  of  settlement  was  end-of-day  net  settlement:  all  payments  and
receipts between banks were allowed to accumulate during the day, to be settled by transfer of
the very much smaller net amount at the end of the day. The risk of this  form  of  settlement  is
that it usually requires participants to grant unsecured and unlimited credit to other participants
during the period  until  final  settlement  occurs.  Credit  extended  to  a  single  counterparty  can  in
some cases exceed a bank’s entire capital. One important solution which has been implemented
in  some  countries,  and  which  we  have  as  a  high  priority  to  implement  within  the  next  few
months in New Zealand, is the replacement of this traditional end-of-day settlement arrangement
with  an  RTGS  system.  Individual  transactions  under  RTGS  are  settled  one-by-one  during  the
day rather than being allowed to accumulate, thereby removing the very large exposures that can
                                                  
3  Speech by the General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements, Mr Andrew Crockett, at the Money,
Macro and Finance Conference held in Durham on 11 September 1997.
BIS Review   108/1997
- 8 -
build  up  between  banks.  Once  implemented,  RTGS  will  be  a  significant  milestone  in  the
reduction of domestic payment system risks.
Another  important  initiative  that  we  are  promoting  to  reduce  systemic  risk  is  to
make  bilateral  and  multilateral  netting  arrangements  for  certain  transactions  legally  binding.
With legally enforceable netting arrangements in place, the various “gross” obligations to make
payments can be offset against one another, and it is only the net amounts due which are called
into question in the event of a bank failure.
Our  attention  is  also  being  actively  focused  on  dealing  with  settlement  risk  in
cross-border  foreign  exchange  transactions.  As  already  noted,  the  value  of  foreign  exchange
deals that are now  being  settled  is  so  substantial  that  the  resulting  settlement  risks  can  be  of  a
size  to  cause  systemic  concern  for  both  national  and  international  financial  systems.  This  risk,
mentioned earlier in my presentation,  is  often  referred  to  as  Herstatt  risk.  As  in  New  Zealand,
much international attention is currently being focused on this problem.
Co-operation amongst supervisors
My  final  comments  on  the  response  of  regulators  to  global  financial  trends
concern the co-operation among supervisors and  international  agencies  to  address  the  potential
for systemic disruption.
These efforts have gained momentum over the last decade as the inherent tension
between  nationally-based  regulatory  structures  and  an  increasingly  globalised  financial  sector
has  become  apparent.  Co-operation  among  bank  supervisors  under  the  auspices  of  the  Basle
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  produced  a  number  of  important  agreements  on  the
supervision  of  banks,  including  minimum  capital  standards  and  minimum  standards  governing
the  supervision  of  banks’  cross-border  establishments.  Similarly  other  supervisors,  such  as  the
International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  and 
the  International
Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS),  have  pursued  co-operation  in  their  areas  of
responsibility. And in the early 1990s, in recognition of the emergence and growth of financial
conglomerates, banking, securities and insurance supervisors from G-10 countries began to work
together  to  identify  problems  that  conglomerates  can  cause  and  to  consider  ways  to  overcome
them.
The Mexican crisis in 1995 in particular, and the widespread incidence and high
cost of banking problems more generally, have prompted calls for concerted international action
to  promote  the  soundness  of  financial  systems.  These  calls  have  strengthened  over  the  last
couple of years with the G-7 countries calling for “the adoption of strong prudential standards in
emerging  countries”  and  encouraging  the  international  financial  institutions  to  “increase  their
efforts to promote effective supervisory structures in these economies”. The Basle Committee on
Banking Supervision has been at the forefront of this effort over the past year with the release of
its Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. These principles have quickly become the
focal point for the increased efforts to strengthen financial sectors around the world. Also aiming
at  more  effective  bank  supervision,  the  IMF  is  making  the  evaluation  of  financial  supervision
and  regulation  part  of  its  annual  country  reviews,  and  the  World  Bank  is  emphasising  the
strengthening  of  financial  infrastructure  as  an  important  part  of  its  structural  assistance
programmes.
BIS Review   108/1997
A comment on the international supervisory response
While the international regulatory response has many positive elements, to me it
has  not  always  been  appropriately  focused.  Often  following  a  crisis,  there  are  calls  to
“strengthen supervision”. For various reasons, I feel that these calls, or the ways in which they
have been answered, have not always been well directed. Let me briefly elaborate on why I think
this.
At both the national and the international levels, the nature of the policy response
to a crisis needs to be based on a careful analysis of the “problem”. It is certainly clear from the
record that there have been significant weaknesses in some countries’ banking systems, and that
these  weaknesses  have  both  contributed  to  the  emergence  and  severity  of  financial  crises  and
complicated  the  task  of  resolving  them.  However,  I  am  somewhat  sceptical  of  the  general
proposition that “poor supervision” has been the primary cause of these weaknesses. There has
been a tendency to give supervision the “blame” for problems which have originated elsewhere,
and/or  to  seek  supervisory  remedies  for  problems  which  might  well  be  better  solved  in  other
ways. I would note further that “supervision” (in its general sense) has sometimes been part of
the “problem” rather than part of the “solution” -- particularly when it  has  involved  excessive
forbearance  by  the  regulatory  authorities,  and/or  excessive  reliance  on  the  public  safety  net.  I
think  it  important  that  we  supervisors  should  be  appropriately  modest  about  what  we  can
achieve, and supervision should not be seen as an assured remedy for all potential problems.
Establishing  price  stability  and  a  sustainable  fiscal  position  are  also  critical
elements in the pursuit of sound financial systems. While weakness in the financial system can
have  macroeconomic 
true  --  unsound
macroeconomic policies can have long-lasting effects that lead to weakness in financial systems.
Excessive  credit  creation  and  inflation  are  obvious  examples.  Some  observers  have  suggested
that virtually every major financial system problem in the last two or three decades was caused,
directly or indirectly, by unsound macroeconomic policies.
is  also  undoubtedly 
implications, 
the  reverse 
Some of the international regulatory responses also do not sufficiently  recognise
that  the  objectives  of  bank  supervision,  and  the  infrastructure  within  which  supervision  takes
place (for example, the quality of company law, accounting standards, and external auditors), are
not  the  same  in  all  countries.  To  have  any  chance  of  being  successful,  international  initiatives
will need to be flexible enough to suit this wide variety of national circumstances.
For  emerging  countries  where  the  banking  infrastructure  may  not  be  well
developed, it may well  be  sensible  to  actively  pursue  financial  stability  through  improving  the
quality of prescriptive rules. In this regard, the initiative by the Basle Committee to establish an
international standard of core principles for effective supervision may be helpful.
But  regulators  in  many  developed  countries  are  finding  that  the  complexity  of
banking,  the  blurring  of  functional  dividing  lines  amongst  financial  institutions,  globalisation,
and the speed of portfolio adjustment are making external regulation based on standard rules less
effective and less feasible. This is resulting in an increasing emphasis  being  placed  on  internal
risk  management  processes  and  in  harnessing  market  disciplines  to  promote  prudent  banking
behaviour.
What this suggests to me is that the regulatory approach followed by a particular
country will need to fully reflect its own circumstances. Attempting to apply a “one-size-fits-all”
approach to all countries is likely to be ineffective, and may even be counterproductive.
BIS Review   108/1997
- 10 -
The Future
So, what do I see as being the likely issues of the future? What is certain is that
the future will surprise us! But some things seem likely.
Innovation  in  the  financial  sector  will  continue,  as  will  the  integration  of  the
world’s financial markets. Using market disciplines to strengthen the financial system also seems
likely to grow in relative importance.
New  Zealand’s  approach  to  promoting  financial  system  stability  is  entirely
consistent  with  the  global  trends  that  I  have  described  and,  in  particular,  with  the
“incentive-compatible”  approach  to  regulation.  It  seems  absolutely  appropriate  for  our
circumstances.  There  will  inevitably  need  to  be  refinements  made  to  our  regulatory  approach
from time to time, but I believe that the principles on which it has been established, and its basic
design, are soundly based and will remain so for the foreseeable future.
At  some  point  in  the  future  the  “special”  status  of  banks  in  the  New  Zealand
supervisory  approach  may  need  to  be  reassessed.  This  might  be  prompted  by  the  continued
gradual  breaking  down  of  the  traditional  distinction  between  banks  and  non-banks  in  financial
intermediation,  or  perhaps  by  banking  services  being  provided  in  New  Zealand  by  institutions
not  physically  located  here.  It  may  also  be  prompted  by  a  risk-proofing  of  payments  and
settlements systems that effectively prevents the problems of one bank contagiously spreading to
others.  Concerns  about  financial  system  stability  might  ultimately  be  best  addressed  by
designing a supervisory framework that  is  focused  on  those  systems  themselves  rather  than  on
the  main  institutions.  For  the  foreseeable  future,  though,  concerns  about  financial  system
soundness in New Zealand are likely to continue to  be  focused  on  the  banking  system,  as  it  is
here that systemic risks are likely to remain concentrated.
BIS Review   108/1997
