Bank of Japan’s summary of the annual review of monetary and economic
developments in fiscal 1996   BANK OF JAPAN, ANNUAL REVIEW 1997.
Overview
Japan’s economy followed a moderate recovery trend in fiscal 1996. The pace of
recovery began to accelerate at the end of 1995, aided by substantially stimulative monetary and
fiscal policy measures, and the recovery continued in fiscal 1996. In the second half of the fiscal
year,  the  economic  recovery  firmed,  particularly  in  private  demand,  driven  in  part  by  the
depreciation of the yen since the previous year.
With respect to final demand in the first half of fiscal 1996, net exports declined
sharply, reflecting such factors as the appreciation of the yen until the middle of 1995 and the
increase  in  imports  of  manufactured  goods  from  Japanese  affiliates  overseas.  However,  the
economic recovery was underpinned by policy-related demand  factors,  such  as  the  increase  in
public-sector  investment  reflecting  the  economic  stimulus  package  of  autumn  1995,  and  the
high  level  of  housing  investment  induced  by  low  interest  rates.    In  the  middle  of  fiscal  1996,
public-sector investment began to decline gradually from its peak, while net exports, which had
been restraining the economic recovery, started to rise, partly reflecting the depreciation of the
yen.  Regarding  private  demand,  business  fixed  investment  increased  steadily  throughout  the
fiscal year, reflecting recovery in corporate profits, progress in stock adjustments, and a rise in
autonomous  investment,  such  as  in  information  technology,  and  the  increase  spread  across
industries  from  large  manufacturing  firms  to  small  nonmanufacturing  firms.  Personal
consumption  followed  a  moderate  recovery  trend  in  line  with  a  recovery  in  compensation  of
employees  despite  fluctuations  caused  by  factors  such  as  the  weather.  From  autumn  1996,
automobile sales, which have a large influence on production, accelerated. Housing investment
remained high, owing both to the increase in demand ahead of the rise in the consumption tax
rate, implemented in April 1997, and to low interest rates.
Industrial  production  remained  virtually  unchanged  until  the  middle  of  1996,
reflecting  the  decrease  in  net  exports,  and  adjustments  in  the  excessive  inventories  of  some
producer goods. However, growth in production has gradually gathered pace since the middle of
the year, as private demand has increased steadily, net exports have begun to increase, and the
increase  in  final  demand  has  led  more  directly  to  a  rise  in  production  because  of  progress  in
inventory adjustments. At the  end  of  the  fiscal  year,  both  industrial  production  and  shipments
recovered  to  the  levels  recorded  at  the  previous  peak  in  the  economic  cycle  reflecting  the
increase  in  demand  before  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate.  In  these  circumstances,
corporate  profits  continued  to  recover  primarily  among  large  manufacturing  firms,  driven  in
part by  a  rise  in  profits  of  processing  industries  reflecting  the  depreciation  of  the  yen  and  the
success  of  corporate  restructuring  efforts.  Business  confidence  also  improved  gradually,
according  to  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  “Tankan—Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in
Japan.” The improvement in profits of large manufacturing firms was reflected in an increase in
their  expenditures,  which  in  turn  contributed  to  a  recovery  in  the  business  conditions  of
corporate service industries and small manufacturing firms. As for labor market conditions, the
unemployment  rate  remained  high  and  growth  in  the  number  of  the  regularly  employed
stagnated  owing  to  persistent  adjustment  pressures  on  personnel  expenses  in  the  corporate
sector. However, overtime working hours and the number of new job offers increased steadily,
reflecting  production  growth  and  improvements  in  corporate  profits,  and  compensation  of
employees rose gradually, particularly in special cash earnings. In sum, the overall labor market
conditions followed a recovery trend.
BIS Review   78/1997
- 2 -
While  substantially  stimulative  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  measures  in  fiscal
1995 continued to underpin economic recovery in early fiscal 1996, a positive cycle of demand,
production, and income began to operate, underpinning the economic recovery throughout fiscal
1996. That is, an increase in final demand pushed up production and led to an improvement in
corporate  profits,  particularly  among  large  manufacturing  firms.  This  in  turn  led  to  an
improvement  in  profits  and  a  rise  in  compensation  of  employees  among  nonmanufacturing
firms and small firms, thereby expanding expenditures. During the second half of  fiscal  1996,
the recovery in private demand firmed, reflecting the positive effects of the depreciation of the
yen  on  corporate  profits,  despite  a  decrease  in  public-sector  investment.  In  other  words,
although  the  pace  of  the  economic  recovery  remained  moderate,  a  recovery  led  by  policy
demand is gradually shifting toward one led by private demand.
Although Japan’s economy bottomed out at the end of 1993, the pace of recovery
remains  relatively  moderate,  owing  to  various  structural  adjustment  pressures  on  industries.
These  include  (1)  pressures  for  the  industrial  structure  to  change  in  response  to  global
competition  resulting  from  the  expansion  of  supply  capacity  in  Asian  countries,  and  to  the
constant  appreciation  of  the  yen  until  the  middle  of  1995;  and  (2)  balance-sheet  adjustment
pressures  owing  to  the  sharp  and  significant  decline  in  asset  prices  since  the  bursting  of  the
economic  “bubble”  in  the  late  1980s.  Steady  progress  has  been  made  in  dealing  with  the
pressures for the industrial structure to change, as reflected in (1) a significant improvement in
corporate  profits,  particularly  among  large  manufacturing  firms,  resulting  from  the  successful
restructuring efforts and the depreciation of the yen from the middle of 1995; (2) progress in the
reorganization of the international production system as seen in the shift in Japan’s exports and
production  toward  more  capital-  and  technology-intensive  goods;  and  (3)  increased  business
fixed  investment  in  new  sectors  owing  to  technological  innovations  and  deregulation  in
information  and  communications  industries.  With  regard  to  balance-sheet  adjustments,  strong
adjustment pressures remained throughout fiscal 1996, as seen in the persistently high level of
the ratio of debts to assets, especially among small nonmanufacturing firms.
In  fiscal  1996,  weakening  of  prices  came  to  a  halt.  Domestic  wholesale  prices
followed a downward trend until the middle of 1996, but in the second half of fiscal 1996 they
virtually stopped declining, owing to a moderate improvement in domestic supply and demand
conditions, as well as a rise in import prices reflecting the depreciation of the yen and the rise in
crude  oil  prices.  In  March  1997,  the  year-to-year  change  shifted  from  decline  to  increase.
Although  corporate  service  prices  continued  to  decline  compared  to  the  level  of  the  previous
year,  reflecting  the  decrease  in  leasing  prices  and  real  estate  rents,  the  year-to-year  declines
were  smaller  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  1996,  due  to  a  recovery  in  demand  for  services
following  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits.  Consumer  prices  (nationwide,  excluding
perishables) also increased by a slightly wider margin from the previous year owing to a smaller
decline in commodity prices as a result of the depreciation of the yen, and the halt in the decline
in  domestic  wholesale  prices,  as  well  as  a  gradual  increase  in  service  prices.  While  prices
seemed to have stopped declining, the increase in import prices from the depreciation of the yen
and  higher  crude  oil  prices  had  little  impact  on  domestic  prices,  as  there  remained  persistent
downward  pressures  on  prices  from  imports  of  manufactured  goods,  particularly  final  goods,
and technological innovations. As for commercial land, prices for large and  well-located  plots
of  land  suitable  for  development  virtually  stopped  declining  owing  mainly  to  the  gradual
progress in stock adjustment for office space. However, the prices of smaller plots of land with
limited  commercial  value  continued  to  decline.  The  recent  development  in  commercial  land
prices thus indicates a distinct splitting into two groups. Meanwhile, residential land prices are
bottoming out, reflecting the high level of residential housing construction.
BIS Review   78/1997
- 3 -
The cyclical momentum for economic recovery gathered strength in fiscal 1996.
However, the pace of the recovery remained moderate owing to continued structural adjustment
pressures, including the balance-sheet problems. Although  weakening  of  prices  had  come  to  a
halt by the second half of fiscal 1996, prices were unlikely to follow an upward trend. Against
the background of these economic and price conditions, the Bank of Japan maintained an easy
monetary policy, keeping the official discount rate at its September 1995 level of 0.5 percent to
establish a solid foundation for the economic recovery.
As for financial developments, the overnight call rate (uncollateralized) remained
on average slightly below the official discount rate following monetary adjustments by the Bank
of  Japan.  Long-term  interest  rates  continued  to  rise  with  some  fluctuations  in  the  first  half  of
1996,  but  fell  sharply  in  the  second  half.  Interest  rates  on  short-term  instruments,  namely
3-month  certificate  of  deposit  (CD)  rates,  followed  a  similar  trend,  although  with  smaller
fluctuations than those in long-term interest rates. Stock prices continued to rise during the first
half of 1996, but began to weaken in the summer, and fell sharply from the end of the year. The
year-to-year  growth  rate  of  M2+CDs,  a  representative  indicator  of  monetary  aggregates,
generally remained around 3.0-4.0 percent, but declined slightly in the second half of the fiscal
year, partly due to the slow growth in funding in the private sector.
Despite the firm recovery of the real economy, particularly in the private sector
during the second half of fiscal 1996, the financial markets during this period adopted  a  more
cautious stance. This was because (1) the financial markets reacted in anticipation of the fiscal
tightening measures—such as the rise in the consumption tax rate and the termination of special
tax  reductions  in  fiscal  1997—and  this  had  restraining  effects  on  economic  conditions;  and
(2) there  was  renewed  awareness  that  various  adjustment  pressures,  especially  balance-sheet
adjustment  pressures,  remained  strong  among  small  nonmanufacturing  firms  and  financial
institutions.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  cyclical  developments  of  the  economic  recovery
were  not  immediately  reflected  in  financial  indicators  through  the  confidence  of  market
participants.  Meanwhile,  significant  progress  was  made  in  fiscal  1996  in  the  solution  of  the
jusen  (housing  loan  companies)  problem,  and  steady  progress  was  also  made  in  solving  the
problem  of  nonperforming  assets  of  financial  institutions,  including  improvements  in  the
framework for the resolution of failed financial institutions.
With respect to the outlook, the probability that Japan’s economy will continue to
recover is rising, although the pace of recovery may decelerate temporarily. This expectation is
based on the fact that the positive cycle of production and consumption has not been deterred by
the  reaction  to  the  increase  in  demand  ahead  of  the  consumption  tax  rate  rise.  Despite  the
continued  economic  recovery,  the  private  sector  has  not  gained  sufficient  confidence  in  its
future  growth,  reflecting  persistent  uncertainty  about  structural  adjustments.  Under  the
structural  adjustment  pressures,  expected  growth  rates  are  unlikely  to  rise  at  the  same  pace  in
different  industries  and  firms.  However,  from  a  long-term  perspective,  the  establishment  of  a
new  industrial  structure  based  on  the  principle  of  comparative  advantage  can  be  expected  to
enhance growth by promoting the efficiency of resource allocation.
In order for Japan’s economy to achieve sustainable  growth,  it  is  vital  to  create
investment opportunities and raise expected growth rates of economic entities through effective
reforms  of  the  economic  structure.  Such  efforts  are  essential  in  adapting  to  the  medium-  to
long-term changes in economic environment, including increasing global competitive pressures,
and  the  further  aging  of  the  population,  and  in  maintaining  Japan’s  economic  strength.
Considering  the  important  role  that  the  financial  sector  must  play  in  the  reforms  of  the
economic  structure,  it  will  be  necessary  to  continue  implementing  measures  to  stabilize  the
BIS Review   78/1997
- 4 -
Japanese financial system, and increase domestic and overseas confidence in the system. At the
same  time,  the  financial  system  must  be  reorganized  to  enhance  its  functions  and
competitiveness, by improving the infrastructure in order to promote competition in accordance
with the Japanese “Big Bang” deregulation package.
BIS Review   78/1997
