Ms.  Phillips  discusses  the  Federal  Reserve  Board's  views  on  proposed
accounting standards for derivatives and risk management activities   Testimony of Ms. Susan
M.  Phillips,  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  before  the
Subcommittee  on  Capital  Markets,  Securities  and  Government  Sponsored  Enterprises  of  the
Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on 1/10/97.
I welcome this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve Board’s views on proposed
accounting  standards  for  derivatives  and  risk  management  activities  issued  by  the  Financial
Accounting Standards Board (FASB).
In  approaching  this  complex  matter,  it  should  be  acknowledged  up  front  that  most
responsible observers and market participants share an interest in improved accounting standards and
disclosure  of  information  that  is  useful  and  relevant  to  the  broad  range  of  users  of  financial
statements. Thus, the desirability of meaningful disclosure is not the issue. All would agree, I think,
that  enhanced  financial  disclosure  and  market  transparency  can  lead  to  more  efficient  financial
markets, more accurate pricing of risks, and more effective market discipline.
With respect to financial disclosures, the interests of most firm managers, investors,
and other market participants are essentially the same. Market participants can benefit from enhanced
disclosure by being in a better position to understand the financial condition of their counterparties
and competitors. Investors have an obvious interest in being able to make meaningful assessments of
a  firm’s  performance,  underlying  trends,  and  income-producing  potential.  Sound,  well-managed
firms can benefit if better disclosure enables them to obtain funds at risk premiums that accurately
reflect their lower risk profiles. Inadequate financial  disclosures,  on  the  other  hand,  could  penalize
well-managed firms if market participants are unable to assess their fundamental financial strength.
While  most  market  participants  favor  sound  accounting  standards  and  meaningful
disclosure, a key question is how to ensure that accounting practices and techniques reflect, and are
consistent with, how a business is run, that is, its overall business strategy. Indeed, accounting
methodology should measure the results of a business purpose or strategy, and not be an end in itself.
For example, in the case of a company that actively trades financial instruments or other products to
profit from short-term price movements, such as a securities firm, reporting trading positions at fair
values appropriately measures the success or failure of that business strategy, and market participants
expect this reporting treatment. However, for many other types of businesses, such as a manufacturer
or a lender that funds loans with liabilities of equal maturity, market value accounting in the primary
financial statements may not accurately reflect business strategies or appropriately measure the firm’s
underlying performance and condition. In these cases, although information about fair value can be
useful in supplemental disclosures, it is questionable whether there is widespread demand for market
value accounting to become the basis for the preparation of the primary financial statements.
Although  the  needs  of  financial  statement  users  may  vary,  a  critical  function  of
financial statements is to reflect in a meaningful way underlying trends in the financial performance
and condition of the firm. The application of market value accounting to business strategies where it
is  not  appropriate,  and  particularly  when  applied  on  a  piecemeal  basis,  may  lead  to  increased
volatility or fluctuation in  reported  results  and  actually  obscure  underlying  trends  or  developments
affecting a firm’s condition and performance. Requiring companies to adopt market value accounting
where it is not consistent with their business strategies can cause them to incur significant costs to
provide  information  that  may  not  reflect  in  a  meaningful  way  their  underlying  circumstances  or
trends in their performance. Moreover, from the standpoint of financial statement analysts and other
users,  having  to  make  adjustments  to  remove  the  effects  of  this  accounting  volatility  from  income
statements and balance sheets -- volatility that is not consistent with firm’s risk positions -- can also
impose significant costs without offsetting benefits.
BIS Review   90/1997
- 2 -
These  problems  can  be  minimized  by  placing  market  values  in  meaningful
supplemental disclosures rather than by forcing their use in the primary financial statements. Such an
approach  would  give  analysts  the  information  they  need,  without  imposing  the  broader  costs  of
having to reverse or back out the effects of artificial volatility from the primary financial statements.
Of course, financial statements and supplemental disclosures must be accurate and not misrepresent a
firm’s financial circumstances -- a problem that can be minimized when financial reports are subject
to thorough review by management and external auditors.
Federal Reserve’s Experience
The  Federal  Reserve  Board  has  a  long-standing  interest  in  the  quality  of  financial
reporting. This arises from our role as the nation’s central bank, and as the supervisor of bank holding
companies, state member banks, and the U.S. operations of foreign  banking  organizations  (FBOs).
The  Federal  Reserve  and  other  bank  supervisors  are  responsible  for  assessing  the  safety  and
soundness  of  the  institutions  they  regulate.  In  this  regard,  the  Federal  Reserve  relies  on  off-site
monitoring,  on-site  supervision,  capital  and  other  regulatory  requirements,  and  policies  that
encourage  sound  risk  management  practices.  We  believe  that  market  discipline  -- supported  by
appropriate  accounting  standards  and  public  disclosure  -- complement  these  supervisory  efforts  by
fostering healthy financial institutions and efficient capital markets.
In the course of supervising financial institutions, the Federal Reserve has developed
considerable  familiarity  with  financial  instruments,  both  derivative  and  non-derivative,  that  are
characterized by a wide range of complexity and risk. We have  learned  that  in  supervising  trading
and derivatives  activities  it  is  the  underlying  characteristics  of  a  financial  instrument  -- and  how  it
contributes to the overall risk profile of the firm -- that are important, not the instrument’s name. Two
instruments that differ in name only may have entirely different treatment  under  existing  legal  and
accounting  frameworks,  even  though  the  economic  risks  (including  market,  credit,  liquidity,
operational,  and  reputational  risks)  they  embody  are  identical.  Financial  engineering  can  certainly
create derivative instruments that combine risks in complex ways. But the same engineers can create
cash instruments that appear simple and traditional, but may have greater risk than many instruments
labeled  “derivative.”  Indeed,  placing  financial  instruments  in  regulatory  or  accounting  pigeonholes
without  regard  to  their  true  risks  and  economic  functions  can  create  disincentives  for  prudent  risk
management.
The Federal Reserve is increasingly emphasizing the need for institutions to manage
the aggregate or portfolio risks of banking and de-emphasizing a focus on specific instruments. Risk
should  be  measured  and  managed  comprehensively.  That  is,  an  institution  should  manage  the
dynamics of its portfolio rather than manage specific instruments. A focus on individual transactions
can  ignore  the  interaction  of  the  specified  instrument  with  other  instruments.  Although  portfolio
theory is widely appreciated by bankers and regulators, putting its principles into practice in banking
has  not  been  easy.  For  example,  past  banking  crises  have,  in  part,  reflected  a  failure  by  some
institutions to recognize and limit concentrations of risk within their portfolios.
The  Federal  Reserve  is  increasingly  recognizing  the  need  for  supervisory  and
regulatory policies to be more “incentive-compatible,” in that they encourage sound risk management
within  an  institution.  Furthermore,  supervisory  and  regulatory  policies  are  placing  increasing
emphasis  on  minimizing  burden  by  using  internal  risk  measurement  systems,  and  by  reinforcing
supervisory  objectives  through  market  forces.  We  believe  that  market  discipline  -- supported  by
appropriate  accounting  standards  and  public  disclosure  -- complements  our  supervisory  efforts  by
fostering strong financial institutions and efficient capital markets. We believe this approach is more
constructive than rote adherence to rules and regulations that may not be consistent with the firm’s
own risk management systems.
BIS Review   90/1997
Consistent  with  these  policies,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  banking  supervisors
have explored regulatory approaches that encourage more use of market-value-based measures in risk
management  approaches.  For  example,  beginning  next  year,  internationally  active  banks  meeting
certain  criteria  for  risk  management  will  calculate  the  amount  of  capital  necessary  to  support  the
market  risk  of  their  trading  activities  using  their  own  internal  value-at-risk  (VaR)  measures.  A
significant  effort  that  could  increase  supervisory  reliance  on  market  discipline  in  the  future  is  the
Federal  Reserve’s  so-called  “pre-commitment”  approach  to  determining  capital  for  market  risk.  It
seeks  to  provide  banks  with  stronger  regulatory  and  market  incentives  to  improve  all  aspects  of
market risk management. Other initiatives have improved the focus of our supervision policies and
examination  practices  on  institutions’  risk  profiles  and  risk  management  activities  in  ways  that
emphasize sound practices and strong internal controls.
Moreover,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  called  for  improved  U.S.  accounting  and
disclosure standards and has had a key role in sponsoring major international initiatives to encourage
improved  disclosures  by  the  largest  banks  and  securities  firms  of  their  trading  and  derivatives
activities. For example, our 1995 and 1996 analyses of the derivatives disclosure by the top ten U.S.
dealer  banks  were  used  as  models  for  the  joint  reports  by  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision and the International Organization of Securities Commissions, which covered a sample
of  the  largest  banks  and  securities  firms  in  the  G-10  countries.  These  studies  revealed  major
differences  in  disclosure  among  the  participating  countries  and  highlighted  the  greater  level  of
disclosure  by  U.S.  dealer  banks.  In  addition,  a  representative  of  the  Federal  Reserve  chaired  an
international  working  group  of  the  Euro-currency  Standing  Committee  that  recommended  in  1994
improvements to disclosure by financial intermediaries of the credit and market risks of their trading
activities. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies also developed improvements
in derivatives disclosure standards for regulatory reports that are similar to disclosure requirements
issued  at  the  same  time  by  FASB  in  Statement  No.  119,  “Disclosure  about  Derivative  Financial
Instruments and Fair Value of Financial Instruments.”
Specific Issues Raised by the Derivatives Proposal
We  share  several  objectives  with  the  FASB  for  improving  financial  reporting.  For
example, we both support the fundamental objectives of promoting clear and understandable financial
reports that increase the transparency of companies’ activities. We also share the view that accounting
and disclosure standards which faithfully represent financial condition and performance can improve
investor and counterparty decisions, thus improving market discipline on banking organizations and
other  companies.  Further,  we  also  agree  that  current  accounting  and  disclosure  standards  for
derivatives -- as well as for other financial instruments -- should be improved.
We  recognize  the  difficult  task  that  FASB  has  in  developing  a  standard  that  is
acceptable  to  its  many  constituents.  In  this  regard,  we  understand  that  FASB  has  considered  and
rejected  a  number  of  approaches  to  hedge  accounting  for  derivatives  because  particular  problems
were  identified  with  each  approach.  We  also  believe  that  the  approach  of  reporting  all  financial
instruments at fair value in the primary set  of  financial  instruments,  while  having  some  theoretical
appeal at least for some types of firms, is not an appropriate solution in the near term. In this regard,
fair  value  estimation  techniques  are  not  yet  sufficiently  robust  for  exclusive  reliance  in  financial
statements. For example, difficult valuation issues arise for highly illiquid instruments for which fair
value is based on models rather than observed prices, core deposits with varying durations, and the
liabilities  of  a  firm  whose  credit  quality  has  weakened.  Furthermore,  fair  value  estimates  can  be
highly subjective, and little guidance is available for measuring fair values in the financial statements.
Another difficult issue relates to whether fair value is the most relevant measurement for commercial
banks and other firms that are in the business of holding illiquid loans and other assets for the long
term. The success or failure of such a strategy is not measured by evaluating such loans on the basis
BIS Review   90/1997
- 4 -
of  a  price  that  indicates  value  in  the  context  of  immediate  delivery.  In  this  regard,  an  appropriate
value for many bank loans and off-balance-sheet commitments -- the one that reflect the nature of a
bank’s  business  -- is  the  original  acquisition  price  adjusted  for  the  expectation  of  performance  at
maturity.
Given  the  many  difficulties  of  FASB’s  task,  it  is  not  surprising  that  their  proposal
raises a number of complex issues. For example, the proposal is likely to lead to increased volatility
in  income  and  stockholders  equity  by  companies  that  manage  risk  with  derivatives.  This  volatility
could be artificial due to the piecemeal approach of marking certain risk positions to fair value, but
not all positions contributing to the risk. As a result, there could be accounting volatility that bears
little relation to an institution’s overall risk position. Supervisors and analysts will have to strip out
the  artificially  created  volatility  to  assess  the  true  performance  of  the  firm.  On  the  other  hand,
companies that do not manage their risks, or manage their risks solely through cash instruments that
are not covered by the standard, would not reflect similar volatility.
A  simple  example  might  illustrate  this  concern.  Assume  a  company’s  activities
consist solely of lending long term at fixed rates and funding these loans with variable-rate deposits. I
think  we  can  all  agree  that  this  company  has  a  significant  exposure  to  interest  rate  risk.  If  the
company  does  not  manage  its  risk  with  derivatives,  it  would  not  be  affected  by  the  derivatives
accounting  proposal  and  would  not  report  any  volatility  from  fair  value  changes  in  its  financial
statements. If, however, the company has a strategy to use derivatives to reduce its interest rate risk
and move it closer to a match-funded position, the company may report greater volatility in income
and stockholders’ equity -- a result not consistent with its reduced risk exposure. For example, if the
company specified under the framework set forth in the FASB proposal that the derivatives are “cash
flow”  hedges  of  variable  rate  liabilities,  the  company  would  have  volatility  in  equity  or  earnings
based on the specifically linked effectiveness tests set forth by the proposal. Thus, the firm in using
derivatives reduces its economic volatility, yet increases its accounting volatility.
More  important,  by  taking  a  transaction  level  approach  to  hedging,  the  proposal
would not describe well the efforts of more sophisticated market participants to hedge their risks on a
comprehensive, portfolio basis. Thus, these firms would effectively be required to keep different sets
of books, and their financial reporting may not be consistent with the derivatives’ intended use. This
leads  me  to  conclude  that  the  proposal  could  discourage  or  constrain  prudent  risk  management
practices  that  rely  on  derivatives.  Furthermore,  it  may  not  improve  transparency  of  financial
information.
The  proposal  also  introduces  into  the  financial  statements  an  untested  method  for
reporting  loans,  deposits,  and  other  assets  and  liabilities  being  hedged.  These  assets  and  liabilities
would be valued at a “hybrid” historical cost and fair value amount on the balance sheet when they
are  hedged  with  derivatives  that  are  designated  as  fair  value  hedges.  For  example,  generally,  the
historical cost values of these assets and liabilities would be adjusted for changes in fair value related
to the risk being hedged. However, certain other changes in fair value would not be recognized (such
as those that arise from other risks, that are the results of an ineffective hedge, or that do not offset a
gain or loss on the hedging instrument). These hybrid amounts could differ significantly from -- and
potentially exceed -- fair values. They may also be difficult to verify by auditors and examiners, thus
reducing the reliability of amounts reported in the financial statements.
The  proposed  approach  is  complex,  which  may  increase  related  developmental
systems costs. In this regard, the proposal may cause significant systems changes for institutions that
hedge with derivatives. At the same time institutions are making these systems changes, they need to
upgrade  their  systems  to  address  Year  2000  issues.  The  cost  of  systems  changes  arising  from  the
derivatives  proposal  should  be  evaluated  along  with  other  costs  and  benefits  arising  from  the
proposal. This is particularly important since the derivatives proposal is intended by the FASB to be
BIS Review   90/1997
an  interim  treatment,  and  its  long-term  goal  is  to  measure  all  financial  instruments  at  fair  value.
Indeed, the FASB already has under way a project that is evaluating issues related to that goal.
BIS Review   90/1997
