Bank of Japan presents its quarterly economic outlook for autumn 1997   BANK OF
JAPAN, QUARTERLY BULLETIN, November 1997 (advance issue).
Summary
Japan’s economic growth has been decelerating since April, partly reflecting the
impact  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.  Corporate  sentiment  has  also  weakened  somewhat.  However,  the
1.
supported by the rise in exports and business fixed investment.
Among  final  demand  items,  public-sector  investment  has  been  declining,  and  housing
investment has also dropped significantly, mainly reflecting the decline after the surge in demand prior to
the consumption tax hike. Personal consumption has continued to be sluggish on the whole, although the
impact  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  has  gradually  subsided.  However,  net  exports  and  business  fixed
investment  have  been  increasing.  In  these  circumstances,  excessive  inventories  are  seen  in  some
industries  such  as  in  consumer  durables,  and  industrial  production  has  stayed  virtually  unchanged.
Employment  and  income  conditions  have  continued  to  improve,  although  the  pace  of  recovery  has
moderated somewhat.
Prices remained stable  on  the  whole,  excluding  the  effect  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.
Domestic wholesale prices (adjusted for seasonal electricity rates) have been relatively weak, reflecting
easy supply and demand conditions for construction-related goods. The year-to-year decline in corporate
service  prices  has  slowed  steadily,  and  the  year-to-year  growth  in  consumer  prices  (nationwide,
excluding  perishables)  has  been  stable  at  around  0.5-0.6  per  cent.  Meanwhile,  changes  in  land  prices
varied by type, and have not stopped declining on the whole.
2.
In  the  financial  markets,  the  overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized)  stayed  at  the
level  slightly  below  the  official  discount  rate  of  0.5  per  cent.  The  long-term  government  bond  yield
temporarily  rose  to  near  2.7  per  cent  at  the  end  of  May,  but  it  followed  a  declining  trend  since  then,
reflecting  the  uncertainty  about  future  economic  growth.  It  has  been  moving  at  around  the  record  low
level  of  around  1.7  per  cent  since  early  October.  Stock  prices  also  moved  at  a  low  level  of  around
17,000 - 18,000.  Meanwhile,  the  yen  depreciated  somewhat  against  the  U.S.  dollar  as  the  contrast
between Japan's and U.S. economic growth gained more attention. The yen has recently moved at around
120 - 122 to the U.S. dollar.
Growth in bank lending continues to be lackluster. Fund-raising activities through capital
markets  fell  below  the  previous  year's  level.  Growth  in  monetary  aggregates  in  terms  of  M2 + CDs
year-to-year average outstanding has continued at around 3 per cent.
3.
With  respect  to  the  outlook,  public-sector  investment  is  expected  to  continue
declining, judging from the government's budget. On the other hand, net exports are expected to follow
an increasing trend, reflecting firm overseas demand and the depreciation of the yen to date, although the
pace of increase will be slower than that recorded up to the second quarter.
According to the Bank of Japan’s Tankan -- Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises
of  September  1997,  the  increase  in  corporate  profits  overall  is  expected  to  be  maintained,  albeit  at  a
slower pace. While profits of small non-manufacturing firms are expected to decline owing to the decline
in demand in addition to structural factors, those of large manufacturing firms are projected to continue
on  an  increasing  trend,  largely  supported  by  exports.  In  these  circumstances,  the  pace  of  increase  in
business fixed investment may slow down somewhat as investment in telecommunications is expected to
remain  unchanged  after  surging  in  the  previous  fiscal  year.  However,  given  that  stock  accumulation  is
not  excessive  and  demand  for  information-related  investment  is  strong,  business  fixed  investment  will
continue a steady increase.
BIS Review   99/1997
- 2 -
As for the household sector, the growth in bonus payments and overtime payments  has
been  slowing.  This  may  suggest  that  the  economic  deceleration  since  spring  1997  has  started  to  affect
household  income.  However,  the  significant  deterioration  of  household  confidence  is  unlikely  to  be
triggered by these developments, as the current employment conditions are very different from those of
around 1993 when the risk of severe employment adjustment was large. Also, the recent weaknesses in
personal consumption and housing investment partly reflect the temporary factors, such as the reaction to
the  front-loading  of  demand  before  the  consumption  tax  hike.  The  downward  pressure  from  fiscal
policies is likely to weaken gradually in the near future. Therefore, once the impact of the consumption
tax  hike  subsides,  an  early  recovery  of  household  expenditure  may  translate  into  the  positive  cycle  of
production,  income  and  expenditure.  Still,  there  are  uncertainties  about  the  recovery  in  personal
consumption, as consumer confidence is susceptible to psychological elements.
4.
With  respect  to  price  developments,  domestic  wholesale  prices  are  likely  to
continue to be weak for the time being. This is because inventory adjustment pressures are being exerted,
and  the  downward  pressure  from  electrical  goods  prices  caused  by  technological  innovation  remains
strong,  although  the  downward  pressure  coming  from  import  prices  has  been  subsiding.  Meanwhile,
corporate  service  prices  will  stay  virtually  unchanged,  and  consumer  prices  are  likely  to  continue  a
similar moderate rise.
5.
In  sum,  fiscal  policies,  including  the  consumption  tax  hike,  continue  to  affect
Japan’s  economy,  and  the  slowdown  in  domestic  demand  seems  to  have  influenced  corporate  profits,
employment and income conditions gradually through a deceleration in production activity.
However, corporate profits and employees’ income have maintained their growth, although at a
somewhat slower pace. Also,  labor  adjustment  and  capital  stock  adjustment  pressures  are  not  so  large,
and  the  risk  of  deflation  is  negligible.  In  light  of  this,  the  basis  for  economic  recovery  has  not  been
undermined. If household expenditure picks up and inventory adjustment pressures subside steadily, the
economic  recovery  is  likely  to  gather  momentum  again,  albeit  gradually.  Given  the  cautious  corporate
sentiments and  the  uncertainty  about  future  developments  in  demand,  it  is  essential  to  monitor  closely
future  economic  developments,  particularly  the  pace  of  recovery  in  household  expenditure,  and  the
progress in inventory adjustment.
BIS Review   99/1997
