 William J McDonough: Completing the journey to the New Basel Accord 
Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, before the Twelfth International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Cape Town, 
South Africa, 18 September 2002. 
 Introduction and Overview  
As the chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, I am honored to welcome you today 
to  the  Twelfth  International  Conference  of  Banking  Supervisors.  I  would  like  to  thank  our  hosts, 
Governor Mboweni and the staff of the South African Reserve Bank, as well as my colleague, Andrew 
Crockett, and the Bank for International Settlements, for organizing our gathering here in Cape Town. 
I’m sure you’ll agree that they’ve done an excellent job.  
It appears to me, and probably to many of you, that South Africans have discovered a wonderful niche 
for  themselves  as  hosts  of  auspicious  international  gatherings,  having  just  concluded  the  World 
Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  in  Johannesburg  a  few  weeks  ago.  So  if  you’re  visiting  this 
beautiful country for the first time, I have a feeling that you may be back in South Africa someday in 
the future. 
Participants at the United Nations summit in Johannesburg sought ways to improve the lives of people 
everywhere by focusing on, among other goals, alleviating poverty and promoting economic growth. 
Bank  supervisors  and  central  bankers  certainly  share  those  goals.  Through  our  duty  to  ensure  the 
safety and soundness of the financial system, we aim to preserve depositors’ savings, to promote the 
circulation  of  credit,  and  ultimately  to  protect  the  health  and  growth  of  our  economies.  Indeed,  we 
cannot alleviate poverty,  we cannot  promote economic growth unless our banks are well managed, 
our financial systems stable, and our markets transparent and open. 
That the health of an economy depends to a great degree on whether its banks are financially sound 
and  well  managed  is  certainly  not  coincidental.  Banks  are  charged  with  critical  public  trust  to 
safeguard the public’s wealth and to serve as a source of credit to consumers and businesses alike. 
When banks fail to discharge these tasks responsibly, the costs to society can be high and the impact 
on the economy devastating.  
At the same time, the duty for supervisors to promote the safety and soundness of the banking system 
entails achieving a delicate balance. Ensuring the prudent management of banks does not mean that 
we  should  hinder  their  growth  or  profit.  Rather,  the  supervisor’s  job  is  to  promote  the  responsible 
pursuit of opportunity and innovation. Likewise, it cannot be our job to prevent every bank failure, for 
some failures remove poorly managed banks from the market and encourage other banks to improve 
their management as well. 
Motivating all banks to improve their management of risk, and thereby strengthen the stability of the 
banking  system,  is  one  of  the  principal  objectives  that  the  Basel  Committee  set  out  for  itself  in 
undertaking a major revision of the international standards for regulatory capital. The three years since 
have been a tremendous journey for all of us as we seek fundamental reform of the capital adequacy 
framework.  
Meeting here in Cape Town, it seems fitting to portray our work to date as an unfinished journey. This 
historic  port  has  traditionally  served  as  a  way  station  and  respite  for  weary  seafarers  who  had 
weathered many storms, but had not yet reached their destination. So today we’ll have a chance to 
rest near the Cape of Good Hope, to reflect on how far we’ve come, and to chart the rest of our way to 
the successful implementation of the New Accord. I’d like to share with you the latest news on where 
the New Accord stands and offer some insight into what you can expect to see in the future. I’ll begin 
with my views on the milestones that we’ve achieved. Then, I’d like to bring you up to date on how we 
are resolving outstanding issues. It’s wise to conclude any speech with thoughts about the future, so 
I’ll close with some remarks on what we’ll need to do to finish our journey – from the perspectives of 
the Committee and of other supervisors, including of those who may have adopted the 1988 Accord 
more recently. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 1
 Milestones Achieved 
Let me begin with the important milestones that we’ve achieved in this undertaking. As you know, we 
embarked on this voyage in the late 1990s because we realized that the original 1988 Basel Accord 
was becoming outdated. It was designed to be uncomplicated so that it could be applied to banks of 
various  sizes  and  risk  profiles  in  many  markets  and  jurisdictions.  Its  subsequent  adoption  by  more 
than 100 countries represented an important first step in the development of an international standard.  
But it has since become clear that the 1988 Accord has been overtaken by advances in the financial 
sector  –  and  in  the  broader  economy.  New  technology,  the  globalization  of  financial  markets,  and 
innovative  financial  products  and  services  have  changed  the  way  that  banks  monitor  and  manage 
credit, market, and operational risks in a manner that the 1988 Accord could not anticipate and does 
not address. Consequently, the internationally active banks for which the original Accord was intended 
are quickly "outgrowing" its limitations. Today it’s quite clear that the 1988 Accord provides this class 
of  banks  with  less  meaningful  measures  of  the  risks  they  face  and  of  the  capital  they  should  hold 
against those risks. 
To  ensure  that  the  New  Accord  remains  flexible,  forward-looking,  and  fit  for  the  service  of 
internationally active banks of the twenty-first century, the Basel Committee established several goals 
for its work, goals that the industry has embraced. 
• 
First, we intended to develop a framework that encompasses the "three pillars" necessary to 
support  an  effective  system  of  regulatory  capital:  the  appropriate  measurement  and 
minimum requirements, supervisory review, and market discipline.  
Second,  we  wanted  to  align  the  minimum  requirements  more  closely  with  the  actual 
underlying economic risks to which banks are exposed,  which should help allocate capital 
resources effectively.  
A third goal was to encourage banks to refine their measurement and management of risk 
over time. By creating incentives in the New Accord for banks to re-evaluate and enhance 
their  tools  constantly,  we  expect  that  banks  themselves  will  adopt  a  forward-looking 
perspective on risk.  
  I’m  pleased  to  say  that,  through  the  Committee’s  efforts  and  the  cooperation  and  support  of  other 
supervisors and the industry, it  appears that  the  proposed framework will attain each goal. We can 
now count them among the milestones we've achieved. 
Encompass the "three pillars" of capital adequacy  
1. 
With regard to the first goal, the new framework will recognize the important roles that supervisors and 
markets  can  play  in  motivating  the  prudent  management  of  risk  and  capital.  Indeed,  it  is  the 
Committee’s view that it would be insufficient for any country to simply adopt the new minimum capital 
requirements and ignore the remaining two pillars. Both the involvement of supervisors in assessing a 
bank’s risk management capabilities and the discipline that greater transparency and active markets 
bring to bear on management can reinforce a bank’s desire to remain adequately capitalized and in 
control of its exposure to risks.  
Improve the risk-sensitivity of the capital framework 
2. 
The  New  Accord  will  likewise  achieve  the  second  and  parallel  goal  to  align  regulatory  capital 
requirements  more  closely  with  the  underlying  economic  risks  that  banks  face.  It  will  do  so  by 
departing from the 1988 Accord’s "one-size-fits-all" methodology that assesses credit risk based more 
on the type of borrower, offering instead a selection of methods to evaluate credit risk based more on 
the  potential  for  loss.  Under  the  new  standardized  approach,  for  example,  banks  with  smaller  loan 
portfolios or less advanced risk management systems will be better able to incorporate a borrower’s 
creditworthiness into their  capital management by relying on external assessments of credit quality. 
Larger  or  more  sophisticated  institutions,  in  turn,  will  be  able  to  rely  increasingly  on  their  own 
assessments under the internal ratings-based approach. 
Similarly,  now  that  the  industry  is  developing  a  more  refined  sense  of  operational  risk  –  the  risk  of 
losses caused by failures in processes – the New Accord will "unbundle" this risk and allow banks to 
differentiate between, and manage separately, their exposures to credit, market, and operational risks.  
2 
 BIS Review 52/2002
 Encourage banks to improve their management of risk  
3. 
We’ve also attained the third goal: to go beyond a rules-based structure and instead encourage banks 
themselves to improve their abilities to identify, measure, and manage their risks appropriately. As you 
know, the most sophisticated approaches to credit or operational risk in the New Accord will permit 
banks to rely increasingly on their internal assessments of risk when determining how much capital to 
hold.  At  the  same  time,  the  New  Accord  will  be  flexible  enough  for  banks  to  build  their  risk 
management functions on the best practices available in the industry, even as those practices evolve 
in the future. By promoting the improvement of the management of risk across the industry, I believe 
that we are laying a foundation for more stable markets.  
The milestones achieved square with banks’ and supervisors’ long-standing efforts 
All of us can take great pride in meeting the goals that the Committee set out to embrace: the three 
pillars  of  capital  adequacy,  enhancing  the  risk-sensitivity  of  the  capital  framework,  and  creating 
incentives  for  banks  to  improve  their  management  of  risk.  And  we  should  recognize  that  these 
proposed  revisions  square  well  with  the  efforts  that  banks  and  supervisors  themselves  have 
undertaken,  independent  of  the  Committee’s  work.  The  banking  industry  has  done  much  over  the 
years to  adopt a forward-looking approach to risk management – one that emphasizes flexibility  in, 
and improvements to, the measurement and management of risk over time.  
For  our  part,  supervisors  have  come  to  focus  much  less  on  point-in-time  assessments  of  financial 
condition and much more on evaluating the quality of internal processes and control structures that 
protect against future losses. By embracing a philosophy of supervision that centers on evaluations of 
risk management capabilities,  we  gain  deeper  insight into banks’ likely resilience during downturns, 
and we are better positioned to focus management’s attention on finding ways to do better. 
Certainly  the  New  Accord’s  inclusion  of  extensive  economic  incentives  to  adopt  sophisticated  risk 
management  processes  adds  encouragement  for  their  enhancement.  Moreover,  the  New  Accord’s 
requirement  of  strong  process  controls  as  a  predicate  for  using  the  more  advanced  approaches 
strongly  supports  our  efforts  to  make  evaluations  of  internal  processes  the  heart  of  a  more 
forward looking supervisory approach.  
The status of the New Accord 
So it would seem that we’ve covered quite a bit of territory over the past three years. Yet a Chinese 
proverb reminds us that, "On a journey of one hundred miles, ninety is but halfway." I suppose the last 
miles of any marathon are the toughest to finish. The wisdom of that proverb is borne out by the tasks 
ahead of us to complete, and then to implement, the new capital framework. So I’d like to turn now to 
the status of the New Accord and of the issues we are resolving.  
As you know, since the Second Consultative Document’s release 21 months ago, the members of the 
Basel  Committee  have  worked  collaboratively  and  publicly  with  supervisors,  banks,  and  others  to 
revise  the  proposals  so  that  they  best  serve  the  needs  of  modern  banking.  We’ve  published  and 
discussed thousands of pages of proposals and studies with the industry and the public. The size of – 
and depth of detail in – those volumes demonstrates how hard we’ve been working and how great the 
challenge is.  
Challenges the Committee is resolving 
Indeed, while our consultations over the years have reflected on some of the finest – and occasionally 
highly esoteric – points of contemporary banking, the Committee encountered a few central concerns 
expressed by the industry – and sometimes by supervisors as well. Some of the overarching issues 
include the complexity of the proposals and their potential to be "procyclical." Other respondents have 
weighed  in  on  proposed  charges  against  operational  risk  and  other  particular  exposures.  I’d  like  to 
share with you now the latest news on how we are resolving those challenges. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 3
 Complexity of the New Accord 
First, to the issue of complexity. Anyone who’s dared to download the proposals in their entirety from 
the BIS website may have been surprised to find out how much paper it requires to print them out. The 
New Accord is truly weighty, in all meanings of that adjective. Naturally, as prudent supervisors, the 
members of the Committee know that it is easier to enforce a simple rule than a more complicated 
one. Wherever possible, the Committee has sought to provide simple alternatives that can be applied 
in many markets and settings. Consultations helped us to simplify or remove a good number of rules 
thought to be unnecessarily complicated. 
However,  it’s  important  to  recognize  that  we  intend  to  apply  the  New  Accord  especially  to  large, 
internationally active banks, all of which are highly developed and complex institutions. One blanket 
won’t cover a mountain range. In fact, the New Accord’s complexity stems partly from the options it 
provides to address the wide range of risk profiles, strategies, and systems that banks maintain. Many 
options  were  created  precisely  because  some  banks  felt  disadvantaged  under  a  proposed  blanket 
rule. Yet each new option alters the balance between simplicity and complexity. 
I think the best example of finding that balance lies in the treatment we’ve proposed for exposures to 
small and medium-sized enterprises. Equating loans to small and medium-sized businesses with loans 
to large corporations ignores critical aspects of the risks associated with each type of lending; it also 
could  lead  to  results  that  seem  unfair  to  banks  that  lend  primarily  to  smaller  businesses.  So  the 
Committee developed a special capital treatment for exposures to small and medium-sized enterprises 
that recognizes the unique characteristics of that form of lending, but admittedly makes the rules more 
complicated, and perhaps a page or two longer. Nonetheless, we believe that this treatment helps to 
align regulatory capital more closely with the underlying risks. 
Procyclicality 
Another general concern expressed is that the New Accord’s increased sensitivity to risk will reinforce 
behavioral  patterns  in  banking  organizations  that  may  increase  the  cost  of  credit  precisely  at  times 
when  its  supply  is  falling,  namely  during  downturns  in  the  business  cycle. While  we  are  working  to 
address  this  concern  about  procyclicality,  it  is  not  a  reason  to  shy  away  from  creating  better  risk 
management tools. 
Here, supervisors must articulate the need for banks to assess risks on the horizon. If banks fail to 
develop and manage to reasonable expectations about how their risk profiles may change over time, 
they may take on excess exposures today that they cannot administer responsibly tomorrow. 
At the same time, we should remember that the New Accord sets out the minimum amount of capital 
necessary to comply with banking regulations. All supervisors expect their banks to operate at levels 
above the regulatory minima, and nearly all banks manage to their economic capital needs, not to their 
regulatory capital requirements. So although deteriorating credit quality might drive up the minimum 
capital requirement, a bank should already be operating above that level, which should dampen the 
effects of a sudden downturn in business conditions and asset quality. 
Along  those  lines,  the  Committee  recently  agreed  that  banks  adopting  the  "internal  ratings  based" 
approach to credit risk will be required under Pillar 2 to conduct meaningfully conservative credit risk 
stress  testing.  Stress  testing  should  help  banks  to  maintain  adequate  capital  buffers  in  advance  of 
potential downturns in the economy. 
The treatment of operational risk 
Beyond  those  two  broad  concerns  expressed  about  the  potential  for  complexity  and  procyclicality, 
some respondents have called for changes to more specific capital charges in the proposals. One of 
the most interesting discussions centers on whether – or how – the New Accord should treat a bank’s 
exposure to potential losses that result from inadequate or failed internal processes and systems, or 
from external events. 
The  endeavor  to  manage  operational  risk,  as  this  group  of  risks  has  become  known,  has  sparked 
significant research in the industry and beyond. Supervisors, like more and more banks, have adopted 
a view of operational risk management as a comprehensive practice comparable to the management 
of market or credit risk. While operational risk cannot be quantified with the same degree of precision 
as market or credit risk, the Committee believes that introducing a separate charge for exposures to 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2002
 operational risk will bolster efforts to find better ways to address it. Failing to include an operational 
risk charge in the new minimum requirements could inadvertently derail the ongoing work to identify 
and manage this exposure. 
Although we’ve seen encouraging progress in measuring operational risk – within both individual firms 
and industry working groups – the Committee recognizes that the industry has not settled on particular 
methodologies  or  principles.  Accordingly,  the  New  Accord  will  permit  an  unprecedented  amount  of 
flexibility  to accommodate a spectrum of approaches to operational risk. For the most sophisticated 
institutions, the "advanced measurement approach" – or "AMA" – is really the ultimate expression of 
the goal of drawing on internal measures. In response to concerns that the proposed  "floor" on the 
AMA stifled innovation, the Committee decided recently  to  eliminate  it. Consequently,  banks will be 
free to experiment with a great variety of methodologies, without undue constraint on their value to the 
firm. The AMA is meant to be a catalyst for innovation.  
Calibration of other particular charges and the overall level of capital 
Of course, a good portion of the consultations have addressed rules and formulae used to determine 
capital  charges  for  other  categories  of  exposures  and  transactions.  The  Committee  and  its  working 
groups have listened carefully to the views of market participants, academics, and other regulators to 
ensure  that  the  resulting  capital  requirements  make  good  economic  sense  and  avoid  burdening  or 
disadvantaging banks unfairly. Based on the changes we are making, we expect that the Committee 
will  achieve  its  goal  of  not  raising  in  aggregate  the  capitalization  required  of  the  banking  industry, 
though  clearly  and  appropriately  those  banks  that  engage  in  higher  risk  businesses  may  see  their 
requirements rise, and vice-versa. 
QIS 3 
To ensure that we’ve gotten it right, the Basel Committee will launch a third Quantitative Impact Study 
– or "QIS 3" – on October 1, 2002, in conjunction with supervisors around the world. The industry has 
demonstrated  tremendous  support  for  this  survey  and  will  devote  substantial  resources  to  its 
completion.  To  date,  265  banks  from  nearly  50  countries  have  agreed  to  perform  concrete  and 
comprehensive assessments of how the Committee's proposals will affect them and then submit their 
findings by December 20, 2002. The inclusion of banks from so many countries will help to ensure that 
the New Accord’s principles can be applied well to institutions in many countries.  
With the public release of the QIS 3 instructions on October 1, the Committee will provide a full picture 
of its proposed framework and quantitative requirements. Assessment of the QIS 3 results will allow us 
to ascertain the need for adjustments prior to the release of an updated proposal for public comment in 
the second quarter of 2003. The Committee intends to finalize the New Capital Accord in the fourth 
quarter  of  2003  such  that  it  can  be  implemented  in  each  country  at  year-end  2006.  During  this 
three-year  period,  banks  and  supervisors  are  expected  to  adapt  and  develop  the  systems  and 
processes necessary to conform to the standards of the New Accord.  
What supervisors are doing to prepare 
Just what will supervisors do during those three years? Let me conclude my remarks today with some 
thoughts on how the Committee and other supervisors will complete the journey to the New Accord. 
There are three areas of focus for us.  
Evaluating banks’ readiness  
1. 
First, the member countries of the Basel Committee have begun to survey their banks’ preparation for 
the  New  Accord.  Some  are  gathering  information  on  how  banks  plan  to  benefit  from  the  new 
framework,  while  others  have  already  evaluated  selected  banks’  internal  rating  systems  and 
databases  to  understand  how  close  those  banks  may  be  to  meeting  the  stringent  requirements 
associated  with  the  more  advanced  approaches.  In  all  cases,  we  are  working  to  understand  the 
challenges that banks will face and are seeking ways to smooth the transition to the new framework. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 5
 Training and preparing supervisory staff 
2. 
Likewise, supervisors in all of the Basel Committee’s member countries are laboring to make sure that 
they,  too,  will  be  ready  for  the  new  rules,  which  is  a  second  area  of  focus.  From  the  supervisor’s 
perspective, the New Basel Accord will require a heightened sense of the internal processes used to 
identify and quantify risk. This, in my mind, focuses our energy on exactly the right place – that is, how 
we can encourage improvements in risk management by critically evaluating current practices.  
Our supervisory assessments will encompass several relatively new elements – importantly, validating 
the  integrity,  accuracy  and  consistency  of  the  bank’s  process  for  assigning  internal  credit  ratings. 
Since those ratings will feed directly into models used to manage credit risk, we will scrutinize more 
than ever their accuracy and integrity. If the initial inputs are wrong, the whole capital allocation system 
becomes faulty.  
Additionally,  we  will  cultivate  further  our  staff’s  ability  to  evaluate  advanced  risk  measurement  and 
management methodologies for operational risk, especially because so much of that work centers on 
advanced statistical analysis.  
Externally, the Committee anticipates providing more assistance, both formally and informally, to other 
supervisory agencies that are preparing for the added responsibilities we will all assume as the New 
Accord  comes  into  force.  Moreover,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  will 
continue  its  collaboration  with  the  Basel  Committee,  especially  in  assisting  supervisors  globally  in 
understanding  and  implementing  all  aspects  of  the  revised  Accord.  The  "FSI"  anticipates  that  more 
than half of its 40 seminars and programs in 2003 will concentrate on components of the New Accord. 
In fact, shortly after the release of the Third Consultative Document next year, the FSI intends to offer 
three special seminars around the world to introduce other supervisors to the most important features 
of the new framework. 
Working toward consistent implementation: Accord Implementation Group 
3. 
The  third  area  of  activity  will  be  to  deepen  the  level  of  communication  and  cooperation  among 
supervisors so that we implement the new rules more consistently across jurisdictions. A "level playing 
field" demands that international competition be driven by each bank’s strengths, rather than by each 
country’s rules. 
Within the Basel Committee itself, we’ve established the "Accord Implementation Group" as a forum 
for sharing information on ways to assess risk management processes under the New Accord. The 
group  is  made  up  of  senior  line  supervisors  –  that  is,  the  people  who  actually  assess  banks’  risk 
profiles – and is led by Nick LePan, the Canadian Superintendent of Financial Institutions.  
Applying the Basel Accord in the non-G-10 countries 
Many  other  countries  are  similarly  preparing  for  the  final  leg  of  our  journey,  and  I  applaud  your 
persistence and dedication to this endeavor. At the same time, the Committee recognizes that some 
countries have only recently adopted the original 1988 Accord and may still be working to ensure a 
basic level of capital adequacy.  
I would like to take a moment to address the supervisors of those countries and emphasize that the 
Basel Committee’s efforts to revise the Accord are focused on the international banks that compete in 
the global capital markets and that have the greatest potential to create systemic risk. The need for a 
common  approach  to  capital  adequacy  regulations  for  such  banks  is  what  drove  the  Committee  to 
create the 1988 Basel Accord. 
As  I  have  noted,  however,  the  original  Basel  Accord  has  in  some  sense  become  the  victim  of  its 
success,  having  been  adopted  in  a  number  of  countries  and  applied  to  entire  banking  systems, 
including banks both large and small. Now, as the Basel Committee is clearly  moving away from a 
single approach to capital, it is important for the Committee and supervisors worldwide to reflect on the 
choices available to regulate the capital of banks that are neither highly complex nor internationally 
active. 
I believe that the differences between domestic banking systems make it impossible to conceive of a 
single capital Accord that would be appropriate for all banks in all countries. Rather, supervisors may 
need to consider different approaches. For some, retention of the current Accord, supplemented by 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2002
 the  second  and  third  pillars,  may  be  the  best  way  forward.  Other  countries  may  elect  the  revised 
standardized approach of the New Accord. Still others may seek a hybrid of these two possibilities. 
We  should  recognize  that  these  might  be  perfectly  valid  choices  for  the  treatment  of  non-complex 
domestic banks, depending on national circumstances. Attempts to force a uniform approach on such 
banks that typically do not compete across national borders are unnecessary and possibly counter-
productive.  Instead,  our  energy  would  be  better  spent  on  sharing  ideas  and  developing  a  common 
understanding of the challenges that supervisors face in dealing with noncomplex domestic banking 
organizations. 
Accordingly, at its meeting yesterday, the Basel Committee agreed to launch an initiative jointly with 
supervisors from many other countries to consider these issues and to develop practical guidance for 
supervisors on the issues associated with the capital regulation of smaller, non-complex banks. 
Let  me  be  very  clear.  The  purpose  of  this  initiative  is  not  to  develop  one  or  even  several  specific 
"Basel-approved" approaches to such regulation. Rather,  we  wish to provide practical assistance to 
supervisors confronting the challenges ahead to develop an appropriate regulatory framework suitable 
for  their  national  circumstances  and  domestic  banking  systems. We  wish  to  support  your  efforts  to 
enhance  the  adequacy  of  capital  in  a  manner  that  conforms  with  your  institutions’  risk  profiles, 
strengthens the management of risk, and fortifies the stability of your financial systems. 
Concluding thoughts on the New Accord 
Clearly, all of us have come a long way since 1988, regardless of whether we were the first or simply 
the most recent supervisors to adopt the original Accord. As we develop new approaches to capital 
adequacy, none of the milestones we’ve achieved, and none of our success in resolving open issues, 
would  have  been  possible  without  the  dedication  that  you,  the  members  of  the  global  supervisory 
community,  have  demonstrated.  You  have  been  enormously  supportive  of  our  work  and  have 
undertaken considerable pains to share your views and ideas. The members of the Committee and I 
are particularly grateful to our friends and colleagues in the rest of the supervisory community for your 
advice and counsel. We know that none of us will be able to claim individually the success of the New 
Accord as our own. 
Instead, it is  dependent on all of us  to  work hard and promote the  virtues and benefits of the New 
Accord in our own countries. Press releases and some encouraging words from supervisors will not 
suffice.  Success  will  demand  our  mutual  and  dogged  determination  to  encourage  our  banks,  to 
prepare our staff, and to cooperate with each other. As we complete the final miles of our marathon 
journey, I am confident that the New Accord will be worthy of our efforts. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 7
