 Villy Bergström: Does globalisation have anything to do with the closing down 
of the ATM? 
Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, held before “pappers avd 111” 
(a local union of the Swedish Paper Workers Union), Grycksbo, 11 February 2002. 
 Globalisation  is  an  unclear  concept  and  I  think  that  the  chairman  of  Pappers  avdelning  111,  Lars 
Göran Johansson, who invited me to this meeting, gave me an interesting task when he formulated 
the heading for my talk. He phrased it as a question; "Does globalisation have anything to do with the 
closing down of the ATM?" 
I shall return to what I believe that people in general mean by globalisation and I shall also return to 
Lars  Göran's  question  at  the  end,  but  allow  me  to  begin  by  saying  that  Sweden  has  undergone  a 
globalisation  process  for  more  than  100  years,  in  the  sense  that  our  country  has  been  exposed  to 
competition.  A  large  proportion  of  our  total  production  has  been  aimed  for  a  long  time  towards  the 
export market, while we have imported goods and received foreign investment capital. 
Foreign trade comprised approximately 20 per cent of the Swedish economy from the 1870s until the 
end  of  World  War  II.  That  is  to  say,  import  and  export  each  comprised  20  per  cent  of  the  total 
production here in Sweden. An increase in foreign trade began during the post-war period, and export 
and  import  now  comprise  approximately  40  per  cent  each  of  our  total  production.  This  means  that 
Sweden has a very open economy, exposed to competition on the world market. 
In a way, the globalisation process at the end of the 19th century went further than the process we are 
seeing  now.  This  was  because  the  labour  force  was more mobile  across  national  boundaries  then. 
Prior to the World War I, there was extensive emigration, primarily to the American continent. Sweden 
lost  one  quarter  of  its  population  through  emigration.  Between  1890  and  1910,  10  per  cent  of  the 
world's  population  moved  permanently  from  one  country  to  another.  During  the  past  quarter  of  a 
century the corresponding figure for emigration was only 1-2 per cent. 
I think that what one usually means by globalisation is that which has happened on the capital markets 
over the past 20 years and which is connected to the deregulation of capital markets. For Sweden, this 
goes  back  to  the  mid-1980s,  when  deregulation  of  the  capital  markets  began.  The  deregulation 
process reached a peak when the final elements of the currency regulations were abolished in 1989, 
enabling the free movement of capital across our borders. 
However,  this  is  nothing  new,  either.  Prior  to  1914  capital  could  move  freely  over  national  borders. 
There was extensive direct cross-border investment. This was when the Swedish railway network was 
built up and the Swedish hydroelectric power system was built with the aid of foreign capital. However, 
I think that the deregulation of the capital markets was still seen as something new and that it is the 
political  change  during  the  post-was  period  that  has  mainly  changed  the  conditions  for  economic 
policy. What people perceive as "globalisation" is probably exactly that, combined with the fact that the 
new  information  technology  enables  all  transactions  to  be  implemented  much  more  quickly  than 
before.  However,  the  concept  of  globalisation  also  includes  the  growth  of  multinational  companies, 
with production units in different countries, the fact that an increasing number of countries are drawn 
into the international trade exchange and that the labour force moves freely between countries, which 
is the case at least within the EU. 
When currency regulation was abolished, foreign investors could begin to buy Swedish treasury bonds 
and shares. Swedes could also begin to save in foreign banks, pension insurance funds and shares. 
There  had  existed  major  obstacles  to  such  transactions  before,  although  they  were  not  completely 
impossible to overcome. 
Foreign ownership of Swedish shares and SEK-denominated bonds rose from almost zero in 1980 to 
SEK 1,350 billion in 2001. When the barriers for capital movement were removed in this way, Sweden 
became subject to daily examination. The slightest sign of mismanagement of economic policy, such 
as a growing budget deficit, rising payroll expenses or inflationary tendencies risks leading to foreign 
investors selling off their holdings of Swedish treasury bonds and shares. Signs of mismanagement 
can also lead to Swedish households and companies choosing to invest their money abroad. This was 
the mechanism that made it impossible for us to keep the fixed exchange rate regime in 1992. At the 
time  of  the  deregulation,  Sweden  had  a  history  of  high  inflation  and  other  imbalances.  Doubts 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 1
 regarding  the  stability  of  the  Swedish  economy  led  to  capital  outflows,  rising  interest  rates  and  a 
shrinking foreign currency reserve. Despite massive supporting purchases of the Swedish krona and a 
drastic defence involving a 500 per cent daily lending rate for banks borrowing from the Riksbank, the 
defence of the exchange rate failed. This meant that the general public had to live for a period with a 
25 per cent interest rate for long-term mortgages! 
Lottery with a good chance of winning 
Financial capital is very transient, if not "restless". It is difficult to obtain good statistics on capital flows, 
but I have managed to find the following observations. Cross-border trade in shares and bonds in the 
USA more than doubled as a percentage of the US GDP between 1970 and 1993. During the same 
period, the corresponding volume rose from almost zero to 10 times GDP in the UK. 
A fixed exchange rate offers speculation at no risk, if there are signs that the currency is over-valued. 
This was the situation in  Sweden in the  early  1990s. The fixed exchange rate regimes signalled to 
speculators that the exchange rate could only weaken. Either the fixed exchange rate would hold firm 
and then investors in Swedish kronor would break even, or else the central bank would devaluate. An 
investor  who,  for  instance,  borrowed  Swedish  kronor  and  used  them  to  buy  dollars,  would  then, 
following a devaluation, have a debt in devaluated kronor and assets in dollars. The actual speculation 
is  aimed  at  causing  a  devaluation  that  will  lead  to  this  type  of  profit.  However,  what  encourages 
speculators  to  act  in  this  way  is  an  economy  that  is  out  of  balance,  e.g.  with  a  large  central 
government debt, poor public finances or poor competitiveness as a result of high costs. 
There is a long list of examples, where speculation has made it impossible to retain a fixed exchange 
rate. As I said, Sweden was forced to abandon its defence of the krona in 1992; the ERM co-operation 
within the EU with a narrow band for fluctuation broke down in August 1993; Mexico was affected in 
1994-95, South East Asia in 1997, Russia in 1998, Brazil in 1999, Turkey in 2001 and Argentina this 
year.  All  of  these  crises  have  at  least  one  thing  in  common:  the  countries  concerned  had  a  fixed 
exchange rate. 
There are both technical and economic reasons for the large deregulation that  occurred in Sweden 
and other countries. For instance, the advent of the new technology -- IT, electronic money and new 
financial  instruments  --  made  it  more  difficult  to  retain  currency  regulations  and  capital  market 
regulations.  The  "leaks"  became  increasingly  large.  Another  thing  was  that  economic  policy  had 
reached  the  end  of  the  road,  inflation  was  clinging  tightly  to  an  annual  level  of  8-10  per  cent  in 
Sweden, growth was poor and unemployment was showing a tendency to rise. 
When the deregulation of the financial markets got off the ground in Sweden, the process was rapid – 
in 25 years we had moved over from being one of the most regulated financial systems in the western 
world  to  being  one  of  the  most  free!  However,  the  process  was  not  exactly  painless.  The 
consequences of the macroeconomic imbalances built up during the period of regulation, combined 
with the Swedish banking system's incapacity to manage risk in its lending when credit granting was 
deregulated were dramatic, to say the least. We experienced this at the beginning of the 1990s, after 
the bank crisis and after abandoning the fixed exchange rate regime. 
During  the  difficult  years  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  with  what  was  for  Sweden  record-high 
unemployment,  a  risk  of  the  central  government  debt  running  riot  and  stubbornly  high  inflation 
expectations, despite a low inflation rate, there were not many people who dared to hope for such a 
rapid  positive  development  as  that  we  saw  during  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  The  central 
government finances are now in good condition, the current account has showed a surplus for several 
years  now,  inflation  expectations  are  at  a  stable  level  of  2  per  cent  and  unemployment  is  down  to 
around 4 per cent. 
Crisis management instead of screening 
Allow me to remind you of the crises we have had due to lack of competitiveness and that Sweden is 
an economy open to trading. During the 1970s Sweden suffered crises in the iron and steel industry, 
and in the pulp and paper industry. The Swedish shipyard industry met its end. Problems arose due to 
high  Swedish  payroll  expenses  and  the  fact  that  new  producers  from  countries  with  lower  costs 
entered the market. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2002
 How  did  we  react  to  these  crises?  Extensive  rationalisation  programmes  were  implemented, 
production was made more efficient and companies were closed down. Today, Sweden has one of the 
world's most efficient steel industries. It is the same with the forest industry. Sweden did not choose 
screening and tariff protection for the bleeding industries; we chose to become more efficient through 
restructuring and retaining our openness. 
Sweden handled the problems arising when the currency was over-valued in around 1990 in a similar 
way, which led to failing confidence in the fixed exchange rate regime. Our country ended up with a 
currency crisis that triggered a property crisis and a crisis in the banking system. The political parties 
put their differences to one side and worked together on consolidating the banks and then the central 
government finances. We chose not to reregulate the capital market, but to retain openness, as in the 
crisis of the 1970s. 
The management of the financial crisis at the beginning of the 1990s has led to the Swedish banking 
system  appearing  to  be  better-equipped  than  those  in  many  other  countries.  After  the  economic 
downturn and the tragic events in the USA last year, it is easy to forget that the Swedish economy is 
basically sound and therefore has good potential to meet new challenges. The deregulation processes 
have contributed to the discipline that now makes us stronger than many other countries in the EU and 
means  that  we  have  the  possibility  to  come  out  of  the  current  downturn  in  the  global  economy 
relatively  easily.  Unlike  many  other  European  countries,  Sweden's  public  finances  are  in  good 
condition, enabling the use of budget policy to subdue the downturn in economic activity. 
Both with regard to free trade and deregulation on the capital markets, Sweden chose to take large 
costs  to  society  in  the  form  of  production  losses  and  mass  unemployment  in  order  to  achieve  a 
development that would be good in the long term. We have been able to reap the benefits of this since 
1996, with growth rates in excess of 3 per cent a year up to the present economic slowdown. And so 
far, we have got off much more lightly than other countries. 
The financial markets are important 
A financial sector that functions efficiently is an important part of a country's economic infrastructure - 
just  as  important  as  the  transport  and  energy  systems.  If  the  financial  sector  ceases  to  mediate 
payments efficiently, it could have very serious consequences for economic development. One of the 
Riksbank's tasks as established by law is to promote a safe and efficient payments system. 
It  is  not  as  easy  to  see  the  direct  usefulness  of  the  modern  financial  system  as  it  is  to  realise  the 
importance of energy and transport. However, the functions of the financial markets - financing, risk 
management and mediation of payments - are as necessary in an advanced industrial and services 
society as the supply of energy and a functioning transport system. 
In  advanced  societies,  savings  are  at  least  partly  separate  from  investment  activities.  The  financial 
sector has the important task of balancing savers' need of security and liquidity against investors' need 
of long-term financing. It often takes a long time from investment until production results come onto the 
market.  Households  that  save  money  could  suddenly  find  themselves  in  need  of  access  to  their 
money,  which  is  made  possible  by  selling  their  savings  in  the  form  of,  e.g.  shares  and  bonds  on 
secondary markets for these securities. A company like Stora Enso wants long-term financing for a 
new  paper  machine,  which  it  might  not  be  possible  to  sell  in  a  couple  of  years'  time  should  the 
company be forced out of the investment. The company's issues of shares and/or bonds provide this 
long-term  investment,  partly  because  the  securities  can  be  sold  on  a  market  without  having  to  be 
redeemed by the company issuing them. 
Another important task for the financial system is to reduce risks for both savers and investors. The 
fact that some companies can involve greater risk than others can be balanced in a well-differentiated 
financial  market  by  savers  spreading  their  savings  across  different  forms,  buying  different  shares, 
bonds, shares in mutual funds that in themselves represent a risk spread, and by depositing some in 
banks. 
A company that takes on debt in order to make profits in future through sales on foreign markets can 
protect itself against exchange rate fluctuations by signing futures contracts, which state when and at 
what prices future income will be converted to kronor. The company can also buy input goods, such as 
oil, and sell, for instance, pulp at a forward rate, so that the company knows for certain what its future 
costs and income will be. It costs to do this, but the company then faces no risks. It is quite simply a 
form of insurance. 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 3
 When  it  comes  to  smaller  companies  and  individual  households,  the  securities  market  is  hardly  a 
suitable alternative. The risks for operators on the capital market are difficult to assess and the costs 
of  the  transactions  have  to  be  spread  out  over  large  amounts.  Instead,  banks  and  insurance 
companies supply services to small companies and households. The banks act as intermediaries, who 
receive deposits that are liquid and convert them into long-term lending, so that savers' requirements 
can be reconciled with the needs of the investing company. 
The mediation of payments is perhaps the most difficult to understand function of the financial market. 
But bear in mind that less than 10 per cent of all payments in Sweden are made with banknotes and 
coins. The remainder are through giro payments in various systems for small, mass transactions and 
large  payments  between  banks  and  companies.  If  we  were  forced  to  use  banknotes  and  coins,  it 
would require a huge transport apparatus and considerable productive time to implement payments. 
New technology in this field is being developed all the time. Just consider charge cards and e-money, 
where payments is through book-keeping in different accounts, without any physical money being in 
circulation.  Millions  of  transactions  of  this  type  are  made  every  day  within  Sweden  and  across  our 
borders. 
Globalisation, the freedom to make financial transactions across national borders, creates conditions 
enabling the financial systems to become more efficient in all of their functions. The possibility to find 
high  yield  investments  increases,  the  possibility  to  spread  risks  increases  and  a  large  market  also 
increases liquidity. When the financing costs become lower, there will be more investors all around the 
world, while savers will be able to obtain greater return for a given risk. 
It is for these reasons that the PPM (Premium Pension Authority) and the AP funds (National Pension 
Funds) invest a large part of our pension money abroad. Because the Swedish institutions managing 
pension funds are  now able to invest money in foreign shares and bonds, there is less risk for our 
future  pensions.  We  will  become  less  dependent  on  Sweden  as  a  nation  being  economically 
successful as some of our pension money is invested in other countries' shares and bonds. However, 
it also makes us owners of very mobile capital,  which immediately flees a country facing economic 
difficulty. None of us would want the AP funds or PPM to invest their capital in Argentina, would we? 
Are poor countries negatively affected by globalisation? 
Globalisation with regard to movement of free capital must be regarded as different when it comes to 
less  developed  economies.  The  population  in  these  countries,  e.g.  in  South  East  Asia,  is  more 
vulnerable than others in well-developed welfare societies. 
Let us finally look at the events in South East Asia around 1997. Domestic banks lent money to long-
term projects, often with government guarantees, such as shopping centres, hotel complexes, airports, 
motorways,  etc.  Banks  and  companies  financed  themselves  by  taking  up  short-term  loans  in  the 
international capital markets, which had lower interest rates than the domestic markets. 
When the foreign investors became nervous at the possibility that those making the investments might 
not manage to pay the interest rates, they cancelled the short-term loans, the capital flowed out of the 
country  and  the  banks  suffered  a  crisis.  No  interest  rate  was  high  enough  to  attract  the  foreign 
investors  to  provide  new  loans.  The  foreign  currency  reserves  dried  up  and  exchange  rates  came 
under  pressure.  Devaluation  was 
the  only  way  out.  Bankruptcies,  bank  crises  and  mass 
unemployment were the result. 
The  large  majority  of  citizens,  who  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  errors  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  were 
made destitute because their small incomes and savings declined in value. Large parts of the growing 
middle class in the  worst  hit countries in South East Asia  were  wiped  out.  Conditional support  was 
often provided with tough requirements of economic policy restraint. A tight fiscal policy would create 
scope for financing restructuring in the banking sector. Stringent monetary policy would counteract an 
overly severe depreciation of the currency. This can be criticised with hindsight, as in South East Asia 
the countries often did not have problematic deficits in public finances or high inflation rates. The IMF 
has admitted since that the restraint was too great, as they did not realise the extent of the financial 
crisis. 
The  task  for  the  BIS,  the  IMF,  the  World  Bank  and  other  international  organisations  should  be  to 
continue the work on finding rules and methods, both to protect innocent people from ruination and to 
put the risk for bad investments on those making the investments. Work on this is underway in the 
organisations  I  mentioned  earlier.  It  involves  capital  adequacy  rules  for  banks,  but  also  reporting, 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2002
 auditing,  financial  supervision,  bankruptcy  legislation  and  transparency  in  conducting  monetary  and 
fiscal policy. The purpose of this is that those who have lent money will be forced to a greater extent 
than they are now to bear the costs of solving a crisis, in order to encourage them to show greater 
caution  when  making  investment  decisions.  However,  it  is  also  important  that  the  organisations 
mentioned counteract corruption and work actively to achieve an open democratic culture in the new 
countries taking part in the globalisation process. 
The recent globalisation debate has focused on a completely different issue, namely injustices in the 
distribution  of  income  around  the  world  and  many  believe  that  these  injustices  would  be  reduced  if 
financial operators were prevented from rapidly moving money to where it provides the highest return. 
Many people feel that multinational corporations all too casually move their production to the countries 
that can offer the lowest production costs and this has also come up for debate in Sweden, particularly 
when Swedish regions have been hard hit by factory closures. The problems mainly concern the trade 
exchange between rich and poor countries and direct investment by rich countries in poor countries. 
Swedish  history  can  also  provide  an  illustration  here.  It  has  been  calculated  that  the  Swedish 
productive capital stock was 50 per cent higher during 1870 and 1914, through the import of foreign 
capital,  than  it  would  have  been  without  this  capital  import.  Sweden's  industrialisation  was  thereby 
speeded up and welfare increased. 
A market economy is the form of economic activity that has proved superior to all other alternatives, 
such  as  a  planned  economy,  in  almost  all  situations. When  it  comes  to  small,  less  well-developed 
countries,  it  has  often  been  shown  that  the  countries  that  opened  themselves  up  to  competition, 
imports and exports have developed much better than the countries that tried import substitution, i.e. 
tried to build up industries for all their own needs. Economic research indicates that this is the case. 
South Korea, Singapore and now China are examples of more or less open economies that are seeing 
much better growth now, while India had poor growth for a long time, as it closed its borders. Other 
countries  that  have  closed  themselves  in,  such  as  Nigeria,  Ukraine  and  Pakistan,  are  suffering 
degrading poverty. Countries that were previously more open with a high standard of living can sink 
into crises and misery, as is the case with Argentina and Uruguay. 
Participating in international exchanges provides investment, access to new technology and spreads 
knowledge of business life and company management. When managed properly, poor countries that 
open  themselves  up  to  the  outside  world  can  achieve  more  rapid  growth  than  the  industrialised 
nations through what economists call "catching up". Sooner or later even the poorest are raised to a 
higher standard of living with a more even distribution within the country. One example of this type of 
development is parts of China, after the country began to turn outwards and liberalised its economy.  
Some conclusions 
Now  back  to  Lars  Göran's  question:  Does  globalisation  have  anything  to  do  with  the  closing  of  the 
ATM? Yes and no. 
In a dynamic economy with rapid growth, the production of goods and services is constantly changing. 
There is cost cutting, restructuring, closures, innovations and new production starting up all the time. 
When an ATM gives rise to more costs than it brings in income, it is closed down and bank services 
have to be handled in a different way, sometimes at higher costs to the customers, but always at lower 
costs to the bank. These are the conditions in a market economy. Globalisation speeds up the process 
by  increasing  competitive  pressure.  The  closing  down  of  the  ATM  may  occur  sooner  than  it  would 
have otherwise. But the tougher competitive pressure provides us with other services, e.g. we can sit 
at our desks at home and pay our bills via the Internet as well as making transfers between wages 
accounts and bank loans. And we can pay by card. The ATM becomes less important. Globalisation 
speeds up the process in the changes in production and consumption patterns in a competitive market 
economy. This probably cannot be avoided and if we are careful, it can be turned to our advantage, as 
has  been  demonstrated  in  recent  years.  And  we  Swedes  have  shown  that  we  can  quickly  adopt 
technological innovations, such as computers, mobile phones and IT. 
Let me finish with a few reflections. I have pointed out the advantages of free movement of capital, but 
also the instability that has followed in the footsteps of deregulation and the crises that have occurred 
since the early 1990s. The free movement of capital makes great demands on the countries' economic 
policy. If it turns out that the crises increase in number and become more profound, the demands for a 
return  to  regulation  will  strengthen.  There  are  already  demands  for  this,  which  are  put  forward  in 
various international forums. History shows that periods of liberalisation have been followed by periods 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 5
 of regulation. It is possible that the regulatory frameworks on which the international organisations are 
currently working will stabilise the foreign exchange markets, but it is also possible that some form of 
"Tobin tax" will win political support. The story isn't finished yet. 
 6 
 BIS Review 9/2002
