 Lars Heikensten: Democracy, markets and globalisation 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Church  of 
Sweden seminar “If the World Bank were directed by Jesus Christ...”, Rättvik, 3 January 2002. 
 First a word of thanks for inviting me to take part in this seminar. Accepting the invitation was an easy 
decision. An involvement in the poor countries and in setting up a functional economic order that can 
contribute to greater prosperity for everyone in the world is something I truly share with the rest of you 
here today. 
In the 1970s I travelled a good deal in what was then known as the Third World. One of the countries I 
visited was Peru, about which some friends and I also wrote a little book. Recently I re-visited Peru to 
discuss monetary policy and other matters with some Latin American colleagues. Three things struck 
me as being fairly typical for what has happened in the global economy in recent decades. 
One is that today the poor and rich countries are even more clearly interlinked. Back in 1975, Sweden 
and  Peru  had  little  in  common,  whereas  now  I  and  my  Latin  American  colleagues  could  share 
experiences of working with inflation targeting, as well as of banking and currency crises, aspects of 
economic policy that are as relevant for them as they are for us. We are being tied together more and 
more by trade, by emerging financial markets and, of course, by modern forms of communication. 
Secondly, in the past twenty-five years a great many people have become materially better off. Lima’s 
streets  and  shops  are  evidence  of  this.  Yet  Peru  is  not  one  of  the  developing  countries  that  have 
benefited  most  from  the  economic  developments  in  recent  decades.  On  the  contrary,  whereas  the 
developing  countries’  aggregate  GDP  has  grown  by  89  per  cent  since  1980,  the  figure  for  Peru  is 
60 per cent. Due to differences in population growth, moreover, the corresponding per capita figures 
are 35 and 10 per cent. 
Thirdly, despite all the improvements, many people are still living in poverty. Income gaps in Peru were 
glaringly large throughout the twentieth century and remain so today. In 1996 the income of the richest 
fifth  of  the  population  was  twelve  times  that  of  the  poorest  fifth.  Turning  now  to  the  developing 
countries as a group, in the past fifteen years the proportion of poor people has admittedly decreased 
but it is still the case that the favourable trend in recent decades has failed to benefit large numbers — 
even practically entire countries, particularly in Africa. 
To  me  it  is  a  healthy  sign  that  this  situation  is  raising  questions  about  how  the  global  economy 
functions. Personally, I do not think we should rest content with aiming for a general improvement in 
living conditions for everyone. Our sights should be raised instead to achieve an order whereby those 
who are worst off benefit more than others, so that gaps in the world are narrowed. 
Today I shall begin with some reflections about the concepts of democracy and market. I am prompted 
to do so in that those who arranged this seminar first asked me to speak about “a democratic world 
economic order”. Then  I shall concentrate  on some  of the  issues of a mainly  economic nature that 
have featured in the debate in recent years on globalisation. In doing so I will be drawing on some of 
my personal experience of economic cooperation. Then I shall sum up and draw some conclusions. 
Democracy and markets 
In my opinion there is no contradiction between democracy and markets. It is rather the case that they 
are  two  complementary  components  of  a  viable  social  system.  A  market  economy  is  the  form  for 
organising economic activities that in almost every situation has proved superior to other alternatives, 
such as a centrally planned economy. Democracy is seen today as the self-evident form for political 
decision-making. 
One of the points about a market economy is that it allows for decentralised decisions about economic 
matters  —  agents  can  conclude  agreements  that  are  mutually  beneficial.  Political  intervention  is 
normally  warranted  only  when  a  third  party  stands  to  lose.  However,  such  situations  are  relatively 
common,  for  instance  in  environmental  questions.  There  is  also  a  self-evident  need  for  political 
decisions  concerning  the  legal  system  and  other  matters  to  do  with  the  necessary  foundation  or 
infrastructure both of markets and of society in general. Finally, there is a place for political decisions 
BIS Review 2/2002 
 1
 when  it  comes  to  basic  welfare  issues  and  matters  to  do  with  the  distribution  of  the  assets  that 
economic activities generate. 
It is clearly essential that political decisions are reached in such a way that they reflect the interests of 
a majority. A democratic system presumably  provides the best assurance of this. But that does not 
mean  that  decision-making  by  political  assemblies  is  an  end  in  itself.  On  the  contrary,  a  prudent 
division of responsibilities between the political system and markets is essential. A great deal of the 
political debate is, in fact, about this dividing line between political and market decisions. Economists 
have quite a lot to say about this; they can elucidate the pros and cons of alternative solutions. But it is 
also a question of value judgements. Moreover, the political system needs to be sufficiently robust to 
stand  up  to  pressure  when  special  interest  groups  and  other  lobbyists  try  to  secure  preferential 
treatment,  not  to  mention  outright  corruption.  Another  important  matter  is  to  ensure  that  market 
systems work properly as regards competition. There are certainly problems in all these respects, not 
least in developing countries but by no means only there. 
The  problem  of  which  decisions  belong  to  the  government  sphere  as  opposed  to  markets  is  not 
confined to the nation state. At the international level there are also differences of opinion as to what 
should be left to individuals and nations to decide instead of being settled in joint political assemblies. 
The global level lacks overriding democratic structures that could help to establish common rules that 
are broadly supported. In the debate on the globalisation process there are also many who consider 
that the global market is not sufficiently ‘democratic’ and that ‘the struggle is about securing the shared 
values that transcend economism’. Another criticism is that the poor countries have too little say in the 
global markets. 
So what do we mean by ‘globalisation’? Pope John Paul has said that “globalisation is something that 
is present in every aspect of our lives”. Others see globalisation as the emergence of a common global 
culture,  perhaps  at  the  expense  of  national  and  local  cultures.  One  is  inclined  to  agree  with  His 
Holiness — globalisation is not a straightforward phenomenon that is easily explained. I would say that 
globalisation stands for the growing interdependence of individuals and countries that is resulting from 
the increasingly comprehensive exchange of everything from goods, services and capital to ideas and 
know-how.  Defined  like  that,  globalisation  is  not  something  anyone  would  want  to  abolish  but  a 
fundamentally positive process that contributes to an increasingly prosperous world, as well as to the 
democratisation of a great many countries. 
That there are problems cannot, however, be denied. They have to do, for instance, with the prevailing 
conditions for world trade and how the resultant gains are to be distributed. Another issue is the free 
movement of capital, which played an important part in the positive economic trend in the 1990s but 
has  also  contributed  to  a  situation  where  economic  unrest  spreads  more  quickly  from  country  to 
country and is sometimes a major ingredient of financial crises in developing countries. Then there is 
the question of how the international financial organisations have functioned and the problem of debt 
in certain poor countries. These are some of the issues I shall now discuss. 
The globalisation debate 
Trade is crucial 
The  first  issue  is  about  trade.  The  critics  argue  that  the  expansion  of  world  trade  to  include  more 
countries as well as additional goods and services leads to the poorest countries being marginalised 
—  developing  countries  are  unable  to  compete  with  the  wealthy  nations  in  this  process.  Some 
consider  it  would  be  better  for  the  poorest  countries  to  close  their  borders  and  build  up  their  own 
industries. They would then be in a stronger position when perhaps they are ultimately incorporated in 
the world economy. 
A  similar  policy  was  advocated  by  some  in  the  1960s  and  ’70s  and  it  was  implemented  in  various 
guises in many countries, for instance in Latin America. But the subsequent course of events provides 
strong  arguments  against  such  an  approach;  isolationism  has  not  been  a  good  way  of  generating 
prosperity.  On  the  contrary,  countries  that  have  staked  their  future  on  trade  and  international 
commitments have managed considerably better both in terms of growth and in combating poverty. 
There are many instances of this in Asia, for example. As is clear not least from Sweden’s own history, 
foreign  trade  is  more  or  less  essential  for  economic  development,  particularly  in  the  case  of  small 
countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2002
 In the past two decades world trade has expanded at an average annual rate of 6 per cent, which is 
twice the rate of global economic growth in this period. Outward-looking countries have tended to grow 
faster  than  those  which  have  been  more  introvert.  Countries  such  as  India,  Vietnam  and  Uganda, 
where the economy has been opened to the rest of the world and trade barriers have been reduced, 
have  been  able  to  combine  stronger  economic  growth  with  greater  success  in  overcoming  poverty. 
World Bank calculations indicate that the potential benefits from the elimination of all the existing trade 
barriers  amount  to  between  USD  250  billion  and  680  billion.  Approximately  two-thirds  of  the  total 
would  accrue  to  the  industrialised  countries  but  for  the  poor  countries  the  gains  would  be  twice  as 
large as all the assistance they are currently receiving. 
Neither  are  the  poor  countries’  difficulties  in  competing  with  the  industrialised  countries  the  primary 
problem. When borders are opened, companies tend to locate their activities where production costs 
are lowest; this frequently  means developing countries, which accordingly  get  additional jobs, rising 
production  and  increased  tax  revenues.  To  attract  investment  on  a  large  scale,  however,  it  is 
necessary  to  have  a  reasonably  effective  judiciary,  an  adequately  skilled  labour  force  and  other 
facilities; these are by no means always available and here it is the developing countries that need to 
act. It is on account of problems such as these that investment from the industrialised countries still 
goes  in  the  first  place  to  so-called  emerging  markets  and  to  only  a  minor  extent  to  the  poorest 
countries. The situation also calls for structural adjustments in the industrialised countries, a process 
that leads in turn to new job opportunities; these countries have to focus on new activities of a different 
kind that can carry higher wage costs, for example. 
This is the same in principle as what happened earlier in Sweden, for instance. We have moved from 
a  state  more  than  a  century  ago  when  nearly  everyone  worked  in  agriculture  to  one  where  first 
manufacturing  and  now  service  industries  have  taken  over  as  the  dominant  source  of  employment. 
This  is  the  process  that  has  doubled  our  material  prosperity  many  times  over.  But  it  has  not  been 
painless.  While  many  people  became  better  off,  the  need  for  adjustment  excluded  others  from 
production.  Countries  like  Sweden  can  now  afford  extensive  social  safety-nets  but  in  developing 
countries these are often absent. 
And although barriers to international trade have been greatly reduced in recent decades, there are 
still a good many obstacles in both industrialised and developing countries. They apply in particular to 
agriculture  and  labour-intensive  manufacturing,  that  is,  to  just  those  activities  where  the  poorest 
countries  have  advantages  over  the  industrialised  world.  The  European  Community  spends,  for 
example, EUR 2.7 billion annually to make sugar a profitable crop for its farmers at the expense of 
cheap sugar from developing countries. At the global level, agricultural subsidies, which according to 
IMF  estimates  are  currently  equivalent  to  over  two-thirds  of  Africa’s  total  GDP,  are  definitely  not 
helping to improve the situation for the poorest countries. 
So there are good grounds for believing that increased trade does benefit the world in general as well 
as the developing countries. In this respect the industrialised countries could do quite a lot to improve 
conditions for developing countries simply by reducing their barriers to trade in agricultural products, 
for instance. It is also the  case, however, that the gains from increased trade are not automatically 
distributed fairly. There  is scope here for the industrialised  world to take initiatives in the context of 
trade  negotiations.  More  can  also  be  done,  in  industrialised  as  well  as  developing  countries,  to 
facilitate adjustments and distribute the gains more equitably. On the whole, trade is a field where we 
know what ought to be done if only the political will were there. 
Pros and cons of capital flows 
Another  topical  issue  in  the  globalisation  debate  is  the  increasingly  large  and  rapid  cross-border 
capital  flows.  I  see  the  freer  movement  of  capital  as  basically  desirable.  It  has  given  developing 
countries  increased  borrowing  facilities  to  mitigate  acute  effects  of  other  economic  shocks,  be  they 
crop  failures  or  lower  prices  for  major  export  products.  The  process  has  also  led  to  increased 
investment in developing countries. At the same time, investors in industrialised countries have had 
new opportunities of diversifying risk and obtaining the higher return that may come from projects in 
developing  countries.  This  should  have  tended  to  improve  the  utilisation  of  capital  in  individual 
countries as well as in the world as a whole. Some observers argue, for example, that the efficient 
capital markets in the United States were a major factor behind the favourable economic trend there in 
the 1990s, a trend that also benefited developing countries. 
But this has not been a straight-forward matter. When the process was initiated, the effects that capital 
liberalisation  in  recent  decades  has  had  on  the  stability  of  both  national  and  global  capital  markets 
BIS Review 2/2002 
 3
 were clearly underestimated. There has now been a change in the international discussion. Much has 
been written about the ways in which deregulations were implemented, both in countries like Sweden 
and in developing countries. The process was sometimes too rapid, sometimes wrongly designed and 
often lacked a thorough assessment of the consequences. These lessons are now being taken into 
account in advice to countries that have not yet opened their markets. In the international discussion 
there  is  also  a  greater  understanding  of  temporary  restrictions  on  short-term  capital  movements, 
although  the  effects  of  taxing  short-term  capital,  as  Chile  has  done,  or  exchange  controls  must  be 
considered uncertain. 
Just as investment capital rapidly flows into a country when economic prospects are bright, so it has 
tended  to  be  rapidly  withdrawn  when  those  who  manage  the  funds  suspect  that  their  assets  are 
threatened  by  growing  economic  problems.  The  major  economic  crises  in  recent  years  provide 
examples of this, in Mexico, Asia, Russia, Brazil and, most recently, Turkey and Argentina. It is, for 
that  matter,  a  process  that  Sweden  experienced  in  the  early  1990s.  When  our  crisis  spread  from 
manufacturing  to  the  economy  as  a  whole,  real  interest  rates  shot  up  and  the  bank  crisis  loomed, 
foreign  investors  pulled  in  their  horns.  That  in  turn  added  to  the  difficulties  in  defending  the  fixed 
exchange rate and led to the krona’s fall. 
At the same time, the Swedish case exemplifies a couple of matters that are also relevant here. Our 
crisis was largely self-inflicted; with a more adequate economic policy in the 1980s, the flight of capital 
could have been avoided. And even though we have left the crisis behind us, it has not been forgotten, 
which  means  that  in  times  of  international  unrest,  Sweden  is  still  affected  to  a  greater  extent  than 
many  other  industrialised  countries.  Another  conclusion  from  the  Swedish  case  is  that  international 
reactions  are  not  necessarily  a  bad  thing;  they  can  be  just  what  is  needed  to  overcome  a  political 
deadlock  and  pave  the  way  for  necessary  changes.  When  foreign  creditors  turned  down  Swedish 
banks,  we  were  forced  to  take  resolute  measures  to  resolve  the  bank  crisis.  This  has  not  yet 
happened in Japan, presumably in part because there is not the same dependence on foreign capital; 
the crisis in Japan has therefore been more protracted and costly. 
A tax on currency transactions (a so-called Tobin tax) has been proposed in the globalisation debate 
as a way  of curbing capital movements and reducing the risk of international financial crises. A tax 
would restrain these flows; its effect would depend on the size of the levy. It is by no means certain, 
however, that it would be just the more speculative flows that are checked; it could equally well be the 
more  stabilising  regular  currency  flows.  There  is,  in  fact,  little  indication  —  either  in  theory  or  in 
experience from earlier centuries — that an economy with sand in its wheels works better than one 
that is well-oiled. 
Just  rejecting  a  Tobin  tax  won’t  do,  however,  at  least  not  if  one  considers,  as  I  do,  that, 
notwithstanding  the  problems,  free  capital  movements  are  good  for  the  global  economy.  Other 
methods must be found to reduce conceivable negative effects. Much is being done in this respect in 
various international fora where I represent the Riksbank. Under the auspices of the IMF and the Bank 
for International Settlements, work is in progress on drafting rules and principles for the operations of 
financial  institutions.  It  is  dealing  with  such  tangible  matters  as  accounting,  increased  transparency 
and,  not  least,  principles  for  managing  risks.  It  is  hoped  that  more  uniform  rules  and  greater 
transparency  in  accounting,  capital  adequacy  and  credit  assessments,  will  improve  financial  market 
conditions and ultimately lower the risk of financial crises. In addition, countries must be alert in the 
general conduct of economic policy so that lending to them is not considered to be unduly risky. Other 
important matters include a sound banking system and effective supervision of the financial sector. In 
Sweden, the events in the early 1990s have led, for instance, to the regular publication of a so-called 
Stability Report on the situation in the financial sector. This has been followed by many similar reports 
at the international  level; the IMF, for example, now  presents regular assessments, so far for more 
than forty countries. 
Before  leaving  the  issue  of  free  capital  movements,  I  want  to  note  that  compared  with  the  earlier 
question of trade, the problems here are not primarily political. As I see it, there is a strong will to do 
something about financial market instability and much work has been done internationally to mitigate 
the risks. At the same time, it is difficult to see how the risks could be eliminated entirely without this 
leading to serious disturbances in and high costs for the world economy. 
Country crisis programmes and IMF stipulations 
A third topic in the ongoing globalisation debate is the role of the international financial institutions, not 
least in the management of financial crises in recent years. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2002
 been criticised in particular from both the left and the right of the political spectrum. On the one hand 
the IMF has been accused of pumping in too much money in the form of massive support for countries 
with  a  medium  income  level  and  thereby  disrupting  the  market’s  normal  credit  assessments  by 
protecting  private  creditors  from  losses.  On  the  other  hand,  the  measures  required  of  individual 
countries have been said to be inappropriate and unduly harsh, leading to negative economic, social 
and political effects. 
During the past decade the IMF has provided support for countries with payment difficulties. This has 
amounted in practice to guaranteeing short loans in particular so that the country in question did not 
have to engage  in onerous renegotiations  with creditors and perhaps ultimately suspend payments, 
with serious potential consequences for its economy and standards of living. It is debatable whether 
this  approach  is  sustainable  in  the  longer  run,  although  in  each  case  acceptable  alternatives  have 
been  hard  to  find  at  the  time  of  the  crisis.  One  consequence,  of  course,  is  that  for  such  countries 
borrowing has been ‘cheaper’ than would otherwise have been the case. International banks and other 
creditors could make do with less compensation than if they had had to reckon with taking the losses 
in  full.  The  support  programmes  have  accordingly  accentuated  the  problems  associated  with  the 
growing flows of volatile capital. Neither has the corresponding support been provided in practice for 
more  long-term  direct  investment,  which  presumably  would  be  at  least  as  valuable  for  developing 
countries in that such investments primarily depend on domestic economic development in the longer 
run. 
This policy has in fact been questioned all the time. It has been maintained on account of an interest in 
avoiding  failures  that  would  be  costly  both  socially  and  politically.  Moreover,  the  provision  of 
government funds has been frequently advocated by strong private interests in the major industrialised 
countries, particularly the United States. It should also be underscored that problems of this kind do 
not  have  self-evident  solutions.  A  way  out  in  some  cases  has  been  for  private  creditors,  with 
government encouragement, to agree voluntarily to prolong their loans. One difficulty here is that the 
discussions with private creditors have to be initiated by the country that is in a crisis. In practice, the 
countries  in  question  have  been  reluctant  to  take  measures  that  might  harm  their  future  access  to 
international  capital  markets.  An  international  bankruptcy  procedure,  which  should  have  been 
instituted long ago, is now being officially discussed again in the IMF. Such a system would probably 
help to make the management of acute financial crises more predictable. 
Another subject for criticism has been the conditions attached to the loan programmes. This was the 
case  not  least  in  connection  with  the  Asian  crisis,  when  critics  considered  that  the  IMF’s  economic 
policy  stipulations  were  inappropriate  and  unduly  harsh,  being  more  likely  to  lessen  instead  of 
enhance  the  chances  of  a  recovery.  Once  again,  we  can  refer  to  Sweden’s  problems  in  the  early 
1990s. When the fixed exchange rate had finally been abandoned in 1992, many argued that interest 
rates ought to be lowered both more quickly and further than was actually the case. I was one of them 
because I believed this was needed both for a quick end to the economic decline and to facilitate the 
consolidation of the government finances. In addition, it ought to aid a faster recovery in the banking 
sector. Others, including the Riksbank at that time, preferred a more cautious path in the hope that this 
would prevent a further weakening of the krona. Striking the right balance in these respects is difficult 
and even with hindsight we cannot be sure who was right. 
The  problems  in  Asia  were  similar. Would  it  have  been  more  appropriate  to  lower  interest  rates  in 
order to avoid the failure of companies with loans in the domestic currency  and the collapse of the 
banking  system,  or  to  stimulate  demand  to  a  greater  extent  so  as  to  keep  the  economy  going?  Or 
were high interest rates on the contrary needed to prevent the flight of necessary capital, a weakening 
of the exchange rate and the failure of companies with foreign-currency debt? Or was it perhaps the 
case that the high interest rates led investors to expect additional business failures and social unrest, 
so  that  they  withdrew  their  capital  for  precisely  this  reason?  As  we  do  not  know  what  a  different 
direction  of  policy  would  have  led  to,  even  today  we  cannot  tell  what  would  have  been  most 
appropriate. But we do know that the tight nature of many of the programmes was eased as time went 
by, partly as the crisis became less acute and the shortage of foreign currency less troublesome. 
Another question concerns the structural changes and reforms that were required in connection with 
some  programmes.  Such  conditions  may  be  justified  as  regards  the  banking  sector  or  bankruptcy 
proceedings,  for  example,  as  these  are  often  clearly  a  part  of  the  problems.  They  are  more 
questionable,  however,  when  they  concern  components  of  the  economy  that  are  not  self-evidently 
connected  with  the  current  stabilisation  problems.  There  were  elements  of  this  in,  for  example,  the 
programme for Korea,  which stipulated measures for the  liberalisation of imports. Such matters are 
BIS Review 2/2002 
 5
 liable to discredit the IMF, besides leading to the IMF’s proposals encountering more opposition than 
otherwise in the borrower countries. 
Before turning to the next issue — the problem of the poor countries’ large debts — let me summarise 
the discussion about the IMF, its lending operations and requirements. In my opinion, the criticism of 
the  massive  loans  contains  several  grains  of  truth.  Solutions  are  admittedly  difficult  to  find  when 
problems have already accumulated but a considerably stricter position at an earlier stage, together 
with greater transparency about the actual situation, could have resulted in a better policy. I am more 
hesitant about the criticism of conditions imposed on particular countries. There have certainly been 
mistakes  —  policy  has,  for  instance,  been  constructed  all  too  frequently  on  the  premise  of  a  fixed 
exchange rate — but even retrospectively, the answers are seldom as obvious as they are said to be. 
Macroeconomic policy in a crisis is almost always a question of arriving at the right balance between 
different alternatives. 
Poor-country debt 
A fourth area of problems in the debate on globalisation concerns the debts of the poorest countries. 
This is something that has not least engaged representatives of the Church, for instance in the context 
of  the  Jubilee  2000  campaign.  It  has  been  argued  that  the  international  community  is  not  doing 
enough to tackle the debt problems of poor countries. 
I  agree  that  the  debt  situation  in  many  developing  countries  can  hamper  economic  development, 
although  a  majority  of  the  poorest  countries  also  face  problems  of  a  more  fundamental  nature,  for 
instance as regards internal institutional conditions. In any event, it is important to work for a level of 
debt that is more sustainable, particularly in the poorer countries. Much has in fact been done in this 
respect.  The  IMF’s  and  the  World  Bank’s  joint  initiative  for  debt  relief  for  the  poorest  and  most 
indebted countries1 was launched in 1996. In contrast to earlier efforts here, this initiative assembled 
all a country’s creditors, including the international financial institutions, to provide debt relief. The aim 
was to reduce the debts of poor and heavily indebted countries to sustainable levels and combine this 
with better conditions for increased growth. In 1998  it  was decided to increase and accelerate debt 
relief in the context of the initiative. To a large extent this decision was a result of representations by 
church and other non-government organisations. 
To date, 24 countries have been promised debt relief equivalent to a total of over USD 20 billion at 
current  values.  Debt  relief  for  the  countries  included  in  the  initiative  is  calculated  to  cost  a  total  of 
USD 33  billion.  It  is  envisaged  that  the  funds  which  debt  relief  makes  available  in  the  countries 
concerned will be used in the first place for increased efforts to combat poverty. 
Why, it may be asked, do we not write off all the debts of the poorest countries? The amounts involved 
may  seem  relatively  small  for  the  international  community  as  a  whole  but  that  is  not  the  case  in 
relation  to  the  resources  that  are  currently  available.  A  total  write-off  would  use  up  all  of  the  IMF’s 
resources  for  soft  loans,  accompanied  by  similar  effects  for  other  relevant  institutions.  That  would 
leave nothing for future IMF soft loans to other poor member countries. Would that be a reasonable 
policy?  Is  it  just  those  countries  with  the  largest  burden  of  debt  that  deserve  most  support?  Put 
differently, given a certain amount of resources for combating poverty, would one concentrate them to 
just the most heavily indebted countries? I don’t think so. Then there is the problem that if the criterion 
for  obtaining  help  is  an  earlier  accumulation  of  large  debts,  what  would  this  signify  to  potential 
borrowers in general? 
Here, too, it is thus a question of striking a difficult balance. It should be possible to waive debt, which 
is  sometimes  a  major  obstacle  to  development.  But  this  must  be  done  in  ways  that  underpin  a 
country’s ability both to generate growth on its own and to combat poverty. Moreover, the assistance 
must be acceptable to taxpayers in the donor countries, which in view of the nature of the regimes in 
some debtor countries, is not always easy. When all is said and done, poor-country debt cannot be 
waived unless people in rich countries are prepared to give up something in turn. It is only we — not 
some international organisations — that can transfer resources to the poor countries. 
                                                      
1  The Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative. 
6 
 BIS Review 2/2002
 Conclusion 
A  crucial  aspect  of  globalisation  is  unquestionably  our  increased  interdependence.  This  has  been 
largely beneficial in terms of increased prosperity, more widespread democracy and so on. But it has 
also had negative consequences, ranging from environmental destruction across national borders to 
higher  interest  rates  and  currency  crises  generated  by  circumstances  in  some  distant  region.  The 
management of such problems calls for increased international cooperation. For Sweden today this 
amounts in practice to collaborating to a growing extent with our European colleagues and then acting 
with greater weight in the  global arena. We can also learn more and more from the experiences of 
others, as was in fact the direct purpose of my stay in Peru. 
Whereas the number of people in absolute poverty (living on less than a dollar a day) rose up to the 
early  1980s,  in  the  past  two  decades  the  number  has  decreased.  Moreover,  life  expectancy  in 
developing countries has lengthened from 40 years in 1950 to 65 years in 1995. Another example is 
literacy,  which  increased in this  period from 40 to 70 per cent. However, the  positive trend has not 
spread to all parts of the world. Poverty is still widespread in countries such as Peru. But this does not 
have all that much to do with globalisation as such. It is essentially bound up with internal conditions, 
for example various power relationships, corruption, a lack of education, harsh climatic conditions and 
other  obstacles  to  development.  So  providing  money  is  not  enough.  Political  as  well  as  economic 
reforms are also needed. 
The  most  important  step  the  rich  countries  can  take  is  to  open  their  markets  to  imports  from 
developing  countries.  Let  me  take  a  topical  example.  Additional  support  for  Argentina  has  been 
discussed in recent weeks, in reality to support banks in industrialised countries, among other things. 
How much better would it not be, both for them and for us, if instead we opened our borders for their 
exports of beef and other products on reasonable terms? In addition, there are sound reasons both for 
debt relief and for greatly increased assistance, particularly for the poorer developing countries. These 
measures should, however, be accompanied by demands for reforms. A reasonable ambition is that 
all industrialised countries at least achieve the assistance target of 0.7 per cent of GNI. 
I  mentioned  initially  that  aiming  for  the  poor  people  in  the  world  to  share  in  our  rising  material 
prosperity is not enough. As I see it, the criticism of globalisation should be met with a policy that aims 
to narrow the economic gaps. More open trade and increased assistance, together with political and 
economic reforms in the developing countries, can contribute to this. 
BIS Review 2/2002 
 7
