 T T Mboweni: Recent financial and economic developments in South Africa 
Speech  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  eighty-second 
ordinary general meeting of shareholders, 27 August 2002. 
 Introduction 
The South African Reserve Bank was again confronted by many challenges during the past year. I am, 
however, glad to say that, as on previous occasions, the Bank coped well. Although some ground was 
lost in containing inflation owing to the exogenous shocks that affected the economy, remedial action 
has been taken to bring the inflation rate down towards the targeted levels. A period of consolidation in 
the banking sector was handled in an effective manner so as to ensure continued domestic financial 
stability. Attention was given to the regulatory structure of the banking sector to continue protecting the 
funds of depositors and to ensure that the intermediation of savings runs smoothly. The efficiency and 
effectiveness of internal administrative procedures were improved further and considerable progress 
was made with transforming the composition of the Bank’s staff to better reflect the demographics of 
the country. 
Recent economic developments 
The  South  African  economy  also  did  well  in  a  rapidly  changing  political  and  economic  world.  A 
comprehensive review of recent economic developments in South Africa is contained in the Reserve 
Bank’s Annual Economic Report, which was released this morning. In my address I therefore wish to 
highlight only the following developments: 
South Africa, like most other emerging-market economies, was affected considerably by the attacks on 
the United States of America in September 2001, the uncertainties that this created politically as well 
as in the business world, the continued relatively high levels of oil prices and the strong downturn in 
world economic activity. The resulting decline in the volume of our exports in the second half of 2001 
affected  domestic  economic  growth.  In  addition,  greater  risk  aversion  to  investment  in  developing 
countries had a marked impact on capital flows to South Africa. In response to the weakness in world 
economic activity, monetary policy in most countries became more accommodative and interest rates 
were  brought  down  significantly.  In  some  countries,  fiscal  measures  were  also  taken  to  stimulate 
activity. These measures now seem to be bearing fruit and a world economic recovery should be of 
significant benefit to South Africa. 
The most important effect of world political and economic developments on South Africa was that they 
contributed materially to the volatility in the external value of the rand during the past year. After the 
value of the rand had been relatively stable in the first six months of 2001, it depreciated steeply in the 
second half of the  year.  As a result, the nominal  effective exchange rate of the rand decreased  by 
about 34 per cent in the second half of the year. Towards the end of 2001 the external value of the 
rand began to recover and the weighted exchange rate recouped about 20 per cent of its losses up to 
the end of May 2002.  
In the following two months the rand fluctuated around this new level but, on balance, declined by just 
more  than  7  per  cent.  This  brought  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  back  to  about 
27 per cent below its level at the beginning of 2001. 
A  number  of  factors  contributed  to  the  depreciation  in  the  value  of  the  rand  during  2001.  These 
included a weak export performance and a strong increase in imports and dividend payments to non-
residents. The resultant deficit on the current account of the balance of payments was accompanied 
by a net outflow of portfolio capital. This outflow stemmed from the perceived higher risk of investing in 
emerging-market  economies,  the  problems  experienced  in  Argentina  and  later  Brazil,  instability  in 
Zimbabwe,  and  unfounded  expectations  of  imminent  exchange-control  relaxations  in  South  Africa. 
Eventually, international investors began to regard the external value of the rand as a one-way bet, 
exporters  delayed  repatriating  their  foreign-earned  currency  and  importers  switched  financing  from 
foreign to domestic sources. In other words, there was a typical speculative bandwagon effect. 
After the authorities had reminded the market about the sound economic fundamentals in South Africa 
in a statement on 20 December 2001,  and  it  became clear  that the exchange  rate of the rand had 
BIS Review 53/2002 
 1
 over-reacted,  this  whole  process  was  reversed.  Exporters  stopped  delaying  the  transfer  of  their 
proceeds, importers shifted back to foreign financing for purchases and international investors were 
again willing to invest large sums in domestic shares and bonds. International conditions calmed down 
somewhat and the world economy began to recover. At the same time the current account of South 
Africa’s balance of payments moved into surplus, mainly owing to a decline in dividend payments to 
the rest of the world and a rise in exports. 
The depreciated external value of the rand has undoubtedly strengthened the price competitiveness of 
domestic  producers  and  could  lead  to  a  strong  export  performance.  Substituting  domestically 
produced  goods  for  imported  goods  should  further  promote  economic  growth.  The  South  African 
economy also proved to be quite resilient to the world economic slowdown in the period under review. 
Despite a synchronised decline in the growth of most of our major trading partners, the growth rate in 
real gross domestic product only declined moderately from 3,4 per cent in 2000 to 2,2 per cent in 2001 
and 2,3 per cent in the first half of 2002. 
The positive production growth in generally depressed world economic conditions could be attributed 
to  continued  strong  domestic  demand  for  goods  and  services.  Final  consumption  expenditure  by 
households  and  general  government  contributed  to  the  pick-up  in  spending,  but  the  largest 
contribution came from investment, especially fixed investment by the private sector. After declining in 
the second half of 2001, the volume of exports also began to rise in the first half of 2002. 
As  could  be  expected  with  the  strong  domestic  final  demand  for  goods  and  services,  the  saving 
performance  of  the  South  African  economy  remained  at  a  low  level.  In  the  past  five  years,  gross 
saving as a ratio of gross domestic product has continued to fluctuate between about 15 and 16 per 
cent,  which  is  too  low  to  finance  the  growth  performance  the  country  needs  for  creating  enough 
employment  opportunities.  The  consistently  low  saving  ratio  has  persisted  despite  a  substantial 
improvement  in  government  saving.  After  being  a  large  dissaver  a  few  years  ago,  government  has 
made  a  positive  contribution  to  saving  since  2001.  Corporate  saving,  which  still  represents  the 
mainstay  of  the  domestic  saving  effort,  has  weakened  considerably  over  the  past  five  years,  while 
household saving remained at low levels. 
The  steady  growth  performance  in  South  Africa  was  accompanied  by  substantially  higher  labour 
productivity. The real  output per  worker in the  non-agricultural sectors had  increased  by  only  about 
1 per  cent  per  year  in  the  period  from  1985  to  1995,  but  rose  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  nearly 
41/2 per cent from 1995 to the first half of 2002. Higher labour productivity was the combined result of 
an  increase  in  output  and  a  reduction  in  formal-sector  employment.  Producers  preferred  to  employ 
capital rather than labour. Economising on the utilisation of labour resources was in part the result of a 
decline in the user cost of capital. But it was also brought about by factors such as a declining gold 
price  and  the  opening  up  of  the  economy  to  international  competition,  which  made  the  use  of 
cost-saving production methods more urgent. 
Concerted efforts by government to reduce the public-sector deficit contributed further to a decline in 
formal non-agricultural employment. More than one million employment opportunities have therefore 
been lost since the peak of the employment cycle in 1989. Employment growth has occurred largely in 
the informal sectors of the economy and in other forms of self-employment. Unemployment in South 
Africa  nevertheless  remains  a  major  problem,  with  nearly  30  per  cent  of  the  economically  active 
population out of work. 
On the monetary front, the broadly defined money supply grew vigorously during 2001 and the first 
half of 2002, and reached a year-on-year level of 18,1 per cent in June 2002. Most of this growth was 
in  the  form  of  increased  short  and  medium-term  deposits  by  corporates.  This  could  imply  that 
companies are uncertain about the outlook for the economy and that investors are restructuring their 
portfolios. It may, however, also be an indication that depositors are positioning themselves for future 
spending. The risk for monetary policy is that in the long run, there is a close correlation between the 
rates of increase in the money supply and the general level of prices. 
The growth in total bank credit extension measured over twelve months moved into the double-digit 
range towards the end of 2001, but slowed down again to 9,6 per cent in June 2002, compared with 
6,9 per cent in June 2001. This increase occurred mainly in the demand of the private sector for funds 
and arose largely from increases in trade finance, mortgage borrowing by households, instalment sale 
credit and leasing financing. 
In the financial markets the private corporate bond market expanded significantly in the past year as 
the government financed most of its borrowing requirements on international capital markets. From the 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2002
 beginning of 2002, part of the companies’ needs for capital was financed in the primary share market 
when the prices of shares improved considerably. New record turnover levels in the secondary bond 
and share markets were attained in the year ended June 2002. The decline that has been discernible 
in  bond  yields  from  the  second  half  of  1998  was  related  to  a  dwindling  supply  of  public-sector 
fixed-interest securities and lower inflation expectations that came to an abrupt end in the last quarter 
of 2001. The depreciation of the rand and resulting inflation fears drove bond yields sharply higher, but 
the mood in the bond market seems to have turned more positive from the beginning of April 2002. 
Monetary policy continued to be supported by fiscal policy in securing financial stability. In the fiscal 
year 2001/02 the public-sector borrowing requirement amounted to only 0,6 per cent of gross domestic 
product. In fiscal 1996/97 it had still been as high as 5,6 per cent. This substantial improvement in the 
finances  of  the  fiscus  was  achieved  by  more  efficient  tax  collection  methods  and  disciplined 
expenditure programmes. As a result, the rise in public debt relative to gross domestic product was 
stopped  and  the  interest  burden  of  government  eased  considerably.  This  afforded  government  the 
opportunity to grant significant tax relief and to expand infrastructural development. 
Monetary policy 
After pursuing a relatively neutral monetary policy stance during 2000 and the first half of 2001, the 
Reserve Bank relaxed monetary policy from the middle of 2001. The neutral monetary policy stance 
was  maintained  in  a  period  of  low  expected  future  rates  of  inflation  and  a  slowdown  in  economic 
activity.  However,  the  twelve-month  growth  rate  in  the  consumer  price  index  excluding  mortgage 
interest cost (CPIX) continued to rise steadily from 6,5 per cent in October  1999 to 8,1  per cent  in 
September 2000. This rise in consumer prices was largely related to international developments, such 
as rising oil prices, general upward pressure on international commodity prices and a depreciation in 
the external value of the rand. 
Although  these  exogenous  factors  became  a  threat  to  monetary  stability,  most  domestic  factors 
remained  positive  for  the  containment  of  inflation.  Greater  stability  in  domestic  interest  rates  also 
seemed warranted to counter the heightened volatility in many financial markets. 
This policy stance was highly effective as there were few signs of the secondary effects of the weaker 
currency.  In  fact,  inflationary  expectations  declined,  nominal  unit  labour  cost  increased  only 
moderately and growth in the money supply slowed down. Internationally the oil price declined, world 
economic  activity  began  to  slow  down  and  interest  rates  were  reduced  aggressively.  The 
twelve-month growth rate of the CPIX was turned around and declined to 6,5 per cent in May 2001 
and to 5,8 per cent in September. 
Taking  all  these  developments  into  consideration,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  decided  to  relax 
monetary policy. The repurchase rate was first reduced by 100 basis points on 15 June 2001 and by a 
further 50 basis points on 20 September 2001. This brought the repurchase rate down to a level of 
9,5 per cent, compared with its peak of 21,85 per cent in early October 1998. However, towards the 
end of 2001 it became clear that the favourable environment for inflation had changed. 
Subsequently, two important develop-ments led the Reserve Bank to reconsider its monetary policy 
stance. Firstly, the inflation targets for the three years after 2002 were announced by the Minister of 
Finance. The target for 2003 was kept unchanged at an annual average rate of increase in the CPIX 
of between 3 and 6 per cent, but this range was lowered to an average of 3 to 5 per cent for the next 
two years. This clearly reflected government’s commitment to the adjustment of policies to bring the 
inflation rate down to lower levels. 
Secondly, the external value of the rand began to depreciate sharply in September. The pass-through 
from the depreciated exchange rate to  inflation had  been surprisingly muted in 2000, but the sharp 
downward  movement  of  the  rand  in  the  last  quarter  of  2001  inevitably  had  a  significant  impact  on 
inflation.  Before  this  change  the  challenge  to  monetary  policy  had  been  how  to  deal  with  external 
shocks that had not been putting undue pressure on domestic inflation. The new challenges were how 
to  deal  with  external  shocks  that  were  now  beginning  to  have  a  significant  impact  on  current  and 
expected inflation, and to avoid an inflation spiral. 
Inflationary pressures began to pick up during the last quarter of 2001. Food prices were initially the 
main factor contributing to the acceleration in inflation. These food price increases were partly related 
to the depreciated value of the rand as domestic prices approximated those determined internationally 
since  the  deregulation  of  agriculture.  In  particular,  maize  prices  were  significantly  affected  by  the 
BIS Review 53/2002 
 3
 depreciation in the value of the rand. The maize price has wide economic significance in South Africa. 
White maize is a staple food for many South Africans and 90 per cent of yellow maize is used as feed 
in the meat, dairy,  poultry  and  egg industries.  Apart from the depreciation  of the value  of the rand, 
supply and demand factors also contributed to the more than doubling of the spot prices of both white 
and yellow maize between June 2001 and January 2002. 
Later the increase in consumer prices became more broadly based, in line with the sharp depreciation 
of the currency. Rising expectations of price increases became an important factor in the inflationary 
process, as was clearly reflected by the  pre-emptive buying of durable goods  by households in the 
fourth quarter of 2001. 
As the depreciated rand pushed prices higher, the twelve-month rate of increase in the CPIX started 
moving upwards from the psychologically important level of below 6 per cent in September 2001 to 
9,9 per  cent  in  July  2002.  The  quarter-to-quarter  rate  of  increase  in  CPIX  inflation  was  even  more 
pronounced,  rising  from  a  seasonally  adjusted  and  annualised  level  of  6,8  per  cent  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2001 to 11,6 per cent in the first quarter of 2002 and 12,1 per cent in the second quarter. 
The  twelve-month  rate  of  increase  in  the  all-goods  production  price  index  accelerated  from  7,8  per 
cent in September 2001 to the even more alarming level of 14,4 per cent in June 2002. 
These developments soon indicated that the inflation target for 2002 could be in jeopardy. Moreover, 
given the lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its impact on inflation, estimated at 
between 12 to 24 months, there was very little that monetary policy could do to rectify this. However, 
the  Bank  remains  committed  to  the  objective  of  price  stability  and  policy  became  focused  on  the 
targets for 2003 and 2004. 
The  first  response  of  the  Bank  to  the  rising  inflationary  pressures  was  to  convene  an  unscheduled 
meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee early in January 2002. Although the exact feed-through of 
the depreciated value of the rand to inflation was still unclear at that stage, a number of developments 
indicated  that  it  might  be  prudent  to  adopt  a  more  restrictive  monetary  policy  stance.  These 
developments included a reversal of the downward trend in oil prices, indications that higher inflation 
expectations were becoming entrenched, higher wage demands, a more rapid rate of increase in unit 
labour  cost  and  large  increases  in  money  supply  and  bank  credit  extension.  In  view  of  these 
developments  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  decided  to  raise  the  repurchase  rate  by  100  basis 
points in order to prevent an inflation spiral. 
Monetary  policy  was  tightened  further  at  the  March  and  June  meetings  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee. In both cases the repurchase rate was increased by 100 basis points, bringing the rate to 
12,5 per cent on 14 June 2002. By March it was clear that inflation expectations had been adversely 
affected by the depreciation of the rand. In addition there was concern about the continued high rate of 
growth of money-supply aggregates and bank credit extension, the state of the balance of payments 
and the rising trend in unit labour cost. It was argued that a tighter monetary policy at that stage could 
avoid more drastic interest rate increases in future if the stricter stance was successful in dampening 
inflationary pressures. 
By June, it was apparent that the upward trends of inflation and inflation expectations had maintained 
their  momentum,  and  that  growth  in  unit  labour  cost  and  money  supply  developments  remained 
unfavourable. The Monetary Policy Committee, however, also identified some positive developments 
that could reduce the pressure on inflation. These developments included the partial recovery of the 
rand,  the  appearance  of  a  surplus  on  both  the  current  and  financial  accounts  of  the  balance  of 
payments, the continued low level of capacity utilisation and the maintenance of fiscal discipline. 
The latest forecasts of the Bank show that, given this tightened stance of monetary policy and barring 
any  unforeseen  negative  shocks,  the  inflation  target  for  2003  could  be  met.  However,  the  average 
annual rate of increase in the CPIX will probably be close to the upper end of the target range and the 
risks to the forecast are on the upside. As such, it seems unlikely that monetary policy will be relaxed 
in the foreseeable future. 
Although the current stance of monetary policy may be perceived as negative for short-term growth 
and employment creation, such a view must be compared with the alternative of even higher future 
interest rate levels, if inflation is not brought under control. Furthermore, the tax concessions granted 
in the last budget should benefit consumption, and the significant depreciation in the external value of 
the rand should promote production, particularly of exported goods. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2002
 Exchange rate policy 
As outlined earlier, the external value of the rand came under severe pressure during the second half 
of 2001. The currency then stabilised in early 2002 and strengthened slowly but consistently until the 
end of May. Since the beginning of June the exchange rate of the rand has fluctuated widely around 
its newly established levels. 
The rand has continued to be negatively affected by developments in emerging markets, and events in 
2002 in Argentina and Brazil, for example, could hamper the short-term outlook for the rand. For this 
reason  the  Reserve  Bank  strongly  supports  the  government’s  policy  that  the  remaining  exchange 
control regulations should be very gradually relaxed. 
Despite the relatively volatile movements in the exchange rate of the rand and even when it became 
apparent that the depreciation of the rand towards the end of 2001 was based largely on speculative 
transactions  unrelated  to  underlying  conditions,  the  thrust  of  exchange  rate  policy  remained 
unchanged.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  is  therefore  essentially  determined  by  the  supply  and 
demand conditions in the market for foreign exchange. 
At the same time, it remains a stated objective of the Bank to gradually close down the net oversold 
open foreign reserve position. The existence of this net oversold open position has been perceived as 
a source of weakness for the rand, and has contributed to negative sentiment towards the currency. 
However, it is also recognised that if the net open foreign reserve position is reduced too quickly, it 
could contribute to rand weakness. The Bank therefore announced in a statement on 14 October 2001 
that  we  would  in  future  not  intervene  by  purchasing  foreign  exchange  directly  from  the  market  to 
reduce this position. The net open foreign reserve position would instead be expunged from the cash 
flows derived from the proceeds of privatisation and the government’s off-shore borrowing. This does 
not imply that all the proceeds from these sources will always be used to achieve this objective. For 
example, part of the proceeds from the sale of Transnet’s interest in M-Cell was not used to reduce 
the Bank’s open position. 
In  accordance  with  this  objective,  the  Bank  reduced  the  net  open  foreign  reserve  position  from 
US$23,2  billion  at  the  end  of  September  1998  to  US$11,5  billion  at  the  end  of  January  2000,  i.e. 
during a period of overall strength in the balance of payments. When the overall balance of payments 
then began to deteriorate, the open position was brought down far more slowly to US$9,0 billion at the 
end of April 2001. The net open position was reduced to US$4,8 billion at the end of July 2001 with 
the  proceeds  obtained  from  the  restructuring  of  the  Anglo  American  Corporation  and  the  De  Beers 
mining company, and from foreign borrowing by government. 
The net open foreign reserve position was reduced further to US$1,8 billion at the end of July 2002 
following the stated approach that the Bank adopted in October 2001. This reduction was basically the 
result of three major sources, namely the transfer of a syndicated loan liability of US$1,5 billion from 
the  Reserve  Bank  to  the  National  Treasury;  the  reopening  of  an  existing  dollar  bond  by  the  South 
African government which raised US$274 million for delivery against the oversold forward book; and 
the issuing of a new US$1 billion bond by the National Treasury for delivery against the forward book. 
While the Bank remains committed to eliminating the net open foreign reserve position, at its current 
level of US$1,8 billion this position should no longer be perceived as a source of vulnerability. 
Financial stability 
International developments also affected domestic financial stability during the past year. The attacks 
on  the  United  States  of  America  on  11  September  2001  illustrated  an  enormous  systemic  risk  to 
financial  systems  worldwide  as  well  as  the  key  role  that  central  banks  must  play  in  such 
circumstances. The increase in the international linkages among financial institutions adds to the risk 
in  such  events.  The  weakening  position  of  Japanese  banks  also  continues  to  be  a  source  of 
vulnerability  for  inter-national  financial  markets.  Furthermore,  corporate  governance  standards  and 
structures,  as  well  as  the  credibility  of  the  accounting  profession,  are  being  questioned  after 
revelations  about  the  corruption  in  and  resultant  failure  of  a  number  of  large  and  well-known 
corporations  in  the  United  States  of  America.  The  corporate  failures  in  the  United  States  have 
impacted  significantly  on  markets  worldwide,  with  many  stock  exchanges  shedding  considerable 
value.  This  again  demonstrates  the  importance  of  restructuring  the  financial  architecture.  Closer  to 
home,  trade  and  financial  links  expose  South  Africa  to  the  contagion  effects  of  recent  adverse 
developments in Zimbabwe, which are closely monitored. 
BIS Review 53/2002 
 5
 Domestically  the  South  African  banking  sector  was  characterised  by  a  process  of  consolidation 
triggered by  the difficulties of some small banks. This trend intensified  after the announcement that 
Saambou Bank Limited, the seventh-largest bank in South Africa, would be placed under curatorship 
from 9 February 2002. As a result, there were significant withdrawals of deposits from some smaller 
banks  in  general  and  BoE  Bank  Limited  in  particular.  This  spurred  the  Reserve  Bank  to  take  a 
proactive and leading role in co-ordinating the actions of all key players in the banking sector, which 
led  to  an  agreement  between  the  private  and  public  sectors  on  the  management  of  liquidity  by 
recycling  cash  flows  and  handling  the  orderly  exit  of  Saambou  Bank  from  the  banking  sector.  The 
withdrawal  of  deposits  from  some  banks  prompted  the  joint  action  by  the  Bank  and  the  National 
Treasury  to  restore  the  confidence  of  depositors,  by  guaranteeing  all  the  deposits  of  BoE  Bank 
Limited. BoE also accelerated the planned sale of its mortgage book to FirstRand Bank to manage its 
liquidity position. 
The activities of Saambou Bank and BoE were merged with those of some of the big four banks in 
South Africa. The liquidity problems of some of the smaller banks induced them to cancel their banking 
registrations  and  to  carry  on  with  niche  operations.  Other  smaller  banks  are  redesigning  their 
ownership structures and in some cases downsizing their balance sheets. 
Despite  these  developments  over  the  past  year,  South  Africa’s  banking  system  remains  sound. 
Domestic  banks  are  well-managed  and  have  sophisticated  risk  management  as  well  as  corporate 
governance  structures  in  place.  Banks  are  well-capitalised,  with  an  average  risk-weighted  capital 
adequacy  ratio  of 12,1 per cent  at the  end of June 2002. This can be compared  with the  new and 
higher required capital adequacy ratio of 10 per cent introduced in October 2001. 
Total bank funding grew by 22,4 per cent during the year up to the end of June 2002. The growth in 
total assets of 18,8 per cent over the same period to a level of R1 065 billion was mainly the result of 
an increase of 21,4 per cent in total loans and advances. The assets of the four big banks as a ratio of 
the total assets of the banking sector rose from 68,8 per cent on 30 June 2001 to 70,5 per cent on 30 
June 2002. At the latter date the foreign banks operating in South Africa held 8,4 per cent of the total 
banking assets, compared with 6 per cent the previous year. 
Despite the difficulties encountered over the past year, the liquidity of the banking sector is generally 
adequate.  The  average  daily  amount  of  liquid  assets  held  in  June  2002  exceeded  the  prescribed 
prudential minimum by about 9 per cent. However, the reported profitability of the banking sector has 
continued to decline as margins on earnings decreased and operating expenses increased. 
Non-performing loans amounted to R26 billion in June 2002. This represents only about 3 per cent of 
total loans and advances, which compares well with international standards. The provisions made by 
banks for non-performing loans were adequate, even in terms of international best practice standards. 
The debt-servicing capacities of households also showed no signs of fragility. The ratios of household 
debt  to  disposable  income  and  of  household  debt  to  financial  assets  both  decreased  over  the  past 
year. 
The single regulator 
The  problems  encountered  in  the  banking  sector  earlier  this  year  illustrated  in  the  most  definite 
manner that it is important that banking supervision in South Africa should remain part of the functions 
of the Reserve  Bank. The blurring of boundaries between the financial services provided by banks, 
insurers  and  securities  traders  has  prompted  certain  developed  countries  around  the  world  to 
consolidate  the  different  supervisory  agencies  under  one  roof.  It  is  commonly  recognised  that  the 
potential benefits of assessing the risk management functions of financial conglomerates on a holistic 
basis  are  very  attractive  for  developed  countries  with  integrated  financial  markets  and  ample 
regulatory resources. 
In South Africa the banking supervision function was transferred to the central bank in 1987 because it 
was regarded as the institution most suited to carrying out this function. Since then, even in the face of 
many abnormal circumstances, banking supervision has been carried out to the highest international 
best practice. Over this period, experience has shown that banking supervision is closely aligned with 
the other functions of the Reserve Bank. With the recent liquidity problems of some small banks, it was 
again  evident  that  a  least-cost  resolution  of  a  banking  crisis  would  always  depend  on  a  special 
collegial interaction between the Registrar of Banks and at least four other departments in the Bank. 
The policy formulation, decision making, co-ordination and rapid execution of the many interventions 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2002
 that  were  necessary  would  have  been  almost  inconceivable  in  a  situation  where  the  supervision  of 
banks was not part of the Bank. 
Stability  in  the  banking  sector  is  so  integral  to  the  monetary  policy  transmission mechanism,  that  a 
central bank must always be involved in banking supervision. Unlike other financial institutions, banks 
potentially pose a systemic risk because of the nature of their contracts. Their assets are typically long 
term and uncertain in value, whereas their liabilities are generally short term and certain in value.  
The banking sector is therefore prone to contagion as soon as confidence in any bank is undermined. 
These  characteristics  give  rise  to  the  commonly  accepted  approach  of  regulating  banks  in  a 
discretionary manner. A rules-based approach to banking regulation would be inappropriate because 
every  case  of  distress  in  the  system  is  unique.  Supervision  consequently  has  to  be  risk-based  and 
proactive. 
The banking supervision function in the Reserve Bank has caused many problems and frustrations, 
and the temptation to pass the responsibility on to another agency is great. However, the capacity to 
perform  effective  banking  supervision  is  crucial  to  price  and  financial  stability.  After  careful 
consideration of the issue, I am therefore convinced that it is in the best interests of the South African 
economy that banking supervision should remain in the Bank. 
At the same time, I also realise that close co-operation should exist between the different regulatory 
authorities  to  address  the  need  for  consolidated  supervision.  Co-operative  working  arrangements 
between  regulators  are  essential  to  address  the  ever-increasing  demands  of  sound  regulation,  the 
hallmark of which consists of decisiveness, timely action and proactive intervention when required. 
Regulating the banking sector 
The  different  approaches  adopted  to  handling  the  liquidity  problem  of  banks  in  the  past  year  have 
created  considerable  uncertainty  about  the  principles  applied  in  regulating  the  banking  sector.  This 
again emphasises that the execution of this function should be made as transparent and business-like 
as possible. 
The objective of bank supervision is to ensure stability, efficiency and depositor protection in banking. 
A stable financial environment is essential for the working of the economy and the attainment of price 
stability.  A  sound  banking  system  contributes  to  the  effectiveness  of  intermediation,  maturity 
transformation, payment facilitation, credit allocation and financial discipline. Moreover, banks play an 
important role in collecting savings, allocating resources and providing liquidity. 
The  registration  of  banks  is  the  first  step  to  achieve  stability  in  the  banking  system.  Stability  is 
promoted by  preventing applicants with potentially destabilising  weaknesses, such as unqualified or 
unscrupulous manage-ment or insufficient capital, from entering the system. Unfortunately, there is no 
reliable  formula  to  determine  whether  a  bank  will  fail  or  succeed.  The  regulator  can  only  apply 
international  regulatory  and  supervisory  norms  to  the  supervision  of  banks.  The  South  African 
authorities  have  adopted  the  25  principles  contained  in  the  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking 
Supervision  of  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision,  to  construct  an  effective  supervisory 
structure in the country. 
In deciding on whether a banking licence will be granted to an applicant, an assessment is made of 
the institution’s business plan, shareholding structure, capital base, directors and senior management, 
internal  controls  and  projected  financial  conditions.  This  evaluation  of  an  application  is  not  a 
mechanical  process,  but  is  in  a  sense  abstract  and  subjective.  Every  application  is  regarded  as 
unique. 
Once  a  bank  has  been  established  it  must  be  monitored  continuously  to  ensure  that  it  remains 
fundamentally healthy. This monitoring process involves a quantitative and qualitative assessment of a 
bank’s  soundness.  The  quantitative  assessment  entails  an  analysis  and  evaluation  of  defined  risk-
based data received from banks on a monthly basis, to determine whether they are within prescribed 
prudential  limits  and  whether  their  financial  positions  fall  within  acceptable  norms.  The  qualitative 
assessment consists of the examination and evaluation of whether risks are being managed properly. 
This assessment is done within a framework of corporate governance structures. 
Despite every effort by the supervisors to ensure a healthy banking system, they cannot guarantee the 
safety and soundness of individual banks at all times. Where a bank encounters difficulties, special 
contingency measures are applied. The general approach followed in providing financial assistance is 
BIS Review 53/2002 
 7
 that the bank in distress is experiencing only temporary liquidity problems. By contrast, an insolvent 
bank or one with ongoing liquidity problems is required to exit from the banking system in an orderly, 
efficient manner with minimum losses to depositors and the least harm to the public’s confidence in 
the banking system as a whole. 
Special action is taken in a case where a temporary liquidity problem is identified. As every case is 
different, these actions may vary from one case to another. A broad framework for the contingency 
procedures  has  nevertheless  been  developed.  A  plan  for  remedial  action  is  normally  drawn  up,  in 
close co-operation with the bank concerned. Possible solutions may range from new capital injections 
by shareholders to measures designed to attract and retain large deposits. In addition, the relevant 
bank may be allowed to obtain liquidity by discounting liquid assets and by utilising its minimum cash 
reserves to cover cash outflows. 
If none of these measures can solve the liquidity problem of the bank in distress, the Reserve Bank 
may,  as  lender  of  last  resort,  be  approached  for  special  assistance  in  certain  circumstances.  This 
special assistance is  granted only against collateral  of acceptable assets  pledged by the  bank or a 
government  guarantee  because  the  Reserve  Bank  is  prohibited  by  statute  from  making  unsecured 
loans. 
The  Bank’s  policy  and  practice  of  solving  liquidity  problems  have  recently  received  considerable 
attention.  Two  reports  were  published  in  the  past  year.  One  was  on  the  failure  of  Regal  Treasury 
Private Bank Limited. The other report was on the financial assistance package to Bankorp (and later 
to Absa) in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The panel of experts, known as the Davis Panel, found in 
the latter report that the assistance had averted a systemic crisis. The panel members also concluded 
that the procedure for dealing with banks in distress had been refined and now conformed to current 
international best practice. 
In reviewing the support provided recently to Saambou Bank and the repayment of all the depositors’ 
money, three of the members of the Davis Panel found that all the actions taken complied with the 
Reserve  Bank’s  established  procedures.  Contrary  to  possible  public  perceptions,  the  authorities  did 
not give any special positive or negative treatment to Saambou Bank’s depositors or shareholders. 
To  create  a  safety  net  for  depositors,  the  Policy  Board  for  Financial  Services  and  Regulation  has 
formulated a proposal on designing a deposit-insurance scheme for South Africa. The main purpose of 
the scheme is to protect small depositors from losses if a bank fails. Membership will be compulsory 
for  all  registered  banks  and  separate  funds  could  be  established  for  non-bank financial  institutions. 
The level of coverage still has to be determined, but it would be low enough to avoid creating a moral 
hazard, yet high enough to inspire confidence. 
The  relationship  between  auditors  and  the  regulator  has  always  been  regarded  as  extremely 
important.  Recent  international  events  involving  the  auditing  profession  have  again  illustrated  the 
critical role that auditors should play in ensuring that the accounts of institutions are a fair reflection of 
their financial position. For this reason, a decision was taken to establish an Auditor-Regulator College 
to create a structure for regular interaction  with and  compliance training for the auditing profession. 
The  college  will  play  a  major  role  in  training  and  strengthening  the  banking  supervisory  process  in 
South Africa. 
Procedures have also been implemented to introduce banking legislation which will, for the first time, 
effectively  deal  with  management  deficiencies  in  banks.  The  proposed  legislation  will,  among  other 
things,  provide  for  the  removal  by  the  regulator  of  directors  and  managers  of  banks  who  are  not 
considered to be fit and proper to perform such appointments. 
These  improvements  to  the  regulation  of  banking  are  being  undertaken  to  safeguard  the  funds  of 
depositors and to ensure that South Africa maintains a recognised, stable banking system. However, 
the Bank is also aware of the need to broaden the access of individuals and small and medium-sized 
enterprises  to  basic  banking  services  and  funding.  To  this  end,  the  approach  in  the  past  was  to 
encourage  registered  banks  to  provide  such  services  and  to  exempt  certain  approved  non-bank 
financial institutions, such as stokvels, credit unions and village financial services co-operatives, from 
the  requirements  of  the  Banks  Act  provided  that  these  institutions  comply  with  certain  specified 
conditions. Work is now in progress to reform the Mutual Banks Act by making provision for different 
classes of banks. This would create a more appropriate regulatory framework and give broader access 
to finance. The Bank also supports all initiatives aimed at finding a balance between facilitating socially 
responsible behaviour by banks and protecting the stability of the banking sector. 
8 
 BIS Review 53/2002
 Internal administration 
In view of the importance of maintaining an overall stable financial environment, a Financial Stability 
Department was established in the Reserve Bank. The primary aim of this department is to assess 
and promote the stability of the banking and financial system in South Africa. The main functions of the 
new department are to identify, analyse and research any potential threats to and weaknesses in the 
financial  system,  and  to  make  policy  proposals  on  and  encourage  changes  that  will  support  the 
stability and effectiveness of the financial system. 
Another  administrative  change  arose  from  the  majority  decision  by  shareholders  to  delist  the  Bank 
from the JSE Securities Exchange SA, with effect from 2 May 2002. The new listing requirements of 
the  JSE  Securities  Exchange  SA  as  well  as  the  unique  role  and  structure  conferred  on  the  South 
African Reserve Bank in terms of its Act, made it evident that the Bank would no longer be able to 
trade  its  shares  on  this  exchange.  The  shareholders’  decision  led  to  the  establishment  of  an 
Over-the-Counter Share Transfer Facility on 3 June 2002, to provide for trading in the Bank’s shares. 
This facility operates as a closed auction and is administered by the Bank. 
Satisfactory  progress  has  been  made  with  a  process  of  Bank-wide  business  continuity  planning  to 
ensure  that  the  Bank  can  continue  functioning  and  meeting  its  obligations  in  the  event  of  any 
interruption  or  disaster.  All  the  Bank’s  departments,  branches  and  subsidiaries  are  participating  in 
preparing the best possible response to a threat to normal operations. 
In the field of information  and communication technology, several  initiatives resulted in  lower costs, 
greater  efficiency  and  new  interactive  ways  of  doing  the  Bank’s  business.  These  included  the 
establishment of a generic facility for receiving data electronically from external associates, enhancing 
the  balance-of-payments  system  to  enable  the  direct  reporting  of  all  cross-border  transactions, 
collecting data online for economic research and creating a new Internet website for the Bank. 
The Bank’s new cash management strategy (Project Imali) was successfully implemented during the 
past  financial  year.  The  branches  of  the  Bank  now  provide  a  full  and  comprehensive  bulk 
cash-handling service to the private banks. This service has been extended to the Mpumalanga and 
Limpopo provinces on a contractual basis. 
Project  Bataki,  the  project  aimed  at  revising  the  banknote  series,  has  made  good  progress. 
Consultations with all stakeholders on developing the preferred technical and security features for the 
current banknotes will commence in the near future. The problems with dye-stained notes arising from 
ineffective  dye-staining  devices  have  been  successfully  addressed.  With  the  co-operation  of  the 
manufacturers  and  users  of  such  systems,  a  new  industry  standard  has  been  developed  and 
implemented. This will make these notes unusable, which should discourage robbery and theft. 
Major  progress  was  also  made  with  the  reduction  of  settlement  risk  in  the  payment  system  when 
agreements were concluded with the payment clearing houses. After intensive consultation with the 
banking  industry,  same-day  settlement  now  generally  takes  place.  Real  Time  Line  settlement  is 
effected directly via the SAMOS system and batch settlements forwarded from Bankserv are settled 
before  the  following  day.  Only  interbank  borrowing  and  lending,  and  the  final  square-off  between 
banks, are done the next day. These changes have aligned South African payment practices to the 
principles of internationally accepted payment systems. 
The  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  in  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  made 
satisfactory  advances  supporting  regional  economic  integration.  In  particular,  notable  progress  was 
made  in  the  fields  of  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems,  information  and  communication 
technology,  legal  and  operational  frameworks  for  central  banks  and  exchange-control  policies.  The 
Reserve Bank has also engaged in technical co-operation and advice to a number of central banks in 
Southern  Africa  as  well  as  in  other  African  countries,  such  as  Rwanda.  In  addition,  the  Bank  was 
actively involved in initiatives to establish closer monetary and economic co-operation in Africa through 
participation in the Association of African Central Banks. 
In  keeping  with  the  objective  of  transforming  the  composition  of  the  Bank’s  staff  to  reflect  the 
demographics of the country, an important milestone was reached in the past financial year when the 
total black staff complement exceeded the white staff complement for the first time since the inception 
of  the  Bank  in  1921.  This  confirms  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  achieving  its  objectives  for  staff 
transformation by 2005, in accordance with the plan submitted to the Department of Labour in terms of 
the  Employment  Equity  Act,  No.  55  of  1998.  Despite  this  progress,  further  efforts  will  be  made  to 
achieve gender and race representivity at all seniority levels. We want the Bank’s staff to reflect the 
diversity and unity of South Africa. 
BIS Review 53/2002 
 9
 Extensions to the Bank’s head office building, which started in 2001, are progressing satisfactorily and 
will  be  completed  in  2003.  Once  completed,  the  building  will  meet  the  Bank’s  requirements  for 
additional office space and for parking and conference facilities. The conference facilities will also be 
made  available  for  use  by  the  public,  which  should  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  activity  in  the 
Pretoria central business district. 
Acknowledgements 
All  these  changes  to  ensure  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  Reserve  Bank  could  not  have  been 
accomplished without the help of a number of people and institutions. In conclusion, I therefore wish to 
express  my  appreciation  to  everyone  who  contributed  to  the  success  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in 
overcoming  the  challenges  of  the  past  year.  I  wish  to  thank  the  Presidency  in  particular,  the 
government in general and Parliament for supporting the work of the Reserve Bank. 
In addition, I wish to express my appreciation to the Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank, including 
the  deputy  governors,  for  their  commitment  and  undivided  loyalty.  Mr  J  H  Cross,  Senior  Deputy 
Governor, left the service of the Bank at the end of his term for health reasons and Mr I J Moolman 
retired. Both of them made valuable contributions to the work of the Bank and the Board, for which we 
are  deeply  grateful.  Finally,  I  wish  to  thank  the  staff  of  the  Reserve  Bank  for  their  professionalism, 
excellent performance and continued loyal support. 
10 
 BIS Review 53/2002
