 Willem F Duisenberg: The euro as a catalyst for integration and competition in 
EMU 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
30th Economics Conference "Competition of Regions and Integration in EMU", Vienna, 13 June 2002.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Here  in  Vienna,  exactly  one  hundred  years  ago,  Joseph  Schumpeter  embarked  upon  his  university 
studies at the School of Law and Political Science. He was a promising young student with ambitions 
in academics, politics and business. Already, at the age of 22, he had published his first works and 
would soon become one of the youngest holders of a doctorate, the youngest private teacher and the 
youngest professor in Austria.  
Joseph  Schumpeter  has  become  known  as  one  of  the  foremost  representatives  of  the  famous 
Austrian  School  of  Economics.  He  has  influenced  economic  thought,  in  particular,  by  introducing 
innovation as a source of economic dynamics. According to Schumpeter, economic development was 
a  dynamic  process,  a  disturbance  of  the  economic  status  quo.  The  real  challenge  for  capitalism, 
therefore, was to create and destroy economic structures in a process he called "creative destruction" 
This,  he  maintained,  was  the  essence  of  economic  development,  a  process  defined  by  the 
implementation by the entrepreneur of new production combinations. 
I believe that Schumpeter would be very interested in the topic I want to discuss today. My speech is 
about  the  euro  as  a  catalyst  for  integration  and  competition  in  EMU,  or,  in  other  words,  about 
economic growth and adjustment in the euro area. Both high, sustainable economic growth and the 
ability to adjust smoothly to changes in the economic environment require further economic integration 
and  competition.  This,  in  turn,  is  closely  linked  to  the  process  of  structural  reform,  which,  to  use 
Schumpeter's words, can  be seen as  a necessary precondition for a  dynamic economic process, a 
disturbance  of  the  economic  status  quo.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  acts  as  a  catalyst  for  this 
dynamic process of structural change.  
In my speech today I will address the following topics. I will first talk about the link between European 
integration and the euro, and then argue why an increasingly competitive and dynamic society raises 
the need for further structural reforms. However, reforms are also important for the smooth functioning 
of a monetary union, a point I will discuss next. Finally, I will assess the progress that has been made 
with the structural reforms in the euro area so far and discuss how the single currency has already 
benefited the euro area's economy, acting – as formulated in the title of my speech – as a catalyst for 
integration and competition. 
A single currency for a single market 
A natural starting point for my topic today is the adoption of the Single Market Programme in 1985, 
paving the way for the famous four "liberties" established in the European Treaties: the free movement 
of goods, services, labour and capital.  
After the adoption of the Single Market Programme, it became increasingly clear that the potential of 
the  internal  market  could  not  be  fully  exploited  while  the  relatively  high  transaction  costs  linked  to 
currency  conversion  and  the  uncertainties  associated  with  exchange-rate  fluctuations  persisted. 
Indeed,  the  single  currency  should  be  seen  as  a  necessary  complement  or,  in  fact,  the  crowning 
achievement of the Single Market.  
That said, we have not reached the end of the development of the Single Market. Instead, I see the 
euro as facilitating further economic integration. For example, countries with the same currency tend to 
trade  more  with  each  other  than  they  would  with  countries  with  different  currencies.  In  addition,  a 
single currency fosters the formation of a single financial system. By  increasing price transparency, 
reducing  transaction  costs  and  fostering  competition,  the  euro  acts  as  a  powerful  catalyst  to  the 
economic  integration  process  in  the  euro  area.  Last,  but  not  least,  our  common  currency  is  also  a 
powerful  symbol  for  all  citizens  of  the  euro  area  that  integration  has  reached  a  new  level.  As  we 
approach the first summer holiday season since the introduction of euro notes and coins, increasing 
BIS Review 39/2002 
 1
 numbers  of  people  in  Europe  will,  themselves,  experience  the  practical  advantages  of  a  single 
currency. 
The impetus the euro gives to economic integration and growth should  not only  be regarded as an 
opportunity for Europe, but also as a necessity in a world of innovation and globalisation. Over the last 
few  decades,  the  world  economy  has  become  ever  more  integrated.  We  have  witnessed  a  strong 
expansion  of  international  trade  and  capital  flows  and  an  increase  in  competition.  Behind  these 
changes  there  are  several  underlying  factors.  Among  the  most  important  is  rapid  technological 
progress,  leading  to  dramatic  reductions  in  transportation  costs  and  an  unprecedented  increase  in 
information processing capabilities. Policy measures have also supported the globalisation trend, with 
the loosening of restrictions to trade and the liberalisation of capital movements. 
This panorama shows that we live in a dynamic and competitive world, where the ability to innovate 
and adjust to changing economic circumstances has become even more important than before. In this 
respect, Schumpeter's thoughts haven't lost anything of their relevance. On the contrary; in a dynamic, 
ever-changing economic environment, entrepreneurs have to be all the more innovative and sensitive 
to  new  opportunities.  The  regulatory  framework  formed  by  the  laws,  rules  and  regulations  that 
influence economic behaviour, should thus provide the right incentives for innovation, dynamism and 
economic growth. 
The EU Heads of State and Government have recognised that, in order to improve the functioning of 
the Single Market and to enhance the economic growth potential of the EU, its regulatory framework 
has  to  be  modernised  and  reforms  are  needed.  Somewhat  more  than  two  years  ago,  the  Lisbon 
European  Council  formulated  a  strategic  goal  for  this  decade,  namely  "to  become  the  most 
competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world". The Lisbon strategy established a 
comprehensive  reform  agenda  which  aims  to  overcome  existing  fragmentation  and  inefficiencies  in 
many different areas. This has provided a major political  impetus for further progress in the field  of 
structural reform that I very much welcome. The European Council aims to increase the potential GDP 
growth rate to around 3% per year, an objective which can only be achieved if steady progress on a 
broad range of reforms is made. Whether or not this objective is met hinges partly on the capacity to 
improve mobilisation of available labour resources. In this regard, one of the explicit objectives set at 
the Lisbon summit is to raise the EU-wide employment rate to 70% of the working age population by 
2010.  
In  order  to  achieve  the  Lisbon  objective,  it  is  crucial  that  progress  is  systematically  controlled  and 
evaluated.  In  this  context,  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines  for  the  Member  States  and  the 
Community  play  a  particularly  important  role.  This  is  the  overall  framework  for  the  co-ordination  of 
economic policies, in particular, those related to fiscal and structural policies. In order to fulfil this role, 
the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines have, in recent years, been enhanced in several ways. They 
have  become  more  operational  through  the  use  of  more  concrete  recommendations  in  both  the 
general  and  country-specific  parts.  Moreover,  within  the  overall  process  of  policy  co-ordination, 
increased emphasis is being placed on implementation. To this end, the European Commission has 
introduced  a  comprehensive  implementation  report  that  assesses  the  extent  to  which  EU  Member 
States have followed the policy recommendations. I fully support these changes. 
As  you  know,  the  most  recent  Spring  meeting  of  the  European  Council,  the  second  "follow-up" 
meeting to Lisbon, took place in Barcelona earlier this year. The conclusions of the Barcelona Summit 
demonstrate that a strong political will and thorough preparation of the technical details are needed if 
the European Union is to meet the ambitious economic, social and environmental objectives that it set 
for itself at the Lisbon Summit. The successful introduction of the single currency is the best proof that 
these ingredients are indispensable. The main point now is that the relevant Council formations, the 
European  Parliament and the Member States take the necessary steps to rigorously  implement the 
structural reform agenda agreed in Lisbon and confirmed in Barcelona.  
Why are structural reforms important? 
Structural policies cover a wide range of areas and instruments. Among the most commonly discussed 
are  microeconomic  regulations  implemented  in  product,  labour  and  financial  markets.  Among  other 
things, such regulations encompass competition policies, entry barriers, tax and benefit systems, state 
aid, employment protection rules, education and training, as well as incentives given to research and 
development.  They  are  important  for  two  main  reasons  since  they  enhance  the  economic  growth 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2002
 potential and facilitate the adjustment to economic change. Let me say a few more words on these two 
reasons. 
First, structural policies are just one of many factors determining the rate at which the economy can 
grow,  although  there  are  many  other  factors  which  influence  the  rate  of  economic  growth.  Some 
factors, such as changes in demand conditions, have temporary effects on economic growth, whereas 
others,  such  as  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  working  age  population  and  capital  stock,  as  well  as  the 
increase  in  productivity,  have  long-lasting  effects.  It  is  this  latter  type  of  factor,  however,  that 
determines the potential growth rate of an economy. These components, in particular the growth of 
employment  and  productivity,  can  be  influenced  by  structural  policies.  Changes  to  tax  and  benefit 
systems, for example, can help to mobilise the unused labour potential in the economy by making it 
financially more attractive to accept a job. This could lead to a better use of the supply side potential of 
the economy. The third factor, productivity growth, can be influenced in several ways: by increasing 
competition,  facilitating  investment,  encouraging  enterprise  and  innovation  and  improving  the 
workforce's  skills.  Structural  policies  have  particular  importance  for monetary  policy.  They  allow  the 
economy to grow at a higher rate, on a sustained basis, without creating inflationary pressures. 
However,  structural  reforms  are  not  only  important  for  economic  growth,  they  also  increase 
adaptability to economic shocks. Adaptability concerns the economy's ability to adapt and respond to 
changing economic conditions. It is the ability to shift resources from areas in recession to booming 
areas, something which is key to the successful functioning of a monetary union. Under EMU, member 
countries are unable to use country-specific monetary and exchange rate policies to address country-
specific  shocks.  The  adjustment  to  such  economic  fluctuations  will  therefore  have  to  take  place 
through other  adjustment mechanisms. Without price and  wage flexibility  and  mobility  of production 
factors, economic shocks would lead to lower economic growth and higher unemployment. Let me say 
a few more words on the important role of these adjustment mechanisms in a monetary union.  
The theory of optimal currency areas 
Ever since the idea of EMU was launched, a discussion has ensued as to whether the whole or part of 
Europe  would  be  an  optimal  currency  area.  The  optimal  currency  area  theory  defines  a  set  of 
mechanisms that might be set in motion when a participating country or region, in a monetary union, is 
hit by an asymmetric shock. First, adjustment to the shock might come from domestic price or wage 
changes,  thereby  altering  the  real  exchange  rate  without  changing  the  nominal  exchange  rate. 
Secondly, migration of production factors might act as an adjustment channel. These flows of labour 
and  capital  are  facilitated  by  a  high  degree  of  economic  and  financial  integration  of  the  countries 
participating in the union.  
In addition to this, the theory of optimal currency areas has also something to say on the similarity of 
shocks  affecting  countries  or  regions  in  a  monetary  union.  In  this  respect,  the  degree  of  trade  and 
financial  integration  are  often  considered.  Trade  and  financial  integration  may  tend  to  lead  to  more 
similar economic developments in the respective countries or regions in a monetary union, reducing 
the likelihood of asymmetric shocks and increasing the economies' abilities to adjust to these shocks.  
So far the theory, let me now move on to the practice. I will now focus on two adjustment mechanisms: 
price-wage flexibility and factor mobility. A host of empirical studies on these mechanisms has been 
undertaken for the euro area. How well does the euro area measure up against these two criteria?  
Price and wage flexibility 
There is broad agreement that price flexibility is low across euro area countries in comparison with the 
United States. In the euro area, price flexibility for goods and services is hampered by trade barriers, 
continuing state aid to several sectors and, more generally, a lack of competition in sectors that have 
been dominated by monopolies or state owned enterprises. 
Low wage flexibility is also an important factor behind the lack of price flexibility in the euro area. Many 
studies  indicate  that  in  comparison  with  the  United  States,  real  wages  are  relatively  inflexible  in 
Europe.  More  specifically,  I  mean  that  the  downward  responsiveness  of  real  wages  to  the  level  of 
unemployment  is  more  limited  in  Europe  than  in  the  US.  There  are,  however,  notable  differences 
across countries in the euro area.  
Let me also mention the potential links between the flexibility of product and labour markets. Reforms 
in one area are likely to have effects across markets. For example, reforms leading to more flexible 
BIS Review 39/2002 
 3
 product markets might improve the performance of the labour market. If regulations on setting up a 
business are loosened, employment creation is also likely to increase. Similarly, labour market reforms 
might also have an impact on product markets. For example, labour market reforms may improve the 
extent to which differences in skills or productivity are reflected in wage differentials, which could affect 
prices. More generally, more flexible labour markets allow companies to adjust to economic changes 
with greater ease. 
Factor mobility 
Let me now turn to the second adjustment mechanism, the mobility of factors of production. Changes 
in  price  levels,  in  product  and  labour  markets,  can  also  be  triggered  by  a  migration  of  factors  of 
production.  If  a  country  or  region  is  affected  by  a  negative  output  shock  and  markets  do  not  clear 
instantaneously, unemployment will rise. Workers will, therefore, tend to migrate to other regions. The 
same  might  be  true  for  capital:  if  a  negative  output  shock  made  capital  obsolete  and  reduced 
profitability, investors would tend to move their funds to other regions. This adjustment mechanism has 
two  limitations.  First,  the  migration  of  labour  and  capital  involves  transaction  costs.  Moreover,  it  is 
doubtful whether this mechanism is very efficient when a country or region is hit by a temporary shock. 
Therefore, factor mobility seems a suitable adjustment mechanism only in case of a permanent shock 
and if prices or wages are rigid.  
Several studies have found that labour mobility within the United States is two to three times higher 
than in Europe. This result is confirmed by the persistence of regional unemployment differences in 
Europe.  
Overall, it can be concluded from empirical studies that the degree of wage-price flexibility and factor 
mobility  is  relatively  limited  in  the  euro  area.  The  lack  of  adjustment  mechanisms  in  the  euro  area 
should, however, not be exaggerated. Euro area countries are highly integrated both in terms of trade 
and financially. As I have just explained, a high degree of trade and financial integration may lead to 
more similar economic developments across euro area countries.  
In addition, the optimal currency area properties are likely to evolve over time. The irrevocable fixing of 
exchange  rates  and  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  may  lead  to  a  convergence  in  the 
production  and  export  structures  of  economies  in  the  euro  area,  thereby  reducing  the  risk  of future 
asymmetric shocks. This argument is often referred to as the "endogeneity" of the optimal currency 
area  hypothesis.  Hence,  according  to  the  endogeneity  literature,  the  euro  area  could  gradually 
become more of an optimal currency area, after the introduction of the euro. More generally, it has to 
be borne in mind that all empirical studies on whether the countries that have entered the euro area 
constitute  an  optimal  currency  area  are  based  on  historical  data.  These  data  refer  to  regimes  with 
flexible  or  fixed-but-adjustable  exchange  rates.  In  short,  the  regime  shift  to  a  monetary  union  may 
have an impact on economic structures and may alter some of the conclusions drawn on the basis of 
these historical data.  
Progress made with structural reforms in the euro area 
Some people say that central bankers are professional sceptics whose job it is to point to economic 
risks and weaknesses. Having listened to me so far, I can imagine that you may find some degree of 
truth  in  this.  Let  me  tell  you,  however,  that  the  euro  area  has  recently  seen  many  changes  and 
innovations that go in the right direction. And I am pleased to be able to tell you that many of these 
changes  are  directly,  or  indirectly,  related  to  the  euro.  Let  us  have  a  closer  look  at  three  areas  of 
change: financial markets, product markets and labour markets. 
Financial markets 
The first area I want to discuss are financial markets. There is ample evidence that financial markets 
have some way to go before national demarcation lines will effectively disappear. Henceforth, there is 
still  a  significant  potential  for  further  financial  market  integration  in  the  euro  area.  Financial  market 
integration  has  been  driven  by  global  developments,  such  as  advances  in  information  technology, 
falling communication costs and standardisation of products. It has also been supported by European 
Commission initiatives.  
A  main  policy  initiative  that  has  contributed  to  financial  market  integration  is  the  Financial  Services 
Action Plan. EU Heads of State and Government have agreed to  implement the Financial  Services 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2002
 Action Plan by 2005, at the latest, and to achieve fully integrated risk-capital and securities markets by 
2003. The groundwork for the latter was prepared by a Committee of Wise Men called the Lamfalussy 
Group.  On  wholesale  markets,  measures  to  facilitate  raising  capital  on  an  EU-wide  basis,  through 
common  rules  concerning  prospectuses,  is  targeted  for  adoption  in  2002.  In  addition,  legislative 
proposals  on  financial  statements for  listed  companies  and  a  common  legal  framework for  a  single 
market for securities and derivatives are close to being adopted. We, at the ECB, fully support these 
initiatives.  I  would  like  to  stress,  however,  that  the  successful  and  timely  implementation  of  the 
Financial Services Action Plan will be very difficult without the continuing commitment of the Member 
States.  
The integration of financial markets would not only facilitate cross-border capital flows towards their 
most productive uses, but it could also serve as a catalyst for structural reform in other markets. For 
example,  the  impact  of  product  market  reforms,  aimed  at  easing  the  restrictions  on  creating  a 
business, are likely to be reinforced if a well-functioning risk capital market, which efficiently channels 
the necessary funds from investors to beginning entrepreneurs, is in place. 
The euro has made a spectacular impact on financial markets in the euro area. Concrete examples of 
its  impact  are  the  integration  of  the  money  market,  the  explosive  growth  of  the  euro-denominated 
corporate debt market and a wave of consolidation among intermediaries and exchanges. These are 
very fundamental changes. The surge of euro-denominated corporate debt, for example, has helped 
to finance the wave of mergers and acquisitions in the European corporate sector and shows how a 
larger and deeper single financial market can help to strengthen Europe's competitiveness.  
Product markets 
Let  me  now  turn  to  product  markets.  The  pace  of  liberalisation  has  differed  considerably  across 
countries  and  sectors  in  the  euro  area,  leaving  ample  room  for  further  reforms.  Whereas  the 
integration  of  goods  markets  is  relatively  advanced,  shortcomings  still  exist  with  regard  to  the 
integration of service industries. Most of the barriers to integration in the service sector appear to be 
due to national regulations, for example administrative procedures for setting up subsidiaries in other 
euro  area  countries.  Regulatory  barriers  along  these  lines  reduce  competition  in  services,  thus 
keeping prices above the level that would be expected in a fully integrated market. 
More progress has been made with regard to the integration of goods markets and regulatory reforms 
in  network  industries.  Here  too,  positive  macroeconomic  effects  can  be  discerned.  Owing  to  an 
increased number of competitors, prices in some network industries, such telecommunications, have 
started to decline, in particular in those industries and countries which liberalised earlier. The initiatives 
in  the  telecommunication  sector  show  how  reforms  that  succeed  in  increasing  competition  in 
previously sheltered sectors considerably enhance productivity and lower prices. As network industries 
provide inputs to the rest of the economy, this may also increase the rate at which the economy can 
grow without creating inflationary pressure. Nevertheless, an important unfinished agenda remains to 
be tackled in almost all network industries. In order to reap the full economic benefits, it is important 
that  reforms  in  network  industries  are  accompanied  by  an  appropriate  regulatory  framework  which 
ensures non-discriminatory access to the bottleneck infrastructure and more generally, a "level playing 
field" for all market participants. The quality of the regulatory framework has a considerable impact on 
the extent to which potential price falls due to structural reforms in network industries will be achieved. 
Another instrument available to reduce distortions to competition is state aid policy. State aid subsidies 
weaken the incentives for companies to improve their efficiency, enabling the less efficient to survive 
at the expense of the more efficient. Although there are still substantial differences between euro area 
countries, the overall trend is towards a reduction in state aid levels. Another positive development is 
that the transparency of state aid policies has improved as a result of the publication of a new state aid 
register and a state aid scoreboard by the European Commission. 
The  impact  of  the  euro  on  these  processes,  which  has  led  to  more  competition,  cannot  be 
overestimated  and  goes  far  beyond  the  mere  abolition  of  intra-European  exchange  rates  and  the 
introduction of common notes and coins. The single currency opens up the euro area product markets 
further and will be a major impetus to competition and integration by increasing the transparency of 
prices across borders. Investment will also benefit as euro area companies no longer have to insure 
against exchange rate movements within the euro area and there are  indeed indications that  direct 
investment into the euro area has strongly increased since the start of EMU. Overall, the euro will give 
new impetus to the initiatives taken in the 1980s to establish a truly integrated internal market. 
BIS Review 39/2002 
 5
 Labour markets 
Progress with labour market reforms has become evident from the increase in employment-intensive 
growth in the euro area. It is very interesting to note that job creation has held up reasonably well over 
recent years. During the first three years of EMU, some 6 million jobs have been created in the euro 
area versus 3.5 million in the US. The unemployment rate in the euro area has declined from almost 
11%  in  1997  to  slightly  more  than  8%  in  2001  (which  is  still  too  high).  On  the  supply  side,  the 
employment  rate,  particularly  in  the  case  of  women,  has  increased  considerably,  along  with  the 
proportion  of  part-time  jobs  and  temporary  contracts  in  total  employment.  Euro  area  average 
participation rates are, nevertheless, still below those of the US or the Scandinavian countries.  
The  explanations  for  this  job-rich  growth  lie  in  structural  changes  in  the  labour  market  and  wage 
moderation.  Government  policies  have  generally  improved  labour  market  performance  in  euro  area 
countries. A number of countries have lowered marginal tax rates in order to make their tax systems 
more  employment-friendly.  Many  countries  have  targeted  tax  cuts  at  the  lower  end  of  the  labour 
market  in  particular.  These  measures  have  contributed  to  a  higher  demand  for  low-skilled  workers. 
Nevertheless, marginal tax rates still remain high  in  some countries.  Some progress has also  been 
made with the introduction of part-time or more flexible working contracts and practices.  
In  addition  to  government  policies,  there  are  signs  of  a  gradual  change  in  labour market  behaviour 
related to the wage formation process. Discipline seems to have improved in that field over the past 
decade. Such a change, resulting from lower inflation expectations, is important. Furthermore, there 
seems to be a growing awareness that, in a single currency environment, the price increases and loss 
of  competitiveness  generated  by  excessive  wage  settlements  cannot  be  compensated  by  an 
exchange rate depreciation and may directly result in a loss of jobs.  
Looking ahead, it is crucial that social partners continue to adhere to moderate wage developments, 
since this is one of the prerequisites in fostering employment and maintaining a favourable outlook for 
price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  In  this  respect,  there  is  some  cause  for  concern  with  regard  to 
ongoing wage negotiations. 
The  wage  formation  process  also  seems  to  have  undergone  changes.  In  a  majority  of  euro  area 
countries,  there  are  signs  of  a  gradual  trend  towards  more  decentralised  bargaining  and  more 
flexibility  at  lower  bargaining  levels.  This  seems  to  happen,  mostly  informally,  through  clauses  that 
allow firms to deviate from the sectoral or central wage agreements according to the financial situation 
of the firm or sector. This is encouraging. The outcomes of wage bargaining should allow not only for 
appropriate  wage  developments  in  the  overall  economy,  but  also  for  adequate  wage  differentiation 
across  sectors,  regions  and  firms.  This  will  make  it  easier  to  account  for  local  conditions,  such  as 
unemployment, productivity or profitability differentials across sectors, regions and firms. 
In short, labour market reforms have, in general, been going in the right direction in recent years and 
the  benefits  of  these  positive  developments  are  clear.  However,  progress  has  been  rather  uneven 
across  countries  and  areas.  In  many  areas  important  reforms  have  not  yet  got  off  the  ground.  For 
instance,  few  changes  have  been  made  regarding  employment  protection  policies  in  euro  area 
countries,  which  remain  amongst  the  strictest  in  the  industrial  countries.  Furthermore,  in  almost  all 
euro area countries, reforms targeting unemployment benefit systems have only made slow progress. 
At the same time, significant mismatches between labour demand and supply are still present along a 
number of dimensions. All this shows that large structural problems remain and need to be solved.  
What  needs  to  be  done  to  speed  up  labour  market  reforms?  This  is  a  difficult  question,  not  least 
because the euro area labour markets are still very heterogeneous. Each country should identify the 
root  causes  of  its  labour  market  deficiencies  and  implement  appropriate  corrective  measures. 
However, there are some areas of reform that apply to many, if not all, euro area countries. Improved 
job mediation,  education  and  training,  to  mention  just  a  few  examples,  all  help  towards  making  the 
matching process more efficient. In addition, euro area countries need to ensure that tax and benefit 
systems  make  work  pay.  Reforms  to  tax  and  benefit  systems  should  increase  work  incentives, 
profitability and competitiveness and consequently labour supply and demand. At the same time, it is 
important  to  ensure  that  tax-benefit  reforms  are  undertaken  without  jeopardising  the  long-term 
sustainability of public finances. 
6 
 BIS Review 39/2002
 Conclusion 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  Joseph  Schumpeter  taught  us  that  economic  development  consists  of  the 
continuous introduction of new combinations of products and means of production. He taught us that 
this process involves the incessant mutation of the economic structure from within, destroying the old 
and creating a new. In today's dynamic, ever-changing economic environment, entrepreneurs have to 
be  all  the  more  innovative  and  sensitive  to  new  opportunities.  The  regulatory  framework  has  to  be 
designed in such a way that it allows this to happen by providing the right incentives for innovation, 
dynamism and economic growth. 
Today's dynamic society also requires an increased ability of markets to adjust smoothly to changing 
economic circumstances. This is all the more true of a monetary union, where member countries are 
no longer able to use country-specific monetary and exchange rate policies to address country-specific 
shocks. In such an environment, other adjustment mechanisms are needed such as price and wage 
flexibility  and  factor  mobility.  Structural  reforms  can  contribute  to  a  better  functioning  of  these 
adjustment  mechanisms  by 
integration  and  competition.  The  relationship  between 
integration, competition and the single currency works in both directions. The euro itself has already 
contributed to more integration and competition and will continue to do so in the future. Its impact is 
most clearly visible in financial markets, where a single money market has been created and a deep, 
liquid  bond  market  has  encouraged  a  surge  in  debt  issuance  by  the  corporate  sector.  In  product 
markets,  the  euro  has  an  important  impact  on  the  cross-border  transparency  of  prices,  acting  as  a 
catalyst for trade. Finally, with regard to labour markets, the wage formation process shows signs of 
increased  flexibility  and  labour  market  reforms  are  starting  to  go  in  the  right  direction.  Overall,  the 
single currency contributes forcefully to more integration and competition, acting as a powerful driver 
for the further enhancement of the Single Market and creating an environment which – I am sure – 
Schumpeter would have enjoyed.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
fostering 
BIS Review 39/2002 
 7
