 T T Mboweni: ICBS opening statement 
Remarks by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the formal opening of 
the 12th International Conference of Bank Supervisors, Cape Town, 18 September 2002. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen. On behalf of the South African Reserve Bank, welcome to sunny 
South  Africa.  It  is  indeed  a  privilege  for  us  to  be  hosting  the  twelfth  International  Conference  of 
Banking  Supervisors  (ICBS).  This  gathering  of  the  world's  bank  supervisors  has  been  taking  place 
every two years since 1979, in some of the most attractive venues in the world. And I am sure you will 
agree  that  Cape  Town  is  no  exception.  The  ICBS  has  become  an  essential  forum  to  promote 
cooperation  among  national  banking  supervisory  authorities  in  the  arduous  task  of  supervising 
international banking. This year it will enable about 280 representatives from some 130 countries to 
exchange views on a range of current issues of common concern.  
One has only to glance at the programme and advance documentation to realise that ICBS 2002 will 
be among the most important and most demanding for delegates ever held. The steady build-up of 
inter-linkages  and  complexity  in  global  financial  systems,  the  events  of  11  September  2001,  the 
protracted  tardy  growth  in  the  key  economies  of  the  world,  and  the  systemic  financial  crises  in  a 
number  of  emerging  market  countries  have  all  contributed  to  an  acute  awareness  of  the  inherent 
fragility of the global financial system. Bank regulation and supervision is right up there in the first line 
of defence against financial instability, and from what I can see, the international best practice setting 
authorities  have  not  dallied  in  responding  to  the  challenges.  Extensive  work  by  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS), the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), the Financial 
Stability  Forum  (FSF),  as  well  as  many  other  international  organisations  and  national  supervisory 
authorities, will form a solid base for the discussions in the next two days.  
The discussions on dealing with weak banks and international bank insolvency are clearly important in 
these times of turmoil. Since capital  is an effective,  yet costly, buffer to protect depositors from the 
effects  of  banking  problems,  the  scheduled  discussion  on  the  draft  Basel  II  Capital  Accord  is  very 
opportune. The draft accord holds the promise of ensuring that banks will have capital more relevant 
to their real risks, closing the gap between regulatory capital and  economic capital, and eliminating 
many of the regulatory arbitrage opportunities that exist in the current framework. It is important that 
the ultimate accord is applicable not only to developed countries with banks that have sophisticated 
risk management models and formally rated credit risks, but also to emerging market economies and 
banks with portfolios of retail and small/medium enterprise (SME) loans. I am particularly pleased to 
note  the  intended  discussions  on  the  transition  of  emerging  countries  to  Basel  II.  We  await  in 
anticipation the results  of the forthcoming Quantitative Impact Study (QIS),  in  which  South  Africa is 
participating fully. In fact,  the multinational  team responsible for driving the study  held an  important 
meeting here in Cape Town just last week. I am confident that South African regulators and banks will 
be ready to implement the Basel II Accord by 2006. 
The topics relating to money laundering and "knowing your customer" processes, and those relating to 
operational risk, are critically important in light of the build-up of terrorist threats to financial stability. I 
am told that many of the countries represented here are working hard at testing the readiness of their 
financial systems to endure sudden crisis events, as well as ensuring that the financial system is not 
abused by terrorist organisations to help fund their activities. 
And  of  course,  the  recent  spate  of  corporate  failures  around  the  world  has  made  discussions  on 
corporate  governance  the  more  imperative.  So,  it  is  indeed  a  remarkably  relevant  and  extremely 
demanding programme in anyone's book. I am impressed, and I wish you well.  
South Africa is regarded as having a dual economy. On the one hand it is an emerging market with its 
fair share of challenges regarding economic growth, wealth distribution, and inflation. In particular, we 
face the challenges of high unemployment, a low savings level, a high HIV/Aids infection rate, and a 
volatile currency. We are also severely affected by commodity prices, especially oil and gold.  
On  the  other  hand,  South  Africa  is  blessed  with  a  sophisticated,  privately  owned,  financial  system 
comparable in many respects with the best of the developed economies. The financial sector is well 
regulated, as confirmed by the IMF and World Bank's joint Financial Sector Assessment Programme 
(FSAP).  The  banking  sector  is  more  than  adequately  capitalised,  and  its  risks  are  well  managed. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 1
 Unfortunately, our financial sector is highly concentrated, a natural legacy of our shameful apartheid 
past. There is also an underlying problem of lack of broad access to basic financial services for the 
majority of the population, which is why I have noted with interest the topic of microfinance in emerging 
market economies on tomorrow's programme. In this regard it may be of interest to note that a review 
of  the  entire  regulatory  architecture  in  South  Africa  is  currently  underway  to  ensure  that  it  remains 
appropriate to our needs going forward.  
These and other challenges are, however, being tackled enthusiastically in a consultative manner, and 
we  remain  highly  optimistic  about  the  stability  of  our  financial  system,  the  growth  prospects  of  our 
economy, and the future of our country. Being so integrally part of Africa, you can be sure that our 
enthusiasm  also  extends  to  the  impact  of  the  New  Partnership  for  Africa's  Development  (NEPAD) 
process on the future of our continent. 
I view the fact that ICBS 2002 is being held in South Africa, the first time outside of the developed 
countries, as a symbolic indication that emerging market countries are recognised as willing and able 
to throw their weight behind the achievement a robust global financial system. We have been involved 
in  best  practice  setting  processes  for  a  long  time,  paying  specific  attention  to  the  special 
circumstances  in  emerging  countries.  Efforts  in  our  region  to  harmonise  regulatory  and  supervisory 
practices are  well known,  and the  annual meeting of the  Eastern and  Southern African grouping of 
bank supervisors (ESAF) yesterday in this venue has surely advanced that cause further. We can be 
proudly  confident  that  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC)  countries  will  not  be 
found lacking in the quest to ensure that there is no weak link in the global financial system through 
which disturbances can be propagated. 
I  wish  you  the  greatest  of  success  in  all  your  deliberations.  My  final  hope  is  that  you,  and  your 
accompanying  partners,  enjoy  the  beauty  of  Cape  Town  and  the  many  interesting  aspects  of  our 
diverse society. Hopefully this will not be too much of a distraction to  you, and that you are able to 
maintain the focus and concentration that will be required if this conference is to succeed in helping 
bank supervisors face up to the many challenges going forward. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2002
