 Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and wage growth 
Address by Mr  Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central  Bank of Norway), to the  general 
assembly of the Employers’ Organisation NAVO, 11 June 2002. 
The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive 
Board’s monetary policy meeting on 22 May and on previous speeches. Please note that the text below may differ 
slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Norway’s economic policy is based on the guidelines for fiscal and monetary policy. The guideline for 
fiscal policy states that the use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget shall be 
equivalent to the expected real return on  the Government Petroleum Fund. This means that all the 
capital  in  the  Fund  is  being  utilised.  Monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation. 
Historically,  periods  of  high  inflation  have  always  been  followed  by  a  downturn.  Low  and  stable 
inflation therefore fosters stability in the economy. 
Establishing  guidelines  for  economic  policy  is  not  new.  Both  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  have  been 
subject to a rules-based framework throughout the post-war period, with the exception of the last half 
of the 1970s and the first half of the 1980s. Monetary policy has had a clear anchor since 1986. 
The  phasing  in  of  petroleum  revenues  in  the  central  government  budget  shall  be  equivalent  to  the 
expected return on the Petroleum Fund. Most of the phasing in of petroleum revenues will take place 
over  the  next  ten  years.  With  a  four  per  cent  return  on  the  Petroleum  Fund,  the  use  of  petroleum 
revenues will rise to almost five per cent of mainland GDP in 2010. 
The inflation target provides an anchor for expectations concerning future inflation and interest rates. 
The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. Monetary policy affects the economy with a lag. The current 
level of inflation does not provide an adequate basis for determining the level at which interest rates 
should be set today. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate 
change  will  occur  within  two  years.  Two  years  is  thus  a  reasonable  time  horizon  for  achieving  the 
inflation target. 
Economic agents can act on the assumption that the inflation rate will be 2½ per cent. If it appears that 
inflation  will  be  higher  than  2½  per  cent  with  unchanged  interest  rates,  the  interest  rate  will  be 
increased. If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the 
interest rate will be reduced. There is symmetry here. It is equally important to avoid an inflation rate 
that is too low, as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high. 
The interest rate is the most important monetary policy instrument. It affects price inflation through two 
channels: demand for domestic goods and services and the krone exchange rate. 
Changes  in  labour  costs  influence  the  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services. 
The tighter the labour market is, the higher wage growth will be. 
Demand for goods and services determines to a great extent how tight the labour market will be. High 
levels of private and public consumption, investment and exports will sustain the demand for labour. 
When the supply of labour is limited, the competition for labour pushes up wages. A tight monetary 
policy stance with a high real interest rate will curb domestic demand. 
In  many  countries,  low  and  stable  consumer  price  inflation  is  the  goal  of  monetary  policy. 
Consequently,  we  can  assume  that  imported  price  inflation  will  remain  subdued.  However,  price 
inflation will nonetheless vary in pace with global economic developments. The krone exchange rate 
also plays an important role in determining import prices. A strong krone exchange rate will curb prices 
for imported goods, while a weak krone exchange rate will result in higher prices. When there is a rise 
in the interest rate in Norway and a widening differential between domestic and foreign interest rates, 
investments in NOK will increase, and the krone exchange rate will rise. 
Price inflation may vary considerably from month to month. This variation may be due to random or 
temporary  conditions,  such  as  fluctuations  in  electricity  prices  or  petrol  prices,  or  the  effects  of 
changes in real taxes. 
  When we assess the interest rate, we disregard these effects. Statistics Norway has constructed an 
indicator for adjusted price inflation - CPI-ATE - which is the measure we use to examine the results of 
monetary policy performance. 
A  sharp  rise  in  labour  costs  is  currently  fuelling  brisk  growth  in  the  prices  of  goods  and  services 
produced in Norway. Inflation  is being kept at bay  because the rise in prices for imported goods  is 
close  to  zero.  A  stronger  krone  exchange  rate,  increased  trade  with  China  and  eastern  European 
countries,  a  reduction  in  tariffs  and  the  global  downturn  have  kept  import  prices  low.  If  the  krone 
exchange rate remains at today’s level, imported price inflation will remain subdued. 
Wage growth has remained at between five and seven per cent every year since 1998. It appears that 
this year’s wage settlement will result in a similar outcome. Strong wage growth is the result of a tight 
labour market. 
The  interest  rate  is  higher  in  Norway  than  in  most  other  OECD  countries.  This  is  a  direct  result  of 
considerably higher nominal wage growth in Norway. 
The  phasing  in  of  petroleum revenues  increases  the  demand  for  labour  from  the  public  sector  and 
from  enterprises  selling  goods  and  services  to  households.  With  little  slack  in  the  economy, 
employment in the internationally exposed sector must decline. 
As  competitiveness  has  deteriorated,  manufacturing  employment  has  been  scaled  back  in  waves. 
Competitiveness deteriorated by around 10 per cent from 1994 to 2001. If wages in Norway relative to 
other countries develop along the same lines as last year and the krone exchange rate remains at the 
present level to the end of the year, competitiveness will deteriorate further by around seven per cent. 
Growth  in  public  spending  from  last  year  to  this  year  is  estimated  at  seven  per  cent.  This  is 
considerably stronger than the growth in value-added in the private sector of the mainland economy, 
which is estimated at around four per cent. The guideline for fiscal policy has been followed closely. 
Real  growth  in  public  consumption  is  estimated  at  1½  per  cent.  In  other  words,  growth  in  the 
production  of  public  services  will  be  moderate,  even  though  public  spending  is  rising  sharply  in 
nominal  kroner  terms  because  of  the  steep  increase  in  the  cost  of  producing  public  services.  This 
reflects high wage growth in the public sector. There have also been substantial increases in transfers 
to the household sector in connection with our social security system. As a result, most of the strong 
growth in central government allocations translates into a sharp rise in household consumption, while 
growth in public service production remains moderate. This is only to be expected when there is steep 
increase in public sector allocations in an economy where there are no available resources. 
Employment and labour force participation rates are high. The labour market is tight. Unemployment 
remains low, with limited available resources. There will be slow growth in the labour force. Working 
hours have been reduced by increasing the number of vacation days. In addition, outflows from the 
labour market have risen over the last few years as a result of early retirement and the use of disability 
pensions.  Strong  wage  growth  generates  demands  for  greater  efficiency  in  both  private  enterprises 
and  government  agencies.  Strong  wage  growth  may  thereby  increase  the  outflow  of  discouraged 
workers to various social security and pension schemes. All in all, we can expect an increase in the 
labour force of only 0.3-0.4 per cent in the years ahead. 
Wage  increases  in  this  year’s  settlement  were  high.  Wage  settlements  in  internationally  exposed 
sectors did not set the trend for wages. Wage increases in these sectors were around five per cent, 
while they were appreciably higher in a number of sheltered industries. This is a break with the pattern 
for the past few years. 
Many  enterprises  in  the  sheltered  sector  can,  in  principle,  pass  on  higher  wage  costs  to  their 
customers.  Monetary  policy  must  reduce  the  possibility  of  passing  on  these  costs  in  order  to  curb 
inflation. This is done partly  by keeping  growth  in demand for goods and services under control. In 
addition, a strong krone may result in the importation of goods and services previously reserved for 
domestic producers. 
In  rural  areas  and  towns,  where  local  government  employment  is  an  alternative  to  working  in 
agriculture,  the  fisheries,  local  service  production  or  small-scale  industry,  the  public  sector,  with  its 
nationwide agreements, is a wage trendsetter. Wage growth in the public sector may therefore be an 
important source of higher inflation. 
In the public sector, higher labour costs as a result of a costly income settlement can only to a limited 
extent be passed on to customers. On the other hand, the rise in costs can increase the pressure to 
  raise central government allocations. Many will probably expect the central government to pick up the 
bill when labour costs rise sharply. 
In the business sector - with its profitability requirements - higher labour costs must be matched by an 
increase  in  productivity.  In  principle,  the  central  government  will  impose  the  same  requirements  on 
government agencies. How these requirements will be met in practice will have a decisive impact on 
developments in central government expenditure and, consequently, on the interest rate and the krone 
exchange rate. 
                  