 William J McDonough: Bank supervision and credit standards under Basel II (cid:150) 
perspectives for SMEs 
Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the G(cid:252)rzenich 
K(cid:246)ln, Cologne, Germany, 25 April 2002. 
 Introduction 
Graf von Hohenthal, Herr Dr. Breuer, members of the panel, (cid:147)meine Damen und Herren(cid:133)(cid:148) 
It is an honor to join your discussion on the efforts of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to 
ensure that the international rules on capital adequacy serve the needs of twenty-first century banking 
effectively.  
What makes this a special privilege for me is the opportunity to meet so many entrepreneurs, owners 
of small and medium-sized businesses, and others  who make up the real engines of the economy. 
Your interest in the work of the Basel Committee reminds us all that we must look beyond the banking 
sector to ensure that the foundation we lay provides for the stability and growth of the entire economy. 
I  have  long  emphasized  that  the  role  of  supervisors  is  not  to  hinder  growth  or  profit,  but  rather  to 
promote  the  responsible  pursuit  of  opportunity  and  innovation.  As  we  improve  the  rules  for  bank 
capital, we must certainly keep this mandate in mind and consider the effects that changes to those 
rules may have on the economy.  
Like  you, I recognize the  need for small and medium-sized enterprises to retain access to credit at 
reasonable  and  fair  prices.  Access  to  credit  matters  not  just  because  credit  can  enable  small 
businesses to grow, but more because small businesses enable the whole economy to grow. This is 
true not just for the (cid:147)Mittelstand(cid:148) in Germany, but also of entrepreneurial ventures around the world. In 
the United States, for example, small businesses traditionally create the majority of new jobs, invent a 
large  proportion  of  all  new  technologies,  and  are  responsible  for  nearly  40%  of  our  gross  national 
product.  
Preview 
I know that you are deeply interested in the steps that the Basel Committee is taking to ensure that 
small businesses continue to enjoy fair and open access to credit, and I am pleased to share with you 
the  good  progress  that  the  Committee  has  achieved  since  the  release  of  the  Second  Consultative 
Paper in January 2001. I(cid:146)ll begin with an overview of the importance of regulatory capital to the stability 
of  the  banking  systems  (cid:150)  and  that  of  the  economy  (cid:150)  and  how  the  Committee(cid:146)s  current  efforts  will 
reinforce that stability. Second, I(cid:146)ll discuss some changes that are of particular interest to banks that 
lend to smaller businesses and to owners of small and medium-sized enterprises as well. I would like 
to  close  by  giving  you  some  insight  into  the  process  and  the  timeframe  that  is  guiding  our  work  to 
complete the impact studies and to move toward release of the final Consultative Paper. At that point, I 
look forward to hearing and learning from you in what I hope will be a rich discussion session. 
Purpose of regulatory capital 
First, let(cid:146)s look back for a moment to understand the path we(cid:146)ve taken. The Basel Committee has long 
sought  ways  to  ensure  that  banks  hold  sufficient  capital  relative  to  the  risks  they  face.  Capital,  of 
course, helps individual banks to weather unexpected losses. On a macro scale, requiring all banks to 
maintain  adequate  levels  of  capital  helps  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  financial  system. When  a 
financial  system  is  more  stable,  banks  are  better  able  to  provide  businesses  and  consumers  with 
funding and credit through good times and bad, which promotes the long-term growth of the economy. 
The risks involved in lending and borrowing have long been recognized, (cid:147)For [a] loan oft loses both 
itself and friend,(cid:148) warned Shakespeare some centuries ago. For their part, banks (cid:150) like all companies 
BIS Review 27/2002 
 1
 (cid:150) seek a healthy balance between risk and opportunity. Because banks serve as key intermediaries of 
credit  within the economy, poor credit decisions harm not just banks, but borrowers as well. Overly 
restrictive terms for credit make loans less accessible to all businesses, impeding their ability (cid:150) and 
that of the economy (cid:150) to grow. If the terms for credit are too lax, loans may be extended in volumes 
that borrowers ultimately may be unable to repay in full. In such circumstances, both borrowers and 
lenders  may  experience  losses  and  bankruptcies,  depleting  the  future  supply  of  credit.  A  banking 
system that encourages lending to companies or individuals in excess of their ability to repay is one 
that hurts not just borrowers, but society as a whole. 
Goal of the New Accord 
In  promoting  the  efficient  use  of  banks(cid:146)  capital  resources,  the  member  countries  of  the  Basel 
Committee are revising a now outdated international agreement on the minimum level of capital banks 
are required to hold. That original 1988 agreement was relatively uncomplicated and represented an 
important  first  step  in  the  development  of  an  internationally  acceptable  standard.  It  has  since  been 
overtaken by advances in the financial sector (cid:150) and in the economy. New technology, the globalization 
of financial markets, and innovative financial products and services have changed the way that banks 
measure and manage credit, market, and operational risks in a manner that the 1988 Accord could not 
anticipate.  Let  me  be  clear  about  this:  the  1988  Accord  is  broken.  It  no  longer meets  the  needs  of 
sophisticated, twenty-first century markets. The new Accord will do just that. 
Our goal for revising the Accord is to go beyond a rules-based structure and instead encourage banks 
themselves to identify, measure, and manage their risks appropriately. In particular, banks making use 
of the most sophisticated approach in the new Accord will increasingly  be able to rely  on their own 
internal ratings of credit exposures when determining how much capital to hold. A key part of this work 
is to provide banks with the appropriate incentives to improve constantly their processes for measuring 
and managing risk. In doing so, I believe that we are able to reinforce the stability of markets. In this 
regard, I am reminded of Goethe(cid:146)s view when he asked, (cid:147)What government is the best? That which 
teaches us to govern ourselves.(cid:148) In a similar manner, I believe that the new Accord will motivate banks 
to enhance their understanding of the risks they face and seek better ways to manage them. 
Because the changes proposed are far reaching, the Basel Committee is working collaboratively and 
publicly with supervisors, banks, and others involved in the financial sector. We(cid:146)ve released thousands 
of  pages  of  proposals  and  studies  for  public  review  and  comment.  The  weight  of  those  volumes 
demonstrates  how  hard  we(cid:146)ve  been  working  and  how  complex  the  challenge  has  been.  We  are 
meeting with industry participants and others in a variety of formal and informal settings, such as this 
gathering tonight, to exchange views on the proposals. My colleagues and I have been enormously 
appreciative  of  the  comments  and  questions  that  we(cid:146)ve  received  and  are  very  impressed  with  the 
quality of those views. Our proposals have been strengthened and improved by the public consultation 
process. 
Based  on  the  comments  we(cid:146)ve  received,  I  believe  that  the  industry  very  much  shares  our  goal  of 
aligning regulatory capital more closely to risk. Other market participants are likewise supportive of our 
efforts  to  develop  an  Accord  that  remains  robust,  relevant,  and  responsive  to  the  demands  and 
innovations of modern banking. Work on the proposal is continuing, and the Committee is currently 
addressing several important issues, including how the revised Accord may affect loans made to small 
and medium-sized enterprises.  
Changes since the Second Consultative Paper 
In countries around the world, and especially in Germany, much has been written about the effects the 
new Accord may have on the cost of credit for small businesses. I believe that, over the past year, 
we(cid:146)ve  made  substantial  progress  in  finding  solutions  that  should  alleviate  those  concerns  for  small 
business  owners,  regardless  of  whether  they  run  a  small  high-tech  consulting  firm  or  a  (cid:147)BMW(cid:148) 
((cid:147)B(cid:228)cker, Metzger und Winzer(cid:148))-firm. I(cid:146)d like to focus on changes to the internal ratings-based ((cid:147)IRB(cid:148)) 
proposals that are relevant to small and medium-sized businesses. Changes concerning the treatment 
of loans to small and medium-sized enterprises include (a) modifications to the capital requirements so 
that they better reflect the underlying risk; (b) greater recognition of collateral provided by small and 
medium-sized enterprises; and (c) an adjustment to the capital charges based on a borrowing firm(cid:146)s 
size. I will also discuss proposals related to banks(cid:146) equity (cid:150) or venture capital (cid:150) investments in other 
firms. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2001
 Modified capital requirements  
Let me begin by explaining what we are doing to ensure that the capital held against loans made to 
small and medium-sized companies is truly reflective of risk. The Committee has on two occasions 
over the past year asked banks to assess the impact of the revised Accord. The data gathered have 
enabled us to evaluate the level of capital that our proposals would generate and to consider several 
modifications.  
As you may know, our early findings suggested that the internal ratings-based approach as outlined in 
the Second Consultative Paper would have required banks to set aside too much capital. Contrary to 
the Committee(cid:146)s clear intent, banks would not have received a capital incentive for adopting this more 
sophisticated approach to capital adequacy. As a result, we had to adjust the capital requirements to 
provide banks with the right incentives under the new framework.  
The Committee(cid:146)s aim is to avoid unintended consequences stemming from the new proposals. That(cid:146)s 
why we are taking additional time to make sure our proposals are right. To this end, we published in 
November  a  change  in  the  IRB  formulas  for  calculating  bank  capital  requirements.  This  change  (cid:150) 
based  on  the  Committee(cid:146)s  internal  research  as  well  as  additional  input  by  bank  risk  management 
experts (cid:150) reduces the extent to which capital will vary with the internal ratings banks assign to their 
exposures. One consequence of this important change is a reduction of around one-third in the capital 
charges on loans to many small and medium-sized businesses, relative to what the Committee had 
proposed in January 2001.  
Greater recognition of collateral  
A  second  change,  announced  in  November,  is  to  expand  the  range  of  acceptable  collateral  to  let 
banks  that  qualify  for  the  internal-ratings  based  approach  recognize  physical  collateral  and  trade 
receivables as a way of reducing their capital requirements. The Committee is aware that small and 
medium-sized enterprises, such as the (cid:147)Einzelkaufleute(cid:148) and (cid:147)GmbH,(cid:148) tend to pledge these forms of 
non-financial  collateral  when  they  apply  for  credit.  By  treating  collateral  in  this  way,  the  Committee 
estimates that IRB capital requirements on loans to smaller companies may fall by another 10 percent 
relative to the first change I mentioned.  
We face a challenge in determining which forms of collateral or trade receivables offer the greatest 
level of protection to banks compared to other forms. This is not an easy task because each type of 
collateral has a unique historical record in reducing loss, records that also vary according to country. 
Moreover,  banks  in  different  countries  manage  collateral  and  trade  receivables  in  very  different 
manners.  
Because of these differences, we believe that national supervisors are best suited to determine which 
sorts of collateral to accept in their respective markets. Rather than having the Basel Committee draw 
up a comprehensive list of permissible instruments, we are developing a set of minimum criteria for 
national supervisors to implement. I believe, particularly in the case of physical collateral, that banks 
using  the  internal  ratings-based  approach  must  obtain  a  timely,  third-party  view  of  the  collateral(cid:146)s 
value. One test, for example, is that should the need arise, the bank must be able to dispose of it with 
relative ease. As a former commercial banker, I cannot see how any responsible banker would be able 
to sleep at night if these conditions are not met. On the other hand, it seems clear to me that if these 
conditions are satisfied, then the collateral does offer a bank protection against loss and  banks will 
need to hold less capital against those loans.  
Let me try to anticipate an immediate question you may have. What do we expect will be the net effect 
of the changes I have discussed? I believe that the impact of more risk-sensitive proposals will be very 
positive for small and medium-sized businesses in many countries. I understand that Jochen Sanio, 
the  very  capable  President  of  the  BAKred  and,  as  of  the  first  of  May,  President  of  the  newly 
established  FSA,  expressed  a  similar  view  at  a  recent  parliamentary  hearing.  He  pointed  out  that 
based  on  our  current  proposals,  on  average,  German  banks(cid:146)  exposures  to  small  and  medium 
companies would require less than the 8% capital currently needed under the 1988 Accord. 
But  the  issue  is  not  simply  a  question  of  impact.  The  principal  motivation  behind  the  Basel 
Committee(cid:146)s efforts has been for bank capital requirements to take appropriate account of risk. In this 
regard, the Committee has over the last six months been engaged in a significant research program to 
assess whether the size of a borrowing firm should be explicitly considered when banks calculate their 
capital requirements. 
BIS Review 27/2002 
 3
 At this point, the Basel Committee is discussing whether and how to factor a firm(cid:146)s size into the new 
framework. A lower capital charge for a portfolio consisting mainly of loans to many small companies 
makes economic sense because that portfolio is likely to be better diversified than one concentrated in 
loans to a handful of large companies. 
Assuming the discussions within the Basel Committee continue to proceed in this direction, it means 
that loans to small and medium-sized borrowers would have lower capital requirements than loans to 
larger companies that are otherwise rated the same.  
One point should be made about the treatment of loans to small and medium-sized enterprises. The 
Basel  Committee  wishes  to  ensure  that  our  new  framework  reflects  the  sound  risk  management 
practices of banks. For example, many banks manage and evaluate their loans to smaller businesses 
in  a  way  that  is  similar  to  the  way  they  handle  consumer  loans.  The  design  of  the  internal 
ratings-based framework will, therefore, allow a number of such loans to be treated like retail credits, 
as opposed to corporate loans.  
This principle also will apply to another important issue within our capital framework, namely the role of 
a  loan(cid:146)s  remaining  maturity.  The  Committee  is  sensitive  to  the  concerns  raised  about  the  need  to 
respect  the  long-term  lending  culture  prevalent  in  a  number  of  countries.  In  this  context,  we  will 
examine  carefully  how,  or  even  whether,  maturity  factors  should  apply  to  lending  to  smaller 
businesses.  
Treatment of equity exposures  
The changes I have referred to concern bank loans, which, of course, are a key source of funding for 
many companies. Nearly all businesses (cid:150) especially those growing into medium or large-sized firms (cid:150) 
also  rely  on  investments  from  outside  parties  to  build  up  their  capital  base.  Here,  I(cid:146)m  referring  to 
outsiders who provide (cid:147)venture capital(cid:148) for growing firms, as well as to investors who buy the publicly 
traded stock of more established firms.  
What  do  I  mean  by  venture  capital?  Many  small  firms  seek  an  (cid:147)angel(cid:148)  investor,  one  who  sees  the 
potential in the firm(cid:146)s strategy and is confident enough of its success to make a substantial investment. 
The angel might be a single wealthy individual, an investment fund or, in some cases, even a bank. In 
exchange for the investment, the investor receives an ownership interest in the income and assets of 
that firm. 
The Basel Committee recognizes that both venture capital and equity investments often are catalysts 
for innovation and growth in the economy. At the same time, we recognize that such investments can 
represent high-risk activities for banks. Consequently, the new rules are being designed to recognize 
the underlying risk while not discouraging or penalizing banks that wish to remain involved in venture 
capital and equity investing. 
Our  goal  is  to  create  a  capital  approach  to  equity  exposures  that  builds  upon  sound  internal  bank 
practice and remains flexible enough to apply in any country. Our challenge is to develop a treatment 
that  makes  sense  today  and  that  will  be  responsive  to  the  evolution  of  banks(cid:146)  practices  in  equity 
funding.  
An  equally  important  consideration  is  implementation,  given  significant  differences  in  the  nature  of 
banks(cid:146) equity holdings across countries and in the ways in which capital markets have evolved over 
time in each country. The Committee wants to avoid disrupting equity holdings that have developed 
under  existing capital regulations ---  whether these are long-term holdings, such as in Germany, or 
those associated with small business investment corporations in the United States. To this end, only 
new equity investments would be captured under the internal ratings-based approach for the first ten 
years after the date that the new Accord is implemented. 
This is an area where the Committee has tried to navigate differences between national practices. We 
see the best way forward as offering two approaches to calculating regulatory capital for banks(cid:146) equity 
exposures, one based on measures of market risk and a second based on the treatment of corporate 
loans. In either case, we intend for both methods to result in comparable capital requirements, which 
we  will  seek  to  confirm  through  our  next  impact  study.  Responsibility  would  lie  with  the  national 
supervisor to determine the approach most suitable for its banks.  
We expect that the new capital treatment will provide much better support for the healthy growth of 
equity financing and venture capital markets than the current Accord. 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2001
 Summary of changes and need for standards 
These important changes (cid:150) modifying the capital charges, permitting greater recognition of collateral 
and trade receivables, and increasing the flexibility of the treatment of equity (cid:150) should go a long way 
toward ensuring that banks that lend to small and medium-sized businesses are not disadvantaged 
under the internal ratings-based approach of the new Accord. I(cid:146)d like to take a moment to speak more 
broadly about the internal ratings-based approach.  
I  think  it  is  a  significant  and  innovative  step  for  banks(cid:146)  internal  ratings  to  play  a  major  role  in  their 
capital  requirements  (cid:150)  a  step  that  plays  very  strongly  into  our  goal  of  better  aligning  capital 
requirements and risks. To do this effectively, we need to ensure that a bank(cid:146)s internal rating system 
enjoys  an  appropriate  degree  of  credibility  and  consistency  when  used  in  determining  regulatory 
capital. Accordingly, we are striving to develop a meaningful set of minimum standards.  
While I have focused on the first (cid:147)pillar(cid:148) of the new Accord, namely the minimum capital requirements, 
it(cid:146)s  important  to  remember  that  there  are  two  other  pillars  vital  to  the  new  framework:  supervisory 
review and market discipline. I would be happy to talk about them during the discussion if you would 
like to hear more.  
Timing of the New Accord  
Let me close by telling you where we are in the process. To make sure that we get the new Accord 
right, members of the Committee and I felt it was important to continue to solicit and evaluate feedback 
from the industry in a variety of ways. Empirical exercises (or the quantitative impact studies as they 
are  called)  will  be  an  important  part  of  this  dialogue,  both  those  underway  now  and  the  more 
comprehensive study that will be undertaken in October.  
The exercise we are designing for the autumn will provide banks with the opportunity to assess the 
impact of a fully specified proposal. It will be targeted to a wide set of banks worldwide, after which, 
the Committee will release its proposal for a third and final round of formal consultation. We expect the 
consultation will be relatively brief given all of the discussion and assessment that has taken place.  
Let me stop here. I would be delighted to answer your questions. 
BIS Review 27/2002 
 5
