 Gertrude Tumpel Gugerell: Financial regulation and systemic stability 
Speech  by  Dr  Gertrude  Tumpel  Gugerell,  Vice  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the 
CEPR/ESI  Annual  Conference:  “Regulatory  Challenges  for  European  Financial  Markets”,  hosted  by 
the Austrian National Bank, Vienna, 21 September 2002. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Austrian National Bank’s website. 
 Introduction  
Supervisors in the early post war period were used to a fairly quiet life. The regulatory regime at this 
time  was  characterized  by  largely  repressed  and  nationally  closed  financial  systems  shielded  from 
competition.  The  Bretton  Woods  system  made  currency  risk  insignificant,  interest  rate  fluctuations 
were very moderate, price competition played no role because interest rate regulations were in place. 
There was also very little competition from non-banks and international competition was restricted by 
capital  controls.  This  situation  resulted  in  high  intermediation  margins  with  relatively  low  risk.  As  a 
consequence  the  risk  bearing  capacity  of  financial  institutions  was  high  and  financial  systems  were 
very stable.  
This  situation  has  radically  changed  since  the  mid  seventies.  After  the  fall  of  the  Bretton  Woods 
system which was accompanied by a process of wide spread financial deregulation interest rate and 
currency risks increased substantially and financial systems became much more competitive all over 
the world. Intermediation margins came under pressure and the risk bearing capacity of the financial 
system  decreased.  Supervisors  were  suddenly  confronted  with  banking  crises  and  problems  of 
financial  instability.  The  sometimes  sizeable  costs  of  these  crises  have  increasingly  refocused  the 
regulatory  debate  from  issues  of  depositor  protection  and  competition  policy  to  issues  of  financial 
stability. Today supervisors and regulators all over the world see the strengthening of the safeguards 
against  financial  instability  as  one  of  their  core  tasks.  But  are  the  instruments  in  place  today 
appropriate to achieve this goal? Are recent regulatory initiatives able to improve current practice?  
I think it is fair to claim that many remarkable improvements have been made recently and during the 
past  two  decades.  The  efforts  to  improve  capital-  and  risk  management  standards  for  banks  have 
resulted  in  substantial  advances  in  adapting  to  a  financial  environment  characterized  by  reduced 
margins and higher volatility. The level of the debate about risk within and outside financial institutions 
has  been  rising  substantially  and  the  awareness  of  potential  problems  in  assessment methods  and 
regulatory instruments is nowadays much higher than ten or twenty years ago.  
All  these  improvements  notwithstanding,  I  want  to  argue  today  that  we  still  need  a  further  critical 
debate about how we think of financial instability, its causes and its economic consequences. In this 
debate we have to question perceived viewpoints and sometimes perhaps to go back to basics.  
There are of course many more open issues than I can possibly address in this talk. So let me confine 
myself mainly to a particular - though important- aspect of this debate: The common perspective on 
financial regulation and financial instability is at the moment mainly concerned with single institutions. 
The  discussion  of  financial  crises  and  systemic  risk  however  requires  a  shift  in  perspective  from 
individual institutions to the financial system as a whole.  
This  shift  in  perspective  is  already  under  way.  The  popularity  of  the  notions  of  “macro-prudential” 
versus “micro-prudential” approaches to regulation and supervision reflect this fact (Borio (2002)). As 
Andrew  Crockett,  the  general  manager  of  the  BIS  explained  in  a  widely  cited  speech  at  the 
international  conference  of  banking  supervisors  in  Basel  in  September  2000,  macro-  and  micro 
prudential  approaches  to  supervision  and  regulation  differ  mainly  in  terms  of  objectives  of  the 
supervisory tasks and in the conception of mechanisms influencing economic outcomes. Whereas the 
macro-prudential objective can be defined as limiting the costs of financial distress for the economy as 
a whole and to reduce the likelihood of large scale breakdowns of financial intermediation, the micro-
prudential approach is concerned with limiting the failure of individual institutions. Whereas the micro-
prudential  approach  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  financial  stability  is  ensured  when  each  and 
every institution in the financial system is sound, the macro-prudential approach does not necessarily 
endorse this view.  
BIS Review 53/2002 
 1
 In the following I want to contribute to this discussion and argue why a shift of perspective from an 
institution-based regulatory policy to a system perspective is indeed necessary and important and why 
we should actively discuss these issues.  
The Endogenous Nature of Financial Risk  
The  recent  history  of  financial  regulation  -  in  particular  the  framework  put  forward  by  the  Basle 
Committee - has been concerned to a large extent with the upgrading of capital standards for banks. 
One of the basic features of this regulation is the idea that capital charges required by the regulator 
should reflect appropriately the risk taken by the banks: they should be risk weighted. Banks that take 
higher risks should be required to hold more capital. The major part of the discussion about capital 
adequacy regulation has so far centered on the appropriate choice of risk weights. In fact a core part 
of  the  proposal  for  the  new  Basle  accord  deals  with  correcting  past  shortcomings  in  the  choice  of 
these weights.  
In this process regulators have relied heavily on individual risk management models operated by the 
banks and audited by the supervisors. Capital charges are determined based on the results from these 
risk  management  models.  The  recent  developments  have  increased  the  scope  for  model-based 
calculations of capital charges to a much wider class of risks.  
A common feature of these models is that financial risks are taken as exogenous to the behavior of 
institutions. Conceptually many of the modern internal risk models look at financial risks borne by the 
banks  in  very  much  the  same  way  as  on  the  risk  of  the  weather.  Managing  the  risk  of  a  financial 
institution is thus seen in analogy to a game against nature (See Morris and Shin (1999)).  
This point of view can be perfectly sensible from the perspective of an individual bank. As an individual 
institution in a big international market it may make sense to view the financial risks reflected in the 
volatility  of  financial  market  and  asset  prices  as  largely  exogenous.  For  the  system  as  a  whole  the 
risks faced by the different agents in the financial system are however endogenous.  
From a system viewpoint it is important to see that prices and volatility are determined endogenously 
in the aggregate and depend on the joint behavior of all agents. Failing to recognize this endogenous 
nature of financial risk can indeed lead to poor risk assessments. In particular in times of crises the 
weather paradigm of financial risks is seriously misleading. While in normal times the actions of many 
heterogeneous  agents  cancel  each  other  out  in  the  aggregate  in  times  of  crises  behavior  usually 
becomes extremely uniform and individual actions become mutually reinforcing thereby amplifying the 
crises. This reminds us of a basic insight in other areas of economics: What is true at the micro level 
may not necessarily hold in the aggregate.  
In  the  recent  academic  literature  various  contributions  by  Morris  and  Shin  (See  Morris  and  Shin 
(1999)) have modeled this basic insight for an analysis of banking crises and currency attacks. Their 
main point is that in a financial market - contrary to weather forecasts - agents play a game against 
nature and against other agents simultaneously. In such a situation actions of individual agents are 
typically mutually reinforcing. Equilibrium behavior is characterized by simultaneous sudden switches 
of collective actions.  
Discrepancies between individually and aggregate rational behavior arise because individual agents 
do not take into account the effects of their behavior on the payoff distribution of other agents. If - for 
example- everybody sells into a falling market prices will plummet and the crisis is reinforced.  
Morris and Shin (1999) discuss the episode of the crash of the US dollar against the Yen in October 
1998 as an example for the logic described above. The dollar had been continuously appreciating in 
the  years before  the crash. In the summer of 1998  it  was  expected that  the dollar  would rise even 
further to the end of the year. In combination with a large interest rate differential between Japan and 
the  US,  many  traders  took  advantage  of  the  situation  by  borrowing  Yen,  buying  Dollar  assets  and 
make profit on the appreciation of the Dollar as well as on the interest rate differential. This kind of 
trading  strategy  was  pursued  by  banks,  hedge  funds  and  even  by  bigger  corporations.  When  the 
Russian default set in during August 1998 all agents that had participated in the so called Yen-carry 
strategy in the months before were all simultaneously eager to unwind their dollar positions reinforcing 
the fall of the Dollar and thereby deepening the crises.  
Individually these strategies might have all been rational. What individual institutions and the weather 
paradigm of financial risks fail to take into account is the fact that the behavior of individuals changes 
the payoff distribution of all other individuals. Since this externality is not taken into account by current 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2002
 risk  management  technology  there  are  reasons  to  believe  that  the  models  will  work  poorly  exactly 
when needed most: before and in times of crises.  
What conclusions can we draw from such an insight? I think the arguments put forward above support 
the point made in the beginning. If we want to design a regulatory framework that is able to act as a 
safeguard against financial instability a shift of perspective from individual institutions to a system level 
is  essential.  The  current  strong  reliance  on  individual  backward  looking  risk  models  has  to  be 
questioned and we have to think on how we can supplement such an approach by a form of aggregate 
assessment that takes the endogenous nature of risk into account as far as possible.  
Summarizing these points  I want to conclude that  we have to ask ourselves  whether  we are at the 
moment perhaps relying too much on the use of internal risk models to determine capital charges. As I 
have argued, these models are rooted in a risk concept that is particularly misleading shortly before 
and in a crises because the endogenous nature of risk. At the onset of a crisis the process that drives 
the data on which risk assessments are based undergoes a structural break and changes its nature. If 
we fail to take these effects into account we are led to flawed and misleading risk assessments.  
The Problem of Hidden Aggregate Risk Exposure  
Another  tension  between  the  micro-  and  the  macro-perspective  exists  in  the  field  of  banking 
supervision. Current  practice is mostly  based on the individual  institution approach. It is  hoped  that 
supervisory  assessment  of  the  “soundness”  of  single  institutions  and  bank  by  bank  regulatory 
monitoring of risk models is sufficient to safeguard the stability of the banking system as a whole. This 
point of view can however be doubted. As with the problem discussed before there is a substantial 
difference between the single institution and the system perspective.  
One of the major reasons why the individual institutions approach is insufficient is the fact that modern 
banking  systems  are  characterized  by  a  fairly  complex  network  of  mutual  credit  exposures.  These 
credit exposures result from liquidity management on the one hand and from OTC derivative trading 
on the other hand. They have substantially increased in importance in the post Bretton Woods area by 
the huge growth in international capital markets. They have also become more important because the 
banking  industry's  reaction  to  a  situation  of  tighter  margins  and  increasing  volatility.  Banks  have 
increasingly used new risk management techniques that try to take risks out of the balance sheet and 
sell it to third parties via derivative contracts, mainly through interest rate swaps.  
In such a system of mutual exposures the actual risk borne by the banking system as a whole and the 
institutions  embedded  in  it  may  easily  be  hidden  at  the  level  of  an  individual  bank.  Thus  again  the 
major problem of an individual institution perspective is a potentially misleading risk assessment for 
the financial system as a whole.  
The  problem  of  hidden  risk  exposure  is  perhaps  most  easily  seen  in  the  case  of  counterparty  risk. 
Judged  at  the  level  of  an  individual  institution  it  might  look  rather  unspectacular.  By  the  individual 
institution  perspective  it  can  however  remain  unnoticed  that  a  bank  is  part  of  a  chain  of  mutual 
obligations in  which credit  risks are highly correlated. Its actual risk exposure thus might indeed be 
quite substantial and can be uncovered only if an assessment can be made at the system level.  
Another example of hidden exposure has been pointed out in the literature by the previous speaker, 
Professor  Hellwig.  He  gave  an  example  where  the  network  of  mutual  credit  obligations  makes 
substantial  exposure  of  the  system  to  interest  rate  risk  invisible  at  the  level  of  an  individual  bank 
because the individual maturity transformation looks short, whereas the maturity transformation of the 
system  as  a  whole  is  rather  extreme  (See  Hellwig  1997).  To  uncover  hidden  exposure  and  to 
appropriately  assess  risk  in  the  banking  system,  rather  than  looking  at  individual  institutions,  risk 
assessment should therefore make an attempt to judge the risk exposure of the system as a whole.  
How a change into a more system oriented supervisory risk assessment could work in practice seems 
at the moment still an open issue. Even if we feel uneasy about the current practice it is not clear how 
a system perspective would look like in practice. This does however not imply that we should not face 
the challenge. To the contrary: If we take the task of strengthening the safeguards against financial 
instability seriously, finding an answer to these questions  is indeed crucial. Let  me point out at this 
stage that Oesterreichische Nationalbank by  its research activities tries to actively contribute to this 
process. The  results  of  these  efforts  are  published  in  our  regular  Financial  Stability  Report  and  the 
Working Paper Series of the Bank.  
BIS Review 53/2002 
 3
 To summarize these remarks let me conclude that we have to rethink the current practice of how we 
supervise  our  banking  systems.  I  have  argued  that  the  problem  of  the  current  approach  based  on 
individual institutions may fail to notice important risk exposures that remain hidden if we don't attempt 
to achieve a risk assessment at a system level.  Spotting the build up of financial instabilities in the 
banking system is in any case an extremely difficult task. But the quality of such risk assessments will 
be greatly improved if we manage to learn how risk assessment at a system level can be done.  
To be sure let me make clear that I am not arguing that the current supervisory practice is of no value 
in the big task of safeguarding financial stability. However, we need complementary approaches that 
bring in the macro-perspective of an overall risk assessment for the banking system as a whole.  
The Problem of Procyclical Effects of Capital Adequacy Regulation  
Another  classical  conflict  between  the  micro-  and  macro-perspective  on  financial  stability  has 
extensively  been  discussed  in  the  case  of  capital  adequacy  regulation.  While  for  an  individual 
institution it may make sense to take a defensive stance in a situation of crises, if all banks do that 
each of them could end worse off.  
From the early days of the Basel accord concerns about these procyclical effects of capital adequacy 
regulation have been raised and the issue has been widely discussed. (See Blum and Hellwig (1995)). 
If I discuss the procyclicality issue here I am therefore telling hardly anything new. However it seems 
necessary to point out at this stage that we can not close the debate yet.  
The mechanism by which capital standards act as a cyclical amplifier is relatively easy to understand. 
Capital adequacy regulation can bring banks into a situation where they have to cut back credit in a 
recession to fulfil their capital requirements after an adverse shock. Especially in a situation where all 
banks  are  hit  at  the  same  time,  this  might  amplify  an  economic  recession  and  increase  bank 
insolvencies rather than prevent them.  
Of course this analysis is based on the assumption that banks can not easily issue new equity and that 
firms can not simply substitute bank credit with other sources of finance. The effect of capital scarcity 
leading to a ''credit crunch'' has been observed and investigated by in the literature by Bernake and 
Lown (1991) and Calomiris and Wilson (1998) among others.  
If there is a substantial cost connected to issuing new equity in bad times and if firms can not easily 
substitute bank finance by other sources, one has automatically a procyclical effect of bank lending no 
matter whether capital requirements are in place or not. However capital requirements may act as an 
amplifier.  
Refining risk weights by making capital charges dependent on internal and external ratings may even 
exacerbate  these  effects  because  ratings  also  vary  with  the  business  cycle.  Preliminary  evidence 
suggests that procyclicality is likely to increase under the new proposal in particular in crises situations 
(See Segoviano and Lowe (2002)).  
Having said this, what conclusions shall we draw from this analysis? I don't have a definite answer but 
I think the concerns that have been raised in the discussion have to be taken seriously and we are 
challenged to think about approaches that could strengthen countercyclical regulatory instruments that 
encourage the build up of cushions in booms that can act as buffers when times deteriorate.  
Making progress in this direction requires that we are able to improve the measurement of risk through 
time  and  in  the  assessment  of  the  profile  of  macroeconomic  risks;  an  extremely  difficult  task  (See 
Borio 2002). There are efforts to proceed in this direction in particular by work at the BIS and at other 
institutions but there is still much to be done.  
Some authors have argued that the procyclicality concerns are largely exaggerated because there are 
reasons to believe that a number of other factors can alleviate or even offset these effects. (See Borio 
2002).  I  think  we  don't  know  the  definite  answer  yet.  Theoretical  arguments  and  the  preliminary 
evidence combined should alert us that we have to make further progress on this issue.  
The Role of Central Banks  
I have argued that there is a need to strengthen the system perspective on financial regulation and 
financial stability and that the regulatory instruments and objectives have to be complemented by new 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2002
 approaches to risk assessment and supervision. At a policy level such an endeavour will necessarily 
involve many institutions and raise difficult policy coordination issues. Let me say a few words about 
the role of central banks in this process.  
Modern central banking has always been intimately connected to banking supervision. This intimate 
link has its historic roots in the establishment of banknotes as a means of payment and the spread of 
commercial bank money or bank deposits as a convenient substitute for banknotes and coins. While it 
is  the  public  function  of  monetary  policy  to  ensure  the  confidence  in  the  paper  currency,  ensuring 
stability of the relationship between central bank and commercial bank money is the ultimate function 
of  prudential  supervision  and  regulation  of  the  banking  system.  Thus  central  banks  have  a  keen 
interest in issues of financial stability.  
As  far  as  the  shift  in  perspective  from  an  individual  institution  approach  to  a  more  system  based 
approach  to  regulation  and  supervision  is  concerned,  central  banks  are  natural  institutions  to 
contribute to such an attempt.  
Central  banks  by  their  role  as  liquidity  providers  to  the  banking  system  and  in  their  functions  in 
prudential supervision have rich  data sets that are relevant to the issues raised above. These data 
sets  provide  potentially  extremely  valuable  information  that  can  be  used  and  exploited  for  the 
development of new tools and methods that can support a system approach to banking regulation and 
supervision.  
As I have indicated in the beginning issues of financial stability have raised to the top of the agenda of 
economic  policy  discussions  because  the  world  and  the  financial  environment  have  substantially 
changed  since  the  mid  seventies.  Both  financial  institutions  and  regulators  during  the  last  decades 
have already learned a lot about how to live in this new world of increased volatility and tight margins. 
As central banks needed some time to learn how to effectively fight inflation, we will need some time to 
learn  how  to  best  deal  with  a  more  volatile  and  competitive  financial  environment.  In  this  learning 
process policy makers can benefit a lot from the input of academic research and economic analysis. In 
the  same  way  as  academic  research  has  provided  very  valuable  insights  that  have  helped  policy 
makers in the conquest of inflation, the attempts to provide safeguards against financial instability will 
equally  benefit  from  an  active  dialogue  between  policy  and  research.  Initiatives  such  as  this 
conference are therefore very valuable indeed and I want to emphasize that good policy solutions to 
the  big  challenge  of  safeguarding  financial  stability  will  depend  very  much  on  a  fruitful  dialogue 
between academic research and economic policy.  
Conclusions  
The  discussion  about  financial  stability  and  financial  crises  has  brought  us  a  long  way  since  the 
beginning of the seventies. We have learned a lot in this process and despite of many shortcomings 
the  regulatory  environment  as  well  as  the  active  management  of  risks  in  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions has substantially improved since then.  
However many questions still have to be addressed. I hope that I have convinced you that one of the 
big  steps  that  is  ahead  of  us  is  the  development  of  meaningful  and  effective  ways  to  complement 
existing  approaches  to  safeguarding  financial  stability  by  a  more  systemically  oriented  viewpoint.  I 
have  discussed  three  issues  -  the  endogenous  nature  of  financial  risks,  the  problem  of  hidden 
aggregate exposure and the problem of procyclicality of capital requirements - to illustrate this point. I 
hope  that  I  have  convinced  you  that  we  could  indeed  benefit  from  a  shift  in  perspective  from  an 
individual institution- to a system perspective.  
If you share this view, then there is still much work ahead both in terms of research and in terms of 
economic  policy.  Policy  makers  will  need  the  input  from  research  to  clarify  many  of  the  open 
conceptual  and  empirical  issues that are raised in this debate. I also hope  that researches find the 
problems that arise for policy makers sufficiently interesting and challenging to think about them and 
that many new ideas will result from attempts to understand the nature of financial risks and financial 
instability. I do hope that a fruitful dialogue between these two worlds - the world of regulatory policy 
and supervision and the world of academic research - will finally result in improved policy solutions for 
the difficult problem of financial regulation and systemic stability.  
BIS Review 53/2002 
 5
