 Joseph Yam: The Asian crisis - lessons for the future 
Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
HKMA  Fifth  Distinguished  Lecture:  “The  Asian  Crisis:  Lessons  for  the  Future”,  Hong  Kong, 
21 May 2002. 
 I am delighted to  welcome all of  you to this fifth HKMA Distinguished Lecture, and to introduce our 
speaker, Dr Stanley Fischer, and our discussant, Dr Stephen Grenville. 
The title of Stanley Fischer’s lecture is “The Asian Crisis: Lessons for the Future.” In a few weeks’ time 
we shall be marking the fifth anniversary of the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis - a day or so, 
incidentally,  after  we  celebrate  an  entirely  unconnected  event,  the  fifth  anniversary  of  the 
establishment  of  the  Hong  Kong  SAR.  Asia  and  the  world  have  gone  through  many  other  ordeals 
since 1997, so that the crisis perhaps seems much further in the past than it really is. But its effects - 
both physical and psychological - are still with us. It is important that we continue to study the causes 
and  effects  and  to  see  what  lessons  there  are  for  the  present.  I  have  spoken  at  length  on  many 
previous  occasions  on  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  and  I  intend  today  to  sit  back  and  listen.  Let  me, 
however, make three very brief observations. 
The  first  is  that,  five  years  on,  very  limited  progress  has  been  made  in  resolving  one  of  the 
fundamental problems that helped make the crisis so devastating for so many economies: a deficient 
global financial architecture, which has been outgrown by the markets that use it. There have indeed 
been  some  reforms  both  internationally  and  in  individual  economies,  and  there  is  a  much  greater 
alertness to the threats to stability posed by volatile, high-velocity international capital flows. But much 
still  remains  to  be  done,  and  as  capital  flows  get  bigger,  the  risk  of  further  crisis  remains. 
Paradoxically, the risks are increased by a false sense of security brought on by two or three years’ 
absence of the kind of contagion that shook so many parts of the world in the nineties. 
The second observation is that, in the absence of international solutions, a number of economies in 
the region have adopted local approaches to the problem. Some have chosen to go slow or even step 
back  from  financial  liberalisation  through  introducing  or  tightening  restrictions  and  controls.  While 
understandable  -  and  in  some  cases  effective  as  short-term  measures  -  such  an  approach  is 
regrettable because it shuts off many of the benefits, as well as the dangers, of globalisation. In Hong 
Kong, where controls of this kind are not practical because of the realisation that global links supply 
our  lifeblood,  we  have  taken  a  different  approach.  We  have  chosen  to  enhance  policy  credibility 
through greater transparency and through strengthening and tightening up our rule-based monetary 
system. 
My  third  observation  is  that  those  who  said  that  the  Asian  crisis  was  the  death knell  of  Asia  as  an 
economic  force  -  and  there  were  many  of  them  -  seem  to  have  been  wrong.  There  has  been 
remarkable resilience, even in the worst-hit economies, and a will to reform and restructure that has 
helped put a number of economies back on their feet even during a time of global economic downturn. 
Progress has not been evenly spread throughout the region, and there are still causes for anxiety. But, 
as  the  world  economy  shows  signs  of  recovery,  the  prospects  for  the  region,  if  not  dazzling,  look 
somewhat brighter. 
It is now my great pleasure to introduce our speaker and discussant. From the late eighties until very 
recently, Stan Fischer has been very much at the centre of world economic and financial crisis - and 
its solutions - first at the World Bank and then as First Deputy Managing Director and subsequently 
Senior  Adviser  at  the  IMF.  He  has  played  a  practical  role  -  often  a  crucial  one  -  in  addressing, 
preventing and resolving crises, and he has written extensively on the subject. Asia, no less than other 
regions of the world, has benefited from his expertise, and we are very honoured to have him here to 
talk about the lessons that can be learned from the recent crisis. 
Steve Grenville served for 20 years with the Reserve Bank of Australia, and was Deputy Governor of 
that Bank from 1996 to 2001. Before joining the Reserve Bank, he served in the OECD in Paris, and 
before that he spent time with the IMF in Indonesia. He played a pivotal role during the Asian crisis, 
and was instrumental in Australia’s involvement in three of the larger support packages in the region. It 
is a great honour to have him here as discussant today. 
BIS Review 33/2002 
 1
 Stan and Steve are old friends of mine. I therefore think it is right for me to comment on the positions 
in which they now find themselves after careers totalling around 40 years in central banking, and to try 
to see if this sheds any  light on the  eternal question: “What happens to central bankers when they 
cease to be central bankers?” I speak from a position of intense personal interest because the recent 
resignation of Don Brash of the Governorship of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand leaves me - so I 
am  told  -  with  the  doubtful  distinction  of  being  the  longest-serving  central  bank  chief  in  the  region. 
Don Brash, who has a reputation for making original career choices, has reportedly gone into politics - 
a precedent which, let me stress, I have no intention of following. 
Stan and Steve have followed what the IMF would no doubt refer to as a “two-corner solution”. Since 
leaving the IMF earlier this year, Stan has firmly anchored himself to one of the world’s largest banking 
and  finance  groups  as  its  Vice-Chairman.  I  will  not  name  the  bank  here,  because  the  HKMA  is 
currently a tenant in a building that bears its name. To avoid giving the impression that the HKMA is a 
subsidiary of that bank, we have always tried to pretend that the building is called something else, by 
refraining from mentioning the name on our stationery, or to deliverymen or taxi-drivers, or to anyone 
else. It is sufficient to say  that the bank in question  is this  year celebrating  its 100th anniversary in 
Hong Kong. 
Steve  has  gone  to  the  opposite  end  of  the  two-corner  solution  by  entering  the  floating  world  of 
academics and consultants. Since leaving the Reserve Bank of Australia six months ago, he has taken 
up  an  appointment  as  Adjunct  Professor  at  the  National  Centre  for  Development  Studies  at  the 
Australian  National  University.  He  also  works  as  an  economic  consultant,  mainly,  I  understand,  on 
Asia-related topics. 
Whatever corner Stan and Steve have chosen, the important thing is that they will continue to give 
their  expertise  to  the  region  through  organisations  which,  though  very  different,  have  an  important 
presence in Asia. They are also here to share that expertise with us today. So without further delay, let 
me welcome them both and call first upon our speaker, Dr Stanley Fischer, to deliver the Fifth HKMA 
Distinguished Lecture. Dr Fischer, please. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2002
