 David Dodge: Bank of Canada’s outlook for the Canadian economy 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, for a meeting with Canadian banks 
and the investment community, New York, 31 January 2002.  
 I am pleased to be here today and to have this opportunity to talk about the Bank of Canada's outlook 
for the Canadian economy and to update you on our monetary policy actions.  
This has been a very difficult year for all of us in North America, but especially for you here in New 
York City. The tremendous loss of human lives as a result of the 11 September terrorist attacks has 
been tragic. Among those who died there were family members, friends, and colleagues. And there 
were other innocent citizens of many nationalities caught in this tragedy, including Canadians. All of us 
at the Bank of Canada share a deep sorrow and extend our heartfelt sympathy.  
The  immediate  impact  and  the  fallout  from  last  September's  events  introduced  new  layers  of 
uncertainty  into  the  economic  picture,  compounding  the  effects  of  a  deepening  global  economic 
slowdown that had become more evident during the summer.  
The Bank of Canada quickly responded to this extreme uncertainty by aggressively lowering interest 
rates in order to minimize the economic impact of the attacks and limit the loss of confidence. Since 
September,  we  have  lowered  our  key  policy  interest  rate  by  200  basis  points,  bringing  the  total 
reduction since the beginning of 2001 to 375 basis points.  
This substantial monetary easing, together with measures taken by Canadian governments to reduce 
taxes and to strengthen national security, should support growth in domestic spending.  
On this basis, and with the improvement we have seen since the fall in the geopolitical climate and in 
consumer confidence, it is now clearer that the Canadian economy will gather momentum as the year 
unfolds. The timing and strength of the recovery will partly depend on how quickly business confidence 
and business investment, which remain weak in many countries, bounce back. Here, it is important to 
note  that  in  Canada  we  did  not  have  the  same  degree  of  overinvestment  in  fixed  capital  in  the 
manufacturing sector during 1998-2000 as in the United States. So, the need for retrenchment and for 
adjustment of excess capacity in Canada would be less.  
The Bank of Canada's current view is that economic growth in Canada will be relatively modest in the 
first half of 2002—between 1 and 2 per cent, on an annualized basis—but that it will accelerate in the 
second half—to a range of 3 to 4 per cent—and strengthen further in 2003.  
This output profile means that there will be an appreciable amount of excess supply in the economy 
through 2002. Because of this, we see core inflation averaging just under 1 ½ per cent in the second 
half of 2002—below our 2 per cent target. Total CPI inflation should remain below the core rate until 
late 2002. With slack in the economy starting to be taken up in the second half of 2002, and expected 
to disappear by late 2003, inflation should move back up close to 2 per cent in about two years.  
I would now like to reiterate some of the comments I made on current developments last week, when 
we  released  our  Update  to  the  November  Monetary  Policy  Report,  and  in  two  speeches  I  gave  in 
western Canada earlier this week.  
It is now becoming clearer that the Canadian economy will strengthen as we go through this year and 
into  2003.  Recent  data  increasingly  support  the  view  that  a  recovery  is  taking  hold.  Household 
spending  in  Canada,  particularly  on  interest-sensitive  purchases,  has  been  stronger  than  expected. 
The  latest  data  on  exports  and  manufacturing  activity  show  signs  of  recovery.  The  inventory 
adjustment is progressing. And with early evidence of a revival in the U.S. economy, the world prices 
of non-energy commodities appear to have bottomed out.  
These signs of a pickup in economic activity in Canada, and elsewhere, are encouraging.  
Over  time,  exchange  rates  should  reflect  economic  and  financial  developments  and  prospects.  But 
movements  in  the  Canada–U.S.  exchange  rate  do  not  yet  appear  to  have  reflected  the  recent 
developments in our economy. And to the extent that the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar 
risks affecting consumer and business confidence in Canada, it is clearly not helpful for our economy. 
Furthermore, at this juncture, it is certainly the case that the economic recovery in Canada does not 
hinge on the current low levels of the Canadian dollar against its U.S. counterpart.  
BIS Review 8/2002 
 1
 Let me sum up. There is a good chance that when the final national accounts data for Canada come 
out, we will see positive, albeit modest, economic growth in both the last quarter of 2001 and the first 
quarter of this year. At this point, all available data suggest that final demand in the fourth quarter was 
stronger than we had anticipated. With production coming in at a much lower rate than final demand, 
the implication is that there has been a sharp rundown of inventories during the fourth quarter. This 
bodes well for the future, since it underpins the significant momentum we expect to see in economic 
activity as the year progresses.  
This is not to say that there are not uncertainties or risks in the economic outlook, or that the Bank of 
Canada will not remain alert to unfolding developments. But, overall, the prospects for the Canadian 
economy are looking up.  
2 
 BIS Review 8/2002
