 Willem F Duisenberg: Challenges to the ECB’s monetary policy 
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  upon  receiving  the 
European  Banker  of  the  Year  Award  on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  Frankfurt, 
16 May 2002 
 Introductory remarks 
Lady Mayor, Karl-Otto, Andrew, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, may I say that it is a special honour 
to receive the European Banker of the Year Award for 2002. The Council, which in two weeks’ time will 
have  been  directing  monetary  policy  for  three  and  a  half  years,  is  proud  to  be  the  recipient  of  this 
prestigious award. 
Since  it  was  set  up  in  June  1998,  the  Governing  Council  has  discussed  and  deliberated  in  an 
atmosphere  of  collegiality  and  consensus.  The  search  for  broadly  shared  resolutions  within  the 
Council has ensured that a balanced judgement could be reached regarding the true state of the euro 
area, which covers a vast geographical area and comprises highly diverse national economies. The 
Council’s consensual approach has fostered a long-term perspective and preserved continuity with our 
past. Seeking and obtaining a broad consensus on policy decisions and then explaining them carefully 
to the public on the basis of euro-area aggregate evidence has a threefold effect. It shields Governing 
Council  members  from  pressures  originating  in  their  home  countries;  it  imposes  a  discipline  on 
monetary  policy  by  having  a  continuous,  multilateral  check  of  time  consistency  and  policy  direction 
within  the  Council;  and  it  counters  any  public  suspicion  that  a  national  bias  may  inform  policy 
decisions. 
Internal governance has been an essential tool in the response to the many challenges confronting the 
ECB  since  its  earliest  days.  At  the  start  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  we  were  faced  with  the 
extraordinary task of having to conduct policy with limited area-wide data, with several conventional 
statistical  indicators  still  under  construction  and,  of  course,  with  the  euro  area  undergoing  a  major 
regime shift. Moreover, we were hard pressed - following the Asian and Russian crises in 1997 and 
1998  -  to  handle  a  difficult  and  unpredictable  situation  which  some  thought  would  spiral  further 
downwards. And at the same time we had to attend to the unique task of laying the foundations for our 
future action, thereby completing the work that had been initiated by the European Monetary Institute. 
The ECB had to be guided towards full possession of the necessary economic details about a new 
and unique monetary area with an economic weight comparable to that of the United States. 
So it must have come as a surprise to many that the birth of the euro in January 1999 went so well. 
Indeed, it was a resounding success. The transition to the euro was virtually free of technical faults. 
We  created  almost  overnight  a  unified  money  market,  which,  despite  the  formidable  transaction 
overload, functioned smoothly from the very start. Short interest rate volatility remained well contained, 
and  the  main  refinancing  operations,  along  with  the  standing  facilities  and  the  reserve  requirement 
system  with  averaging  provisions,  have  since  guaranteed  that  money  market  developments  remain 
closely in line with the ECB’s intentions. 
The arrival of euro banknotes and coins on 1 January this year also went very smoothly. We supplied 
300  million  people  with  a  new  means  of  payment  which  in  sixty  days  replaced,  without  technical 
failures or psychological regret, currencies that had served for centuries. Exchanging the old national 
banknotes and coins for the new euro denominations was a massive operation  requiring  enormous 
technical  effort,  perfect  logistical  co-ordination  and  economic  wisdom.  Its  success,  again,  exceeded 
the expectations of many - and perhaps even our own dreams. From the outset, the people of Europe 
have been enthusiastic about the euro and have quickly adopted their new money. 
Key factors behind a successful monetary policy  
But let me move on to my main subject today: the key institutional factors underlying the Governing 
Council’s policy. I shall also consider the many challenges - in addition to the changeover - which we 
have faced since the inception of the single monetary policy. 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 1
 First,  the  well-designed  institutional  framework  of  EMU  was  a  key  factor  setting  the  stage  for  a 
successful  monetary  policy.  The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Union  assigned  to  the  ECB 
unambiguous responsibility for the maintenance of a stable scale of value which agents can internalise 
in their expectations. And it has shielded monetary policy from political interference. 
Price stability diminishes investment risk, reduces the cost of capital and lengthens the horizon over 
which lenders and borrowers wish to engage in credit arrangements. This multiplies the opportunities 
for agents to exercise their entrepreneurial spirits, to pursue and spread technological advances and 
to contribute to the well-being of society at large. Technological factors and agents’ attitudes towards 
consumption, savings and work combine with government thrift and legislation to determine the real 
basis for economic well-being. Any attempts by a central bank to change this balance of real forces in 
the short run at the expense of the stability of the currency can only be futile and self-defeating. 
Today, there is a broad consensus among economists that monetary policy is not a suitable tool for 
fine-tuning economic developments. Any attempts to sacrifice the medium-term goal of price stability 
to efforts to meet short-term objectives will ultimately weaken the stability of a currency. To prevent 
monetary policy itself disrupting the economy, it needs to be made and kept independent of pressures 
arising from short-term political and electoral objectives. 
A second key factor behind a successful monetary policy is the macroeconomic policy framework laid 
down in the Treaty. While preserving the value of our currency is our primary occupation, the Treaty 
recognises that the ECB does not operate in a vacuum. So, it has created a harmonious institutional 
structure in which areas of shared responsibilities across policy domains are carefully avoided, and the 
single  monetary  policy  finds  a  standing  safeguard  in  the  virtuous  principles  disciplining  its  policy 
counterparts. The Stability and Growth Pact is a central component in this structure. The past three 
decades  have  taught  us  that  fiscal  laxity,  far  from  enhancing  collective  prosperity,  has  only  made 
endeavours  by  central  banks  to  preserve  the  value  of  money  costly  and  painful.  The  principles 
underlying the Pact have restrained and ultimately reversed what appeared an unrelenting growth in 
public liabilities. This has reduced the long-term cost of borrowing and made easier the task of the 
single monetary authority. 
Within  the  framework  of  the  Treaty  and  the  provisions  set  in  place  to  implement  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact,  national  governments  exchange  views,  agree  on  general  guidelines  and  policy 
recommendations,  and  share  frank  assessments.  For  its  part,  the  ECB  accepted  the  invitation  to 
participate in an informal dialogue with governments and other political actors. This was done on the 
clear understanding that the purpose was to share information and insights, not to receive guidance or 
instructions on matters of monetary policy. 
The institutional balance upon which this dialogue rests, while adequate and balanced, is delicate and 
at times fragile. We thus take note with increasing alarm that the voices calling for co-ordinated action 
by the monetary and fiscal authorities have become louder and more authoritative recently. According 
to these voices, the ‘policy mix’ should be improved, and the monetary and fiscal authorities should 
agree on ‘common standards that define general principles’ guiding policy conduct over time. We note 
these ideas with concern. If such steps were taken, they would undermine the independence granted 
to the ECB in pursuing its mandate. They would alter the incentives of economic actors to discharge 
their respective duties to the best of their ability. They would blur policy responsibilities and instil the 
perception that monetary policy may have become subservient to the needs and logic of the political 
cycle.  Not  least,  they  would,  by  implication,  severely  damage  central  bank  credibility,  which  in  turn 
would cause painful costs, in terms of higher interest rates. 
The exchange of information and advice, notably across policy domains, and more explicitly between 
fiscal  and  monetary  jurisdictions,  should  never  turn  into  reciprocal  interference.  The  success  of 
monetary  policy  fundamentally  depends  on  central  bank  credibility.  Central  bank  independence,  a 
fundamental principle of modern monetary governance, should never be challenged. 
A third key factor behind a successful monetary policy is the ECB’s monetary policy strategy and the 
communication  of  its  policy  to  the  public.  The  Governing  Council  has  clearly  stated  the  ECB’s 
objective and the framework used to guide its actions. The Governing Council is also very transparent 
about its assessment of the current economic situation and the risks to price stability involved. There 
are  no  ambiguities  as  to  how  monetary  policy  would  respond  to  possible  changes  in  the  economic 
environment  and  in  the  balance  of  risks  to  price  stability.  All  this  provides  sufficient  information  for 
other policy actors to take the steps they deem necessary. At the same time, these policy actors also 
know how the ECB will react to their decisions. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2002
 When  setting  up  the  ECB,  a  major  challenge  for  the  Governing  Council  was  to  devise  a  monetary 
policy strategy. This strategy, which was announced in 1998, is a new one, specially designed for the 
euro area. And compared with the strategies of other central banks, it is perhaps a more complex one. 
It was therefore not surprising that it has led to many  discussions. In fact, the ECB has sometimes 
been criticised for not adopting a strategy focusing on one, or at most two indicators. Some observers 
claimed  that  the  ECB,  by  having  adopted  its  two-pillar  strategy,  might  eventually  downgrade  the 
importance of the reference value for broad money growth. In their view, this would spell the danger of 
falling  back  into  discretion.  Other  observers,  meanwhile,  were  advocating  a  central  -  virtually 
all-encompassing - role for inflation forecasts. 
As is now evident, we were well advised not to yield to either of these calls. It would have been unwise 
to base our policy on any privileged indicator or a single forecast, to the exclusion of all other pieces of 
information, in a changing world in which statistical inference is such an elusive guide to our real-time 
perception  of  reality.  We  chose  to  broaden,  rather  than  narrow,  our  perspective  of  the  economy. 
Forced to decide, we chose to err, if anything, on the side of more evidence than needed, rather than 
disregarding key information; we opted to be inclusive rather than exclusive. 
This choice has ruled out the use of simple rules for both internal use and external communication. A 
central bank does not want to mislead its public with the elementary logic of a two term linear reaction 
formula, only to surprise them whenever circumstances demand. So observers should never succumb 
to the easy temptation of blaming a central bank for failing to obey a simple rule. More fundamentally: 
they should never lose sight of the complexity of the ‘economic story’ behind the conduct of monetary 
policy in a world of uncertainty. 
In its interactions with the public, the ECB has never departed from an honest and faithful - if at times 
seemingly  unwieldy - account of this complex reality. We have shared  with the public the  evidence 
reaching  the  Governing  Council  ahead  of  policy  discussions.  We  have  described  in  detail  the 
economic  rationale  behind  policy  decisions.  Those  decisions  are  explained  in  the  press  conference 
after the first meeting of the Council every month, in the Monthly Bulletin, in numerous speeches by 
members of the Council and in my testimonies to the European Parliament. Just listening to what I say 
about the current state of the economy and its direction can save all that time and effort devoted to 
uncovering  the  alleged  secrets  of  central  bank  thinking,  or  the  individual  views  of  members  of  the 
Governing Council. 
Experience after four years 
How did these three key factors setting the stage for a successful monetary policy have an impact on 
the functioning of the Governing Council and on the ECB’s monetary policy? Looking back over the 
past  years,  I  can  see  that  the  mutually  reinforcing  viewpoints  of  the  two  pillars  have  served  as  a 
balanced and comprehensive basis for analysis prior to monetary policy decisions. At the same time, 
the  complex  process  of  cross-checking  information  gathered  from  each  of  the  two  pillars  has 
sharpened  -  rather  than  diminished  -  our  awareness  of  the  changing  conditions  in  our  economic 
environment. 
When  confronted  with  new  developments  in  the  economic  environment,  the  Governing  Council  has 
never hesitated to take resolute, timely action to pursue a policy stance which best serves the purpose 
of maintaining price stability over the medium term. 
Regarding the conditions for maintaining price stability, in January 1999, the single currency was born 
into  an  environment  of  inflation  rates  hovering  around  1%,  below  the  upper  limit  of  the  range 
considered to be consistent with price stability. At that time, there were some signs of risks of deflation 
in  the  context  of  a  depressed  global  economy  and  the  financial  distress  following  the  Asian  and 
Russian crises. We responded by cutting interest rates by 50 basis points in April 1999. 
When, in the remainder of 1999 and in 2000, our analysis indicated that external shocks, namely the 
sharp rise in oil prices and the depreciation of the euro, were increasingly putting pressure on prices, 
and our assessment of monetary and credit aggregates signalled the existence of generous liquidity 
conditions  in  the  euro  area,  we  raised  rates  on  seven  occasions.  Between  November  1999  and 
October 2000 interest rates were increased by a total of 225 basis points in order to counteract the 
emergence of risks to price stability in the euro area. 
In early 2001, our analysis started to signal declining inflationary pressures over the medium term. But 
in 2001 price developments were affected by a surge in food costs driven by an unprecedented health 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 3
 crisis  which  had  disrupted  important  segments  of  the  primary  sector.  At  the  same  time,  the  lower 
actual and prospective economic growth was one factor supporting an outlook in which inflation rates 
approached levels in line with our definition of price stability. It is worth noting that the first decision to 
lower our policy rates was taken in May 2001, that is, when actual consumer price inflation was at its 
peak in the euro area. This is a clear indication of the medium-term and forward-looking orientation of 
our  policy.  Between  May  and  November  2001,  we  lowered  our  policy  rates  by  a  total  of  150  basis 
points. 
In order to forestall imbalances that may not have been visible or evident at first sight, we have rarely 
been caught off guard by events. On the one occasion when we were - after the terrorist attacks in the 
United States on 11 September - we did not lose our nerve. We reacted without hesitation and moved 
swiftly to ensure that financial markets continued to function effectively. 
By  and  large,  we  can  claim  that  we  have  maintained  a  firm  course  of  action  in  the  day-to-day 
business,  guided  by  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  and  that  the  shocks  we  have  experienced  have 
received  a  timely  and  appropriate  monetary  policy  response.  Inflation  has  been  kept  under  control 
even in the face of substantial adverse shocks. 
Concluding remarks 
In conclusion, I believe that all the institutional preconditions for a stable currency and macroeconomic 
success are in place in Europe today. The institutional construct of the Treaty has paved the way for a 
single  monetary  policy  in  Europe  to  be  a  lasting  success.  The  ECB  -  through  its  strategy  -  has 
successfully  implemented  the  framework  within  which  it  pursues  its  mandate.  And  in  the  daily 
execution  of  its  policy,  the  ECB  displays  a  firm  hand  and  a  clear  sense  of  direction  in  countering 
inflationary risks as they emerge. 
Markets seem to acknowledge this achievement. Continuous adverse price shocks have done little to 
shake  the  conviction  of  most  Europeans  that  the  statute  and  the  competence  of  the  ECB  will 
indefinitely  and  effectively  contain  any  inflationary  or  deflationary  forces.  This  has  constantly  been 
reflected in well-behaved inflation expectations. Despite the fact that the recent increase in oil prices 
currently tends to slow down the fall in HICP inflation, long-term expectations of inflation have been 
remaining below 2%. 
Certainly,  we  are  less  than  entirely  satisfied  about  recent  price  developments.  Recently  published 
inflation  forecasts,  developments  in  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  and  recent  trends  in  wages 
neither clearly confirm nor entirely defuse the risk of an entrenchment of upward tendencies in prices. 
At  this  juncture,  it  is  therefore  particularly  important  to  remain  vigilant  with  regard  to  the  further 
evolution  of  the  key  factors  determining  future  price  developments. While  we  have  to  acknowledge 
that monetary policy cannot affect inflation developments over the short-term, we are determined not 
to put our achievements at risk. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2002
