 Ernst Welteke: Financial market disturbances - a challenge for monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at Market News International, 
London, 24 September 2002. 
 I. 
Playing  the  financial  markets  has  been  anything  but  an  easy  thing  to  do  recently.  During  the  late 
1990s, many investors enthusiastically embraced the idea of a “new era” of systematically increasing 
returns. Now that the flaws in that concept have become evident, many of them have had to abandon 
a significant portion of their wealth. Confidence in financial markets has been severely shaken.  
Monetary  policymakers are concerned  when financial markets are as shaky as they  are at present. 
Monetary  policy  has  a  vital  interest  in  the  stability  of  the  financial  markets.  The  Maastricht  Treaty 
assigns co-responsibility for the stability of the financial system to the euro-area central banks. The 
measure of responsibility  assigned to them reflects the use that monetary policy makes of financial 
markets  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  I would  like  to  outline  a  number  of  major  fields  of 
responsibility in which financial market disturbances affect central banks. 
II. 
Let me first put the turbulence in the financial markets into perspective. The turmoil has been felt most 
keenly in the equity markets. Since peaking in March 2000, major stock indices have been hit hard. 
The Dow Jones EuroStoxx 50 and the German Dax 30 have both roughly halved since reaching their 
all-time  highs.  The  US  Standard  and  Poor’s 500  Index  has  shed  about  40 per  cent,  while  the 
technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite index has shrunk to almost one-quarter of its peak value.  
Remember, in an environment of healthy corporate  profits, soaring  asset prices took price-earnings 
ratios  up  to  hitherto  unknown  heights.  Equity  markets  looked  overvalued,  but  the  “New  Economy” 
paradigm enticed investors into not regarding them as overvalued.  Experience  shows that a bubble 
can scarcely be identified with certainty until it bursts.  
The  price-earnings  ratios  for  major  stock  indices  peaked  at  about  twice  their  historical  averages. 
Individual  stocks,  especially  from  the  bubble-plagued  TMT  sector,  experienced  much  higher  price-
earnings ratios. For the EuroStoxx, the S&P 500 and the German Dax 30, the ratios are now close to 
their historical averages. The bubble has been deflated to a certain extent.  
Booming  fixed  income  markets  mirror  the  faltering  stock  markets.  As  investors  became  more  risk-
averse, they switched from equities to bonds. The upshot of this is that government bond yields are 
close to their historical lows.  
Volatility  in  equity  and  bond  markets  has  itself  been  volatile.  We  have  witnessed  a  number  of 
pronounced spikes in volatility. In early August and again in early September, volatility was almost as 
high as it had been during major international financial crises such as the “Russian crisis” four years 
ago.  
For  the  euro  area,  the  equity  market  downturn  arrived  in  the  midst  of  an  increasing  capital  market 
orientation  on  the  part  of  financial  investors  and  the  corporate  sector.  Should  we  now  write  off  the 
markets in the same way as we have written off many of our investments in the past? No, I do not 
think so. Disintermediation is an unbroken trend, as may be seen in corporate bond issuance, which 
has held up fairly well.  
Furthermore,  financial  markets  have  proved  they  are  fit  to  serve  investors’  needs.  To  some 
disappointed investors, this may seem cynical. But think of it in the context of the accounting cheats. 
Once  the  true  figures  became  known  to  investors,  equity  valuations  were  aligned  to  the  correct 
fundamentals. Once we had transparency, the markets worked their magic. The markets themselves 
cannot be blamed for the wrongdoings of some dishonest market participants. But we definitely need 
to adjust the incentives for better transparency. Balance sheet fraud is a criminal offence, not a trivial 
one. Tougher sentences might help to make that clear. Strange as it may sound, market turbulence in 
the wake of faulty accounting is an indication of how effective financial markets are.  
BIS Review 54/2002 
 1
 III. 
Turmoil  in  financial  markets  is  not  confined  to  the  equity  markets  of  the  advanced  economies. 
Emerging markets have suffered a host of financial crises during the past decade. The most recent 
crises occurred in Turkey, Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil.  
In  contrast  to  earlier  financial  crises,  today’s  investors  discriminate  better  between  individual 
borrowers. Emerging market economies can protect themselves to a certain extent from contagion by 
pursuing  sound  policies.  When  Argentina  defaulted  last  December,  the  vast  majority  of  emerging 
market countries that had pursued better macroeconomic policies escaped unscathed.  
The stability – or instability – of international financial markets owes much to the framework for crisis 
prevention  and  crisis  resolution.  Monetary  policymakers  have  made  a  major  contribution  to  the 
international financial community’s thoroughgoing approach to crisis prevention. With regard to crisis 
prevention, there exists a broad consensus. All necessary steps should be taken to get the incentives 
right — and that means the incentives both for creditors and for debtors.  
What  measures  can  a  country  take  to  strengthen  its  resilience?  The  basic  recommendation  is  to 
pursue sound and consistent policies. Liberalising capital flows is beneficial for emerging markets. But 
the sequencing has to be right. They should start with more stable long-term capital flows, such as 
FDI, and deregulate volatile short-term capital flows last. As capital-account liberalisation progresses, 
financial supervision needs to keep pace. Supervision needs to become ever more effective in order to 
reduce  the  vulnerability  of  the  domestic  financial  sector.  The  Asian  countries  in  crisis,  for  example, 
grossly neglected the link between capital-account liberalisation and independent banking supervision.  
Prudent public debt management is another key measure in crisis prevention. Governments need to 
contain short-term external debt, particularly if it is denominated in foreign currency. Over the longer 
term,  stable  capital  inflows  into  emerging-market  countries  can  only  be  secured  by  pursuing 
sustainable policies. But that is not quite enough. Transparency counts. Financial market players want 
to  base  their  decision-making  on  hard  facts.  Countries  seeking  access  to  financial  markets  must 
provide reliable economic and financial data on a timely basis – just like companies do. The Financial 
Stability  Forum  has  summarised  these  and  other  good  practices  in  a  list  of  12  key  Standards  and 
Codes. Implementing such standards and codes is an effective tool for making countries less prone to 
crisis.  
Focusing solely on emerging markets in the prevention of international financial crises gives no more 
than an incomplete picture, however. It would obviously be helpful if the advanced countries were to 
grant  more  liberal  access  to  their  product  markets.  The  current  round  of  trade  negotiations  set  in 
motion at Doha late last year therefore has some bearing on the stability of the international financial 
markets, too.  
During  the  1990s,  there  was  a  rapid  increase  in  lending  to  emerging  markets.  Moreover,  the 
composition  of  the  lending  community  changed.  In  the  1990s,    the  private  sector  accounted  on 
average for almost 80 per cent of net capital flows to emerging markets, compared with 35 per cent in 
the  1980s.  As  bond  issues  supplemented  –  or  in  some  cases  all  but  replaced  –  international  bank 
lending,  the  number  of  creditors  increased.  Therefore,  the  days  when  a  handful  of  creditors  could 
negotiate  a  debt  workout  in  what  was  known  as  the  "London  Club"  definitely  belong  to  the  past. 
Finally, since the mid 1990s private capital flows to emerging markets have been dominated by foreign 
direct  investment  flows,  which  is  a  more  stable  external  financing  source  in  comparison  to  volatile 
portfolio investments and bank lending. 
Since the mid-1990s, crises have usually been resolved by the provision of – sometimes extremely 
large – financial assistance packages by the IMF. This practice, however, sets the wrong incentives for 
all participants. International financial market will only proper function if private creditors and investors 
not  only  reap  the  benefits  of  their  decisions  but  also  bear  losses  caused  by  unfavourable 
developments. Violating this principle by having the IMF inject massive financial aid at times of crisis 
inevitably encourages excessive risk-taking by investors. Such behaviour – also termed  moral hazard 
– contributes to emerging market economies overwhelmed by debt and undermines the willingness to 
reform in borrowing countries.  
Therefore, we need to rearrange the incentives in an improved framework for crisis resolution. This 
framework must provide for an orderly debt workout in the event of a financial crisis and comprise a 
more  balanced  burden-sharing  between  the  private  and  public  sectors  in  line  with  their  respective 
roles.  
2 
 BIS Review 54/2002
 Limiting  access  to  official  lending  will  be  at  the  core  of  any  future  framework  for  crisis  resolution. 
Greater ex ante clarity about the scale of official financing will help to guard against both debtor and 
creditor moral hazard. Exceptional financing should be reserved for truly exceptional cases requiring 
substantial justification ex ante and ex post.  
Strict and credible limits on access to IMF financing call for private sector involvement on a regular 
basis. This is the key to an improved functioning of the international financial markets. Investors who 
cannot reasonably expect a bail-out have greater reason to practise effective risk management. In the 
same way, debtors have greater reason to undertake necessary adjustments and reforms in order to 
secure access to financial markets. If such a framework is put in place, moral hazard will not distort 
investment decisions.  
Private sector involvement in crisis resolution can and should take a variety of forms. Priority should 
be given to approaches which foster cooperation between debtors and creditors. That would include 
voluntary approaches such as “collective action clauses” in private debt contracts. Such clauses can 
substantially reduce the risk of litigation and asset attachment, once a majority of creditors has agreed 
on debt restructuring.  
The  IMF  has  proposed  a  Sovereign  Debt  Restructuring  Mechanism  similar  to  national  bankruptcy 
codes  for  enterprises.  However,  as  so  many  questions  of  both  a  practical  and  legal  nature  remain 
open,  such  a  statutory  approach  will  not  be  available  for  years.  Any  reshaping  of  the  international 
financial architecture should therefore concentrate on adjusting incentives by revamping IMF lending 
policy in the way I have set out. This would automatically entail an enhanced role for the private sector 
in crisis resolution.   
IV. 
Financial  market  turmoil  also  raises  concern  about  the  stability  of  the  national  financial  systems. 
Prudent financial regulation and supervision are the foundations of financial system stability. Why and 
how  central  banks  should  be  involved  requires  constant  clarification.  There  are  good  reasons  for 
advocating central bank involvement in financial regulation and supervision.  
Let’s start with financial supervision. Financial system stability is a prerequisite for the efficient conduct 
of monetary policy. Consequently, the EC Treaty calls for the European System of Central banks to 
contribute to the stability of the financial system (Art. 105(5)EC). Macro-prudential supervision is in the 
best  interests  of  central  banks.  In  conducting  monetary  policy  and  in  operating  payment  systems, 
central banks gain valuable information on the stability of market participants. "The marrying of micro- 
and macro-prudential analysis", as BIS General Manager Andrew Crockett once put it, allows us to 
exploit synergies of monetary policy and financial supervision.  
In the field of financial regulation, the EU is currently deliberating whether to introduce the “Lamfalussy 
model”, which is now applied in securities regulation in the banking and insurance sectors as well. The 
ECOFIN Council and the European Parliament would thus make a decision only on the framework for 
envisaged  legislation  –  known  as  “level 1”  –  while  a  regulatory  committee  would  decide  on  the 
technical  details  of  new  laws  –  “level 2”.  In  the  “Lamfalussy  model”,  this  regulatory  committee 
comprises only representatives of the ministries of finance. However, “level 2” needs to draw on the 
expertise of central banks. Why is that so? 
For  the  banking  industry,  one  of  the  main  tasks  of  European  regulators  consists  in  translating 
internationally agreed standards into European law: Basle II, the new minimum capital requirements, 
will be next. Central banks are experts on Basle II, since they are substantially involved in negotiating 
the new Capital Accord in the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision. They are truly familiar with 
the details of the new framework and such knowledge is indispensable for the EU legislative process. 
But  it  is  not  only  the  details  that  count.  The  regulation  of  the  banking  industry  has  an  even  larger 
bearing on the real economy than the regulation of the securities industry does. Banking regulation 
may affect the competitiveness of the overall economy in various ways owing to the national specifics 
of  financial  systems.  Central  banks  are  experts  on  the  national  financial  systems.  Exploiting  the 
specific knowledge central banks have to offer in the regulatory process – as is currently the case in 
the well-established Banking Advisory Committee – is something I regard as crucial. 
Attempts  to  rid  either  financial  regulation  or  financial  supervision  of  central  bankers’  influence  will 
backfire  at  some  point  in  the  future.  Prudent  risk  management  would  prevent  such  a  risk  from 
materialising. 
BIS Review 54/2002 
 3
 V. 
Besides  raising  issues  of  systemic  stability,  financial  disturbances  also  affect  the  real  economy, 
irrespective  of  what  generated  the  turbulence  in  the  first  place.  Transmission  to  the  real  economy 
works via three main channels.  
The channel that received most attention during the latest market downturn is also the least effective 
one  in  the  euro  area:  the  wealth  effect.  As  their  portfolios  shrink  in  line  with  stock  valuations, 
consumers  tend  to  cut  their  expenditure,  so  the  theory  goes.  European  consumers  hold  a  smaller 
portion  of  their  portfolios  in  stocks.  For  example,  the  ECB  estimates  that  a  10 per  cent  permanent 
decline in stock prices in the euro area would reduce consumption by a maximum of 0.19 per cent. 
This compares with significantly higher estimates for the US. As investors’ habits change in the euro 
area, the wealth effect should be expected to gain slowly in importance. 
The second channel – and probably the most important one for the euro – is the direct and indirect 
impact  that  fickle  stock  markets  have  on  business  financing  costs.  Equity  financing  becomes  more 
expensive, as investors are less eager to buy new shares and demand higher risk premia. Bank credit 
is  harder  to  come  by,  as  potential  collateral  shrinks  in  value.  And,  as  investors  become  more  risk-
averse, rising spreads for corporate bonds may make capital market financing more expensive. Given 
surging capital costs, marginal investment projects become unprofitable.  
The third channel through which adverse financial developments may impinge on the real economy 
can be described by “negative sentiment”. A certain sense of crisis will tend to weaken confidence. 
However, in the current situation it is not entirely clear whether the financial market disturbances are 
predominantly a cause or an effect of the downward revision of high-flying expectations. The impact, 
I suppose, works in both directions.  
Both financial markets and the real  economy are suffering from post-bubble  blues. Businesses and 
consumers are short on confidence and long on worries. Financial, economic and political uncertainty 
have  risen  in  parallel.  After  the  “golden  nineties”  the  pendulum  now  is  swinging  back.  It  may  even 
swing back too far and overshoot like exchange rates tend to do. Unfortunately, there is no Prozac to 
alleviate post-bubble blues.  
An in-depth analysis of the data may help to clarify the picture. The situation is better than the sombre 
mood suggests, although admittedly not as good as we had hoped for.  
Economic growth in the euro area economy is subdued this year. Expectations were running far ahead 
of  the  economic  recovery.  The  downward  revision  of  earlier  upbeat  expectations  has  narrowed  the 
unusually large gap between high-flying expectations and the assessment of the current situation. The 
business  and  consumer  climates  now  suggest  a  slower  start  to  a  less  vigorous  recovery.  Leading 
indicators do not, however, point to another economic downturn.  
Recent price developments are bolstering consumption. The euro area inflation rate at 2.1 % (August) 
is almost back in the range which the ECB Council regards as price stability. Both short-term and long-
term  real  interest  rates  are  below  average  and  do  not  hamper  investment.  Liquidity  is  ample,  and 
monetary conditions are favourable. Monetary policy is expansionary.  
What, then, is standing in the way of a more decisive economic recovery? We need to be honest: the 
euro area has not been able to produce a self-sustained economic recovery without the US first pulling 
us out of the economic trough. This time, our overseas business partners are still struggling to unwind 
the economic and financial imbalances that built up during the “golden nineties” and the late bubble 
economy.  The  unwinding  process  is  taking  longer  than  was  expected  in  the  rather  optimistic 
assessments early this year.  
Home-grown structural weaknesses are being felt all the more keenly in the euro area. There is no 
shortage  of  analysis.  There  is  a  “to  do”  list  lying  on  the  desk  of  everyone  concerned.  There  is  a 
backlog  in  terms  of  concrete  action,  especially  in  the  field  of  labour  market  flexibility.  Adjusting 
incentives, reducing regulation and eliminating rigidities should help to unleash the forces of economic 
growth.  The  euro  area  must  put  itself  in  a  position  to  kick  off  a  self-sustained  economic  upswing. 
Tackling reforms decisively is important not least in terms of bolstering confidence, which is a more 
appropriate – and, incidentally, more effective long-term – antidote to the post-bubble blues than any 
“Prozac” might be.  
4 
 BIS Review 54/2002
 VI. 
In  times  where  uncertainty  abounds,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  a  stabilising  factor.  Euro  area 
monetary policy is geared to maintaining price stability.  
Given financial market turbulence, should monetary policymakers broaden their focus to include share 
prices in their definition of price stability? Well, in my opinion, that is not a good idea. The objections to 
targeting asset prices weigh more heavily.  
To begin with, there is the issue of defining the appropriate asset price level. There is no way in which 
central banks can make a “diagnosis” superior to that of the market.  
Then, even if the matter of diagnosis issue could be solved to our satisfaction, stabilising consumer 
prices and stabilising asset prices might call for diverging policy paths. Central banks could well find 
themselves faced with the dilemma of having to decide to which goal they should give priority. The fact 
that bubbles tend to occur in periods of low inflation only accentuates that potential conflict.  
And, last but not least, there is the question of “moral hazard”. Central banks would need to respond in 
perfect symmetry to overshooting and to undershooting stock prices. Financial markets would become 
severely distorted if market participants were to come to the conclusion that the central bank would let 
them enjoy returns when the markets are up but bail them out once the market goes downhill.  
Instead, we should stick to our tried and tested approach of stabilising the general price level in the 
product and services markets.  
Nonetheless, monetary policy contributes to a sound development of asset prices. The Eurosystem’s 
monetary  policy  strategy  emphasises  money  supply  in  the  first  pillar  of  its  strategy.  An  adequate 
money supply – that is, money supply which is in line with potential output growth – is a necessary 
condition for preventing the emergence of speculative bubbles. Also, a low inflation rate in itself fosters 
long-term investment and helps to stabilise asset prices.  
This  summer,  euro  area  monetary  policy  has  been  confronted  with  conflicting  signals:  monetary 
growth continues to be strong. Its high growth rate owes much to low opportunity cost and ongoing 
portfolio  reallocation.  Given  weak  final  demand,  the  risk  of  ample  liquidity  being  channelled  into 
inflationary pressure is regarded as quite low.  
A more serious risk to price stability is the price of crude oil, which has begun to climb upwards in the 
wake of increasing political tension in the Middle East. 
Further  non-negligible  risks  to  price  stability  stem  from  a  potential  weakening  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact.  Some  European  countries,  among  them  my  own,  need  to  make  intensified  efforts  to 
balance  their  budgets.  The  pact  is  symmetrical  with  a  lower  limit:  balancing  the  budget  over  the 
economic cycle requires governments to run a surplus when the economy is doing well. In the trough 
of the economic cycle, governments can then allow automatic stabilisers to develop their full effect up 
to the budget deficit ceiling of 3 per cent of GDP. Not least, demographic developments require the 
budget to be balanced over the economic cycle as a whole.  
Despite these  uncertainties, both the markets and the Eurosystem expect the recovery to continue. 
The  euro  area  cycle  is  unlikely  to  experience  a  double  dip.  In  actual  fact,  the  moderate  pace  of 
economic expansion in the euro area is set to continue, not least because macroeconomic policy is 
supportive: 
1. 
Monetary  conditions  are  favourable  to  growth:  liquidity  is  ample.  Real  interest  rates,  both 
long- and short-term, are below their historical averages.  
The  euro  area  does  not  display  fundamental  imbalances  –  the  labour  market  being  the 
notable exception. The balanced current account reflects the sustainable savings rate.  
The world economy is set to stay on its – admittedly, not very steep – path of growth. 
Both  investors  and  consumers  will  soon  have  to  make  up  for  the  investment  and 
consumption spending that was put off during the downturn.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
Bearing these facts in mind, the Governing Council of the ECB believes the risks to price stability to be 
balanced. Therefore, we decided to stay on hold when we last assessed the monetary policy stance 
two weeks ago. 
BIS Review 54/2002 
 5
 VII. 
Financial turbulence does not leave monetary policy makers cold. As you undoubtedly knew already, 
central  bankers  are  a  cautious  lot.  We  do  not  easily  buy  into  market  euphoria  nor  do  we  buy  into 
gloomy scenarios. 
In  order  to  contain  financial  market  disturbances,  we  need  to  improve  the  international  financial 
architecture, to conduct financial regulation and supervision in a prudent manner, and to adhere to a 
stability-oriented monetary policy. 
6 
 BIS Review 54/2002
