 Jean-Pierre Roth: The challenges of an international financial centre: the Swiss 
case 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, to the 
British-Swiss Chamber of Commerce, London, 26 February 2002. 
 It gives me great pleasure to have the opportunity to address your distinguished assembly today. Like 
all the Swiss I know, I always enjoy coming to London. Even though there are considerable differences 
between our two countries, we have many things in common. We are both proud of our history and of 
our  colourful  traditions,  we  cherish  our  freedom  and  our  independence.  What’s  more,  in  both  our 
countries, the financial industry has been a pillar of our economic strength in recent times. 
But  these  days,  the  most  striking  parallelism  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  Switzerland  can  be 
seen in monetary affairs. Both countries are “outs”: they do not belong to the Euro-zone. In Britain, the 
currency is still the pound sterling and, in Switzerland, we still have a preference for our franc. We thus 
both face the same challenge: living next to a large currency area which absorbs most of our foreign 
trade. This situation is new for both of us. It is of course not up to the Swiss central bank governor to 
speculate how long this situation will last in the United Kingdom. But as far as I can tell, there is a good 
chance that Switzerland will remain an island in the middle of the Euro-ocean for years to come! 
Experience shows, however, that the monetary regime itself is not a central issue for the existence 
and the development of a financial centre. Neither in the UK, nor in Switzerland is European monetary 
integration considered to be a necessary or a sufficient condition for a successful financial centre. In 
today’s global and very competitive markets, success relies more than ever on fundamental strengths 
and skills. 
Switzerland as a financial centre 
Since the early 1990s, international financial markets, along with the entire banking sector, have been 
undergoing  profound  changes.  The  driving  force  behind  this  world-wide  trend  is  threefold:  first,  the 
advances made in the processing and the transmission of information; second, the trend towards the 
liberalisation  of  financial  markets;  and,  third,  the  growing  and  increasingly  diversified  demand  for 
financial  services.  These  developments  have  led  to  a  widening  of  horizons,  to  a  proliferation  of 
financial products, and to increasing international competition. Switzerland - thanks to its long tradition 
of openness to the world - was well prepared to face the challenges of global markets. 
But  globalisation  and  world-wide  competition  did  not  leave  our  financial  centre  untouched. 
Consolidation  has  significantly  altered  the  structure  of  the  Swiss  banking  industry.  During  the  90s, 
domestic mergers and acquisitions have reduced the number of banks by about 40 percent. 
Nevertheless, despite a clear tendency towards financial market concentration, Switzerland remains a 
country with a wide network of small banks. Beside the two big banks, Credit Suisse Group and UBS 
AG, Switzerland counts over 100 regional and savings banks, 24 cantonal banks, 17 private banks 
and over 140 subsidiaries and branches of foreign banks. Our banking sector is extremely dense with 
a strong presence in all parts of the country. 
The insurance sector  is the second traditional leg of our financial centre. Our insurance companies 
have  strongly  expanded  abroad.  Here  also,  open  markets  and  intense  competition  have  led  to 
consolidation and large units. 
More than 10 years of global de-regulation have left deep and lasting marks not only on the structure 
of  the  financial  sector,  but  also  on  the  range  of  its  activities.  Reacting  to  the  changing  market 
environment  and  stiffer  international  competition,  many  banks  have  placed  more  emphasis  on  their 
international business and shifted their activity from balance-sheet to off-balance-sheet transactions. 
This  is  true  in  Switzerland  as  well.  Investment  banking  and  asset  management  have  gained  in 
importance, whereas less lucrative areas, such as domestically-oriented retail banking, have lost part 
of their attractiveness. 
In  our  case,  the  expansion  of  the  investment  banking  activities  has  taken  the  form  of  a  number  of 
acquisitions in foreign countries, tightening the ties between Switzerland and other financial centres. 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 1
 The  expansion  of  asset  management  has  been  much  more  domestically  generated.  Asset 
management  is  an  area  in  which  Switzerland  has  been  traditionally  strong.  According  to  unofficial 
statistics, Swiss banks are entrusted with about one third of the totality of the world’s assets managed 
by  banks  in  other  countries  than  those  where  their  clients  are  domiciled  (so-called  offshore  wealth 
management),  which  places  them  well  ahead  of  their  competitors.  Indeed,  asset  management  and 
private banking are the strongest segments of Swiss banking, not only in terms of market shares, but 
also measured by revenues. 
For many observers, the success of our banks in asset management and private banking can only be 
explained by the existence of Switzerland’s banking secrecy. I think they misunderstand the meaning 
of this feature. In any case, it would be short-sighted to believe that a financial centre could insure its 
long-term  development  on  a  single  factor.  A  successful  strategy  requires  strong  fundamentals:  a 
competent  and  dedicated  workforce,  reliable  services  and  products,  and  efficient  infrastructures.  I 
have no doubt that you share this view with me. 
Necessary characteristics of a successful financial centre 
How can we explain the long-lasting development of the finance industry in Switzerland? It is not the 
result of some public strategy or industrial policy. Instead it is the combined outcome of a number of 
factors which all point in the same direction. 
An open-minded economy 
a) 
Firstly,  Switzerland,  as  a  traditionally  very  open  economy,  was  well  placed  to  benefit  from  trade 
liberalisation  and  financial  deregulation.  We  are  used  to  see  our  economic  performance  being 
constantly challenged and directly dependent on our ability to adjust to a changing world environment. 
What has been true for Nestlé, Novartis or Swatch - to name just a few - is also valid for the banks: in 
today’s  competitive  marketplace,  only  the  fittest  will  survive,  some  of  them  even  becoming  global 
players in the process. 
Professional skills 
b) 
Secondly, our finance industry has access to a pool of well-educated, highly-skilled, multilingual, and 
service-oriented workers who are very familiar with international financial markets. Private banking has 
a long tradition in Switzerland, and financial advisory services to foreign clients have been a part of the 
Swiss banking business for generations, literally. 
Efficient financial infrastructure 
c) 
Thirdly,  besides  the  availability  of  a  highly  professional  staff,  there  is  the  outstanding  efficiency  of 
Switzerland’s  financial  infrastructure.  I  am  referring  here  to  the  so-called  “Swiss  value  chain”  which 
comprises a full set of settlement and payment systems, with their individual parts harmonised in an 
optimum way. The entire facility consists of a trading platform, a payment-against-delivery system, and 
a central payment system. A fourth component, a central counterparty, is currently being developed. 
It might be due to their long tradition of watchmaking that the Swiss have developed a skill to build and 
interconnect sophisticated settlements systems. In 1987, the Swiss National Bank launched the Swiss 
Interbank Clearing (SIC), the first RTGS system and precursor of many payment systems around the 
globe.  Shortly  after,  the  Swiss  Exchange  moved  from  a  traditional  “à  la  criée”  procedure  to  an 
electronic platform including the automatic transfer of securities. With virt-x, here in London, it has now 
gone one ambitious step further, creating the first international fully integrated electronic exchange. 
Stable domestic environment 
d) 
Fourthly, Switzerland, with a stable political environment, also offers the legal protection that, together 
with trust, is so crucial in the banking business. Furthermore, the healthy social climate and peaceful 
labour relations also contribute to a successful banking system. 
Among the elements which contribute to a favourable environment - and indeed very high on the list - I 
obviously  also  include  financial  stability  and  the  strength  of  our  currency.  Switzerland  enjoys 
traditionally a very strong current account position. Contrary to a popular belief, it is not a net capital 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2002
 importer,  but  a  massive  exporter  of  funds. With  an  excess  of  savings  over  investment,  we  transfer 
capital to the rest of the world. Our external surplus gives to our banks an important role in channelling 
funds and it strengthens their international position. 
For the long-term oriented investor, moreover, knowing that the Swiss franc will keep its purchasing 
power and maintain its external value is, of course, of great importance, and it reflects positively onto 
the entire Swiss financial industry. In situations of crises, security-conscious investors too, even those 
with shorter time horizons, demonstrate through their actions that the Swiss franc has special merits. 
The fact that the Swiss franc is a safe haven currency certainly does not make the work of the Swiss 
National  Bank  any  easier.  We  nevertheless  view  the  continued  existence  of  our  own  independent 
currency,  which  can  be  freely  traded  on  world  markets,  as  an  important  asset  for  Switzerland  in 
general, and for its financial sector in particular. 
Efficient supervision 
e) 
To  be  sure,  no  financial  centre  can  survive  without  credible  guarantees  as  to  its  soundness  and 
robustness. As we know, financial institutions are different from other firms. Due to the complex ties 
that exist between them, and given that the very institution of money is built on trust, fragile elements 
can destabilise the entire industry. They can have devastating effects on the other players, including 
on  fundamentally  healthy  institutions.  A  prerequisite  for  a  successful  financial  centre  is  therefore  a 
strong banking supervisory authority. 
Integrity 
f) 
All the ingredients mentioned so far are important building blocks of a flourishing financial centre. One 
should  not  forget,  however,  that  the  most  significant  factor  for  a  successful  banking  system  is  the 
assurance that the public, and the bank customers in particular, be honestly and fairly treated. In short, 
without trust there can be no lasting successful financial centre. 
This is more than wishful thinking on the part of a central banker. It is obvious that it is in the self-
interest of any financial centre, of its lawmakers, its supervisory authorities and of its private agents 
and  their  associations  to  set  and  implement  rules  and  codes  of  conduct  that  match  the  highest 
standards. With market globalisation and the free flow of capital, there is a real risk that a financial 
centre will become involved in illegal transactions against its  will. I consider reputational risk as the 
major challenge facing financial centres at the beginning of this century. In Switzerland this has long 
become  conventional  wisdom.  Know  your  customer  rules  have  effectively  been  implemented  and 
constantly  adapted  to  the  evolving  requirements  of  the  market  realities  for  many  years.  Swiss  anti 
money laundering rules and regulations are widely recognised as expressions of the state of the art. I 
shall come back to this thorny topic in a moment. 
Challenges ahead 
What are the challenges ahead? 
Market globalisation 
a) 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  the  banking  sector  has  gone  through  a  period  of  heavy  restructuring 
during the past decade or so. Banking no longer amounts to simply accepting savings and granting 
loans. Business has become increasingly complex and is dominated by a dwindling number of ever-
larger  financial  conglomerates.  The  trend  toward  concentration  and  the  tendency  toward  onshore 
international  banking  can  be  observed  in  your  country  as  in  mine.  The  internationalisation  of  the 
banking  business  has  led  the  large  banks  to  establish  major  business  units  outside  their  home 
country. Our banks create now more jobs outside the country than in Switzerland. 
Obviously, global business is the first challenge to be faced by the financial centres as well as by the 
authorities. A close co-operation between supervisors is essential. 
The trend toward financial conglomeration poses an additional challenge for the banking industry: the 
tendency towards “all-finance”. More and more providers not only offer banking services, but all types 
of  other  financial  services  as  well,  notably  insurance  products.  A  single  supplier  offers  specific 
advantages  to  the  customer  while  providers  in  turn  expect  synergies,  customer  loyalty,  and  lower 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 3
 costs. It is not yet clear whether this strategy will be a commercial success, and the question is heavily 
debated among specialists. 
What is clear,  however, is that financial conglomerates are a challenge for the supervisors as  well. 
Today,  banks  and  insurance  companies  are  often  governed  by  different  laws  and  supervised  by 
different  authorities.  The  absence  of  consolidated  supervision  makes  it  more  difficult  to  assess  the 
combined  risk  of  conglomerates.  With  the  creation  of  the  Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA),  the 
United Kingdom has taken the lead in this respect. The creation of an integrated financial supervisory 
authority  is  now  also  being  envisaged  in  Switzerland  and  in  other  major  financial  centres.  A  single 
authority  could  supervise  all  banks,  securities  dealers,  investment  funds,  insurance  companies, 
financial conglomerates and portfolio managers. This integrated supervisory authority would also play 
a key role in the fight against money laundering. 
Fight against money laundering and financial crime 
b) 
I  come  naturally  to  the  issue  which  is  of  major  importance  for  all  financial  centres  today:  the  fight 
against money laundering and criminal money. 
Any financial system - and the Swiss system is no exception - can be misused in order to transfer or 
recycle  money  issued  from,  or  linked  to  illegal  activities,  including  terrorism,  drug  trafficking,  illicit 
trades  in  weapons,  modern  slavery,  and  corruption,  just  to  name  a  few.  To  be  sure,  a  money 
laundering risk already existed in the past. As a result of globalisation, however, and of the growing 
significance  of  organised  crime,  the  risk  has  increased  considerably  in  recent  years,  not  just  in  my 
country,  but  in  every  major  financial  centre.  For  this  reason,  a  dense  network  of  legal  regulations, 
controls  and  self-regulatory  mechanisms  is  necessary  in  order  to  make  a  financial  centre  as 
unattractive as possible for criminal funds. 
Switzerland has been one of the first countries to introduce strict anti-money laundering laws. They 
cover the activities not only of banks, but also of any other financial intermediary such as insurance 
companies, funds managers, lawyers and even fiduciaries. 
Our experience so far has shown that an efficient fight against financial crime requires two specific 
rules: first, the application of strict due diligence procedures that includes careful identification of the 
customers, i.e. of the beneficial owners of the assets involved; second, the obligation, imposed to the 
market intermediaries to inform the authorities in case of any founded suspicion of money laundering. I 
am fully convinced that an effective fight against money laundering can only be successful if an active 
co-operation between financial institutions and authorities is promoted. In our view, the responsibility 
of the banker should prevail over an automatic reporting of transactions exceeding a certain amount. 
Tracking down criminal money is even more difficult than identifying money laundering operations. The 
financing of criminal activities does not require large amounts and the ex ante identity of a criminal is 
not  a  source  of  pertinent  information.  Furthermore,  funds  used  in  the  financing  of  terrorism,  unlike 
cases  of  money  laundering,  very  often  are  legally  acquired.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  financial 
intermediaries  in  both  the  banking  and  the  non-banking  sectors  thoroughly  verify  their  client 
relationships in order to identify suspicious circumstances. In this connection, strict observation of the 
“know-your-customer” principle is again of key importance. 
Switzerland  does  not  hesitate  to  offer  international  co-operation  in  judicial  matters  and  to  block 
incriminated  assets.  Following  the  decision  of  the  United  Nations  to  apply  sanctions  against  the 
Taliban regime in 1999 and 2000, we blocked a certain number of Afghan bank accounts and froze 
the  assets  belonging  to  persons  listed  by  the  Sanction  Committee  of  the  United  Nations.  To  date, 
76 accounts are frozen with a total of 42 million Swiss francs. 
In the United Kingdom and in Switzerland, the authorities and the banks themselves are fully aware of 
the utmost importance of successfully warding off criminal funds. We all realise that money laundering 
is  not  only  morally  unacceptable,  but  that  it  also  clearly  undermines  the  public’s  confidence  in  our 
financial centre. 
Unfortunately  identifying  money  laundering  and  criminal  money,  is  not  an  easy  task,  for  criminal 
elements are not short of imagination, and continuously invent new schemes to deceive our banks and 
our  authorities.  Although  Switzerland  is  at  the  forefront  in  the  fight  against  money  laundering,  the 
Swiss  financial  centre  has  also  suffered  from  a  number  of  mishaps,  especially  involving  politically 
exposed figures. The same experience has been made elsewhere: the London City as well as other 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2002
 centres have been misused similarly or even to a greater extent by undesirable clients. These cases 
stress the need for relentless vigilance. 
Political integration and fiscal harmonisation 
c) 
Let me come now to another issue of great importance to us: the movement toward tax harmonisation 
in Europe. 
You can easily imagine that Switzerland, as an island within the EU, has close economic ties with the 
single  market.  About  80%  of  our  imports  come from the  EU,  which  absorbs  more  than  60%  of  our 
exports. After the United States, Switzerland is the EU’s second largest trading partner and our firms 
are among the most important investors in the EU (for instance, we are the second largest in the UK). 
As  a  non-EU  member,  we  seek  co-operation  on  the  basis  of  bilateral  agreements.  A  first  round  of 
agreements  will  be  implemented  this  spring.  A  second  round  of  negotiations  will  begin  shortly.  It 
covers one issue which is of major importance for our financial centre: the taxation of savings income. 
Switzerland is directly affected by the EU’s intention to introduce a system of automatic exchange of 
information between banks and tax authorities in order to enhance tax revenues on savings income 
within the European Union. One can of course fear that such a plan might trigger capital transfers to 
non-EU financial centres for purely fiscal reasons. 
Our position is known:  we do not  want the Swiss financial centre to  become a privileged haven for 
funds seeking to avoid EU regulations. We are thus ready to consider a reform of our withholding tax 
regime along the line of the EU directive. We even consider the possibility of handing over to the EU 
part of the tax on interest earnings of EU residents. 
We  have  already  50  years  of  positive  experiences  with  a  withholding  tax:  it  is  a  convenient  and 
efficient way to collect resources without income declaration. We have never considered introducing 
any system of automatic exchange of fiscal information for our own citizens, and we are not ready to 
consider  such  a  scheme  for  foreign  depositors.  We  feel  that  our  current  system  secures  an 
appropriate  balance  between  protection  of  the  private  sphere  and  safeguarding  the  interest  of  the 
State. 
There are many misunderstandings between Switzerland and the UK about this fiscal issue. Let me 
recall a few points: 
– 
First, it  is  wrong to say that foreigners can  invest  their funds tax-free in  Swiss banks. We 
have a 35% withholding tax imposed on all interest and dividend payments made in favour of 
residents and non-residents. 
Second, to avoid  any loophole basically  due to an  international failure to  apply  the debtor 
principle  in  withholding  taxation,  we  are  ready  to  reshape  our  system  in  line  with  the  EU 
directive, i.e. to apply the payment agents principle in withholding taxation whenever a client 
of a Swiss bank is fiscally domiciled in the EU. 
Third, and this must not be forgotten, Switzerland grants full judicial co-operation to fight tax 
fraud. 
  Thus,  our  position  is  fair.  With  these  measures  -  which  are  fiscally  equivalent  to  the  exchange  of 
information - Switzerland cannot be accused to be a fiscal paradise attracting foreign money like an 
offshore centre. 
With capital being extremely mobile internationally, it is evident that co-ordinated taxation policy makes 
sense  only  if  it  covers  all  the  main  financial  centres.  The  EU  regulation  will  not  have  to  be  only 
implemented  in  the  member  countries,  but  also  in  their  many  dependent  and  associated  territories. 
Furthermore, it is crucial for Europe that similar measures are taken on a world-wide basis. Without a 
fully watertight solution, offshore centres around the globe will expand their business at the expense of 
Europe and this with an increasing lack of transparency and with higher global risks. 
One last point about fiscal harmonisation. I live in a country that counts nearly three thousand different 
tax regimes. In Switzerland, every town, every canton and, of course, the federal government, all have 
the authority to levy taxes and to set the rates. It is part of the functioning of our internal democracy 
and of our decentralised political system. We firmly believe in the benefits of tax competition, which 
manages to keep tax rates relatively low. We regret that at the international level, any mention of “tax 
competition” is almost always preceded by the term “harmful”. This clearly reveals preconceptions and 
a biased judgement. 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 5
 Financial privacy 
d) 
With tax harmonisation, banking secrecy is once more at the centre of the discussion. Allow me to add 
a few words on this subject. Earlier on, I did not mention banking secrecy - or perhaps should we call it 
financial privacy - as one of the necessary features of a successful financial centre, because I believe 
that, per se, it is not. What is important, though, as I emphasised earlier, is trust and professionalism. 
Banking  secrecy  is  the  prohibition  for  bankers  and  their  staff  to  divulge  any  privileged  information 
regarding their clients or third parties. The beneficiary of banking secrecy is the client, not the bank. 
Financial privacy is part of the Swiss legal structure. In my country, like here, individual freedom and 
protection of the private sphere are highly valued and deeply respected. In Switzerland, privacy rules 
are not limited to the banking sector, but they apply with equal vigour to professions such as doctors, 
lawyers, solicitors and the clergy. 
The respect of one’s private sphere has a long tradition. Like yours, our country is based on a high 
value attributed to the individual and on democracy. Our state is a bottom up - rather than a top down - 
construction. We trust our citizens - who are often called to vote on important matters, including on 
those relating to taxes. We trust them when they keep their army rifle, with a full round of ammunition, 
at  home.  We  trust  citizens  when  they  file  their  tax  forms,  and  we  trust  them  when  they  undertake 
financial transactions. Sure, there are occasional abuses, and these are prosecuted with determination 
to  the  full  extent  of  the  law.  We  do  not  believe,  however,  that  these  cases  can  be  used  to  justify 
switching over to a system where big brother breathes down our neck. 
Swiss  people  would  not  comprehend  -  and  indeed  they  would  not  support  -  any  initiative  aimed  at 
throwing out financial privacy principles simply because some dishonest people have taken advantage 
of them, any more than they would accept giving up medical secrecy because of a few cases of health 
insurance fraud. Nor could the Swiss understand - or accept - that the foreign clients of our banks be 
treated any differently, i.e. without the same amount of due trust and respect. 
But -  and  this  is important - banking secrecy  is not  absolute.  It is simply  not  true that  Swiss banks 
maintain secret numbered accounts whose holders are not known to anyone. Swiss banks do hold so-
called numbered accounts, but a restricted circle of persons within the bank must - by law - know the 
name of the person(s), i.e. the beneficial owner(s) behind every account. In this regard, the “know your 
customer  rule”  is  once  again  essential.  Banking  secrecy  is  routinely  lifted  in  the  case  of  criminal 
investigations  and  the  Swiss  judicial  authorities  have  earned  high  marks  for  the  extent  of  their  co-
operation in international criminal affairs, including those involving politically exposed persons. These 
facts do not mean that our country is especially attractive for criminal money. They rather show that 
bank secrecy rules are not an obstacle to an efficient and determined action against criminal activities. 
Let  us  be  frank:  the  fact  that  some  financial  centres  only  rarely  or  even  never  register  cases  of 
suspicious transactions is certainly not a proof of integrity but rather of a lack of it. 
Conclusion 
Today, we find many financial centres around the globe. They all benefit from easier communication 
and  high  capital  mobility.  Some  have  a  long  history  of  banking  activities,  others  have  recently 
expanded, often by giving foreign investors special legal or fiscal treatment. 
With its customers from all over the world, Switzerland is as much an offshore centre as London or 
any other significant financial centre. We do not provide special advantages to foreign investors. Our 
financial  centre  has  been  built  on  a  wide  range  of  comparative  advantages:  a  financially  sound 
country, a stable political and monetary framework, a long tradition of banking and an internationally 
oriented economy. All these points are also valid for the United Kingdom. There is a major difference 
in terms of specialization, however: the City is “the” market place for investment banking and a number 
of  other  financial  activities  in  Europe,  whereas  Switzerland  plays  a  dominant  role  in  asset 
management. 
Despite  different  realities  and  market  positions,  Switzerland  and  the  United  Kingdom  share  many 
common values vis-à-vis their financial centre: 
– 
both  countries  believe  that  financial  activity  requires  professionalism,  high  standards  and 
efficient supervision; 
6 
 BIS Review 13/2002
    both  countries  consider  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of  criminal  activity  as  major 
threats  for  the  long  term  development  of  their  financial  system  and  act  decisively  against 
them; 
both countries favour market competition  in general and have  a liberal attitude toward  tax 
competition in particular; 
both  countries  are  reluctant  to  accept  over-regulation  and  see  in  the  mushrooming  of 
offshore centres a source of risk for the global financial system. 
I come therefore to the conclusion that there are more converging interests than rivalries between our 
financial  centres.  Some  diverging  views  are  due  to  misunderstandings.  With  its  traditions  and  its 
experience  in  asset  management,  Switzerland  attaches  great  value  to  financial  privacy.  But,  as  I 
showed you, the protection of financial privacy is not an obstacle to an efficient fight against money 
laundering or the financing of terrorism, nor does it hamper fair tax competition with our neighbours if a 
withholding  tax  is  implemented  along  the  line  of  the  EU  directive.  Both  the  disclosure  of  certain 
informations  relating  to  bank  clients  and  the  protection  of  privacy  in  the  financial  sphere  arise  from 
fundamental ethical convictions that are worth protecting. 
I am confident that  with a  frank dialogue and mutual effort to understand each other’s position, the 
common values of the Swiss and British financial centres will again come to the forefront. In particular, 
it is our predominant joint interest to see the very demanding standards that we have set for our own 
financial industry become the world-wide accepted rules. The long history of our financial centres and 
the large experience of our banking industry should give us a natural leadership role in this respect. 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 7
