 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in 
Frankfurt, 4 April 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today's meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB.  
As usual,  we examined recent monetary, financial  and economic developments. The Governing 
Council  concluded  that  the  current  level  of  key  ECB  interest  rates  remains  appropriate  for  the 
maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and,  accordingly,  decided  to  leave  them 
unchanged.  
Starting  with  the  analysis  under  the  first  pillar  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  three-month 
average  of  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3  stood  at  7.8%  in  the  period  from  December  2001  to 
February 2002, compared with 8.0% in the period from November 2001 to January 2002. The high 
level of the annual growth rates of M3 continues to reflect the past portfolio shifts to liquid positions. 
These  shifts  primarily  occurred  during  autumn  2001,  when  the  economic  and  financial  environment 
was  characterised  by  high  uncertainty.  However,  in  the  meantime,  some  normalisation  in  the 
development  of  M3  has  taken  place.  This  is  indicated  by  a  significant  slowdown  in  the  short-term 
dynamics of M3 in early 2002, a period in which the annual rate of growth of loans to the private sector 
has also continued to decline. However, the period of moderation in monetary growth has as yet been 
too short to allow a definitive assessment. 
Against this background, the Governing Council continues to hold the view that the information from 
the first pillar does not thus far point to risks to price stability. Nevertheless, the persistence of excess 
liquidity in the economy could become a concern once the economic recovery in the euro area gathers 
pace.  
As regards the second pillar, the trough in economic activity was in all likelihood reached at the end 
of last year. Further information received over the past few weeks, i.e. surveys, financial market and 
leading indicators, strengthened the expectations of a recovery in the course of this year. While some 
uncertainty  remains  as  regards  the  precise  pattern  of  the  recovery,  not  least  in  the  context  of  a 
substantial increase in oil  prices, the latest  evidence has reinforced our  previous assessment. Real 
GDP  growth  rates  in  the  euro  area  should  again  be  in  line  with  potential  growth  later  this  year. 
Domestic factors support the recovery. First, a reversal of the past inventory drawdown is under way 
and  real  disposable  income  growth  is  expected  to  benefit  from  lower  rates  of  inflation.  Second, 
financing conditions are favourable. We also expect the stronger international environment to play an 
important role in stimulating euro area exports, and both domestic and external factors should foster 
investment. Finally, the positive outlook for the euro area economy is very much supported by sound 
fundamentals and the absence of major imbalances. 
Turning to price developments, let me first recall that, over recent months, annual rates of consumer 
price  inflation  have  been  affected  by  several  factors  of  a  special  or  temporary  nature.  This  volatile 
pattern was broadly anticipated. However, annual inflation rates are currently somewhat higher than 
was expected a few months ago, with early estimates for March pointing to a figure of 2.5%. This is 
mainly because oil prices have again risen significantly in the more recent period. If sustained, higher 
oil prices would also have an impact on inflation rates in the remainder of 2002. While inflation rates 
are  expected  to  fall  to  below  2%  later  in  the  coming  months,  this  decline  may  possibly  be  less 
pronounced  than  was  foreseen,  and  inflation  rates  during  this  year  could  turn  out  to  be  somewhat 
higher than previously expected. 
Beyond the shorter term, upward pressure on prices from aggregate demand should, in the light of 
current projections of a gradual economic recovery in the euro area, remain contained. In addition, the 
outlook for inflation  is fundamentally dependent on  wage moderation.  Such moderation  is important 
not  only  in  order  to  contain  risks  to  price  stability  but  also  to  foster  employment  growth.  As  I  have 
already  noted  on  earlier  occasions,  there  is  some  cause  for  concern  with  regard  to  ongoing  wage 
negotiations.  
BIS Review 22/2002 
 1
 Fiscal policies in the euro area can also contribute to the maintenance of a favourable outlook for 
non-inflationary growth. It is vital that the commitments made to achieving balanced budgets by 2003-
04  be  firmly  followed  up  in  the  Member  States  concerned.  A  continuation  along  the  path  of  fiscal 
consolidation is essential, as is vigilance in ensuring strict adherence to the medium-term plans and 
rigorous implementation of the procedures of the Stability and Growth Pact.  
Equally, the expected recovery should be seen as an ideal opportunity to strengthen efforts towards 
implementing comprehensive structural reforms – in public expenditure and revenues and product, 
labour  and  financial  markets.  Heads  of  State  and  Government  confirmed  this  objective  during  their 
recent  meeting  in  Barcelona.  If  implemented  vigorously,  such  reforms  could  increase  the  growth  of 
real GDP and employment on a sustainable basis. Past improvements in the functioning of markets, 
together  with  wage  moderation,  have  contributed  to  strong  employment  growth  and  a  considerable 
reduction  in  unemployment.  It  is  therefore  clearly  in  the  interest  of  all  countries  to  continue  to 
rigorously implement the agenda agreed in Lisbon and recently confirmed in Barcelona.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2002
