 Bruno Gehrig: Review of the Swiss economy 
Introductory  remarks  by  Prof  Bruno  Gehrig,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 14 June 2002. 
 Developments in the financial markets 
From  a  Swiss  vantage  point,  the  situation  on  the  financial  markets  in  the  first  half  of  2002  was 
predominantly  influenced  by  the  exchange  rate  development  of  the  Swiss  franc.  The  appreciation 
against  the  euro,  which  set  in  after  11  September  2001,  has  been  arrested  but  has  failed  to  bring 
about a sustained correction of the exchange rate. Moreover, the US dollar, too, has declined since 
April. At the beginning of June, it had fallen to its lowest level against the Swiss franc in two-and-a-half 
years. 
There are several reasons for the decline of the US dollar – by approximately 7% against the euro and 
the Swiss franc since the end of March, by approximately 6% vis-à-vis the yen – : imponderables of 
global political significance, growing doubts concerning a sustained upswing in the United States and 
–  exacerbated  by  the  collapse  of  Enron  –  the  scepticism  of  investors  with  respect  to  the  future 
development of yields. The record US current account deficit is increasingly being financed by means 
of short-term capital flows from abroad, which, by their very nature, are volatile. 
Against this background, high-risk investments generally showed a weaker trend. Equity markets and 
the  US  dollar  lost  in  value  while  the  gold  price,  bonds  and  the  Swiss  franc  moved  up.  As  may 
repeatedly be observed in uncertain times, higher demand for Swiss francs resulted from the greater 
attraction exerted by our currency on foreign and particularly also on domestic investors. One of the 
reasons for this is the extremely high international net creditor position of our country (139% of GDP). 
In times of instability, Swiss investors reduce the risks by investing a larger part of their holdings (or 
the  yields thereon) in the home currency or by hedging their foreign-currency balances to a greater 
extent  than  previously.  Both  strategies  strengthen  the  demand  for  Swiss  francs.  With  interest  rate 
differentials between Swiss franc and foreign currency investments having widened since spring, the 
«price» to be paid by investors for the «safe haven» offered by the Swiss franc has, however, risen. 
The  yield  differential  between  long-term  investments  in  euros  and  those  in  Swiss  francs  again 
amounts  to  almost  two  percentage  points;  since  the  start  of  the  year  alone  it  has  increased  by 
approximately  40  basis  points.  Interest  rates,  which  have  reached  a  relatively  lower  level  in  this 
country, to some extent mitigate the economic burdens associated with the appreciation. They have 
probably also contributed to the slight recovery of the euro vis-à-vis the Swiss franc in the past few 
days. 
In the first half of 2002, capital market rates were influenced by economic expectations in the United 
States. The positive economic data in March triggered a vigorous rise in long-term US interest rates by 
approximately 50 basis points within a very brief time. With economic indicators below expectations 
since April, long-term yields fell back to their mid-2001 level. The expectations reflected in the futures 
markets concerning the development of money market rates – and therefore also monetary policy – 
have undergone a marked downward adjustment, notably for the US dollar, but also for the euro and 
the Swiss franc. Hopes of a vigorous and rapid economic recovery have given way to a more realistic 
assessment. 
The SNB as asset manager 
In the context of its statutory mandate, the National Bank manages sizeable assets (table 1). In May 
2002, their market value exceeded Sfr 100 billion. 
The  free  assets  (Sfr  21  billion)  are  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  National  Bank  and  allocated  to  other 
purposes. Mr Blattner will provide details on the management of the free assets. 
The monetary assets (Sfr 86 billion) serve monetary purposes. Claims from repo business (Sfr 16 
billion) reflect our money market activities on the assets side of the balance sheet, while Swiss franc 
securities  (Sfr  5  billion)  are  available  for  absorption  repos  if  necessary.  Foreign  exchange  reserves 
(Sfr  41  billion)  are  at  the  centre  of  our  activity  as  asset managers.  At  the  end  of  1997,  the  leeway 
BIS Review 39/2002 
 1
 previously  granted  solely  for  money  market  investments  was  legally  extended.  This  provided  a 
possibility to spread fixed-interest investments more evenly across various maturities and currencies 
and to widen the range of instruments. 
Among the currencies (graph 1), the US dollar and the euro predominate with shares of 42% and 46% 
respectively.  The  maturities  of  the  investments  extend  over  the  entire  interest  rate  curve,  with  the 
average maturity being around five years. In the debtor categories, government paper predominates, 
accounting  for  a  share  of  more  than  50%.  The  rest  comprises  claims  against  international 
organisations  and  banks  or  bank-like  borrowers  with  an  above-average  rating.  Aside  from  these 
traditional bonds, US mortgage-backed securities were introduced in 2000, a new investment category 
which represents an ideal addition to the portfolio. 
In  the  context  of  the  primary  requirements  specific  to  a  central  bank  –  extremely  high  liquidity, 
investment  focus  on  the  major  currencies  US  dollar  and  euro,  a  mainly  passive  investment  style  – 
risk/return considerations are of prime concern. The goal is to achieve the highest possible return by 
means  of  all  available  concepts  and  techniques  of  modern  asset  management  with  adequate  risk 
control.  The  investment  strategy  is  developed  by  inhouse  investment  specialists.  It  is  mostly 
implemented internally by a team of eight portfolio managers. We resort to external asset managers 
for the investment of approximately Sfr 4 billion (global bonds and mortgage-backed securities). Our 
entire investment activity is systematically monitored by risk specialists. 
In 2001, a yield of 5.2% was achieved on foreign exchange reserves. The average yield in the past 
four years was 6.3%. A comparison with similar investments – for example, with the average yield on 
Swiss  investment  trusts  and  investment  funds  for  foreign  currency  bonds  –  shows  that  this  is  a 
remarkable result. Gold holdings (Sfr 21 billion) and Swiss franc assets (Sfr 5 billion in securities, Sfr 
16 billion in repos) also contribute to the earnings from monetary assets. The overall yield is largely 
determined  by  gold  price  and  exchange  rate  fluctuations,  while  interest  rate  and  credit  risks  play  a 
lesser role. 
In  the  past  year,  overall  aggregate  income  on  monetary  assets  amounted  to  approximately  4.5%. 
Other  than  in  earlier  years,  the  price  of  gold  contributed  to  a  positive  yield.  Still,  the  gold  price  is 
subject  to  strong  fluctuations  and  its  development  is  difficult  to  foresee.  Moreover,  as  in  the  past, 
unfavourable currency movements are to be expected. These influences were clearly at work during 
the past year. The appreciation of the Swiss franc has had a noticeable adverse effect on yields. In the 
first  quarter,  the  soaring  gold  price  led  to  a  yield  of  approximately  3%  on  monetary  assets.  In  the 
second quarter, considerable losses resulted on the currencies; these losses have already cancelled 
out a part of the positive overall yield from the first quarter. This illustrates the strong yield fluctuations 
to which our assets are exposed. With the current composition of monetary assets, average returns of 
close to 3% per annum are to be expected in the long term, however accompanied by high annual 
fluctuations. These are liable to result in a negative overall yield in about three out of ten years. 
Due to this fluctuation risk, but mainly because of the currency reserves required for the conduct of 
monetary policy, the National Bank has to rely on adequate provisions. Part of the earnings are to be 
allocated  to  provisions  in  order  to  enable  these  to  grow  in  step  with  the  Swiss  economy.  The 
remainder is available for distribution to the Confederation and the cantons. Currently, the provisions 
are  well  funded.  Due  in  part  to  the  high  yields  on  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  the  last  few  years, 
provisions  exceeded  the  level  aimed  at  by  around  Sfr  13  billion  at  the  end  of  2001.  This  cushion 
makes  it  possible  to  increase  the  distribution  to  the  Confederation  and  the  cantons  over  the  next 
eleven years as agreed. 
With  a  view  to  the  future,  various  decisions  relating  to  investment  strategy  are  beginning  to  take 
shape, aside from the transfer of the free assets. Based on the consultation procedure it is becoming 
clear that the revision of the National Bank Law will again extend the leeway for investment. Particular 
attention  is  devoted  to  corporate  bonds,  a  significant  investment  segment.  Moreover,  it  must  be 
examined whether and to what extent equities can improve the risk/return features of monetary assets 
in a meaningful way. In addition, the allocation of monetary assets to the various investment sectors 
must be optimised on an ongoing basis. Such questions are studied and clarified internally. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2002
 Table 1 
Structure of the SNB's assets (May 2002, in CHF billions) 
Monetary assets 
  Foreign exchange reserves 
  Reserve position in the IMF 
  Gold holdings 
  Swiss franc securities 
  Claims from repo transactions (net) 
Total monetary assets 
Free assets 
  Gold holdings 
 Investments 
Total 
  Graph 1 
 
41 
3 
21 
5 
16 
86 
 13 
8 
107 
BIS Review 39/2002 
  3
