 Thirachai Phuvanat naranubala: Preparing for rapid growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Thirachai  Phuvanat  naranubala,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Payment Card Business Forum, Bangkok, 28 June 2002. 
 Distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen, 
I am pleased to be invited to address this meeting of prominent members of the financial community 
from the neighbouring countries of Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam as well as some of the familiar faces 
from the Thai financial institutions.  
The  dynamism  of  the  payment  service  industry  in  this  region  is  fast  catching  the  attention  of 
international community, and the future promises yet more potential.  
The  theme  of  this  seminar,  "Preparing  for  Rapid  Growth"  is  certainly  very  timely.  I  am  sure  the 
discussion will focus on both the return and the risks involved.  
But timely as it is, and growth is certainly a good thing, but when growth is rapid, there always is a 
danger.  Thus,  discussion  on  international  best  practices,  risk  management  and  good  corporate 
governance at this early phase of growth is extremely important. These good things take time to build 
up.  
Economic growth in South East Asia  
This year we are seeing most South East Asian economies firmly back on the path of recovery. They 
are  poised  to  regain  their  growth  potentials.  Luckily,  the  tragic  event  of  September  11th  has  not 
pushed them off this steady course.  
This improvement is reflected in the improved sovereign ratings which has allowed many countries to 
re-access the international financial market with new bond issues. 
In the case of Thailand, the economic growth which slowed down to 1.8% last  year has picked up 
significantly to 3.9% in the first quarter of this year. Unemployment rate has also declined, helping to 
strengthen consumer confidence.  
Our  growth  was  driven  by  private  consumption  and  government  stimulus.  For  the  remainder  of  the 
year  and  the  next,  contribution  from fiscal  pump  priming  will  be  less,  but  we  are  confident  that  the 
recovery of exports will take up the slack.  
We think that our exports will recover because we believe the improvement in the US economy will 
continue,  even  though  at  a  more  moderate  pace  than  originally  forecasted.  The  bottoming  of  the 
electronic cycle will also revive growth of many of our neighbours, who are our most important export 
customers. 
The only point of disappointment is in business investment growth which has been slow due to the still 
high  excess  capacity  in  many  industries  in  Thailand.  These  are  the  industries  that  cater  for  the 
domestic market, although the capacity utilization rate is rising quickly in recent months.  
However,  I  am  optimistic  that  the  buoyant  consumer  demand  will  soon  make  it  more  and  more 
attractive  for  some  businesses  to  start  thinking  about  expansion  or  diversification.  I  believe  similar 
development is also being seen in varying degrees throughout South East Asia.  
The rate of inflation was only 1.6% last year, allowing the central bank to conduct an accommodative 
monetary policy. The reduction of external debt has been steady. External debt is now only 60% of 
GDP compared to 90% at its peak. 
Financial  institution  performance  in  Thailand  has  also  strengthened  considerably.  Last  year  the 
banking system recorded an operating profit of 0.68 % on assets, boosted by both improved interest 
income and fee-based income.  
The transfer of non performing loans to the government owned, Thai Asset Management Corporation, 
has  reduced  the  NPL  ratio  in  the  banking  system  to  11.5%.  With  less  need  for  provisioning,  the 
average BIS ratio of the Thai banks now stands at approximately 13% at the end of March this year. 
BIS Review 44/2002 
 1
 Last week the Thai authority also finalized the measures to deal with losses from the financial sector 
intervention.  The  government  will  fiscalize  the  losses  by  issuing  bonds  to  cover  them  in  full.  The 
servicing of the interest rates will be entirely from the government budget.  
The retirement of the principals will be borne by the central bank. But it will be paid out of the central 
bank's future yearly profits which would be earned mostly from the international reserves and would 
normally  be paid over to the  government in  its  yearly  appropriation of the  profits anyway. Thus the 
scheme will not affect the Bank of Thailand's ability to formulate monetary policy in the future.  
The  scheme  also  makes  more  clear  the  path  of  fiscal  deficit  in  Thailand.  With  fiscal  consolidation 
beginning  next  year  when  the  economy  firmly  recovers,  the  scheme  sets  a  limit  of  fiscal  burden  at 
approximately 60% of the GPD which is still quite a manageable limit.  
The environment is therefore becoming more optimistic, the business prospects are becoming bright, 
and one should now plan for growth. What then, ladies and gentlemen, are the issues that we should 
pay attention to when we plan for growth?  
Preparing for rapid growth  
For emerging markets like ours, I think we have to address issues both at macro and micro levels. 
At  the  macro  level,  the  authority  has  to  ensure  that  there  is  adequate  infrastructure  to  handle  high 
volume of transactions safely and efficiently. The need here covers not only that of the point of sale 
hardware and communication technology.  
The problem is that these things become obsolete quickly and one has to ensure that the domestic 
system in use is compatible with the international system, as well as the level of security required.  
But far more important is the financial and legal infrastructure. I will highlight a few, starting with  
First, the need to clearly define the rights and obligations of card issuers, card users and other parties 
involved in the transactions particularly in case of frauds. In Thailand, we have now drafted the Credit 
Card Act to set this framework but its enactment is still pending.  
Secondly,  the  need  to  set  up  a  good  credit  information  system  to  help  card  issuers  in  their  risk 
management. The minimum is a system that allows the sharing of negative information or some kind 
of black lists. But one should quickly migrate towards pooling and sharing positive information as well.  
A well functioning credit information system is not harmful to the consumers. Instead it enables the 
borrowers  on  the  margin  to  obtain  credit,  those  who  would  have  been  refused  in  its  absence.  In 
Thailand  we  already  have  two  credit  bureaus  operating,  and  the  Credit  Bureau  Act  will  soon  be 
enacted to govern their businesses. 
Third, the need to protect the consumers. The charges and expenses levied against them should be 
made  clear  and  easy  to  compare  between  various  issuers.  Interest  rates  should  be  declared  as 
effective  annual  rates  and  sufficient  lead  time  should  be  allowed  and  communicated  to  consumers 
before changes in terms and conditions come into effect. 
In Thailand, we are planning to set a uniform standard for the whole industry regarding such things as 
interest free periods, the setting of due dates and calculation methods for past due balances. 
Finally, if internet transactions become prevalent or poised for rapid growth, there is the need to define 
its  proper  legal  framework.  On  this  issue,  we  have  just  passed  the  relevant  laws  and  are  in  the 
process of drafting the subsidiary regulations at ministerial level.  
At  the  micro  level,  and  this  is  your  direct  responsibilities,  card  issuers  have  to  put  in  place  a  good 
system of risk management. This means able to identify what events will pose risk to you, which risks 
you  should  take,  how  they  should  be  monitored  and  what  measures  can  be  employed  to  mitigate 
those risks. 
I must emphasize here that proper risk management simply cannot be done without a sophisticated 
system to gather process and analyse the information.  
The  last  issue  I  would  raise  today  is  that  of  accounting.  Card  issuers  must  ensure  that  they  hold 
adequate  and  prudent  levels  of  provision  against  bad  debts  in  their  accounts.  Probability  of  default 
should be carefully analysed by various methods, making full use of the modern techniques available 
at credit bureaus. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2002
 Ladies and gentlemen: For the next 2-3 years, I am looking only for a moderate growth, not a rapid 
growth. I am hoping for a firm and sustainable recovery in South East Asia. But for the recovery to be 
firm and sustainable, we must indeed plan for the event of rapid growth. And that means we have to 
be prepared in every way.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 44/2002 
 3
