 Thirachai Phuvanat naranubala: The role of non-bank financial institutions in 
relation to monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Thirachai  Phuvanat  naranubala,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Regional  Seminar  on  Non-Bank  Financial 
in  East  Asia  Region,  Bangkok, 
4 September 2002. 
Institutions 
 I wish to congratulate the Securities and Exchange Commission of Thailand and The World Bank for 
organizing  such  an  interesting  seminar  in  Bangkok,  and  to  thank  them  for  inviting  me  to  share  my 
thoughts with you today.  
I  can  see  that  the  topics  in  the  seminar  will  cover  many  important  aspects  of  non-bank  financial 
institutions’  operations  --  ranging  from  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  to  capital  market 
development  as  well  as  the  issue  of  governance.  But  I  am  the  only  person  touching  on  monetary 
policy aspect. 
Monetary policy does affect an important part of your business, which is the bond market. Because the 
one factor reflected in the bond market yield curve is inflation expectation. Therefore, if the framework 
and the conduct of monetary policy result in low and predictable inflation, it will help curb volatility of 
the yield curve and support development of the bond markets. Change in monetary policy stance also 
directly affect interest rate and hence the bond market. Thus, it pays for you to understand monetary 
policy. 
Monetary Policy in Thailand 
In order for you to do that, I have to start by telling you about how the monetary policy framework has 
evolved here in Thailand. 
Since the end of the Second World War, Thailand employed the regime of fixed exchange rate one 
way or another. 
At the beginning our currency was fixed to the British Pound, and later to the US Dollar - first directly, 
then later via a basket with a very heavy US Dollar content. 
The regime had served us very well. It provided certainty for international trade, and it helped to attract 
foreign investment. We were able to maintain the parity with the US Dollar for more than 18 years until 
1981 when we had our first devaluation. 
The  pressure  on  our  parity  in  the  early  days  was  slight.  Thailand’s  exports  at  that  time  were  rice, 
rubber, tin and teak. Our production costs for those items were among the lowest in the world. 
However, beginning from the 1980’s, we began to industrialize. Our industrial exports which was only 
33 % of the total exports at the end of the 1970’s quickly rose to 76 % in 1990 and even further to 86% 
today.  
With  industrialization,  we  began  to  find  that  our  productivity  did  not  keep  up  with  our  major  trading 
partners,  particularly  the  US,  and  pressure  on  the  parity  began  to  build  up.  Our  domestic  costs  of 
production  have  never  been  flexible  downward.  To  ask  for  a  wage  and  salary  reduction  was 
unthinkable then - as it is today. Our only choice was to devalue. 
The  devaluations  that  occurred  were  not  always  smooth.  More  than  once,  they  brought  on  political 
tension, between those in the government who believed in it and those in the opposition, or even the 
military, who thought otherwise. In one incident, it even caused a change in the central bank governor. 
Finally, we had to float our currency in 1997. 
Since then, we have adopted Inflation Targeting as our monetary policy framework. A core inflation 
target  was  announced  at  between  0  and  3.5  %  per  annum.  The  central  bank  will  regularly  monitor 
economic changes and make forecasts. If we see that the rate of inflation has a tendency to exceed 
the range,  we  will adopt a tighter monetary policy stance by increasing the policy  interest rate, and 
vice versa if we see it going under the range. The policy rate that we use is the 14 day repurchase 
rate.  
BIS Review 48/2002 
 1
 This is completely different, of course, compared to the days of fixed currency regime when interest 
rates in Thailand would move mostly in tandem with the US rates.  
The  change  in  the  monetary  policy  framework  therefore  affects  the  financial  environment  and  your 
businesses a great deal. 
Development of the bond market 
What other change also happened? 
One very important change that has occurred in Thailand is the rapid development of the bond market, 
which took off after the 1997 crisis. 
The bond market is an important tool for safety and soundness of the financial institution system. It 
allows  the  intermediation  process  to  proceed  uninterrupted  when  the  banks  are  temporarily  in 
difficulty. But more importantly, it helps with liquidity management. 
In the case of Thailand, the government throughout the 1980’s had been very disciplined in their fiscal 
policy. They maintained balanced budgets in most years. As a result, no new government bond was 
issued, as old ones were being retired. 
Without a deep and liquid government bond market, growth of corporate bond was also slow. When 
the crisis erupted, financial institutions that could not seek liquidity from the inter bank market were 
stuck without liquid instruments in hand. Some of them might have survived had the bond market been 
more active. 
After the crisis, the government had to issue massive amount of bonds to cover losses in the financial 
system. Today, the Thai bond market is therefore much larger, at 38 % of the GDP. We have a much 
more active market. 
What does an active bond market mean to monetary policy? I will highlight three points. 
First is the implication on transmission mechanism. 
When the central bank wants to change stance in monetary policy, it changes interest rate up or down. 
But it does not directly change the interest rates along the whole spectrum of the yield curve. It only 
affects  the  key  policy  rate,  which  in  the  case  of  Thailand  is  the  very  short-term  14  day  rate  in  the 
repurchase market.  
However, to have an impact on the real economy, there must be a way to transmit this signal all the 
way  to  the  financial  activities  that  determine  economic  transactions,  such  as  business  capital 
formation, household consumption and savings. 
The traditional channel is through commercial banks. And now we have another channel through the 
corporate bond market. This channel is poised to grow more rapidly in the future. 
The second aspect is that central bank also operates in the government bond market in its conduct of 
monetary policy. It can sell and buy bonds to pump money in or out of the system, through their open 
market operations. 
An efficient, deep and liquid bond market therefore will not only help make the intermediation process 
competitive and active - but also allow the central bank to transact in the market more effectively.  
The third aspect is the function of the bond market in managing the capital flows. Emerging market 
economies  when  they  are  successful  tend  to  attract  capital  inflow  very  quickly,  and  in  very  large 
quantity. Unfortunately, if things turn bad, the outflow of capital can also be equally quick and in as 
large a quantity. 
How  can  one  better  manage  this  volatile  capital  flow?  To  some  extent,  I  think  the  risks  can  be 
mitigated with a well functioning bond market.  
If  we  can  make  it  function  as  a  temporary  reservoir  to  store  the  incoming  water,  and  more  slowly 
releasing  it  to  the  various  users  of  fund  within  the  country,  at  the  right  pace  for  absorption  -  if  the 
market  selection  process  can  be  made  such  that  only  the  projects  with  really  viable,  economic 
prospects  are  granted  the  fund  -  and,  if  the  foreign  owners  of  fund  can  be  persuaded  to  hold  the 
instruments  denominated  in  borrowers’  own  currency,  thereby  shifting  the  position  on  the  foreign 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2002
 exchange risks from the borrowers to the investors, then the bond market can be a safer channel for 
capital flows than the commercial banks. 
At this point you may disagree that if foreign investors in bonds want out, they will still sell the bonds, 
causing the prices to be sharply lower anyway. This is true. But price volatility in the bond market is 
still better than a run on your banks. 
Therefore an efficient bond market can help lessen the adverse impact that volatile capital flows may 
have on the financial institutions. A sound financial system is of course a necessary condition for the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
The role of non-bank financial institutions 
Let me now turn to the non-bank financial institutions. What can be your roles in relation to monetary 
policy? I can offer four suggestions. 
Number  one,  you  can  make  yourself  an  efficient  player  in  the  market.  The  more  efficient  the 
competitors, the better the market is.  
But in order to compete well, you will have to be well capitalized, well organized with good governance 
and risk management processes. 
Number two, you can help establish market codes and practices that conform to world standards. The 
market  needs  rules  to  ensure  smooth  trades  and  dispute  resolutions,  and  to  guard  against 
manipulation. The industry has an important role to play in the setting of rules and codes of conduct. 
Number three, you can help ensure that the market has a wide variety of products. We should aim for 
a market that can offer many kinds of contract, to serve those needing to unbundled or rearrange all 
kinds of risks at competitive prices. 
And lastly, you can build for yourselves a good analytical capability. It will prevent herd behavior, and 
help to stabilize the market.  
But more importantly, proper project analysis can ensure that capital  is channeled only  to the good 
projects. It can help prevent over expansion of businesses, over diversification and over enthusiasm 
that inevitably winds up as non-performing loans in the end. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The task of the central bank in monetary policy is to ensure that it sets the right policy, and that its 
policy is transmitted through to the overall economy. The financial system through which their policy is 
transmitted must also be safe and sound. 
Non-bank financial institutions do indeed have vital roles to play here. 
BIS Review 48/2002 
 3
