 Bank of Japan’s August report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 12 August 2002 
 The Bank’s View2 
Japan’s  economy,  despite  persistent  weakness  in  domestic  demand  and  increasing  uncertainty 
regarding  the  global  economy,  has  almost  stabilized  as  a  whole  with  exports  and  production 
continuing to increase. 
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  continues  to  decrease  and  private 
consumption,  despite  some  resilience,  remains  weak  as  a  whole.  Moreover,  housing  investment 
remains  sluggish  and  public  investment  continues  to  decline.  Meanwhile,  net  exports  (real  exports 
minus real imports) continue to increase significantly due to the recovery in overseas economies and 
also to the effects of restocking abroad, mainly in IT-related goods.  
Industrial  production  is  picking  up  clearly  in  response  to  the  upsurge  in  exports  and  adequate 
reduction of excess inventory stocks. Against this background, corporate profits appear to have started 
to recover. In addition, the rebound in production is having effects on labor markets, albeit marginally, 
with  an  increase  in  overtime  hours  worked  and  in  new  job  offers  mainly  for  part-time  workers. 
However,  firms  are  still  maintaining  their  stance  on  reducing  personnel  expenses  and  as  a 
consequence,  household  income  continues  to  decrease  noticeably.  Thus,  employment  and  income 
situation of households overall remains severe. 
Turning  to  the  economic  outlook,  the  upward  trend  in  exports  is  expected  to  continue  against  the 
background of the gradual recovery in overseas economies, although the pace is likely to slow as the 
impetus from overseas restocking weakens. Thus, industrial production is expected to follow a gradual 
uptrend with some fluctuations in its pace.  
On  the  other  hand,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a 
declining  trend  and  private  demand  is  likely  to  remain  weak  for  the  immediate  future.  Yet,  if  the 
increase in exports and production mentioned above continues, the recovery in corporate profits will 
become distinct, and this will gradually bring a positive impact on domestic private demand. In fact, the 
decline in some leading indicators of business fixed investment has come to a halt. 
Overall, it can be envisaged that the stabilization of Japan’s economy will become more definite as the 
increase  in  exports  and  production,  through  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits,  will  underpin 
domestic  private  demand.  However,  considering  that  forces  restraining  the  economy,  such  as 
excessive labor input and debt, are still persistently at work, momentum for a self-sustaining recovery 
will be subdued for some time. Furthermore, stock prices in the U.S. and worldwide as well as the U.S. 
dollar remain volatile and firms’ outlook for the global demand for IT-related goods has become rather 
cautious.  Judging  from  these  factors,  uncertainty  regarding  external  conditions  seems  to  have 
increased  somewhat  further.  In  these  circumstances,  it  should  continue  to  be  heeded  that  further 
destabilization in the foreign exchange and financial markets at home and abroad could easily exert a 
negative influence on the economy.  
On the price front, import prices have started to decline mainly due to the U.S. dollar’s depreciation 
against  the  yen  since  this  spring.  Domestic  wholesale  prices  have  weakened,  partly  because  the 
effects  of  the  increase  in  import  prices  until  spring  started  to  dissipate.  Moreover,  consumer  prices 
stay on a gradual downtrend and corporate services prices continue to decline.  
As  for  the  conditions  surrounding  price  developments,  the  balance  between  supply  and  demand  is 
expected to keep exerting downward pressure on prices for a while amid persistently weak domestic 
demand, although the completion of inventory adjustment and the rise in capacity utilization rates will 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
August 8 and 9, 2002. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on August 8 and 9 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 46/2002 
 1
 support  prices  to  some  degree.  Moreover,  factors  such  as  the  ongoing  technological  innovations  in 
machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain prices. 
With  import  prices  beginning  to  decline,  domestic  wholesale  prices  are  projected  to  continue  to  be 
weak for a while, as they are sensitive to import prices. Consumer prices are expected to stay on a 
declining trend for the time being at the current gradual pace. This is because while the slower growth 
in  imports  of  consumer  goods  is  expected  to  alleviate  the  downward  pressure  on  prices  to  some 
extent,  the  faster  pace  of  decline  in  wages  may  possibly  reinforce  the  ongoing  decline  in  prices, 
especially for services prices.  
As for the financial market, in the short-term money markets, the outstanding balance of the current 
accounts at the Bank of Japan is moving around 15 trillion yen as the Bank continues to provide ample 
liquidity to the money market. 
In these circumstances, the overnight call rate continues to move at very close to zero percent. Also, 
longer-term interest rates remain steady. 
Yields on long-term government bonds dropped to 1.26 percent in response to a further depreciation 
of the U.S. dollar against the yen and a decline in stock prices, and are recently mixed moving around 
1.25-1.3  percent.  Yield  spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  bonds  and  corporate  bonds)  and 
government bonds are virtually level. 
Stock prices declined from late July as foreign institutional investors sold stocks in line with a decline 
in U.S. and European stock prices, and are recently moving around 9,500-10,000 yen. 
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  rose  to  115-116  yen  in  mid-July  reflecting  the  overall 
downtrend in the U.S. dollar, and is currently fluctuating at around 120 yen to the U.S. dollar. 
With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high 
credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip  companies.  The 
lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms continue to be severe. In the corporate 
bonds and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with low credit ratings is still severe, but the 
environment for firms with high credit ratings is accommodative. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  continues  to  follow  a  downtrend  mainly  because  firms  are 
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year basis. The year-on-year growth rates of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP 
issued are on a downtrend.  
The  monetary  base  increased  substantially  —by  around  20-30  percent—  from  the  previous  year’s 
level,  although  the  growth  rate  slowed  slightly.  The  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  money  stock 
remained around 3.5 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Overall,  the  recent  financial  environment  remains  extremely  easy  on  the  whole  in  terms  of  money 
market conditions. The deterioration in the financing situation of firms has come to a halt. However, 
the stance of investors toward firms with high credit risks remains severe and the lending attitudes of 
private banks remain cautious. Hence, the developments in the behavior of financial institutions and 
corporate financing continue to require close monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2002
