 Willem F Duisenberg: Some remarks on the euro in a US context 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at a breakfast meeting 
of the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, 19 April 2002. 
 Introduction  
It  is  an  honour  for  me  that  Paul  Volcker  has  introduced  my  presentation  this  morning.  Under  his 
chairmanship and that of Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve has made an invaluable contribution 
to the well-being of the American people, and to the world economy. Paul Volcker managed to stop 
the inflation spiral, which started in the early 1970s, and turned it into a sustained disinflation process. 
The low inflation record combined with high real growth in the 1990s here in the United States also 
owe a lot to the courageous and determined policy that Paul Volcker carried out in the 1980s, which 
gave clear priority to monetary stability. 
It is also an honour for me to address such a distinguished audience in the United States. In particular 
last  year,  the  attention  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the 
European countries that have adopted the euro (cid:150) jointly referred to as the Eurosystem (cid:150) was focused 
on communicating to the 300 million citizens of the euro area the ins and outs of the introduction of the 
euro, in particular the  euro banknotes and coins.  At the same time, the ECB realises that  it is also 
important to address audiences outside the euro area and the European Union. Although we refer to 
the  euro  as  ’our  currency’,  the  impact  of  the  euro  goes  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  euro  area. 
Indeed, the euro may be referred to as one of the key currencies in the world, with the Eurosystem 
being the central bank responsible for issuing it. 
In  particular,  people  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic  may  be  interested  to  learn  more  about  the  euro. 
Indeed, knowledge of what is happening in Europe in this respect still seems to be rather limited. This 
is partly because, in the 1990s, US commentators were somewhat critical of European policy makers 
seeking  to  establish  a  monetary  union.  Many  of  these  commentators  thought  the  Europeans  were 
’building  castles  in  the  air’.  However,  as  1  January  1999  approached,  the  date  when  the  exchange 
rates of 11 European countries were irrevocably fixed and the euro was introduced, it became clear 
that, indeed, something special was happening in Europe. 
In my speech today, I would like to elaborate on some key aspects of the euro area. I would like to put 
them in a US context, and recall the scepticism expressed about the euro by some US commentators. 
To be more precise, my remarks this morning will focus on the following questions: 
   Is it possible to have a single currency without having a nation-state?  
Are the economies of Europe sufficiently homogeneous to handle a single currency? 
Last but not least, how does the euro area monetary policy function?  
A single currency without a nation-state 
Many  US  commentators  thought  that  the  euro  would  not  fly,  as  the  European  Union  does  not 
constitute a nation-state. They argue that it is difficult to conceive how sovereign states, such as the 
members of the European Union, can give up their monetary independence. To back up their case, 
these commentators sometimes refer to the United States. The US dollar was introduced in 1792 as 
the  currency  of  the  young  nation-state  that  was  established  in  1789.  Indeed,  the  currency  was 
regarded  as  an  expression  of  the  unity  of  the  young  nation  and  its  independence  from  the  British 
crown.  
However, in economic and even cultural terms, this young nation was a very heterogeneous collection 
of  former  colonies  and  in  many  respects,  apart  from  the  common  language,  perhaps  much  more 
diverse than the current euro area.  
It is also interesting to note that although the US dollar was introduced almost at the same time as the 
United States was established, the US could hardly have been called a fully-fledged monetary union in 
those  days,  at  least  not  according  to  our  current  definitions.  Besides  some  ill-fated  and  short-lived 
attempts  in  the  late  18th  and  early  19th  century,  the  United  States  did  not  have  a  central  bank, 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 1
 responsible  for  issuing  the  currency,  until  1913,  when  the  Federal  Reserve  System  was  set  up. 
Moreover, effective banking laws were also lacking, at least until 1863, when the National Banking Act 
became  law.  Indeed,  throughout  much  of  the  19th  century,  exchange  rates  between  US  states 
underwent de facto fluctuation, due to the excessive use of paper money, the quality of which differed 
from one state to another, and the absence of widely accepted currency in the form of gold and silver. 
At the same time, the process of political union in the United States remained incomplete, as the Civil 
War  in  the  1860s  manifestly  demonstrated.  One  can  even  argue  that  the  current  constitutional  and 
political  set-up  of  the  United  States  and  division  of  responsibilities  between  the  federal  and  state 
governments goes back to the 1930s, the aftermath of the Great Depression. The point that I would 
like to make is that (cid:150) like in Europe (cid:150) monetary and political integration were lengthy processes that 
went hand in hand, processes that were much more complicated than some of these commentators 
would have us believe. 
Moreover, in order to understand why Europe has successfully introduced a single currency without 
being  a  nation-state,  it  is  important  to  grasp  the  history  and  essence  of  the  European  integration 
process.  Having  been  the  initiator  and  to  a  large  extent  the  theatre  of  two  world  wars,  European 
countries  realised  they  could  only  avoid  the  horrors  of  another  armed  conflict  by  coming  closer 
together. The strategy was, and still is, to link the countries of Europe by gradually integrating their 
markets and economic policies. By doing so, political integration will follow. In 1968 a customs union 
was  established  among  the  countries  of  the  then  European  Economic  Community,  followed  by  the 
establishment of a European single market in 1993. In order to make a single market, i.e. ensure the 
free  movement  of  goods,  services,  capital  and  labour,  it  was  felt  necessary  to  introduce  a  single 
currency.  And  as  you  know,  this  most  recent  step  in  the  European  integration  process  occurred  in 
1999. Its introduction was a logical step in an integration process that started after the Second World 
War and which will ultimately lead to ever closer ties between the countries of Europe. 
The euro area: a fairly homogeneous economic entity 
US commentators were also sceptical about the homogeneity of the European economies. A single 
currency  would  only  be  beneficial  if  the  potential  members  of  the  monetary  union  were  fairly 
homogeneous. If not, countries would no longer be able to adequately respond to diverse economic 
developments, as they could not let their exchange rates fluctuate. These commentators also argued 
that the European countries had no other adjustment mechanisms, such as a high labour mobility or 
fiscal stabilisation, which might serve as a substitute for exchange rate flexibility. 
However,  in  my  view,  there  are  very  good  reasons  for  having  a  single  currency  in  those  Member 
States of the European Union which have sufficiently converged. This is supported by the experience 
gained in the three and a half years since the introduction of the euro. 
First,  economic  research  and  empirical  evidence  has  shown  that  countries  in  Europe  are  not  as 
heterogeneous  as the critics of the euro project often claim. Indeed, compared  with the  differences 
between the economic structures and business cycles of US regions, the European countries score 
relatively well. The research has also shown that a given region in the US will recover more quickly 
from an economic shock than a region or a country in Europe. However, these results are based on 
data  collected  before  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  The  adoption  of  a  single  currency  in  Europe  will 
most likely have made economic structures in Europe more homogeneous. In addition, since the early 
1990s, Europe has undertaken structural reforms that have contributed to the flexibility of product and 
labour markets.  
Second, although labour is much less mobile between European countries than between US states or 
regions,  the  European  Member  States  nevertheless  have  some  fairly  powerful  (fiscal)  stabilisation 
mechanisms  at  their  disposal,  in  case  countries  are  affected  by  shocks.  In  contrast  to  the  United 
States,  the  ’federal  budget’  of  the  European  Union  is  very  small  and  fiscal  policy  is  a  national 
prerogative. This also implies that member countries have the capacity to tackle shocks by themselves 
and do not require the assistance of the ’federal budget’. How does this work? The Member States of 
the  European  Union  have  signed  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This  Pact  requires,  among  other 
things, that national governments should pursue (cid:150) over the medium-term (cid:150) a balanced budget or a 
surplus.  This  allows  countries  to  let  automatic  stabilisers  function  if  they  are  affected  by  economic 
shocks. The budget deficit of a Member State is, under normal cyclical circumstances, not allowed to 
exceed 3% of GDP. However, research has shown that if countries do indeed stick to the Stability and 
Growth Pact, they should be able to absorb economic shocks and fluctuations in the business cycle by 
letting automatic stabilisers function, without breaching the 3% limit.  
2 
 BIS Review 25/2002
 Third, in many areas there are obvious benefits from maintaining a decentralised political structure. As 
we know, monopolies (cid:150) both those exercised by companies and centralist governments (cid:150) are harmful 
to  growth  and  welfare.  Competition  between  jurisdictions  can  often  be  as  healthy  as  in  the  market 
economy. In that respect, the EU is not far away from the set-up in the US, if one disregards some key 
areas like foreign and defence policy. 
Key aspects of the ECB’s monetary policy  
I  have  attempted  to  explain  why  some  of  the  criticism  made  by  US  commentators  regarding  the 
introduction  of  the  euro  is  not  justified.  Indeed,  the  experience  with  the  single  currency  so  far  has 
proved these critics to be wrong. Finally, as I am first and foremost a central banker, let me now turn to 
the monetary policy pursued in the euro area. 
With the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999, responsibility for monetary policy-making was, by 
definition, transferred from national to European level. This shift necessitated the creation of the ECB. 
As already mentioned, the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area countries make up the 
Eurosystem. The Eurosystem, which has the traditional functions of a central bank, may be referred to 
as  the  central  banking  system  of  the  euro  area,  which  is  virtually  identical  to  the  Federal  Reserve 
System in the United States. 
Decisions  on  monetary  policy  are  taken  by  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council,  which  consists  of  a  six-
member Executive Board and the Governors of the national central banks of the 12 countries currently 
in the euro area. The members of the Governing Council consider the interests of the euro area as a 
whole; they do not represent their respective countries. The authority and functioning of the Governing 
Council over, and in relation to, monetary policy decisions is, again, very similar to that of the Federal 
Open Market Committee in the US context.  
Let me now list some of the key aspects of the ECB’s monetary policy framework. 
First and foremost, the ECB’s primary objective is to maintain price stability. This mandate stems from 
the Treaty on European Union, which formed the blueprint for Economic and Monetary Union and was 
ratified by all the national parliaments of the European Union. The ECB is convinced that by focusing 
on  price  stability  central  banks  contribute  significantly  to  a  society’s  well-being.  Apart  from  credibly 
preserving price stability, monetary policy can do nothing to enhance the potential growth rate of the 
economy. In fact, the policy task of improving long-term growth prospects is entirely in the hands of 
governments.  They  need  to  carry  out  structural  and  fiscal  reforms,  which  should  aim  to  reduce 
rigidities and enhance the flexibility of labour and goods markets, via restraining tax wedges and by 
maintaining proper incentives regarding the demand and supply of labour, in a context of sound public 
finances. 
In  order  to  make  the  ECB’s  objective  operational,  a  quantitative  definition  has  been  set  for  price 
stability,  as  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  has  mandated  the  ECB  to  maintain  price  stability.  To 
anchor  expectations  and  to  offer  a  yardstick  against  which  the  ECB  can  be  held  accountable,  the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  provided  a  numerical  definition  of  price  stability  as  "a  year-on-year 
increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%". The 
Governing Council also emphasised that price stability has to be maintained over the medium term. 
The focus on the medium term acknowledges that monetary policy cannot steer price developments in 
the short term. At the same time, it reflects the notion that measured policy reactions to threats to price 
stability can prevent unnecessary volatility being introduced into the economy.  
The  ECB’s  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  has  established  a  range  of  inflation  outcomes 
deemed compatible with price stability. The range definition that we have adopted reflects the degree 
of  uncertainty  attached  to  the  meaning  and  measurement  of  the  concept  of  price  stability.  It  allows 
uncertainty  about  the  measurement  bias  in  the  HICP  to  be  accommodated  within  the  range,  while 
ensuring  that  "true"  price  stability  (zero  inflation)  is  included.  Moreover,  the  definition  provides  a 
"buffer" in the face of economic shocks and avoids the impression that monetary policy is equipped to 
fine-tune price developments with a high degree of precision. 
Regarding the definition of price stability, I wish to emphasise two further aspects. First, it is defined 
with  reference  to  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  The  ECB  has  made  it  very  clear  that  monetary  policy 
cannot, and should not try to, address regional or local economic problems. Secondly, the Governing 
Council  aims  to  avoid  both  inflation  and  deflation.  We  are  well  aware  of  the  potential  problems 
associated  with  the  hitting  of  the  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates  and  the  attendant 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 3
 potential loss of effectiveness in the conduct of monetary policy under conditions of persistent price 
deflation.  This  is  an  important  reason  why  there  is  a  safety  margin,  in  the  form  of  small  positive 
inflation rates below 2%, in our definition. 
In order to form an appropriate assessment of the success or failure of the ECB’s monetary policy, the 
medium-term orientation of the ECB’s policy should be borne in mind. Monetary policy needs to be 
evaluated over a sufficiently extended period. The ECB’s policy can be considered successful if price 
stability, according to our definition, has prevailed for most of the time and if variability of inflation has 
remained low. 
From  the  start,  the  definition  set  by  the  Governing  Council  has  served  very  well  the  purpose  of 
anchoring medium-term inflation expectations. This is evident from inflation expectations derived from 
market  surveys  or  from  the  analysis  of  yields  on  long-term  bonds.  This  stability  of  inflation 
expectations is remarkable given that we had to face substantial shocks to the price level in the euro 
area (cid:150) mainly stemming from energy  and food prices (cid:150) over the  past three  years. The definition of 
price stability has thus reduced inflation uncertainty, thereby lowering the risk premia included in long-
term interest rates. 
I would finally like to address one other key aspect of the framework according to which the ECB tries 
to pursue its objective. The recognition that monetary policy has to cope with an ever changing and 
imperfectly  known  world  has  been  an  essential  consideration  in  the  design  of  the  ECB’s  monetary 
policy  strategy.  Besides  defining  price  stability,  the  Governing  Council  chose  to  equip  itself  with  a 
broad but robust framework for analysing economic developments and shocks, which we call the two 
pillars of our of monetary policy strategy.  
In recognition of the fundamentally monetary origins of inflation, our strategy assigns a prominent role 
to money in the formulation of monetary policy. This so-called first pillar of the ECB’s strategy implies 
the use of approaches and models in which monetary aggregates play an important role in analysing 
risks to price stability. In parallel, the second pillar ensures that other forms of analysis and models, 
such as the investigation of the interplay between supply and demand as well as cost-push dynamics, 
are  incorporated  into  the  analysis  of  price  developments.  Also,  the  Eurosystem  staff  projections 
regarding  the  economic  outlook  of  the  euro  economy  are  analysed  in  the  context  of  this  pillar. 
Together, the two pillars ensure a comprehensive assessment of the economic situation and allow a 
focus on the nature of the shocks hitting the euro area. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am coming to the end of my remarks here today. The introduction of the euro 
has been an outstanding achievement. In particular, the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins 
went much more smoothly than initially expected. The success of the whole undertaking shows that 
many of the critics who opposed the euro in the 1990s were indeed wrong. Moreover, the success of 
the euro can be attributed to the sound economic and monetary framework laid down in the Treaty on 
European Union, which includes the tasks and functions of the ECB. 
I  hope  you  will  agree  that  the  differences  between  the  practices  of  major  central  banks  oriented 
towards  price  stability  are  in  fact  relatively  limited.  All  these  central  banks  share  a  number  of  key 
elements  that  guide  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  However,  the  experience  of  central  banks 
worldwide  also  shows  that  there  is  no  single,  unique  way  to  successfully  conduct  monetary  policy. 
Perhaps it is no accident that the monetary authorities of the world’s two largest currency areas (cid:150) the 
Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  Eurosystem  (cid:150)  have  eschewed  excessively  simplified  and  rigid 
frameworks  to  conduct  policy.  They  have  consciously  chosen  to  enlarge,  rather  than  narrow,  on  a 
priori grounds, the set of indicators which they routinely monitor.  
I thank you for your attention. I am now happy to answer your questions (cid:150) that is, to the same extent 
as most central bankers would answer them.  
4 
 BIS Review 25/2002
