 Bank of Japan’s May report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 22 May 2002. 
 The Bank’s View2 
The  pace  of  deterioration  in  Japan’s  economy  has  moderated,  with  production  starting  to  pick  up 
reflecting the increase in exports and progress in inventory adjustment. 
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  continues  to  decrease  and  private 
consumption remains weak. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is 
on a downtrend. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus real imports) are increasing due to the 
recovery in overseas economies. 
Industrial  production  is  starting  to  pick  up,  reflecting  the  increase  in  exports  and  also  the  further 
progress in inventory adjustment as a whole. However, firms are maintaining their stance on reducing 
personnel expenses given persistently strong excessiveness in employment. Therefore, employment 
and  income  conditions  of  households  continue  to  worsen,  reflecting  the  decrease  in  the  number  of 
employees and the faster pace of decline in wages. 
Turning  to  the  outlook,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to 
follow  a  downtrend  for  a  while,  judged  mainly  from  leading  indicators  and  firms’  investment  plans. 
Private  consumption  is  also  likely  to  remain  lackluster  mainly  due  to  worsening  employment  and 
income  conditions.  In  addition,  government  spending  is  basically  projected  to  continue  a  downward 
trend. 
Meanwhile, as for exporting conditions, overseas economies, especially in the U.S. and East Asia, are 
likely to follow a recovery path. The worldwide inventory adjustment in IT-related goods has come to 
an end except for some goods such as networking equipment. Moreover, the yen is still lower than 
where it was last autumn. Under these circumstances, exports are projected to continue a moderate 
recovery. Industrial production is likely to follow a gradual uptrend supported by the increase in exports 
and also by the progress in inventory adjustment. This increase in production will help corporate profits 
to  recover,  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  and  is  expected  to  gradually  support  domestic 
private demand such as business fixed investment. 
Overall, Japan’s economy is projected to stop deteriorating as a whole since an increase in exports 
and production will lead to an improvement in corporate profits and in turn, domestic private demand. 
However, in addition to the weak employment and income conditions, the pace of increase in exports 
and production is likely to  remain modest on balance. Therefore, it will take a while for the positive 
effects,  stemming  from  the  developments  in  exports  and  production,  to  spread  across  the 
nonmanufacturing  sector,  small  firms  and  households.  With  regard  to  the  outlook  for  overseas 
economies,  an  essential  element  for  exports,  there  are  various  uncertain  factors  including  the  U.S. 
economy, and the developments in crude oil prices and its effects on the global economy. Amid the 
persisting fragility  and uncertainty  of the economy, continuous attention should be still kept  in mind 
that unstable movements in the foreign and domestic financial markets, including the foreign exchange 
market, would easily exert a negative influence on the economy. 
On  the  price  front,  import  prices  continue  to  rise  mainly  due  to  higher  crude  oil  prices.  Domestic 
wholesale prices are  almost flat recently since  the  decline in machinery prices and the reduction in 
electricity charges are offset against the increase in import prices and the effects of the progress in 
inventory adjustment. However, consumer prices and corporate service prices continue to decline. 
As  for  the  conditions  surrounding  price  developments,  past  depreciation  of  the  yen  and  the  rise  in 
crude oil prices are regarded as factors to support prices for the time being. However, since domestic 
demand is projected to remain weak for a time, the balance between supply and demand is expected 
                                                      
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
May 20 and 21, 2002. 
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on May 20 and 21 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 1
 to  keep  exerting  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Furthermore,  factors  such  as  the  ongoing 
technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining of distribution channels will 
restrain  prices.  In  addition,  the  faster  pace  of  decline  in  wages  may  also  work  as  a  factor  to  push 
prices  downward,  mainly  in  services  prices  which  are  sensitive  to  wage  developments.  Reflecting 
these factors, domestic wholesale prices, which tend to be greatly affected by the exchange rate and 
crude  oil  prices,  are  likely  to  be  more  or  less  flat  for  the  time  being.  On  the  other  hand,  consumer 
prices are expected to stay on a gradual declining trend. 
As for the financial market, in the short-term money markets, the outstanding balance of the current 
accounts  at  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  recently  moving  around  15  trillion  yen  as  the  Bank  continues  to 
provide ample liquidity to the money market. 
In  these  circumstances,  the  overnight  call  rate  continues  to  move  around  zero  percent.  Moreover, 
interest rates on term instruments remain steady. 
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  are  moving  in  the  range  of  1.3-1.4  percent  recently.  Yield 
spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  bonds  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  are 
contracting slightly. However, spreads between bonds with low credit ratings and government bonds 
still remain wide. 
Stock prices are level on the whole and are basically moving in the range of 11,000-12,000 yen. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen appreciated reflecting the overall downtrend in U.S. dollars 
due mainly to weak U.S. stock prices. 
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious  in  extending  loans  to 
firms  with  high  credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip 
companies.  The  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  firms  are  becoming  more 
severe. In corporate bonds and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with low credit ratings 
continues to be severe on the whole, but the environment for firms with high credit ratings is improving 
recently. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  continues  to  follow  a  downtrend  mainly  because  firms  are 
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year basis. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is 
decreasing  somewhat.  The  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  amount  outstanding  of  CP  issued 
continues to decline, although the amount is still well above the previous year’s level. 
The  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  monetary  base  in  April  increased  further  due  partly  to  the 
continued high liquidity demand even after entering the new fiscal year, reflecting a system failure of a 
major  bank  group.  The  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  money  stock  (M2  +  CDs)  remained  around 
3.5-4.0 percent. 
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Overall,  the  recent  financial  environment  remains  extremely  easy  on  the  whole  in  terms  of  money 
market conditions. The deterioration in the financial position of firms is coming to a halt. However, the 
stance  of  investors  toward  firms  with  high  credit  risks  remains  severe  and  the  lending  attitudes  of 
private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious.  Hence,  the  developments  in  the  behavior  of  financial 
institutions and corporate financing continue to require close monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2002
