 Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa: Reflections on recent financial incidents 
Luncheon  speech  given  by  Mr  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Third Joint Central Bank Research Conference on Risk Measurement 
and Systemic Risk, Basel, 8 March 2002. 
 Introduction 
I  am  delighted  to  have  this  opportunity  to  meet  this  distinguished  group  of  experts  and  former 
colleagues that has come together here in Basel to study issues related to financial stability. I would 
like  to  share  with  you  a  few  thoughts,  inspired  by  the  two  recent  cases  of  Enron  and  Argentina, 
respectively the largest-ever corporate and sovereign defaults we remember. Like many observers, I 
will try to identify whether the two cases raise any fundamental questions concerning the functioning of 
the financial system and the interplay between market forces and public authorities.  
I started my career as a central banker some 35 years ago, when public intervention in the economy, 
and  particularly  in  the  financial  sphere,  was  very  pervasive.  Almost  all  business  activities  by  banks 
required  a  specific  authorisation,  and  many  actions  were  simply  forbidden.  Market  participants  had 
little room for free and innovative action. It has taken a long time for the pendulum of ideas, economic 
realities  and  policies  to move  towards  market forces.  Public  intervention  has  been  gradually  scaled 
back, from having an excessively wide scope to a narrow one,  carefully targeted at market failures. 
This long shift – which has accidentally coincided with the span of my professional life, and to which 
both my actions and my convictions have fully adhered – has produced extraordinarily large efficiency 
gains from which our economies have greatly benefited.  
Enron and Argentina can undoubtedly be looked at from various angles, and only time will clarify the 
lessons  we  have  learnt  from  the  two  cases.  One  question  we  can  ask  today  is:  do  Enron  and 
Argentina indicate that the pendulum may not be very far from swinging back again, between the two 
extremes of very pervasive public intervention and complete laissez-faire? Is it time to reconsider – 
with  some  historical  perspective  –  what  public  intervention  is  needed  to  best  support  the  orderly 
functioning of financial markets? Without pretending to provide full answers to these questions, let me 
just offer a few thoughts.  
Risks in the financial sector 
I start with two observations about the origin and propagation of risks. First, although the increasing 
complexity of the financial system renders it more and more difficult to identify the origin of risks, we 
should never forget that the threat to financial stability stems, fundamentally, from the real sector. It is 
in the real sector that events occur that ultimately cause gains and losses in the financial field. Such 
events  may  be  the  unexpected  disruption  of  a  particular  market,  a  price  shock,  a  sharp  change  in  
technology, the deterioration of macroeconomic conditions  or the policy  decisions of a  government. 
Managing the risks associated with the uncertainty and risk of the real sector is at the core of financial 
intermediation.  
Second, the propagation of risk. The way in which risk is spread within the financial system varies over 
time  in  relation  to  several  factors,  including  market  and  regulatory  developments.    Enron  and 
Argentina highlight once again the importance of two aspects that characterise risk propagation today: 
first, the growing use of complex financial instruments to assume and transfer risks and, second, the 
abrupt changes in international capital movements. As to the first, some evidence suggests that the 
markets  for  credit  risk  transfer  instruments  are  quite  concentrated,  both  in  terms  of  dealers  and 
ultimate risk-takers. As to the second, lack of data on many important players in the global financial 
system leaves us relatively uninformed about the possible sources of destabilising capital movements. 
Enron: failure to deliver transparency 
Let me move to the Enron case. There seems to be a broad consensus that this incident points not 
only to truly illegal actions and infringements of ethical codes of conduct, but also to ineffective market 
discipline exercised by Enron’s equity and debt-holders, due to lack of adequate transparency. Enron 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 1
 owed much of its initial success to deregulation, both in the gas and electricity sectors and in a variety 
of other areas. It was publicly perceived as a highly successful company. Only when the company was 
approaching bankruptcy did market analysts react and shareholders and creditors become aware of its 
vulnerabilities.  Only  then  did  attention  focus  on  the  risks  entailed  in  its  extensive  off-balance  sheet 
transactions. Inadequate accounting rules are partly responsible for the failure to uncover highly risky 
operations or for the inadequate disclosure of complex off-balance-sheet transactions. The extensive 
and parallel consulting business with Enron that auditors entertained are also to blame.  
We are in the process of drawing many lessons regarding the public policies required to ensure the 
smooth operation of the market discipline, which is also of utmost importance for the functioning of the 
financial system. Of these lessons, three – in my opinion – stand out as crucial. First, it is timely to 
recall  Paul  Volcker’s  proposal  of  June  last  year  calling  for  an  international  initiative  to  update 
accounting standards so as to adequately deal with the complexity of derivative financial instruments. 
We should do our utmost to ensure that the Enron affair serves as a powerful incentive to speed up 
efforts in this field.  
Second, the case  highlights the question  of adequate oversight of financial activities undertaken by 
non-financial  corporations.  Despite  being  the  main  dealer,  market-maker,  and  liquidity  provider  in 
important  areas  of  the  energy  and  other  derivatives  markets,  Enron  was  not  required,  by  either 
regulators  or  market  practice,  to  disclose  information  to  its  counterparties,  or  to  set  aside  capital 
against  its  trading  risks.  The  absence  of  such  mechanisms  prevented  an  early  detection  of  the 
problem and might have even created incentives for imprudent risk-taking.  
Finally, the case suggests that our system is not sufficiently alert to possible conflicts of interest. The 
combination of auditing and consulting  in the  Enron  case is only one  example. Such conflicts arise 
whenever a financial institution provides corporate finance and similar services to a specific client who 
issues securities in which the financial institution can invest its own funds or those of its clients.  
All in all, these three issues give cause for concern and also deserve careful consideration by public 
authorities. My feeling here is that, if a player such as Enron is not under the control of regulators, it 
should  be  under  tight  market  control  exercised  by  analysts,  accountants,  shareholders  and  lending 
banks.  If  these  endogenous  controllers  fail  to  be  alert,  they  should  be  sanctioned  in  the  form  of 
monetary losses or regulatory constraints. 
Argentina: hands-off approach coupled with official sector weakness 
Let me turn to Argentina. Here, the lessons are at the international macro-economic level. Not too long 
ago,  Argentina  was  the  focus  of  attention,  though  for  very  different  reasons  than  now.  In  the  early 
1990s,  “neo-liberal”  economic  reforms  were  implemented;  hyperinflation  was  brought  to  a  halt;  the 
economy  was  progressively  deregulated  and  privatised.  As  macro-economic  stability  was  achieved, 
foreign capital poured into the economy and growth quickly resumed. 
In  a  continent  that  had  just  emerged  from  the  debt  crisis  of  the  1980s  and  with  very  few  success 
stories to tell, Argentina’s experience under this economic paradigm was very positive for much of the 
1990s, growing at an average rate of nearly 5 per cent from 1991 to 1998. This was a period marked 
by a series of external shocks, which Argentina’s currency board successfully overcame, namely, the 
“Tequila” crisis in 1995, the East Asian crises in 1997, and the devaluation of the Russian rouble in 
1998. But they were not cost-free: in the absence of using the exchange rate as a shock absorber, the 
burden of adjustment in the economy under a currency board agreement necessarily falls on wages 
and prices. 
In the case of Argentina, the rigidity of the hard peg came to the forefront in the wake of a series of 
external shocks in early 1999 – notably the higher cost of financing to emerging markets, the sharp 
devaluation of the Brazilian real, the rapidly appreciating US dollar, and falling commodity prices. The 
straitjacket  imposed  by  the  currency  board  cast  doubts  on  Argentina’s  medium-term  economic 
performance and concerns about its ability to service and refinance debt were further compounded by 
the relative fiscal laxity in previous years. 
As the credibility of the currency board came under increasing pressure, the country required policy 
adjustments but also sustained signs of support from the official sector. Yet Argentina’s misfortune is 
that, as its need for official financing was increasing, opinions about how multilateral agencies should 
act when faced with emerging market crises were changing – in particular, with regards to the need of 
engaging private creditors (particularly bondholders) in the resolution of debt problems. The last IMF 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2002
 package in support of Argentina (September 2001), for example, contained specific provisions to this 
end.  In  the  subsequent  months,  Fund  officials  publicly  encouraged  the  Argentinean  authorities  to 
reach  an  agreement  with  private  sector  agents  over  debt-exchange  operations.  And  in  December 
2001, the Fund suspended its loan programmes with the country. 
While private sector involvement in crisis resolution should be welcome, one may wonder if it should 
be the sole instrument to deal with such circumstances. Many feel that the official sector was rather 
unkind  to  Argentina.  After  all,  its  macroeconomic  indicators  –  particularly  its  fiscal  accounts,  which 
were the main source of concern – were broadly the same (or better) than other countries which had 
received large IMF funding in recent years, such as Turkey or Brazil. Argentina’s central government 
debt in 2001 was less than 55 per cent of GDP, and its government deficit (including the provinces) 
amounted to less than 6 per cent of GDP in the same year. In contrast, Turkey posted a 57.4 per cent 
debt-to-GDP ratio and a government deficit of 11.6 per cent of GDP in 2000, right before its currency 
and banking crises. Brazil had a government deficit of 7.9 per cent and external debt-to-GDP ratio of 
30 per cent in 1998.  
The  international  community  is  relieved  that  economic  and  financial  contagion  has  not  spread  from 
Argentina to other economies in the region, notably Mexico and Brazil. Yet I cannot but wonder how 
Mexico  and  Brazil  would  be  doing  today,  had  the  same  Argentine-style  “hands-off”  approach  been 
followed  back  in  1995  and  1999  respectively.  In  many  ways,  the  present  robustness  of  these  two 
countries is a testament to the – now much criticised – support they have received from the official 
sector. 
Conclusion  
Let  me  conclude.  Are  we  addressing  Enron  and  Argentina  jointly  just  because  the  two  events 
happened at the same time or because they have something else in common? There is no doubt that 
the two cases are quite different. Yet I see both of them as a reminder that we need to distinguish 
clearly between the scope of public intervention and its effectiveness. Where there is room for public 
action, a minimum scope of intervention should not be tantamount to weak or ineffective intervention. 
The  important  lesson  that  emerged  from  the  past  experience  of  overextended  public  intervention  is 
about excessive scope and not about unnecessary strength. 
Both  events  highlight  weak  responses  by  the  authorities  to  a  deteriorating  situation.  In  the  case  of 
Enron, the signals provided by market authorities and policy-makers were not strong enough to ensure 
adequate transparency and avoid conflicts of interest. While some initiatives to improve the situation 
were put forward over a relatively long period before the Enron incident, the prevailing pressure from 
the  corporate  sector  prevented  substantive  achievements.  Regulators  and  policy  markers  have 
something in common with policemen. A policeman has to be friendly and helpful to citizens – just as 
regulators need to be market-friendly – but a policeman always has to remember who he is.   
Hence,  the  main  lesson  I  would  draw  from  the  recent  events  is  that  strong  public  intervention  is 
necessary on those occasions when markets fail to work properly. This should not be confused with a 
wide and pervasive intervention in the markets as public authorities used to do in the past. We, who 
are  responsible  for  the  oversight  of  markets,  should  signal  our  commitment  to  well-defined  and 
effective intervention, when needed, and thus contribute to the stability of the financial system. 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 3
