 Y V Reddy: Parameters of Monetary Policy in India  
Lecture  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  88th  Annual 
Conference  of  The  Indian  Econometric  Society  at  Madras  School  of  Economics,  Chennai, 
15 January 2002.  
Dr Y V Reddy is grateful to Dr D V S Sastry, Shri Deepak Mohanty, Shri Indranil Bhattacharyya and Shri Kaushik 
Bhattacharya for their assistance 
 Friends 
It is a great honour to be asked to deliver an invited lecture at the annual conference of the Indian 
Econometric  Society  and  I  am  grateful  to  the  organisers  for  this  opportunity.  For  obvious  reasons, 
including  the  growing  interest  in  monetary  policy,  I  intend  presenting  before  you  the  parameters  of 
monetary policy in India. In the first part of this lecture, I propose to give a general overview of the 
parameters of monetary policy. In the second part, I would touch upon the international experience in 
this  regard  with  a  particular  focus  on  changing  contours.  The  third  part  contains  a  description  of 
evolving parameters of monetary policy in India  beginning  with a  brief description of the process of 
policy making. The fourth part would highlight the impressive gains made dring the reform period so 
far,  in  regard  to  statutory  preemptions,  deregulation  of  interest  rates,  financial  and  external  stability 
despite the persisting fiscal deficits and large market borrowing programmes. The concluding part sets 
forth immediate tasks before the Reserve Bank of India in its conduct of monetary policy.  
Parameters of Monetary Policy 
Objectives 
It is generally believed that central banks ideally should have a single overwhelming objective of price 
stability. In practice, however, central banks are responsible for a number of objectives besides price 
stability, such as currency stability, financial stability, growth in employment and income. The primary 
objectives  of  central  banks  in  many  cases  are  legally  and  institutionally  defined.  However,  all 
objectives may not have been spelt out explicitly in the central bank legislation but may evolve through 
traditions  and  tacit  understanding  between  the  government,  the  central  bank  and  other  major 
institutions in an economy.  
Of late, however, considerations of financial stability have assumed increasing importance in monetary 
policy. The most serious economic downturns in the recent years appear to be generally associated 
with financial instability. The important questions for policy in the context of financial instability are the 
origin  and  the  transmission  of  different  types  of  shocks  in  the  financial  system,  the  nature  and  the 
extent of feedback in policy and the effectiveness of different policy instruments.  
Transmission Mechanism 
Monetary policy is known to have both short and long-term effects. While it generally affects the real 
sector with long and variable lags, monetary policy actions on financial markets, on the other hand, 
usually have important short-run implications. Typical lags after which monetary policy decisions begin 
to  affect  the  real  sector  could  vary  across  countries.  It  is,  therefore,  essential  to  understand  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy actions on financial markets, prices and output. Central 
banks form their own views on the transmission mechanism based on empirical evidence, and their 
monetary  strategies  and  tactics  are  designed,  based  on  these  views.  However,  there  could  be 
considerable  uncertainties  in  the  transmission  channels  depending  on  the  stages  of  evolution  of 
financial markets and the nature of propagation of shocks to the system. 
The four monetary transmission channels,  which are  of concern to policy makers are: the  quantum 
channel, especially relating to money supply and credit; the interest rate channel; the exchange rate 
channel, and the asset prices channel. Monetary policy impulses under the quantum channel affect 
the real output and price level directly through changes in either reserve money, money stock or credit 
aggregates. The remaining channels are essentially indirect as the policy impulses affect real activities 
through  changes  in  either  interest  rates  or  the  exchange  rate  or  asset  prices.  Since  none  of  the 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 1
 channels of monetary transmission operate in isolation, considerable feedbacks and interactions, need 
to be carefully analysed for a proper understanding of the transmission mechanism.  
The  exact  delineation  of  monetary  policy  transmission  channels  becomes  difficult  in  the  wake  of 
uncertainties  prevalent  in  the  economic  system,  both  in  the  sense  of  responsiveness  of  economic 
agents  to  monetary  policy  signals  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  proper  assessment  by  the  monetary 
authority of the quantum and extent of desired policy measures on the other. The matter is particularly 
complex  in  developing  countries  where  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  is  in  a 
constant process of evolution due to significant ongoing structural transformation of the economy. 
Strategies and Tactics 
It  is  important  to  distinguish  strategic  and  tactical  considerations  in  the  conduct  of monetary  policy. 
While monetary strategy aims at achieving final objectives, tactical considerations reflect the short run 
operational procedures. Both strategies and tactics for monetary management are intricately linked to 
the  overall  monetary  policy  framework  of  a  central  bank.  Depending  upon  the  domestic  and 
international macroeconomic developments, the long run strategic objective could change, leading to 
a change in the nature and the extent of short run liquidity management.  
The strategic aspects of monetary management crucially depend on the choice of a nominal anchor by 
the central bank. In this regard, four broad classes of monetary strategies could be distinguished. Two 
of these, viz., monetary targeting and exchange rate targeting strategies, use a monetary aggregate 
and the exchange rate respectively as an explicit intermediate target. The third, viz., multiple indicator 
approach, does not have an explicit intermediate target but is based on a wide range of monetary and 
financial indicators. The fourth, viz., inflation targeting, also does not have an intermediate target, but 
is characterized by an explicit final policy goal in terms of the rate of inflation.  
In  the  1970s  when  monetary  policy  came  into  prominence,  many  countries  adopted  either  money 
supply or exchange rate as intermediate targets. During the late 1980s, these paradigms started to 
change  following  globalization,  technological  advancements  and  large  movement  of  capital  across 
national boundaries.  
In  view  of  difficulties  in  conducting  monetary  policy  with  explicit  intermediate  targets,  of  late,  some 
countries are switching to direct inflation targeting, which works by explicitly announcing to the public 
the goals for monetary policy and the underlying framework for its implementation. In this framework, 
the monetary authorities have the freedom to deploy the instruments of monetary policy to the best of 
their capacities, but are limited in their discretion of policy goals. The framework is advocated on the 
ground that it clearly spells out the extent of central bank accountability and transparency. 
In reality, monetary policy strategy of a central bank depends on a number of factors that are unique to 
the  country  and  the  context.  Given  the  policy  objective,  any  good  strategy  depends  on  the 
macroeconomic and the institutional structure of the economy. An important factor in this context is the 
degree  of  openness  of  the  economy.  The  more  open  an  economy  is,  the  more  the  external  sector 
plays a dominant role in monetary management. The second factor that plays a major role is the stage 
of development of markets and institutions: with technological development as an essential ingredient. 
In a developed economy, the markets are integrated and policy actions are quickly transmitted from 
one  sector  to  another.  In  such  a  situation,  perhaps  it  is  possible  for  the  central  bank  to  signal  its 
intention with one single instrument.  
Operating Procedures 
Operating  procedures  refer  to  the  choice  of  the  operational  target,  the  nature,  extent  and  the 
frequency  of  different money  market  operations,  the  use  and  width  of  a  corridor  for market  interest 
rates and the manner of signaling policy intentions. The choice of the operating target is crucial as this 
variable is at the beginning of the monetary transmission process. The operating target of a central 
bank could be  bank reserves, base money or a benchmark interest rate. While  actions of a central 
bank could influence all these variables, it should be evident that the final outcome is determined by 
the combined actions of the market forces and the central bank. 
The major challenge in day-to-day monetary management is decision on an appropriate level of the 
operating target. The success in this direction could be achieved only if the nature and the extent of 
interaction  of  the  policy  instruments  with  the  operating  target  is  stable  and  is  known  to  the  central 
bank. As the operating target is also influenced by market movements, which on occasions could be 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 extremely  volatile  and  unpredictable,  success  is  not  always  guaranteed.  Further,  success  is  also 
dependent on the stability of the relationship between the operating target and the intermediate target. 
In a monetary targeting framework, this often boils down to the stability and the predictability of the 
money multiplier. In an interest rate targeting framework, on the other hand, success depends upon 
the strength of the relationship between the short-term and the long-term interest rates. Finally, the 
stability of the relationship between the intermediate and the final target is critical to the successful 
conduct of the operations.  
Monetary Policy Transparency 
Transparency in monetary policy is emphasised in the recent years on the ground that it leads to a 
reduction  in  the  market's  uncertainty  about  the  monetary  authority's  reaction  function.  It  is  further 
argued  that  greater  transparency  may  improve  financial  market's  understanding  of  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  and  thus  reduce  uncertainty.  The  limits  to  transparency  are  also  recognised  since 
publishing  detailed  results  of  a  central  bank's  economic  projections  may  eliminate  an  element  of 
surprise,  which  is  useful  on  occasions  with  respect  to  the  central  bank’s  operations  in  financial 
markets. 
International Experience 
In  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  although  the  experiences  and  the  choices  made  by  individual 
countries vary, recent surveys highlight a number of common features, viz., 
• 
First, at the macro level, there is now widespread concern about the potential harmful effects 
of persistently high fiscal deficits as it may lead to excessive monetisation. 
Second, there have been significant reductions in the reserve ratio to relieve the pressure on 
the banking sector and reduce the costs of intermediation. In fact, a number of countries now 
have no reserve requirement;. And, in some countries, the level of minimum deposit at the 
central bank has fallen to such low levels that it is no longer considered an active monetary 
instrument.  
Third, the deepening of financial markets and the growth  of non-bank intermediation  have 
induced  the  central  banks  to  increase  the  market  orientation  of  their  instruments.  A 
consequence of this is a greater activism of central banks in liquidity management.  
Fourth, the greater activism through indirect instruments led to a more intensive use of open 
market operations (OMO) through flexible instruments like repo. The OMO can be used for 
net  injection  or  absorption  of  liquidity  and  can  be  resorted  to  irrespective  of  whether  the 
operating target works through the rate channel or quantity channel.  
Fifth, the market environment has induced many central banks to focus more on the interest 
rates rather than bank reserves in trying to influence liquidity. 
Sixth, increasing evidence of market integration implies that central banks can concentrate 
on  the  very  short  end  of  the  yield  curve.  There  is  growing  evidence  in  favour  of  co-
movements  of  interest  rates  of  different  maturity.  This  has  simultaneously  increased 
monetary policy challenges, as central banks have to keep a watchful eye on all markets and 
be  cautious  of  any  cascading  effect  or  contagion  emerging  in  the  domestic  economy  or 
originating in a foreign economy. 
Seventh,  at  an  operational  level,  while  there  is  increasing  transparency  on  the  long-run 
strategic  objective,  central  banks  may  not  disclose  their  tactical  considerations  as  some 
maneuverability in influencing the market is required. However, in many cases information is 
revealed  to  the  market  with  a  lag.  Many  central  banks  also  attempt  to  estimate  market 
expectations directly through surveys. While market expectations play a major guidepost in 
formulating monetary strategies, information management plays a crucial role for short-run 
stabilisation. 
Eighth,  a  notable  consequence  of  recent  financial  and  currency  crises  has  been  the 
increasing emphasis on the quantity and quality of data dissemination, i.e., adequate, timely 
and reliable information in a standardized form.  
       BIS Review 3/2002 
 3
     Ninth, a number of central banks now also disseminate the minutes of the meetings of major 
monetary policy decisions, which help to gain credibility and in building a reputation of the 
central bank in achieving the objectives of monetary policy. 
Tenth,  an  important  issue  is  policy  coordination  between  the  fiscal  and  the  monetary 
authorities.  The  stance  of  fiscal  policy  is  important  as  it  has  a  much  broader  spectrum  of 
objectives.  If  fiscal  authorities  are  the  dominant  players,  monetary  policy  instruments  are 
rendered  less  effective.  As  monetary  policy  evolves  from  a  transitional  setting  of  fiscal 
dominance,  issues  like  direct  access  of  government  to  central  bank  credit  becomes 
important and crucial for fiscal-monetary coordination. 
Eleventh, policy coordination is also an important issue facing economies linked by trade and 
capital  flows.  In  an  increasingly  synchronised  business  cycle  environment,  international 
policy coordination becomes extremely important. 
Twelfth,  internationally,  there  has  been  more  awareness  that  policy  effectiveness  is 
constrained by uncertainty. In fact, in many countries, the central bank projections are now 
published in the form of a fan chart rather than point estimates. 
Monetary Policy in India 
Policy Making Process 
Traditionally,  the  process  of  monetary  policy  in  India  had  been  largely  internal  with  only  the  end 
product of actions being made public. A process of openness was initiated by Governor Rangarajan 
and  has  been  widened,  deepened  and  intensified  by  Governor  Jalan.  The  process  has  become 
relatively  more  articulate,  consultative  and  participative  with  external  orientation,  while  the  internal 
work processes have also been re-engineered to focus on technical analysis, coordination, horizontal 
management, rapid responses and being market savvy. 
The stance of monetary policy and the rationale are communicated to the public in a variety of ways, 
the most important being the annual monetary policy statement of Governor Jalan in April and the mid-
term review in October. The statements have become over time more analytical, at times introspective 
and a lot more elaborate. Further, the statements include not only monetary policy stance or measures 
but also institutional and structural aspects. The monetary measures are undertaken as and when the 
circumstances warrant, but the rationale for such measures is given in the Press Release and also 
statements made by Governor and Deputy Governors unless a deliberate decision is taken not to do 
so on a contemporaneous basis. The sources for appreciating the policy stance encompass several 
statutory and non-statutory publications, speeches and press releases. Of late, the RBI website has 
become a very effective medium of communication and it is rated by experts as one of the best among 
central bank websites in content, presentation and timeliness. The RBI’s communications strategy and 
provision  of  information  have  facilitated  conduct  of  policy  in  an  increasingly  market-oriented 
environment.  
Several new institutional arrangements and work processes have been put in place to meet the needs 
of  policy  making  in  a  complex  and  fast  changing  world.  At  the  apex  of  policy  process  is  Governor, 
assisted  closely  by  Deputy  Governors  and  guided  by  deliberations  of  a  Board  of  Directors.  A 
Committee of the Board meets every week to review the monetary, economic, financial conditions and 
advice or decide appropriately. Much of the data used by the Committee is available to the public with 
about a week’s lag. There are several other standing and adhoc committees or groups of the Board 
and  Board  for  Financial  Supervision  plays  a  critical  role  in  regard  to  institutional  developments. 
Periodic  consultations  with  academics,  market  participants  and  financial  intermediaries  take  place 
through  Standing  Committees  and  Ad  Hoc  Groups,  in  addition  to  mechanisms  such  as  resource 
management  discussions  with  banks.  Within  the  RBI,  the  supervisory  data,  market  information, 
economic  and  statistical  analysis  are  reoriented  to  suit  the  changing  needs.  A  Financial  Markets 
Committee focuses on a day-to-day market operations and tactics while a Monetary Policy Strategy 
Group analyses strategies on an ongoing basis. Periodic consultations with the Government, mainly 
with  Ministry  of  Finance  do  ensure  coordination.  In  brief,  there  are  significant  technical,  analytical, 
institutional and dynamic inputs that go into the process of making monetary policy.  
4 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 Objectives 
Although there has not been any explicit legislation for price stability, the major objectives of monetary 
policy in India have been those of maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate flow of credit to 
the productive sectors of the economy. The relative emphasis between the objectives depends on the 
underlying  economic  conditions  and  is  spelt  out  from  time  to  time.  Compared  to  many  other 
developing  economies,  India  has  been  able  to  maintain  a  moderate  level  of  inflation.  Historically, 
inflation rates  in  India rarely  touched double  digit and  when they  did,  in most cases, they  were the 
result of supply shocks either in the form of increase in agricultural commodity prices or in the form of 
increase in international prices of crude oil. 
Transmission Mechanism  
The  monetary  policy  framework  in  India  from  the  mid-1980s  till  1997-98  can,  by  and  large,  be 
characterized  as  a  monetary  targeting  framework  on  the  lines  recommended  by  Chakravarty 
Committee  (1985).  Because  of  the  reasonable  stability  of  the  money  demand  function,  the  annual 
growth  in  broad  money  (M3)  was  used  as  an  intermediate  target  of  monetary  policy  to  achieve 
monetary objectives. Monetary management involved working out a broad money growth through the 
money demand function that would be consistent with projected GDP growth and a tolerable level of 
inflation. In practice, however, the monetary targeting approach was used in a flexible manner with a 
'feedback' from the developments in the real sector.  
While  the  monetary  system  in  India  is  still  evolving  and  the  various  inter-sectoral  linkages  in  the 
economy are undergoing changes, the emerging evidences on transmission channel suggest that the 
rate channels are gradually gaining importance over the quantum channel. The econometric evidence 
produced  by  the  Third  Working  Group  on  Money  Supply  (1998)  indicated  that  output  response  to 
policy  operating  through  the  interest  rate  was  gaining  strength.  Similarly,  the  impact  of  an 
expansionary  monetary  policy  on  inflation  was  found  to  be  stronger  through  interest  rates  than  the 
exchange rate, given the relatively limited openness of the economy.  
Strategies and Tactics 
There  has  been  a  shift  in  strategic  objective,  necessitated  by  deregulation  and  liberalization  of  the 
financial markets combined with increasing openness of the economy. The estimated income elasticity 
of demand for money which had exhibited a clearly decreasing trend in the earlier part of the reform 
period  showed  a  sharp  turning  point  in  1996-97  resulting  in  an  increasing  trend  thereafter.  The 
changing  nature  of  the  relationship  highlights  that  while  money  is  still  an  important  indicator, 
information  pertaining  to  other  monetary  and  financial  indicators  should  also  be  taken  into  account 
seriously while formulating monetary policy, especially in view of the sweeping changes in the financial 
sector in India in recent years. From the year 1998-99, RBI announced that henceforth it would follow 
a  multiple  indicator  approach.  In  this  approach,  interest  rates  or  rates  of  return  in  different markets 
along with movements in currency, credit, fiscal position, trade, capital flows, inflation rate, exchange 
rate,  refinancing  and  transactions  in  foreign  exchange  –  available  on  high  frequency  basis  –  are 
juxtaposed  with  output  data  for  drawing  policy  perspectives.  In  a  way,  such  a  shift  was  a  logical 
outcome of measures taken over the reform period since the early 1990s. 
Operating Procedures 
In  the  pre  reform  period  prior  to  1991,  given  the  command  and  control  nature  of  the  economy,  the 
Reserve Bank had to resort to direct instruments like interest rate regulations, selective credit control 
and  the  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  as  major  monetary  instruments.  These  instruments  were  used 
intermittently to neutralize the monetary impact of the Government's budgetary operations.  
The administered interest rate regime during the earlier period kept the yield rate of the government 
securities artificially low. The demand for them was created through intermittent hikes in the Statutory 
Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR).  The  task  before  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  was,  therefore,  to  develop  the 
markets to prepare the ground for indirect operations. 
As a first step, yields on government securities were made market related. At the same time, the RBI 
helped create an array of other market related financial products. At the next stage, the interest rate 
structure was simultaneously rationalized and banks were given the freedom to determine their major 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 5
 rates. As a result of these developments, RBI could use OMO as an effective instrument for liquidity 
management including to curb short-term volatilities in the foreign exchange market.  
Another important and significant change introduced during the period is the reactivation of the Bank 
Rate by initially linking it to all other rates including the Reserve Bank's refinance rates (April 1997). 
The  subsequent  introduction  of  fixed  rate  repo  (December  1997)  helped  in  creating  an  informal 
corridor in the money market, with the repo rate as floor and the Bank Rate as the ceiling. The use of 
these two instruments in conjunction with OMO enabled RBI to keep the call rate within this informal 
corridor for most of the time. Subsequently, the introduction of Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) from 
June 2000 enabled the modulation of liquidity conditions on a daily basis and also short term interest 
rates through the LAF window, while signaling the stance of policy through changes in the Bank Rate.  
Gains from Reform  
It  has  been  possible  to  reduce  the  statutory  preemption  on  the  banking  system. The  Cash  reserve 
Ratio  (CRR),  which  was  the  primary  instrument  of  monetary  policy,  has  been  brought  down  from 
15.0 per cent in March 1991 to 5.5 per cent by December 2001. The medium-term objective is to bring 
down the CRR to its statutory minimum level of 3.0 per cent within a short period of time. Similarly, 
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) has been brought down from 38.5 per cent to its statutory minimum of 
25.0 per cent by October 1997.  
It  has  also  been  possible  to  deregulate  and  rationalise  the  interest  rate  structure.  Except  savings 
deposit, all other interest rate restrictions have been done away with and banks have been given full 
operational flexibility in determining their deposit and lending rates barring some restrictions on export 
credit  and  small  borrowings.  The  commercial  lending  rates  for  prime  borrowers  of  banks  has  fallen 
from a high of about 16.5 per cent in March 1991 to around 10.0 per cent by December 2001. 
In terms of monetary policy signals, while the Bank Rate was dormant and seldom used in 1991, it has 
been  made  operationally  effective  from  1997  and  continues  to  remain  the  principal  signaling 
instrument. The Bank Rate has been brought down from 12.0 per cent in April 1997 to 6.5 per cent by 
December 2001. It is envisaged that the LAF rate would operate around the Bank Rate, with a flexible 
corridor, as more active operative instrument for day-to-day liquidity management and steering short-
term interest rates. 
A contrasting feature in the positions between 1991 and 2001 is India’s foreign exchange reserves. 
The  monetary  and  credit  policy  for  1991-92  was  formulated  against  the  background  of  a  difficult 
foreign  exchange  situation.  Over  the  period,  external  debt  has  been  contained  and  short-term  debt 
severely restricted, while reserves have been built in an atmosphere of liberalisation of both current 
account and to some extent capital account.  
The foreign currency assets of the Reserve Bank have increased from US $ 5.8 billion in March 1991 
to US $ 48.0 billion in December 2001. In view of comfortable foreign exchange reserves, periodic oil 
price  increases  (for  example  in  1996-97,  1999-2000  and  2000-01)  did  not  translate  into  Balance  of 
Payment (BoP) crises as in the earlier occasions. Such enlargement of the foreign currency assets, on 
the other hand, completely altered the balance sheet of the Reserve Bank.  
Large capital inflows have been accommodated by the Reserve Bank while its monetary impact has 
been sterilized through OMO. This has helped in reducing the government’s reliance on credit from 
RBI. Consequently, there has been secular decline in monetised deficit, and in the process net foreign 
exchange  assets  of  RBI  have  become  the  principal  contributor  to  reserve  money  expansion  in  the 
recent period.  
Tasks before RBI 
These are impressive gains from reform but there are emerging challenges to the conduct of monetary 
policy in our country. Thus, while the twin objectives of monetary policy of maintaining price stability 
and ensuring availability of adequate credit to the productive sectors of the economy have remained 
unchanged, capital flows and liberalization of financial markets have increased the potential risks of 
institutions, thus bringing the issue of financial stability to the fore. Credit flow to agriculture and small- 
and medium-industry appears to be constrained causing concerns. There are significant structural and 
procedural bottlenecks in the existing institutional set up for credit delivery. The pace of reforms in real 
sector, particularly in property rights and agriculture also impinge on the flow of credit in a deregulated 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 environment.  The  persistence  of  fiscal  deficit,  with  the  combined  deficit  of  the  Central  and  State 
Governments continuing to be high, draws attention to the delicate internal and external balance.  
It is necessary to recognize the existence of the large informal sector, the limited reach of financial 
markets relative to the growing sectors, especially services, and the overhang of institutional structure 
that  tend  to  constrain  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  India.  The  road  ahead  would  be 
demanding  and  the  Reserve  Bank  would  have  to  strive  to  meet  the  challenge  of  steering  the 
structurally  transforming  economy  from  a  transitional  phase  to  a  mature  and  vibrant  system  and 
increasingly deal with alternative phases of the business cycle. Some of the immediate tasks before 
RBI are presented to provoke debate and promote research.  
Modeling Exercises 
In addressing a gathering of elite econometricians assembled here, a mention should be made about 
developments  in  monetary  modeling.  It  is  well  recognized  that  monetary  policy  decisions  must  be 
based on some idea of how decisions will affect the real world and this implies conduct of policy within 
the framework of a model. As Dr. William White of Bank for International Settlements (BIS) mentioned 
in an address recently in RBI, “the model may be as simple as one unspecified equation kept in the 
head of the central bank Governor, but one must begin somewhere. Economics may not be a science, 
but  it  should  at  least  be  conducted  according  to  scientific  principles  recognizing  cause  and  effect”. 
While reliance on explicit modeling was rather heavy in some central banks, particularly in the 1960 
and 1970s, there has been increasing awareness among the policy markers of the limitations of such 
models for several reasons. It is difficult to arrive at a proper model for any economy with the degree 
of  certainty  that  policy  makers  want  especially  in  view  of  observed  alterations  in  the  private  sector 
behaviour  in  response  to  official  behaviour.  Further,  data  to  monitor  the  economy  are  sometimes 
inadequate, or delayed, and often revised. It is said that in regard to modern economies, not only the 
future but even the past is uncertain, due to significant revisions in data. The process of deregulation 
coupled  with  technological  progress  has  led  to  increasing  role  for  market  prices  and  consequently 
more  complexities  for  establishing  relationships  in  an  environment  where  everything  happens  very 
fast, and in a globally interrelated financial world. In brief, there is need to recognize the complexities 
in model building for monetary policies and approach it with great humility and a dose of skepticism 
but ample justification for such modeling work certainly persists. 
It  is  felt  that  this  is  an  appropriate  time  to  explore  more  formally  the  relationship  among  different 
segments  of  the  markets  and  sectors  of  the  economy,  which  will  help  in  understanding  the 
transmission mechanism of the monetary policy in India. With this objective in mind, RBI had already 
announced its intention to build an operational model, which will help the policy decision process. An 
Advisory  Group  with  eminent  academicians  like  Professors  Mihir  Rakshit,  Dilip  Nachane,  Manohar 
Rao, Vikas Chitre and Indira Rajaraman as external experts and a team from within the RBI were set 
up for developing such a model.  
The  model  was  initially  conceived  to  focus  on  the  short  term  objective  of  different  sources  and 
components of the reserve money based on the recommendations of an internal technical group on 
Liquidity  Analysis  and  Forecasting.  Though,  multi-sector  macro  econometric  models  are  available, 
such models are based on yearly data and hence these may not be very useful for guiding the short 
term monetary policy actions of RBI. Accordingly, it was felt that a short- term liquidity model may be 
developed  in  the  RBI  focusing  on  the  inter-linkages  in  the  markets  and  then  operationalise  these 
linkages to other sectors of the economy. The Advisory Group met twice and after deliberations felt 
that a daily/weekly/fortnightly model would give an idea about short- to medium-term movements but 
models  using  annual  data  will  also  be  useful  to  assess  the  implications  of  the  monetary  policy 
measures on the real economy. On the basis of the advice of eminent experts in the Advisory Group, it 
has been decided to modify the approach.  
The current thinking in RBI is broadly on the following lines: the short term liquidity model making use 
of  high  frequency  data  will  be  explored.  Accordingly,  the  interaction  of  the  financial  markets  with 
monetary  policy  have  been  examined  with  weekly  data  focusing  mainly  on  policy  measures  and 
different  rates  in  the  financial  markets.  Observations  in  the  operational  framework  of  the  model  is 
limited as the LAF has been operationalised only a year ago. A crucial aspect in an exercise is the 
forecast of currency in circulation.  
The intention of RBI is to expedite the technical work in this regard and seek the advice of individual 
members of Advisory Group on an ongoing basis both at formal and informal levels. It is expected that 
the  draft  of  the  proposed  model  would  be  put  in  public  domain  shortly.  RBI  would  seek  the  active 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 7
 participation  of  the  interested  econometricians  in  the  debate  on  the  draft model  and  give  benefit  of 
advice to RBI for finalizing and adoption.  
Reduction in CRR 
Among  the  unrealized  medium-term  objectives  of  reforms  in monetary  policy,  the  most  important  is 
reduction in the prescribed CRR for banks to its statutory minimum of 3.0 per cent. The movement to 
3.0  per  cent  can  be  designed  in  three  possible  ways,  viz.,  the  traditional  way  of  pre-announcing  a 
time-table for reduction in the CRR; reducing CRR as and when opportunities arise as is being done in 
recent years; and as a one-time reduction from the existing level to 3.0 per cent under a package of 
measures. 
In the initial years, the first approach was effective but had to be abandoned when the timetable had to 
be  disrupted  to  meet  the  eruption  of  global  financial  uncertainties  and  pressures  on  forex  market. 
Hence, the second approach of lowering CRR when opportunities arise has been adopted, and now it 
has been brought down to 5.5 percent. However, if it is felt that this approach takes a longer time and 
a compressed time-frame is desirable to expedite development of financial markets, it is possible to 
contemplate a package of measures in this regard. The package could mean the reduction of CRR to 
the statutory minimum level of 3.0 per cent accompanied by several changes such as in the present 
way  of  maintenance  of  cash  balances  by  banks  with  RBI.  With  the  lagged  reserve  maintenance 
system  now  put  in  place,  banks  can  exactly  know  their  reserve  requirements. With  the  information 
technology available with banks and with the operationalisation of Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. 
(CCIL) shortly and with the development of repo market, it would be appropriate if CRR is maintained 
on a daily basis. However, till banks adjust to such changes in the maintenance of CRR, a minimum 
balance of 95 per cent of the required reserves on a daily basis may have to be maintained when CRR 
is reduced to 3.0 per cent. The other elements of package have to be worked out carefully.  
Access to Call Money Market 
An  important  related  component  of  ongoing  reform  relates  to  restricting  the  call  money  market  to 
banks and Primary Dealers (PDs). Several measures have been initiated in this regard but in view of 
the  growing  importance  attached  to  stability  in  the  financial  system  and  the  growing  alternatives  to 
access liquidity management through activation of repos facilitated by CCIL, there is a strong case to 
impose  some  limits  on  access  to  non-collateralised  borrowing  through  call  money  even  under  the 
dispensation of restricted participation only to banks and PDs. The call money window should be used 
to iron out temporary mismatches in liquidity and banks should not use this on a sustained basis as a 
source of funding their normal requirements. A beginning has been made by prescribing for access to 
call  money  a  ceiling  of  2.0  per  cent  of  aggregate  deposits  in  respect  of  urban  co-operative  banks 
(UCBs). Such a stipulation can be extended to all commercial banks and with some modifications such 
as, an alternative of 25.0 to 50.0 per cent of their net owned funds. If any bank has any temporary 
need to go beyond the ceilings prescribed for access to call money, RBI could consider such requests 
to alleviate possible shocks to individual banks. Similarly, once the repo market develops, PDs should 
reduce and in fact consider eliminating their access to the call money market. There is an opinion that 
such restrictions of access to call money in Indian conditions would add to stability in financial markets 
and help develop term money market. A final decision would no doubt be taken after discussions in 
Technical  Advisory  Committee  on  financial  markets  of  RBI,  and  further  consultations  with  market 
participants. 
Liquidity Adjustment Facility  
RBI  influences  liquidity  on  a  day-to-day  basis  through  LAF  and  is  using  this  facility  as  an  effective 
flexible  instrument for smoothening interest rates. The operations of non-bank participants including 
FIs, mutual funds and insurance companies that were participating in the call/notice money market are 
in the process of being gradually reduced according to pre-set norms. Such an ultimate goal of making 
a  pure  inter-bank  call  money  market  is  linked  to  the  operationalisation  of  CCIL  and  attracting  non-
banks also into an active repo market. The effectiveness of LAF thus will be strengthened with a pure 
inter-bank  call/notice  money  market  in  place  coupled  with  growth  of  repo  market  for  non-bank 
participants. The LAF operations combined with judicious use of OMOs are expected to evolve into a 
principal  operating  procedure  of  monetary  policy  of  RBI.  To  this  end,  RBI  may  have  to  reduce 
substantially the liquidity through refinance to banks and PDs. For example, if RBI intends to tighten 
the money market conditions through LAF, the automatic access of refinance facility from the RBI to 
8 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 banks  and  PDs  may  reduce  the  effectiveness  of  such  an  action  and  thereby  cause  transmission 
losses  of  monetary  policy.  It  may  be  appropriate  to  note  that  in  most  of  the  developed  financial 
markets, the standing facilities operate at the margin.  
At  present  RBI  provides  standing  facilities  comprising  the  support  available  to  banks  under 
Collateralized Lending Facility (CLF) and export credit facility to banks, and liquidity support to PDs. 
One  way  of  reducing  the  standing  facility  will  be  to  eliminate  CLF  from  the  standing  facilities  and 
reducing the present ratio of normal and back-stop facilities. The existing methodology of calculating 
eligible export credit refinance continues till March 2002 and RBI has expressed its intention of moving 
away from sector specific refinance. As CRR gets lowered and repo market develops, the refinance 
facilities should also be lowered giving more effectiveness to the conduct of monetary policy.  
Towards International Standards  
As  part  of  the  ongoing  process  of  reforms,  it  is  necessary  to  improve  our  standards,  codes  and 
practices in matters relating to financial system and bring them on par with international ones. One of 
the  Advisory Groups  with  Shri M.  Narasimham as Chairman and Shri  S.S. Tarapore  as a member, 
assessed  the  extent  of  India’s  compliance  with  international  standards  and  codes  in  the  area  of 
‘Transparency  in Monetary and Financial Policies’.  Noting that RBI’s policies and operations largely 
conform to the IMF Code, the Group offered a set of recommendations for making India fully compliant 
with the Codes. 
First,  the  Group  recommended  that  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  should  be  set  out  by  the 
Government, as part of its overall economic policy package, and the Government should be obliged to 
seek  parliamentary  debate  on  these  objectives  as  also  any  changes  in  these  objectives  thereafter. 
The Group further suggested that the Government should also consider prescribing to the RBI single 
objective such as a medium-term inflation while the Government would have for itself a clearly set out 
hierarchy of objectives for which it could use its other instruments of policy. However, RBI is of the 
view that at the current stage of institutional development and fiscal stance, coordination and harmony 
are  of  paramount  importance  though  there  is  need  for  clearer  demarcation  of  responsibilities  and 
accountability between RBI and the Government with appropriate degrees of transparency. Moving in 
this  direction,  RBI  is  divesting  all  ownership  functions  as  also  term  lending  functions,  subject  to 
approvals by the Government.  
Second,  the  Group  recommended  amendments  to  relevant  legislation  to  accord  greater  operational 
flexibility to the RBI for the conduct of monetary policy and regulation of financial system. In the light of 
the Finance Minister’s budget statement, RBI has transmitted proposals for legislative changes in the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, which is under the consideration of the Government. These proposals if 
endorsed  by  the  Parliament  would  accord  greater  operational  flexibility  to  the  RBI  for  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
Third,  it  was  suggested  that  the  Government  should  set  up  its  own  independent  debt  management 
office to take over the present functions discharged by the RBI, and thus avoid conflict of interest in 
conduct of monetary policy. RBI in its annual monetary policy of 2001, has announced progress made 
in this regard and its intention to divest itself of the debt management function. An enabling proposal 
to delink the function of debt management of the Government from the Reserve Bank has been made 
in  the  RBI  (Amendment)  Bill  2001.  The  Government  has  also  decided,  in  principle,  to  delink  these 
functions.  
Fourth,  the  Group  recommended  that  RBI  should  set  up  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  as  a 
committee of the Board, by regulation, requiring no specific changes in the law. However, at present, 
no  view  has  been  taken  in  the  matter  of  either  setting  up  such  a  Committee  or  disclosing  the 
deliberations  leading  to  monetary  policy  actions.  In  this  context,  it  needs  to  be  noted  that  the 
transparency and consultative processes in RBI have been deepened and widened significantly in the 
recent years. RBI’s approach in this regard is to evolve the processes of monetary policy making that 
are  appropriate  to  the  changing  conditions  in  Indian  monetary  and  financial  system  recognizing  the 
need to be in broad harmony with best practices. 
Finally, the Group proposed that the RBI should continue to be in the avant garde on disclosures of 
forward liabilities and should reveal, on a regular basis, separately its direct and indirect intervention 
operations.  RBI  has  continued  to  enhance  its  disclosures  both  through  its  publications  and  through 
Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) of the IMF.   
BIS Review 3/2002 
 9
 Research Agenda  
It is useful to identify a research agenda where both the academic community and policy makers could 
engage productively. For example, some academic work has been done on inflation targetting in India. 
Considering  that  inflation  targetting  is  in  no  case  a  panacea  but  a  sensible  possible  option,  many 
central  banks  have  adopted  this  strategy  and  in  India  also,  this  issue  of  inflation  targeting  is  being 
debated. Before taking a view on this, some related issues like measurement of inflation, core inflation, 
choice of price variables (to include asset prices or not) may have to be addressed. Similarly, with RBI 
pursuing  the  twin  objectives  of  monetary  policy  and  operating  on  short-term  interest  rates,  it  is 
essential  to  properly  study  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  Related  issues  include 
measurement of potential output,. assessment of the lag structure of different variables with respect to 
monetary  policy  decisions.  Some  light  on  these  crucial  areas  will  help  the  policy  makers.  At  the 
present juncture of segmented money market lacking in depth and width, development of yield curve 
and  term  structure  of  interest  rates  may  not  appear  to  be  critical,  but  as  we  move  along  with 
development  of  financial  markets,  these  important  areas  have  to  be  explored.  Moreover,  the 
relationship between bank credit and output may also require indepth analysis. Finally, the last chapter 
of the Report on Currency and Finance 2000-01 attempts to present the estimated characteristics of 
sectoral behaviour, inter-linkages and the underlying dynamics of the overall economy in the form of a 
structural macroeconomic model. This model is the result of the on-going research work among the 
professionals of RBI. This provides a basis for further research work in the academic community also. 
These are some illustrative items of significance for further research in the realm of monetary policy. 
Concluding Remarks 
In this lecture, I have attempted to focus on the conduct of monetary policy and highlighted some of 
the immediate tasks. In case, there is interest in an overview of theory and analytics, especially in the 
context of role of monetary policy in revitalizing growth in India, I would urge you to refer to the Report 
on Currency and Finance 2000-01, released yesterday. The challenges ahead are aptly summarized 
in the concluding paragraph of the chapter on Growth, Inflation and the Conduct of Monetary Policy of 
the  Report,  which  states  “The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  India  would  continue  to  involve  the 
constant  rebalancing  of  objectives  in  terms  of  the  relative  importance  assigned,  the  selection  of 
instruments and operating frameworks, and a search for an improved understanding of the working of 
the economy and the channels through which monetary policy operates”. 
10 
 BIS Review 3/2002
