 Jarle Bergo: Inflation targeting and the phasing in of petroleum revenues - a 
dilemma for monetary policy? 
Address by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank, at the seminar on foreign exchange 
policy issues arranged by the Association of Economists, Gausdal, 25 January 2002. 
 Introduction 
Since last year’s seminar, new guidelines for economic policy have been introduced. As the title of my 
speech suggests, these guidelines will serve as the starting point for my talk. In his presentation last 
year,  Norges  Bank’s  Governor  said  “Monetary  policy  cannot  function  effectively  without  a  good 
interplay with fiscal policy”. I will start by taking a closer look at the implementation of monetary policy 
before I discuss the guidelines for phasing in the petroleum revenues and the interplay between fiscal 
and  monetary  policy.  Finally,  I  will  take  a  look  at  the  implications  that  the  phasing  in  of  petroleum 
revenues will have for our industry structure. These implications may pose a challenge to many, but 
not necessarily to monetary policy. 
On  29  March  2001,  the  Stoltenberg  Government  issued  new  guidelines  for  monetary  policy  and 
presented  guidelines  for  fiscal  policy.  Monetary  policy  was  to  be  oriented  towards  low  and  stable 
inflation. The inflation target was set at 2½ per cent. 
The  guidelines  for  fiscal  policy  imply  that  over  time,  the  central  government  budget  deficit  shall  be 
equivalent  to  the  expected  real  return  on  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund.  The  change  in  the 
guidelines for economic policy met widespread support in the Storting. The budget for 2002 adhered 
to these guidelines. 
The implementation of monetary policy 
The  inflation  target  is  set  at  2½  per  cent.  In  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  we  aim  at 
achieving this objective. 
The interest rate affects inflation through a number of channels. An increase in the interest rate will 
normally  contribute  to  reducing  inflation  by  curbing  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  by 
strengthening the krone exchange rate against other currencies. A lower interest rate has the opposite 
effect.  
Generally, the effects of an interest rate change depend on the situation prevailing at the time and on 
how the market perceives the interest rate change in each case. The effects may also vary over time. 
Monetary policy influences the economy with considerable lags. Analyses performed by Norges Bank 
indicate that a substantial share of the effects on inflation occurs within two years. Two years is thus a 
reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target of 2½ per cent. The regulation says that in 
general, the  direct effects on consumer prices of changes in taxes,  excise duties and extraordinary 
temporary disturbances shall not be taken into account. However, knowledge of such disturbances two 
years ahead will be the exception rather than the rule. Normally, there will be a correlation between 
the  projections  of  overall  inflation  two  years  ahead  and  such  adjusted  projections.  However,  an 
adjusted price index reflects where we are today in relation to the target in two years. And it will be 
most relevant to look at such an adjusted index when we wish to evaluate the success of monetary 
policy. 
The  guidelines  for  monetary  policy  may  be  formulated  as  follows:  If  it  appears  that  inflation  will  be 
higher than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears 
that  inflation  will  be  lower  than  2½  per  cent  with  unchanged  interest  rates,  the  interest  rate  will  be 
reduced. There is symmetry here, so for us, it is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is lower 
than 2½ per cent as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is higher than 2½ per cent. 
 
BIS Review 7/2002 
 1
  
A number of factors influence the interest rate’s effect on demand and inflation. These include debt 
and assets in the private sector, capacity utilisation rate in the economy, the situation in the foreign 
exchange  market,  the  expected  duration  of  a  change  in  interest  rates  and  the  formation  of 
expectations.  
We have analysed the effect of a change in the interest rate in the light of different scenarios.1 The 
chart summarises these analyses and shows the range of outcomes for the effects of an interest rate 
increase on inflation. An interest rate increase of one percentage point over two years is estimated to 
curb inflation by 0.20-0.35 percentage point after two years, and by 0.30-0.40 percentage point after 
three years. GDP growth will be reduced by 0.25 percentage point the first two years. After the interest 
rate increase has been reversed, GDP growth will pick up again. After a period, GDP will approach the 
level  that  would  have  been  achieved  with  an  unchanged  interest  rate  throughout  the  period.  The 
results of analyses in the Bank of England2 are similar, but the uncertainty, of course, is considerable.  
The key interest rate is set on the basis of an overall assessment of the inflation outlook two  years 
ahead.  Our  inflation  projections  and  our  views  on  the  balance  of  risks  associated  with  these 
projections  provide  a  summary  of  these  assessments.  Due  to  a  number  of  factors,  there  is 
considerable uncertainty surrounding the inflation projections. Our knowledge of the functioning of the 
economy is far from perfect. We base our projections on simulations using the macroeconomic model 
RIMIMI. As the model is not an exact replica of reality, a forecast error arises. In addition, the different 
economic mechanisms change. Normally, this occurs gradually, but in some cases the changes may 
occur quickly.  
Moreover, it may be difficult to assess the current situation in the light of the information available at 
any one time. The information is often deficient, both because statistics are published with a lag and 
data contain measurement errors. We must also make assumptions about a number of factors when 
working  on  the  projections.  The  economy  will  occasionally  be  exposed  to  events  that  cannot  be 
anticipated. The terrorist attacks in the US on 11 September represent such an extreme event. We 
can expect other events to occur with a greater or lesser degree of probability. 
Historically, the deviation between actual underlying price inflation and our projections has been within 
an interval of +/-1 percentage point. When we later report on the implementation of monetary policy, 
we will place special emphasis on analysing the causes when deviations from the target are more than 
+/- 1 percentage point. 
                                                      
1  
2  Economic models of the Bank of England, Bank of England (1999). 
“Box: Effects of a change in interest rates” in Inflation Report 4/2000, Norges Bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2002
   
Normally, we make projections with a time horizon of about two years. During this period, a number of 
events will necessitate a revision of the projections. A number of uncertainties will be clarified along 
the  way. New information  about how the economy functions may be revealed.  As we approach the 
period for which the projections apply, the uncertainty surrounding the projections will diminish. 
The chart shows how the projections for the rise in the CPI from 2000 to 2001 have changed from 
December 1999 to the end of 2001. Through 2000, the estimate was revised upwards by more than 
1 percentage point. The most important factor influencing this adjustment was an upward revision of 
the projections for oil and electricity prices in 2001. We see that from the end of 2000, the deviation of 
estimated price inflation from actual price inflation, which was 3 per cent, was modest.  
Norges Bank’s inflation projection is our judgement of the most probable outcome for the rise in the 
CPI  two  years  ahead.  The  macroeconomic  model  RIMINI  is  a  tool  that  is  used  in  making  these 
projections.3 Judgement and assessments of current statistics and results from other models are also 
                                                      
3   A  further  discussion  of  the  use  of  RIMINI  in  the  work  on the  inflation  projections  is  provided  in:  Kjetil  Olsen  and  Fredrik 
Wulfsberg:  “The  role  of  assessments  and  judgement  in  the  macroeconomic  model  RIMINI”,  Economic  Bulletin  2/2001, 
Norges Bank. 
BIS Review 7/2002 
 3
 important. In setting the interest rate, however, we also place emphasis on the probability distribution – 
or the balance of risk – surrounding the projection. Therefore, we also publish our assessment of the 
risk associated with our own projections.  
The chart shows our assessment of risk as it was presented in the last Inflation Report, published on 
31 October 2001. The black line represents what we consider the most probable development in the 
CPI. The bulk of the distribution was below the line. This is reflected in the formulation “the probability 
that inflation two years ahead will be lower than 2½ per cent is greater than the probability that it will 
be higher.” In order to reduce the possibility of substantial deviations from the inflation target, Norges 
Bank takes the balance of risks into account when assessing the interest rate. 
 
 
The  assessment  of  the  balance  of  risks  largely  expresses  the  Bank’s  own  judgement.  We  have 
systematised  our  judgement  so  that  it  is  possible  for  others  to  determine  whether  the  bank’s 
assessments seem reasonable. The assessment of risk is linked to six factors that are important for 
price inflation.4 
Our assessment of risk associated with each of these factors is formulated as a probability distribution 
around the projection for the variable in question. The assessment of risk associated with the actual 
inflation projection emerges as a weighted average of these six distributions. The weighting of each 
factor  reflects  its  significance  to  developments  in  price  inflation  as  this  emerges  in  our  model. 
Weighting is heaviest and approximately the same for domestic private demand, wage growth, growth 
in public expenditure and developments in the global economy. The weighting for exchange rate and 
oil price is somewhat lower. 
The chart shows our assessment of the balance of risks associated with estimated wage growth as it 
was presented in the Inflation Report 3/2001. We estimated 5 per cent wage growth in 2003. At the 
same time, we said that the probability that wage growth would be higher than projected was greater 
than the probability that it would be lower. We could present similar charts for the other five factors. 
The ”fan” for the inflation projection is a topographical map of the overall assessment of the balance of 
risk. 
                                                      
4   The risk model is discussed further in “Box: Assessment of risk to the inflation projection”, Inflation Report 2/2001, Norges 
Bank. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2002
  
The uncertainty associated with the analyses is one of the reasons that we normally proceed gradually 
in adjusting the interest rate to the inflation target.5 In this way, we have the possibility of utilising new 
information that becomes available along the way. Most central banks have chosen such a model in 
their use of instruments. In exceptional cases, situations may arise that demand strong and immediate 
reactions. An example of this is the situation in Norway in the autumn of 1998, when there was unrest 
in the financial markets and a rupture of confidence in the Norwegian krone. Another is the Federal 
Reserve’s interest rate cuts in 2001. Even in these cases, however, the entire interest rate adjustment 
was not made immediately. 
In an uncertain world, central banks cannot guarantee that a process of increasing or decreasing the 
interest rate will necessarily continue. New information may require an adjustment of the projections. 
Nor  can  ”gradual”  be  construed  to  mean  that  an  adjustment  to  a  new  interest  rate  level  will  be 
achieved by changing the  interest rate at every monetary  policy meeting. ”Gradual” may also imply 
that we want some time to evaluate new information or are awaiting further information before making 
a move. 
Transparency about intensions, strategies and implementation of monetary policy makes it easier for 
economic agents to assess monetary policy. A monetary policy that is understood and predictable may 
contribute to improving the efficiency and impact of monetary policy.  
Last year, Svein Gjedrem quoted Willem F. Duisenberg:6 
“Transparency  in  monetary  policymaking  should  be  understood  as  the  extent  to  which  the  external 
presentation of the decisions corresponds to the internal decision-making process.”  
The following quote from a report written in 2001 by five internationally known economists (A. Blinder, 
C. Goodhart, P. Hildebrand, D. Lipton and C. Wyplosz) may provide a good supplement to Duisberg’s 
words:  
“…transparency  should  allow  the  public  to  understand,  and  possibly  anticipate,  the  central  bank’s 
decisions, to see each of them as the logical conclusion of a chain of past and future decisions aimed 
at a clear set of targets,….7 
We in Norges Bank wish to be credible so that in retrospect our actions are understood and appear to 
be logical in relation to the inflation target.  
                                                      
5   Frøyland, Espen and Ingunn Lønning (2000): “The significance of uncertainty in monetary policy”, Economic Bulletin 4/2000, 
Norges Bank. 
6   Duisenberg, Willem F. (2000): “Making monetary policy in a broad monetary union”, BIS Review 8/2000. 
7   Blinder. A., C. Goodhart, P. Hildebrand, D. Lipton, C. Wyplosc (2001): “How do central banks talk?” Geneva Report on the 
World Economy no. 3, May 2001. 
BIS Review 7/2002 
 5
 The Executive Board assesses economic developments and the outlook for the economy to the best 
of  their  judgement.  However,  our  assessments may  deviate  from  the  assessments  of  others.  Many 
factors are evaluated before an interest rate decision is made. If Norges Bank makes a decision that 
differs from market expectations, differences in assessments may be the cause.  
The  Executive  Board  evaluates  economic  developments  at  every  monetary  policy  meeting.  This 
evaluation is reflected in the Executive Board’s interest rate decisions and in Norges Bank’s view of 
the outlook for inflation, which is published immediately after each monetary policy meeting. It is an 
advantage if the market anticipates and adapts to the interest rate decisions in advance, but meeting 
market expectations cannot rule the decision. The decision must be based on our mandate, which is to 
set  the  interest  rate  in  such  a  way  that  inflation  remains  at  around  2½  per  cent.  The  fundamental 
consideration here is the assessment of the outlook for inflation. If the inflation outlook has changed 
significantly, Norges Bank will take the consequences of this development when it sets interest rates.  
We  wish  to  be  transparent  with  regard  to  our  response  patterns,  our  analyses  of  economic 
developments  and  our  assessment  of  the  effects  of  monetary  policy.  Our  inflation  projections  and 
assessments  are  available  to  the  public.  Norges  Bank’s  views  on  the  inflation  outlook  is  presented 
three times a year in the Inflation Report. We place emphasis on providing a satisfactory presentation 
of the basis for the interest rate decisions, by, for example, presenting our projection for the inflation 
outlook ahead and our assessment of the balance of risks associated with this projection. 
The  Executive  Board’s  updated  assessments  are  presented  in  connection  with  the  monetary  policy 
meetings every six weeks. Immediately after the meeting, the Bank issues a press release and holds a 
press  conference.  The  press  conference  is  transmitted  live  on  the  Internet.  The  introduction  to  the 
press conference is also published on the Internet. 
Newspaper articles and speeches are published in both Norwegian and English on our web site. 
Once  a  year,  Norges  Bank  evaluates  the  projections  made  in  the  Inflation  Report.  The  results  are 
published  in  an  article  in  Economic  Bulletin.  The  Annual  Report  contains  an  assessment  of  the 
monetary policy that has been conducted. If actual price inflation deviates significantly from the target, 
the Bank will account for this in the Annual Report.  
Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  decisions  are  a  consequence  of  the  response  pattern  that  has  been 
communicated, our analyses and our assessments of the effects of monetary policy. 
If  we  have  succeeded  in  communicating  our  response  pattern  and  thus  laid  the  foundation  for  a 
credible  monetary  policy,  the  market  should  not  in  general  be  surprised  by  the  Executive  Board’s 
interest rate decisions. A measure of market surprise may be the change in money market rates from 
the  day  before  to  the  day  after  a  monetary  policy  meeting.  A  small  change  will  indicate  that  the 
decision was in line with market expectations. On the other hand, a large change indicates that the 
market had expected another decision. 
6 
 BIS Review 7/2002
 This chart shows the change in deposit rates (red bar) and in three-month money market rates (blue 
bar)  in  connection  with  monetary  policy  meetings  since  1999.  The  plus  and  minus  signs  show  the 
extent to which Norges Bank has signalled upside or downside risks. As a reference for the extent of 
the effect, the lines around the time axis show the average daily absolute change in the three-month 
money market rate. As from the monetary policy meeting on 21 July 1999, the date of the meetings 
have been made public in advance. 
We see that changes in the money market rate are modest in connection with most monetary policy 
meetings.  The money  market  rate  changed  by  more  than  0.20  percentage  point  in  connection  with 
only four of the nearly 30 meetings included in the chart.  
We  have  also  made  similar  estimates  for  a  number  of  other  countries  in  order  to  have  a  basis  for 
comparison.  The  next  charts  show  changes  in  connection  with  monetary  policy  meetings  in  the 
European Central Bank, the Bank of England and Sweden’s Riksbank. 
 
  BIS Review 7/2002 
 7
   
The effect is not systematically different from the effects in other countries. If interest rate decisions 
are  largely  anticipated,  adjustment  costs  will  decline.  This  is  an  advantage.  What  we  must  be 
measured  against  primarily  is  whether  we  are  setting  the  interest  rate  correctly  in  relation  to  the 
inflation target. 
Guidelines for fiscal policy 
The fiscal policy stance is a key factor for developments in domestic demand. Towards the end of the 
1990s  politicians  were  facing  new  challenges  in  the  formulation  of  economic  policy.  A  high  level  of 
activity and a tight labour market could imply a tighter economic policy. At the same time, there were 
increasing demands to use a larger portion of the substantial and rising petroleum revenues that were 
manifested through the Government Petroleum Fund.  
The guidelines for fiscal policy had so far been that the budget should have an approximately neutral 
effect on the economy in a normal cyclical situation. A shift towards an increased use of petroleum 
revenues would then inevitably involve a fiscal policy that no longer had a neutral impact, but which 
would generally have an expansionary effect on the economy. 
In such a situation, it will be highly desirable to establish mechanisms that prevent serious imbalances 
in the economy. The phasing in of revenues must take place in a controlled manner and not through 
abrupt  changes,  but  a  counterbalance  to  the  generally  expansionary  fiscal  policy  must  also  be 
established  in  order  to  avoid  galloping  inflation,  unstable  exchange  rates  and  boom  periods.  The 
necessary  structural  changes  in  the  Norwegian  economy  which  an  increased  use  of  petroleum 
revenues implies must take place within a framework of nominal stability.  
The guidelines, as set out in Report no. 29 to the Storting (2000-2001), provide the response to the 
first challenge: 
“Considerable  emphasis  must  be  placed  on  stabilising  fluctuations  in  the  economy  with  a  view  to 
ensuring  appropriate  capacity  utilisation  and  low  unemployment.  Petroleum  revenues  are  gradually 
phased  into  the  economy,  approximately  in  pace  with  the  expected  real  return  on  the  Government 
Petroleum Fund.” 
The first sentence can be seen as a justification for a gradual phasing in of petroleum revenues. A 
phasing in of revenues based on using the expected real return on the Petroleum Fund must be said 
to  be  reasonably  controlled  and  gradual.  Another  aspect  is  that  the  plans  do  not  call  for  using  the 
actual wealth. However, the expansionary impetus to the economy in any one year will depend on the 
time profile for the accumulation of capital in the Petroleum Fund. 
8 
 BIS Review 7/2002
 There was broad support in the Storting for the guidelines. Both the previous and current Government 
have  placed  considerable  emphasis  on  adhering  to  these  guidelines  in  the  government  budget  for 
2002. 
 
The use of petroleum revenues is calculated on the basis of the structural, non-oil deficit. This means 
that,  in  general,  changes  in  activity  levels  in  the  economy  do  not  influence  the  use  of  petroleum 
revenues. This also implies that fiscal policy will contribute to curbing fluctuations through automatic 
stabilisers.  In  years  with  a  high  level  of  activity,  the  actual  budget  deficit  will  be  smaller  than  the 
structural deficit. In years with a low level of activity, the actual deficit will be higher. It is the level, and 
not changes in economic activity, that influences the structural deficit. 
The  chart  shows  the  planned  use  of  the  real  return  on  the  Petroleum  Fund,  measured  by  the 
government  budget’s  structural,  non-oil  deficit  as  a  percentage  of  mainland  GDP.  We  see  that  the 
plans call for a gradual increase in the use of petroleum revenues over the government budget. This 
can contribute to avoiding abrupt shifts in demand.  
 BIS Review 7/2002 
 9
 The  chart  shows  that  the  expansionary  impetus  varies  substantially  and  is  greatest  in  the  first  few 
years. 
The value of the Petroleum Fund will vary over time as a result of variations in the transfer of capital 
due to fluctuations in the oil price, petroleum production and the return achieved by the Fund. 
How the guidelines are to be applied has been discussed thoroughly in various political documents. 
The expected real return shall be used as a basis for the phasing in of petroleum revenues. Hence, 
the  use  of  these  revenues  does  not  fluctuate  in  step  with  the  actual  real  return.  Moreover,  the 
calculations  shall  normally  be  based  on  an  estimate  of  the  Fund’s  size  at  the  time  the  budget 
documents  are  completed.  This  means  that  fluctuations  in  revenues  affect  the  budget  with  a 
considerable lag. The budget for 2002, for example, is based on the size of the Fund at the beginning 
of  2001.  Estimates  for  petroleum  revenues  and  the  return  through  2001are  then  added.  These 
estimates  are  provided  in  the  National  Budget  presented  in  autumn  2001.  The  actual  return  on  the 
Fund in 2001 will not be included in the calculations until the budget for 2003. 
Moreover,  attempts  shall  be  made  to  curb  the  impetus  from  particularly  large  fluctuations  in  the 
phasing-in  rate  implied  by  the  main  rule:  “In  the  event  of  extraordinary,  substantial  changes  in  the 
Fund’s capital or in the structural, non-oil deficit from one year to the next, the change in the use of 
petroleum revenues must be distributed over several years based on an estimate of the size of the 
real return on the Fund a few years ahead” (Report no. 29 to the Storting 2000-2001, p. 7). 
This means that fiscal policy can still be  used to stabilise economic developments. This is a sound 
Norwegian tradition, but may be demanding.  
At last  year’s seminar, the Central Bank Governor stated: “In Norway it is important that the annual 
budgets are anchored in a long-term strategy which takes into account that oil revenues may fluctuate 
from one year to the next”. The guidelines satisfy the requirements of this long-term strategy. 
Consensus concerning the guidelines and adherence to them will create confidence in the long-term 
formulation  of  fiscal  policy.  This  also  provides  a  stable  framework  for  monetary  policy.  Under  such 
conditions, the effect of monetary policy instruments will be more predictable. 
The uncertainty facing economic agents is reduced through the establishment of credible fiscal policy 
guidelines.  A  stable  operating  environment  is  an  important  precondition  when  decisions  that  have 
long-term consequences shall be taken. This will also contribute to stability in financial markets. 
The  guidelines  that  were  introduced  last  year  stated:  “Fiscal  policy  has  the  main  responsibility  for 
stabilising  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy”.  If  fiscal  policy  is  to  continue  to  contribute  to 
smoothing  fluctuations  in  the  economy  at  the  same  time  that  the  guidelines  for  the  phasing  in  of 
petroleum revenues are to appear credible, the guidelines should be applied in such a way that they 
place  a strict limit on the  average  use of petroleum revenues over time. This means that if we  use 
more  than  the  expected  return  in  one  period,  we  must  use  less  than  the  expected  return  in  other 
periods. 
The  guidelines  allow  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  to  be  adapted  to  some  extent  to  the  cyclical 
situation.  Fiscal  policy  will  then  ease  the  burden  on  monetary  policy  in  the  sense  that  the  inflation 
target, and hence nominal stability, can be achieved with fewer changes in monetary policy. 
However,  permitting  a  discretionary  use  of  fiscal  policy  also  involves  temptations.  It  will  probably 
always be easier to increase spending over government budgets during a downturn than it will be to 
reduce spending when the cyclical situation again improves. In that case, fiscal policy may prove to be 
more expansionary over time than implied by the guidelines. This will have to be countered by a tighter 
monetary policy, and there is also a risk that doubt arises as to whether the guidelines actually apply. 
The  need  for  credibility  may  therefore  in  itself  indicate  that  cyclical  considerations  should  only  very 
seldom  lead  to  discretionary  deviations  from  the  main  rule.  Automatic  stabilisers  will  still  have  an 
effect. 
I believe that our politicians are aware of this risk. In the National Budget for 2002, the budget balance 
was cyclically adjusted by NOK 5.1 billion, which shows that we are experiencing a period of strong 
expansion. The plans nevertheless called for the use of petroleum revenues in 2002 that was identical 
to the expected real return on the Petroleum Fund at the beginning of the fiscal year. Hence, it is only 
via automatic stabilisers that fiscal policy will be adapted to the cyclical situation this year. I interpret 
this to mean that the threshold for departing from the main rule is high. 
10 
 BIS Review 7/2002
 Structural effects on the Norwegian economy 
As may be inferred from the presentation so far, it is monetary policy that shall address the second 
challenge:  preventing the  increased  use of petroleum revenues from resulting in nominal instability. 
Despite many uncertainties, I do not believe that there are grounds for serious concern with regard to 
monetary policy’s ability to deliver nominal stability over time, at least as long as fiscal policy is stable 
and predictable. However, the interest rate level will naturally have to be adapted. 
A situation whereby we shift from fiscal policy guidelines that aim at neutrality to a long-term, gradual 
phasing  in  of  petroleum  revenues,  while  maintaining  nominal  stability,  will  entail  some  adjustment 
mechanisms  that  will  be  controversial.  This  applies  not  least  to  the  effects  on  Norway’s  industry 
structure. Increased spending over government budgets and/or reductions in direct and indirect taxes 
will result in an increase in total domestic demand. A substantial portion of this increase in demand will 
be focused on private and public services. The sheltered sector will have to lay claim to a higher share 
of available labour. In an economy with full capacity utilisation, this can in practice only take place if 
resources are transferred from the exposed to the sheltered sector. 
Independent of the phasing in of petroleum revenues, employment in the sheltered sector is expected 
to rise in the period ahead. It is not difficult to imagine that the phasing in of petroleum revenues will 
amplify this trend. 
The  expected  reduction  in  manufacturing  employment  will  be  amplified  with  an  increased  use  of 
petroleum  revenues.  Adjustments  may  come  about  through  deteriorating  competitiveness  and 
profitability in internationally exposed industries. Monetary policy cannot influence these adjustments 
in the long term. In the short and medium term, however, a monetary policy reaction may still have 
temporary effects on developments in the real economy. The phasing in of petroleum revenues may 
swiftly translate into pressures on economic resources, which in turn may generate pressures that lead 
to higher domestic wage and price inflation. Monetary policy must then be adapted in order to counter 
inflationary pressures. A higher interest rate compared with other countries may result in a nominal 
appreciation. This leads to deteriorating competitiveness and contributes to reducing employment in 
the exposed sector. How quickly this takes place will depend on the monetary policy tightness required 
to counter price and wage pressures. 
Conclusion 
We live in an uncertain world. The economy will constantly be exposed to shocks of different types. 
We  must  be  prepared  for  changes  in  the  functioning  of  the  economy  over  time.  No  one  knows 
precisely  how  different  shocks  will  affect  the  economy  or  what  effects  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
instruments will have. A stable operating environment in the form of a predictable monetary and fiscal 
policy contributes to reducing some of this uncertainty. This is a benefit for economic agents. Monetary 
policy decisions are also made under uncertainty. This is the most important challenge we face in the 
formulation of monetary policy. 
Given the phasing in of petroleum revenues now being planned, fiscal policy will be expansionary for 
many years ahead. This will contribute to stimulating domestic demand and thus influence monetary 
policy’s scope for manoeuvre in the medium term. Monetary policy must be tighter than it otherwise 
would  have  been.  The  consequences  of  using  a  growing  portion  of  petroleum  revenues  will  be  a 
challenge  to  many,  including  the  labour  market,  the  business  sector  and  political,  decision-making 
bodies. 
A  gradual  phasing  in  of  petroleum  revenues  is  clearly  preferable  to  large  and,  to  some  extent, 
unpredictable  changes  in  fiscal  policy  from  one  year  to  the  next. Without  clear  limits for  the  use  of 
petroleum  revenues,  considerable  uncertainty  concerning  the  formulation  of  economic  policy  ahead 
could arise. For monetary policy, the guidelines are not a challenge but a benefit. 
When  the  implications  of  the  guidelines  for  Norway’s  industry  structure  become  apparent,  it  is  not 
given that everyone will be equally enthusiastic. If, at the same time, we have a strong exchange rate, 
some may want monetary policy to counter a strong krone exchange rate even if we are on track in 
relation to the inflation target. Monetary policy cannot and shall not do this. The objective of monetary 
policy is to contribute to low and stable inflation. Reducing interest rates in order to weaken the krone, 
thereby  jeopardising  the  inflation  target,  would  mean  that  we  are  not  doing  our  job.  Nor  would  this 
change the necessary structural adjustments that the increased use of petroleum revenues implies, 
but only increase their costs. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 7/2002 
 11
