 Urban Bäckström: The importance of a well-functioning stock market 
Remarks  by  Mr  Urban  Bäckström,  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  World  Federation  of 
Investors 20th World Congress, Stockholm, 7 June 2002. 
 First I want to express my gratitude for the invitation to attend your congress and briefly discuss with 
you the importance of a well-functioning stock market. 
Let  me  start  by  saying  that  just  as  it  is  important  that  networks  for  transport,  electricity  and 
telecommunications function properly, so is it essential that, for example, payments can be transacted, 
capital  can  be  saved  and  channelled  to  the  most  profitable  investment  projects  and  that  both 
households  and  firms  get  help  in  handling  financial  uncertainty  and  risk  as  well  as  possibilities  of 
spreading  consumption  over  time.  Financial  markets  constitute  an  important  part  of  the  total 
infrastructure for every economy that has passed the stage of domestic production. 
The  financial  system  performs  three  main  tasks:  firstly,  it  handles  payments;  secondly,  it  channels 
savings to investments with a good return for future consumption; and thirdly, it spreads and reduces 
economic risks in relation to the players’ required returns. 
A smooth functioning of all these activities facilitates  economic growth in that lower costs and risks 
promote the production of goods and services as well as employment. In this way the financial system 
contributes to increased prosperity. 
The stock market is one of the most important sources for companies to raise money. Experience has 
taught us that the price of shares and other assets is an important part of the dynamics of economic 
growth. Rising share prices, for instance, tend to be associated with increased business investment 
and vice versa. Share prices also affect the wealth of households and their consumption. Therefore, 
central banks tend to keep an Argus eye on the development of the stock market and reflect on how 
the financial system functions. Another reason is the oversight of financial stability. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  confine  my  brief  remarks  to  some  aspects  that  have  to  do  with  the  fact  that 
shares now weigh considerably more heavily in household portfolios than was the case thirty  years 
ago. What are the implications of this trend? 
Increased interest in stock market investment 
In  recent  decades  the  financial  system  in  most  western  countries  has  undergone  a  remarkable 
transformation. One feature of this development is disintermediation. A portion of the funds involved in 
saving  and  financing  flows  directly  to  the  financial  markets  instead  of  being  routed  via  banks’ 
traditional lending and deposit operations. The general public’s heightened interest in investing in the 
stock  market,  either  directly  or  through  mutual  funds,  has  been  an  important  component  of  this 
process. Statistics show that in recent decades shares have made up an increasingly large proportion 
of  households’  financial  assets  in  many  countries.  Thirty  years  ago  in  Sweden,  bank  deposits  and 
other very liquid assets with little risk made up almost 60 per cent of households’ financial wealth, as 
against less than 20 per cent today. The major part of this adjustment in financial portfolios has gone 
to shares but a good deal now takes the form of insurance saving. The trend towards forms of saving 
with  a  higher  risk  has  been  accentuated  by  new  rules  for  insurance  companies,  permitting  a  high 
proportion of shares, although this is arranged more indirectly. Similar tendencies are to be found in 
other industrialised countries. So it is not just in Sweden that saving has moved away from traditional 
bank deposits. 
This is a positive trend. However, long-term saving requires an ability to manage the associated risks. 
Stock prices fluctuate widely, in marked contrast to the stability of bank deposits. This is something 
that could affect not only the individual investor or household, but also the economy on a large scale. 
Therefore,  I  think  it’s  important  to  discuss  the  risks of  the  financial  sector  in  general  and  the  stock 
market in particular. This could be even more important now that so many newcomers have entered 
the stock market. 
Allow me to quote the following: 
  “With each passing year, the noise level in the stock market rises. Television commentators, financial 
writers, analysts, and market strategists are all overtalking each other to get investors’ attention. At the 
same  time,  individual  investors,  immersed  in  chat  rooms  and  message  boards,  are  exchanging 
questionable  and  often  misleading  tips.  Yet,  despite  all  this  available  information,  investors  find  it 
increasingly difficult to profit. … Stock prices skyrocket with little reason, then plummet just as quickly, 
and  people  who  have  turned  to  investing  for  their  children’s  education  and  their  own  retirement 
become frightened. There appears to be no rhyme or reason to the market, only folly.” 
This is a quote from the preface to a recently published biography about the well-known and long term 
value  oriented  investor  Warren  Buffet.1  Buffet  began  his  career  forty-five  years  ago  with  only 
100 U.S. dollars and has over the years built himself a multibillion-dollar fortune. I quote the passage 
to  illustrate  a  view  held  by  some  of  what  was  going  on  in  the  stock  market  during  the  end  of  the 
20th century and the beginning of the 21st. 
Learn from new theories 
From experience we know that investors may temporarily pull financial prices away from their trend 
level. Over-reactions can occur so that excessive euphoria drives prices unduly high, just as undue 
pessimism  can  push  them  down  too  far.  New  theoretical  and  empirical  arguments  have  been  put 
forward against the notion that financial markets are efficient. 
According to the efficient market hypothesis, it is only changes in fundamental factors, such as profits 
or  dividends,  that  ought  to  affect  share  prices.  Something  that  no  doubt  helped  to  question  the 
explanatory power of the efficient-market hypothesis was the stock market crash in 1987, when the 
Dow Jones index plummeted 22.6 per cent - the largest-ever one-day fall in the United States. This 
dramatic  event  demonstrated  that  share  prices  can  fall  even  though  nothing  more  fundamental 
appears  to  have  happened;  a  thorough  search  failed  to  detect  any  specific  or  unexpected 
development that might account for the crash. It also seems to be the case more generally that many 
price movements are not  occasioned by  new  information;  a study  of the fifty  largest one-day share 
price movements in the United States in the post-war period confirms this.2 Moreover, a number of 
studies have shown that price movements have occurred solely because the company in question has 
been included in or excluded from Standard & Poor’s 500 index, without any new information about 
fundamentals. 
Various explanations for such overreactions have been found. For instance, research has shown that 
risk  management  systems  and  the  use  of  strategies  such  as  stop-loss  limits  and  VaR  limits, 
theoretically could cause financial markets to overreact. 
Other  research  has  shown  that  different  forms  of  psychological  factors  can  also  cause  those 
developments. Experimental psychology has found that people often perceive a wider pattern in the 
light of just a few observations that are actually entirely random. In the present context this means that 
a succession of good news items about a company’s profits may lead investors to project the trend 
well into the future and accordingly generate an over-reaction; if the share price then rises, this is seen 
as confirming the analysis. A period of good returns also boosts the investor’s self-confidence, making 
her/him bolder and more prone to take risks. Bit by bit the over-reaction takes shape and, if the worst 
comes to the worst, leads to a bubble.3 
A phenomenon - also studied in experimental psychology - that works against taking an independent 
stance is group thinking. It is not easy to stick to an opinion that differs from what a majority of the 
group seems to hold; “surely all the others cannot be wrong” is a common thought. An example with 
which you may be familiar is the reluctance to enter a restaurant that is empty; people generally prefer 
one that has many guests - they simply rely on the judgement of others. 
Even if you hold a different opinion from others, it could be profitable to act as you think the majority 
will. An investor who considers a stock to be valued above its fundamental level could still decide to 
buy or hold on to the stock if he or she believes that others might still be interested in buying the stock 
at an even higher price, for instance due to the factors mentioned earlier. In a paper the authors draw 
                                                      
1  Hagstrom, R.G. (2001): The essential Buffet, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York. 
2  Cutler, D., J. Poterba and L. Summers (1991): Speculative dynamics, Review of Economic Studies 58, pp. 520-546. 
3  See  e.g.  Tversky,  A.  and  D.  Kahneman  (1974):  Judgement  under  uncertainty:  heuristics  and  biases,  Science  185, 
pp. 1124-1131. 
  an analogy with a game of poker.4 In normal times the market behaves like a game of roulette; the 
probabilities are known and independent of the investment decisions of the different players. In times 
of market stress, though, the game becomes poker. The players have to take into consideration the 
position of others and their likely behaviour. 
We  are  also  liable  to  succumb  to  wishful  thinking.  An  example  that  confronts  me  almost  daily  at 
present  is  when  supporters  of  a  national  football  team,  for  instance,  are  frequently  over-confident 
about the chances of winning. 
Learn from history 
The so-called IT boom, combined with markedly lower transaction costs as a result of new technology, 
induced many inexperienced people to invest in shares. Moreover, access to the Internet leads to an 
increased  number  of  share  transactions,  often  with  poorer  results.  Investors  have  also  become 
younger. The same tendency applies to stockbrokers and analysts, many of whom began their careers 
in  the  1990s.  Inexperienced  investors  did  not  get  the  assistance  and  support  they  needed.  In  the 
period running up to the Nasdaq crash, less than 1 per cent of the analyst’s recommendations had 
been to sell. The media accentuated the exuberant mood, with reports of rapidly rising share prices, 
and  the  notion  that  quick  money  could  be  earned  in  the  so-called  new  economy  became  the 
conventional wisdom. 
From the recent years’ experience I can identify some important and interesting issues. Although time 
does not allow me to expand on them, allow me nevertheless to mention some briefly. 
What  can  be  done  to  make  the  stock  market  function  better?  What  can  be  done  to  provide  more 
support in the future for long-term saving by households? How could more education and knowledge 
be provided so that the inexperienced investor becomes experienced and well-educated instead. 
I’m sure that shareholders associations all over the world have an important role to play in this respect. 
Further,  it  goes  without  saying  that  prompt,  up-to-date,  correct  and  relevant  information  is  crucial. 
However, we must remember that more information is not the same as better information. Quality is 
not the same as quantity. The inexperienced investor must be helped to interpret the information and 
pick out what matters most. An important role could be played by independent analysts, not to mention 
media. There have to be agents in society that can see through and criticise corporate managements 
that are unduly optimistic or provide information selectively. 
The argument for this is that international studies indicate that in the second half of the 1990s firms, 
banks and analysts had incentives to talk inexperienced people into investing in new enterprises on 
grounds that were not entirely sound. Many new technology companies were not generating a profit 
and had to rely instead on paying for wages and equipment by issuing shares. For this to be feasible, 
stock market valuation needs to be high. In this sense there were incentives for managements to trim 
reports  and  statements  about  their  firm’s  future  profits.  At  the  same  time,  analysts  and  investment 
banks, with potential earnings from launching share issues, lacked incentives to take a critical look at 
these reports, so inexperienced investors did not get the assistance and support they needed. 
In  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  financial  market  imbalances,  it  is  important  that  we  have  a  well 
thought-out  legislative,  regulatory  and  supervisory  infrastructure  that  functions  properly  and  follows 
changes  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  This  is  a  never-ending  task  that  requires  the  participation  of  all 
concerned. 
Today, households face what are sometimes very difficult risk-management decisions that were not 
called for or even possible before. Many people still lack the relevant knowledge for this and it may be 
asked whether people in general can be expected to have such knowledge  in the future. Everyone 
cannot be a specialist in risk management and financial theory. 
Therefore,  I  think  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  should  become  more  consumer-oriented, 
instead  of  today’s  greater  focus  on  products.  The  increased  exposure  of  households  to  the  stock 
market calls for tailor-made plans for the life cycle that take all important risks into account. Central 
matters here are, of course, investment horizons, how buying and selling is arranged and the degree 
of diversification across companies and geographical regions. Another parameter is, as indicated, the 
                                                      
4  Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (1999): Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 15, no 3. 
  life  cycle;  the  possibility  of  saving  for  the  long  run  is  restricted  by  how  much  capital  is  likely  to  be 
needed in the nearer future. 
Admittedly, this process has to some extent begun already. However, the decisive steps lie ahead. 
 