 Willem F Duisenberg: International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, 
opening address 
Opening  address  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Frankfurt, 5 July 2002.  
  Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Governor Gramlich, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  deliver  the  opening  address  of  a  new  transatlantic  dialogue  –  the  International 
Research Forum on Monetary Policy – sponsored by the European Central Bank (ECB), the Board of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  the  Center  for  German  and  European  Studies  at 
Georgetown  University  (Washington,  DC)  and  the  Center  for  Financial  Studies  at  the  Goethe 
University  here  in  Frankfurt.  The  European  Central  Bank  is  glad  to  host  the  first  meeting  of  this 
research forum.  
I  am  particularly  pleased  to  welcome  Governor  Gramlich  here  today,  an  esteemed  colleague  and 
member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. He will put his seal, so to speak, 
on  this  forum  on  behalf  of  our  colleagues  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic.  I  should  also  like  to 
welcome  the  representatives  of  the  Center  for  German  and  European  Studies  and  the  Center  for 
Financial Studies, as well as all those who will present or discuss a paper. This forum brings together 
not only central bankers from both sides of the Atlantic, but also academics. Moreover, I should like to 
thank  the  organisers  of  this  first  International  Research  Forum,  in  particular  Ignazio  Angeloni,  Matt 
Canzoneri, Dale Henderson and Axel Weber.  
Since the establishment of the ECB – four years ago – the dialogue between the ECB and the Federal 
Reserve System has gradually intensified. It is fair to say (please forgive me, Governor Gramlich) that 
it  took  the  Federal  Reserve  System  some  time  to  realise  that  the  Eurosystem  –  the  ECB  and  the 
national central banks of the countries that have adopted the euro – has become the central banking 
system of the second largest currency area in the world. Admittedly, it also took the Eurosystem some 
time to grow into this role, but it has now done so and is seen to have done so, both inside and outside 
the  Eurosystem.  Contacts  between  the  ECB  and  the  Federal  Reserve  System  reached  their  most 
intense level shortly after the tragic events of 11 September last year. The swap arrangement between 
the Fed  and the  Eurosystem, which aimed to prevent a shortage of US  dollar liquidity  in European 
markets, was one result. The concerted monetary policy actions on 17 September was another. It is 
also  interesting  to  note  that  ties  between  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  Eurosystem  have 
grown stronger in basically all areas of central banking. 
The  International  Research  Forum  represents  a  new  link  in  this  network  of  contacts.  It  will  bring 
together central bankers and academics from both sides of the Atlantic to discuss new research on the 
theoretical and empirical aspects of monetary policy that are relevant to the euro area and the United 
States, but that are also relevant from a global perspective. Moreover, the dialogue will be an ongoing 
event; we plan to hold meetings like this one on a regular basis. The next one will be in Washington 
DC, on 14 and 15 November 2003, hosted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Looking  at the programme for today and tomorrow, I can identify three categories of research, and 
most of the research to be presented here is not limited to just one of these categories. 
First,  we  have  issues  which  are  at  the  heart  of  monetary  policy-making,  and  which  are  of  great 
relevance  to  central  bankers  worldwide.  For  instance,  work  on  financial  integration  and  monetary 
policy,  on  inflation  persistence,  and  on  optimal  monetary  policy.  Second,  we  have  research  on 
cross-country comparisons involving the United States and the euro area, and on issues that concern 
both currency areas, such as regional  inflation  in  a  currency union. Finally,  we have papers on the 
international  dimension  of  monetary  policy-making, 
the 
macroeconomics of international price discrimination, the currency denomination of international trade 
as well as inflation dynamics and international linkages. 
Let me touch on one issue which my colleague Otmar Issing will consider in greater depth at dinner 
tonight.  It  follows  from  my  introductory  remarks  about  increased  co-operation  between  the  Federal 
Reserve System and the ECB, namely international policy co-ordination. Although I am very much in 
favour of intensifying the dialogue between the two institutions – I am sure we can learn a lot from 
including  policy  co-ordination, 
BIS Review 43/2002 
 
1
 the  conclusion 
is  different.  Under 
theory  considerations, 
each other – I am, at the same time, one of the first to recognise the limitations of international policy 
co-ordination.  Indeed,  we  should  distinguish  between  international  co-operation  and  international 
co-ordination. In the latter case, policy-makers do not only pursue domestic goals, but also explicitly 
take into account the impact of their actions on the outside world. 
The economic literature – both theoretical and empirical – is clear on this issue. In the stylised and 
imperfect  world  of  an  economic model,  policy  co-ordination  is  mostly  beneficial,  in  terms  of  welfare 
gains (measured on the basis of a more or less standard utility function). This is the conclusion that 
emerges from the early literature on policy co-ordination. However, if you try to elaborate this stylised 
and  imperfect  world,  for  instance  by  introducing  transaction  costs,  uncertainties  regarding  the  true 
economic  model,  or  game 
these 
circumstances,  the  gains  from  international  policy  co-ordination  are  non-existent  –  and  a  regime  of 
non-co-ordination would in fact be better. 
This  conclusion  from  the  more recent  literature  is  consistent  with  the  policy  line  taken  by  the  ECB. 
Asking  monetary  policy  to  do  more  than  maintain  price  stability,  or  to  serve  other  purposes,  risks 
creating illusions about what monetary policy can do, as Otmar Issing will explain tonight. In addition, a 
central bank's ability to steer interest rates can only be used to serve one objective, which is – in most 
cases – to maintain price stability. This can be achieved either by targeting the exchange rate, a policy 
typically  pursued  by  small  and  open  economies,  or  by  employing  a  monetary  policy  strategy  that 
focuses on the internal stability of the currency, which is the ECB's strategy. Going beyond this is quite 
a difficult exercise.  
Some  of  the  arguments  against  international  policy  co-ordination  also  apply  to  policy  co-ordination 
within the euro area, an issue which will be discussed at the Convention on the Future of Europe. As 
you  might  be  aware,  some  commentators  and  politicians  say  that  policy  co-ordination  should  be 
stepped up. I agree as far as economic policies are concerned – at least to some extent – but I have 
serious  doubts  about  any  increase  in  co-ordination  between  monetary  and  economic  policies.  It  is 
obvious that monetary and fiscal policy-makers should exchange views on macroeconomic policy in 
the euro area. This is already done at the meetings of the Eurogroup, and it is highly appreciated also 
by the ECB. However, an ex ante co-ordination of monetary policy and fiscal policy is a completely 
different story. Policy-makers in these two fields have clear and separate mandates. Monetary policy 
aims to maintain price stability. Fiscal policy should comply with the Stability and Growth Pact. Mixing 
up these mandates would unnecessarily complicate policy-making. It would blur competencies – which 
are well defined in the Treaty on European Union – and might undermine the ECB's credibility as the 
guardian of price stability. And as the research shows, the gains that can be expected from such ex 
ante  co-ordination  are  non-existent,  or  even  negative.  Indeed,  I  am  convinced  that  the  European 
Central Bank and fiscal policy-makers can best contribute to a stable macroeconomic environment by 
sticking to their respective mandates. 
Ladies and gentlemen, one final word before I hand over to Governor Gramlich: I have not been able 
to read all your papers, but I am sure that they will provide a more than valuable addition to the body 
of economic literature and will deepen our understanding of monetary policy-making. I should like to 
wish you all a very fruitful conference. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2002
