 Leszek Balcerowicz: The optimal timing and path for Poland’s entry into EMU 
Speech by Prof Leszek Balcerowicz, President of the National Bank of Poland, at the 11th European 
Banking Congress in Frankfurt, 23 November 2001. 
 Thank you very much Mr Chairman, 
I welcome this opportunity to address such a distinguished audience. 
I would start with two basic assumptions. First, we are not discussing whether euro will go east or not 
because we are assuming Poland and other candidate countries will enter the European Union with 
the status of a country  with derogation, so sooner or later they  will  be obliged  to join the Monetary 
Union as well. Therefore, the issue under discussion is not “if” but “when” and “how” i.e. what are the 
optimal timing and the optimal path. 
Secondly,  one  should  assume  equal  treatment  of  candidates  and  present  EU  member  countries 
i.e. fulfilling  the  Maastrich  Criteria,  no  less  no  more.  There  should  be  no  additional  criteria  like,  for 
example,  a  required  level  of  financial  deepening,  as  it  would  indicate  an  unequal  treatment  of 
candidate countries. 
Taking the second assumption of the entry into the EMU as granted, I would like to focus on the core 
issue, which is the question of optimal timing. 
My basic point is, that, firstly, early entry into the Monetary Union is possible and secondly, that it is 
preferable to the delayed one. By early entry I mean entry close to the earliest possible date, which 
one can recognise to be around year 2006, given the assumption of entry to the European Union in 
2004. It is this time neighbourhood we need to consider. The points would be as follows. 
First of all, let me say, that, in my opinion, arguments applicable to Poland are also largely true for 
other candidate countries in most of the cases. 
Poland has achieved a relatively high level of structural convergence with the European Union. It can 
be measured, for example, by a share of exports to the EU in relation to all exports. This number is 
actually  higher  in  Poland  right  now  then  it  had  been  in  Greece,  Portugal  and  Spain  before  their 
respective  entries  to  the  EU  and  the  MU.  We  have  also  achieved  a  high  degree  of  cyclical 
convergence. These two points combined, translate to a situation in which Poland is not so sensitive 
any more to, what is called, an asymmetric shock. 
Second, we have achieved a tremendous extent of disinflation. Inflation in Poland this year would be 
between 4% and 5% and similar figures will apply to other candidate countries. If one compares this 
data with inflation rates in some of the EU countries, one cannot see much of a difference - look at 
Holland. 
Third, Poland had managed to achieve a high level of disinflation while introducing a high level of price 
liberalization. It means there is only a limited scope for further corrective inflation. All but few prices are 
completely liberalized and driven by healthy market conditions. 
Fourth, in respect to so-called Ballassa Samuelson Effect, I agree with President Duisenberg, that it is 
mostly an empirical issue. I think the extent of this effect has been overstated and overdone in many 
theoretical studies. Empirical data in respect to Poland has shown, that in the past the contribution of 
BS Effect to the overall inflation rate has been in the range from 1% to 1.5%. 
As a matter of fact, BS Effect is also present in the Eurozone, in countries like Greece and Portugal. 
This  is  not  the  reason  for,  as  some  people  heralded,  a  weak  euro.  Problems  of  Greece  are  not 
responsible for weak euro that is, if one thinks euro is weak. 
The already mentioned disinflation, limited scope for future corrective inflation, and manageable level 
of BS Effect make the Maastricht Inflation criteria achievable. Fiscal criteria must be met in the interest 
of the countries concerned, as it would contribute to their economic growth. 
Fifth,  there  is  an  intermediate  period  between  the  date  of  entry  of  Poland  and  other  candidate 
countries into the European Union and membership of the Monetary Union. The question is, what is 
the  optimal  length  of  this  period.  I  would  like  to  point  out,  that  it  might  be  a  rather  turbulent  time. 
BIS Review 1/2002 
 1
 Economic forces behind convergence and rapid capital flows might create an economic roller caster. It 
may well be in the interest of the candidate countries to make this period as short as possible. 
Sixth, it is true that any country entering the EMU need to fix the exchange rate. One should not take 
for  granted,  however,  that  the  longer  the  period  of  the  intermediate  regime  the  better,  as  it  is  not 
always  true  that  longer  wait  produces  more  information  about  the  proper  rate  of  exchange.  It  may 
produce just more noise. 
Seventh,  both  further  efficient  disinflation  and  strengthening  long-term  economic  growth  require 
completion of certain structural reforms in the candidate countries. There is no way around it. In case 
of  Poland,  the  liberalization  of  the  labour  market  and  increased  participation  rate  is  badly  needed. 
Fiscal  reforms  must  concentrate  on  rationalising  the  spending  and  not  just  increasing  taxes. 
Privatisation needs to be completed and it should include the banking sector. We have to strengthen 
competition in fuel and energy sectors. Legal framework needs to be adjusted to be more efficient. 
The earlier deadline of the entry to the EU could act as a powerful motivating device to complete those 
reforms. I am a great believer in the deadlines and I think they help to achieve success. Delaying the 
entry could do more harm then good, as it could weaken the incentive to complete the necessary and 
often politically costly reforms. 
Eighth, flexibility of the rate of exchange is a poor substitute for structural reforms. 
Ninth, I agree there is evident fear among the certain existing EU members, including Germany, that 
once Poland, Hungary, Slovakia or Latvia enter the EMU, the euro could be weaken. I do not find any 
rational argument supporting this preposition. 
Firstly, as I pointed out, earlier date of entry would mobilise the candidate countries to complete the 
structural reforms. 
Secondly, candidate countries combined make up for only around 6% of the enlarged EU GDP. Any 
negative impact the enlargement might have, which is unlikely, in any case will be highly subdued. 
Thirdly, I think the reason behind the relative weakness of the euro, is not Greece or Portugal or the 
other EMU members but something different. The entry of Poland and other countries into the EMU, 
assuming  they  complete  reforms,  will  not  weaken  the  euro  at  all.  Finally,  as  for  today  there  are 
differences in the rate of inflation given the BS Effect in the EMU countries, hence why should be a 
problem for others, with inflation only marginally different from the EU average, to join the Eurozone? 
Tenth, earlier entry of the candidate countries into EMU would allow them to start reaping the related 
advantages  (more  price  transparency,  reduced  transformation  costs,  stronger  macroeconomic 
framework) at the earlier date. 
Summarising, we should not oppose nominal and real convergence. One should not assume there is 
an unavoidable conflict between the two. Firstly, results of nominal convergence, a low inflation rate 
among  them,  are  one  of  the  foundations  of  the  long-term  economic  growth.  Secondly,  the  great 
harmoniser between the real and nominal convergence are the structural reforms. The more reforms 
one  has  implemented,  the  less  costly  the  disinflation  is  and  the  stronger  the  longer  term  economic 
growth. 
I would finish up with the main point. The strategy on behalf of the European Union should be not to 
delay  the  entry  of  the  candidate  countries  into  EMU  but  to  encourage  the  candidates  to  complete 
structural  reforms. The  cost  of  disinflation  would  be  lowered  and  the  long  term  economic  would  be 
helped. This is a win-win strategy as it helps the candidates and ensures the existing EU members 
that the new members would be economically stable and dynamic. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2002
