 Bimal Jalan: Indian Banking and Finance - Managing New Challenges 
Speech  by  Dr  Bimal  Jalan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Banking  Economists' 
Conference, Kolkata, 14 January 2002. 
 Introduction 
In my inaugural address last year, I had indicated a vision for Indian banking in the new millennium – 
that  of  a  vibrant,  internationally  active  banking  system,  drawing  upon  its  innate  strengths  and 
comparative advantages to make India a major banking centre of the  world. I  had pointed out then 
that, while it may take up to 10 or even 15 years to achieve this vision, the time to begin was now. 
Recent developments have only served to bring forward the urgency attached to embarking upon this 
quest. Even as we do so, it is necessary to recognise that, in view of recent global developments and 
the  economic  slowdown,  the  progress  towards  this  goal  would  call  for  even  greater  effort  and 
determination.  In  this  context,  the  theme  chosen  for  this  year’s  Conference  i.e.,  “Indian  Banking: 
Paradigm Shift” is most timely as it provides an opportunity to deliberate on the new challenges ahead, 
and the action that we must take to manage them. I am happy to be a part of these deliberations and 
to deliver the inaugural address to the 23rd Conference of Bank Economists here today. 
As you are aware, global economic prospects turned sharply adverse since September 2001 following 
the terrorist attacks on the US. The possibilities of a recovery in the global economy  have  become 
highly  uncertain,  belying  the  initial  expectations  of  a  V-shaped  recovery  as  well  as  the  subsequent 
hopes of a U-shaped recovery. As of now, the consensus of forecasts settles around 2.4 per cent for 
world GDP growth for 2001. World trade volume growth could slow down to around 1.3 per cent and 
net capital outflows from developing countries may now be larger than anticipated earlier. Although the 
sharp  spurt  in  international  oil  prices  has  abated,  their  future  behaviour  remains  unclear. 
Macroeconomic  weaknesses  have  also  been  associated  with  an  erosion  of  business  confidence. 
Insurance,  airlines,  tourism  and  hotel  industries  have  been  hit  hard  and  the  exposure  of  financial 
institutions to these industries can be a potential source of vulnerability.  
Despite  the  relatively  inward-looking  nature  of  the  Indian  economy,  it  cannot  remain  insulated  from 
these international developments. The direct effects of these external developments on our banking 
system are expected to be limited. Indirect effects, especially through exports and subdued industrial 
activity could, however, impact upon the asset quality of our banking system and other segments of 
the financial system. The need to constantly monitor international developments and take appropriate 
and often, preemptive action add an  entirely new dimension to the  progress of our banking system 
towards its longer-term vision. 
We have made considerable progress in implementing banking and financial sector reforms. There is 
also  some  improvement  in  the  financial  performance  of  the  banking  system  in  terms  of  various 
indicators of operating efficiency. Nevertheless, there are several areas regarding the efficiency of our 
banking  system  –  rather  than  its  stability  –  that  raise  concerns,  especially  during  a  period  of 
generalised uncertainty. The level of non-performing assets (NPAs) continues be high by international 
standards,  preempting  funds  for  provisioning  and  eating  into  the  performance  and  profitability  of 
financial  intermediaries.  The  response  to  the  debt  recovery  and  asset  restructuring  initiatives 
undertaken as part of financial sector reforms has also been slow.  
In the period ahead, our financial system will also have to prepare for a tightening of the prudential 
norms  as  the  new  Basel  Accord  becomes  effective  and  a  fuller  response  to  the  current  financial 
environment  emerges.  Our  financial  institutions  continue  to  be  susceptible  to  financial  market 
turbulence,  especially  in  the  equity  market.  Upgrading  technical  skills,  technology,  research  and 
human capital, developing effective ‘front-office’ strategies and fortifying internal rules of governance 
and responsibility assumes a renewed priority in the fast changing scenario.  
The face of banking, as  we have known it, is also changing rapidly. India is approaching  an era  of 
financial  conglomorisation  and  ‘bundling’  in  the  provision  of  financial  services.  Besides  infusing 
heightened competition, there are implications for the regulatory and supervisory regime. Banks and 
financial  institutions  have  to  prepare  for  changes  in  the  regulatory  framework  towards  a  more 
focussed,  comprehensive  and  efficient  environment  that  eschews  regulatory  forbearance.  Legal 
reforms accordingly will have to ascend the hierarchy of priorities in the reform process.  
BIS Review 3/2002 
 1
 Against this background, in this talk, I propose to focus on the main challenges facing Indian banking, 
such as, the role of financial intermediation  in different phases of the business cycle, the emerging 
compulsions  of  the  new  prudential  norms,  and  benchmarking  the  Indian  financial  system  against 
international standards and best practices. I will also say a few words about the changing context of 
regulation and supervision of the financial system in India, the need for introducing new technology in 
the banking  and financial  system, and the importance of strengthening skills  and intellectual capital 
formation in the banking industry. 
Recent Macroeconomic Developments and the Banking System 
For a greater part of the twentieth century, the role of the financial system was perceived as mobilising 
the massive resource requirements for growth. Since the 1970s and 1980s, development economics 
underwent a paradigm shift. The financial system is no longer viewed as a passive mobiliser of funds. 
Efficiency  in  financial  intermediation  i.e.,  the  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  intermediate  between 
savers and investors, to set economic prices for capital and to allocate resources among competing 
demands  is  now  emphasised.  Developments  in  endogenous  growth  theory  since  the  late  1980s 
indicate that efficiency in financial intermediation is a source of technical progress to be exploited for 
generating increasing returns and sustaining high growth. These changes have provided the rationale 
for many developing countries to undertake wide-ranging reforms of their financial systems so as to 
prepare them for their true resource allocation function. As important financial intermediaries, banks 
have a special role to play in this new dispensation.  
The sharp downturn in global macroeconomic prospects and the continuing sluggishness in domestic 
industrial activity have necessitated a revision in the forecast for India’s real GDP growth in 2001-02 
from 6.0-6.5 per cent expected at the time of the April 2001 Monetary and Credit Policy Statement to 
5.0-6.0 per cent in the mid-term review of the policy. The downward revision is primarily predicated on 
the outlook for the industrial sector which grew by barely 2.2 per cent in April-October 2001 as against 
5.9  per  cent  in  the  corresponding  period  of  last  year,  mainly  on  account  of  the  slowdown  in 
manufacturing  and  mining  and  quarrying.  Capital  goods  production  declined  by  as  much  as 
6.6 per cent and several sectors recorded a slow down in growth rate or an absolute decline. On the 
other hand, agriculture sector, supported by reasonable monsoon, recorded a rebound in growth. The 
kharif output is expected to cross a new peak of 105.6 million tonnes and prospects for the rabi crop 
are also good. On the external front, merchandise exports increased marginally by 0.5 per cent in the 
first eight months of 2001-02. While oil imports fell by 13.4 per cent, the non-oil imports showed an 
increase of 8.4 per cent. Despite a moderate widening of the trade deficit, continuing buoyancy in net 
invisible receipts has kept the current account deficit very low. According to available data, net capital 
flows are also likely to be  of a higher order than in the preceding  year. Foreign exchange reserves 
rose to US $ 48.0 billion as on December 28, 2001 recording an accretion of the order of the US $ 5.8 
billion over the end-March 2001 level.  
In the context of the recent deceleration in the economy the intermediation role assumes even greater 
relevance.  Banks  and  financial  institutions  should  endeavour  to  play  a  ‘supply-leading’  rather  than 
‘demand-following’ role in initiating the upturn by energising the financial intermediation process. By 
virtue  of  a  bird’s  eye  view  of  the  economy  and  their  superior  credit  assessment  of  the  investment 
proposals  and  the  efficiency  of  capital,  banks  should  endeavour  to  economise  on  ‘search’  costs  in 
identifying  and  nurturing  growth  impulses  in  the  commodity  and  service  producing  sectors  of  the 
economy.  
In the recent period, monetary policy in India has also moved into a counter-cyclical stance signalled 
by cuts in key interest rates and cash reserve requirements. At the same time, market operations have 
ensured  adequate  liquidity  to  support  the  revival  of  aggregate  demand  with  a  clear  preference  for 
softening of interest rates within the overall institutional constraints on the interest rate regime. Inflation 
has been steadily falling and this has had a positive impact on inflation expectations, along with the 
underlying resilience of the macroeconomic fundamentals of the Indian economy. The 50 basis point 
reduction  in the  Bank Rate and the 200 basis point  reduction  in the CRR, announced recently, are 
expected to significantly enhance the lendable resources of the banking system.  
The  current  situation  of  comfortable  liquidity  provides  an  opportunity  for  banks  to  transform  idle 
liquidity  into  investible  resources  for  growth.  The  easy  interest  rate  environment  would  make  it 
possible for banks to ‘price in’ projects which would have earlier remained unfunded due to inherently 
lower  returns  to  capital  or  due  to  lack  of  access  to  prime  lending  rates.  This  will,  however,  require 
reassessment of portfolios and internal liquidity constraints, even adjustments in risk profiles and risk 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 management. The deceleration in the industrial growth scenario, of course, opens up the moral hazard 
of adverse selection and the possibilities of large-scale contamination of portfolios. In a situation of 
generalised slowdown, unviable projects can look potentially bankable given the scarcity of investment 
avenues. 
Nevertheless,  the  possibilities  for financial  intermediation  in  the  current  situation  are  too  varied  and 
challenging to ignore. There is no systematic evidence that financial sector reforms by themselves and 
without supportive policies in other areas, can contribute to a revival of the economy; yet this is a time 
when  the  responsibility  on  the  financial  system  to  contribute  to  the  process  of  economic  revival  is 
greater than before. Periods of downturn in economic activity also provide opportunities for banks to 
undertake  consolidation  and  strengthening.  There  is  a  strong  complementarity  between  financial 
stability  and  macroeconomic  stability.  The  interests  of  both  are  served  by  a  stable  and  resilient 
financial system.  
In recent years, various measures have been taken to improve the functioning of different segments of 
the financial markets and thereby, to improve the operational effectiveness of monetary policy. The 
Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF), which was introduced in June 2000 has emerged as an effective 
and flexible instrument for managing liquidity on a day-to-day basis. In the second stage of the LAF, 
which  commenced  from  May 2001,  variable  rate  repo  auctions  replaced  the  collateralised  lending 
facility  and  Level  I  support  to  primary  dealers.  Standing  facilities  were  rationalised  and  a  back-stop 
facility was introduced at variable market-related rates. Concurrently, LAF operating procedures were 
recast to improve operational flexibility and complementary measures were undertaken to improve the 
functioning  of  money  and  government  securities  market  segments  and  to  facilitate  their  orderly 
integration.  
In order to enable the call money market to evolve into a pure inter-bank market, lending by non-banks 
was  reduced  to  85  per  cent  of  their  average  daily  call  lending  in  2000-01  from  May  2001.  The 
minimum maturity for wholesale term deposits of Rs.15 lakh and above has been reduced to 7 days 
from  the  earlier  minimum  maturity  of  15  days.  The  maintenance  of  daily  minimum  cash  reserve 
requirements has been lowered to 50 per cent from 65 per cent for the first seven days of the reporting 
fortnight. Interest paid on eligible balances under CRR has been raised to the level of the Bank Rate 
from November 3, 2001. The market has responded positively with an appreciable rise in turnover and 
a decline in volatility.  
Several  measures  have  also  been  taken  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  government  securities 
market.  14-day  and  182-day  Treasury  Bills  were  withdrawn  and  the  notified  amounts  of  91-day 
Treasury  Bills  has  been  simultaneously  increased.  A  Negotiated  Dealing  System  (NDS)  is  being 
introduced  to  facilitate  electronic  bidding  and  to  disseminate  information  on  trades  on  a  real-time 
basis.  For  this  purpose,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  begun  the  automation  of  its  public  debt  offices.  An 
important step is the setting up of the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) to act as counterparty 
in all trades involving government securities, Treasury Bills, repos and foreign exchange. The entire 
system will operate in a networked environment and INdian FInancial NETwork (INFINET) will provide 
the backbone for communication.  
Prudential Norms 
A  strong  and  resilient  financial  system  and  the  orderly  evolution  of  financial  markets  are  key 
prerequisites  for  financial  stability  and  economic  progress.  In  keeping  with  the  vision  of  an 
internationally competitive and sound banking system, deepening and broadening of prudential norms 
to the best internationally recognised standards have been the core of our approach to financial sector 
reforms.  This  has  been  supported  concurrently  by  heightened  market  discipline,  pro-active  and 
comprehensive  supervision  of  the  financial  system  and  the  orderly  development  of  financial  market 
segments.  The  calibration  of  the  convergence  with  international  standards  is  conditioned  by  the 
specific realities of our situation; however, the New Capital Accord of the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision which was released in January 2001 adds urgency to the process of convergence. It is 
against the  backdrop of these exigencies that prudential norms are being constantly monitored and 
refined. In the recent period, banks are being encouraged to build risk-weighted components of their 
subsidiaries  into  their  own  balance  sheets  and  to  assign  additional  capital.  Risk  weights  are  being 
constantly refined to take into recognition additional sources of risk. The concept of ‘past due’ in the 
identification  of  NPAs  has  been  dispensed  with.  Banks  and  financial  institutions  are  being  urged  to 
prepare  to  move  to  the  international  practice  of  the  ‘90  day  norm’  in  the  classification  of  assets  as 
non-performing by 2003-04.  
BIS Review 3/2002 
 3
 The new Basel Accord, as contained in the second  Consultative Paper on Capital Adequacy of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision released in January 2001 is in response to the perceived 
rigidities in the 1988 Accord’s capital requirements, the scope for capital arbitrage and the increased 
sophistication in the measurement and management of risk. The new Accord rests on three mutually 
reinforcing  pillars  i.e.,  minimum  capital  requirements,  processes  of  supervisory  review  and  market 
discipline. Under the first pillar, the current definition of capital and the minimum requirement of 8 per 
cent  of  capital  to  risk  weighted  assets  is  retained.  Capital  requirements  would  be  extended  on  a 
consolidated basis to holding companies of banking groups.  
The primary emphasis of the new Accord is on improving the measurement of risk. The process of 
measurement  of  market  risk  is  maintained.  Three  alternatives  for  calculating  credit  risk  capital 
requirements  are  proposed  to  be  made  available  to  banks,  depending  on  the  complexity  of  their 
business and the quality of their risk management operations. The ‘standardised approach’ which can 
be employed by less complex banks remains conceptually the same as in the 1988 norms; however, it 
expands the scale of risk weights and uses external credit ratings to categorise credits. Banks with 
more advanced risk management capabilities can employ an internal ratings based (IRB) approach – 
‘foundation’  and  ‘advanced’  variants  are  proposed  on  a  progression  scale  –  in  which  banks  may 
categorise  exposures  into  multiple  credit  ratings  of  their  approved  internal  rating  systems.  The 
internally estimated probability of default, the maturity of exposure and the credit type i.e., corporate or 
retail, will determine risk weights. There is a new explicit capital charge proposed on operational risk.  
The processes of supervisory review contained in the second pillar emphasise the need for banks to 
develop sound internal procedures to assess the adequacy of capital based on a thorough evaluation 
of its risk profile and control environment, and to set commensurate targets for capital. The internal 
processes would be subject to supervisory evaluation, review and intervention, when appropriate. The 
third  pillar  aims  at  bolstering  market  discipline  through  enhanced  disclosure  by  banks.  Disclosure 
requirements are set  out in several  areas under the  new  Accord, including the  way  in  which banks 
calculate their capital adequacy and their risk assessment methods.  
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has received more than 250 comments on the January 
2001  proposals.  The  Committee  is  expected  to  release  a  fully  specified  proposal,  based  on  these 
comments, in early 2002 and to finalise the Accord during 2002. An implementation date of 2005 is 
envisaged. The Reserve  Bank forwarded its comments to the Basel committee in May 2001. It has 
supported  flexibility,  discretion  to  national  supervisors  and  a  phased  approach  in  implementing  the 
Accord. The Accord could initially apply to internationally active – banks with over 15 per cent of their 
business  in  cross-border  transactions,  as  proposed  by  the  Reserve  Bank  –  and  significant  banks 
whose  domestic  market  share  exceeds  1  per  cent  –  with  a  simplified  standardised  approach  to  be 
evolved  for  other  banks.  Material  limits  on  cross-holdings  of  capital  and  eschewing  of  direct 
responsibility  on  external  credit  rating  agencies  in  the  assessment  of  bank  assets  have  also  been 
proposed by the Reserve Bank. It has also expressed its preference for external credit rating agencies 
that publicly disclose risk scores, rating processes and methodologies.  
The new accord, when implemented, is likely to have significant implications for the banking system as 
a whole. Besides requiring increased capital, it attaches urgency to the development of efficient and 
comprehensive internal systems for assessment and management of risks, setting up and adhering to 
adequate  internal  exposure  limits  and  improving  internal  control  generally.  The  guidelines  for  risk 
management  and  asset  liability  management  provided  by  the  Reserve  Bank  serve  as  a  useful 
foundation  for  building  more  sophisticated  control  systems.  The  feedback  received  from  few  banks 
indicates  the  need  for  substantial  upgradation  of  existing  management  information  systems,  risk 
management  practices  and  technical  skills.  Capital  allocation  is  also  expected  to  be  more  risk 
sensitive and, therefore, banks and financial institutions will have to plan in advance so that there are 
no  disruptions  in  the  capital  structure.  Further  sophistication  in  risk  management  and  control 
mechanisms  will  have  to  evolve  as  experience  with  preferential  risk-weighting  and  sensitivity  to 
external ratings is accumulated.  
A key requirement when the new Accord, after further modification, becomes operational is that of high 
quality human resources to cope with and adapt to the new environment. Enhancing technical skills 
and abilities to handle new technologies and new risks, exploiting information flows to price them in, 
and developing foresight in anticipating changing risk-return relationships will become essential.  
4 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 Market Discipline 
Processes  of  transparency  and  market  disclosure  of  critical  information  describing  the  risk  profile, 
capital  structure  and  capital  adequacy  are  assuming  increasing  importance  in  the  emerging 
environment. Besides making banks more accountable and responsive to  better-informed investors, 
these processes enable banks to strike the right balance between risks and rewards and to improve 
the access to markets. Improvements in market discipline also call for greater coordination between 
banks and regulators.  
India  has  been  a  participant  in  the  international  initiatives  to  ensure  improved  processes  of  market 
discipline that are being worked out in several fora, such as, the multilateral organisations, the BIS, the 
Financial Stability Forum, and the Core Principles Liaison Group. Concurrent efforts are underway to 
refine  and  upgrade  financial  information  monitoring  and  flow,  data  dissemination  and  data 
warehousing. Banks are currently required to disclose in their balance sheets information on maturity 
profiles of assets and liabilities, lending to sensitive sectors, movements in NPAs, besides providing 
information on capital, provisions, shareholdings of the government, value of investments in India and 
abroad, and other operating and profitability indicators. Financial institutions are also required to meet 
these disclosure  norms. Banks also have to disclose their total investments made in equity shares, 
units of mutual funds, bonds and debentures, and aggregate advances against shares in their notes to 
balance sheets.  
From  this  year  onwards,  notes  to  banks’  balance  sheets  will  disclose  the  movement  of  provisions 
against  NPAs  as  well  as  those  held  towards  depreciation  on  investments.  Guidelines  relating  to 
non-SLR investments through the private placement route mandate the disclosure of information on 
issuer composition and non-performing investments in a similar manner. Efforts have been made to 
identify and monitor early warning indicators of financial crises. The overall approach is to combine the 
use  of  micro-prudential  indicators  with  macro-economic  indicators  in  order  to  develop  a  set  of 
aggregate  macro-prudential  indicators.  This  brings  about  a  mix  between  bottom-up  and  top-down 
assessment.  As  the  methodology  gets  refined  and  the  indicators  are  stress-tested  for  predictive 
power, financial stability surveillance  will be significantly  improved. This  process will  involve greater 
transparency and objectivity in the disclosure practices of banks. 
Efforts have also been made to set up a Credit Information Bureau to collect and share information on 
borrowers and improve the credit appraisal of banks and financial institutions within the ambit of the 
existing legislation. The Bureau has been incorporated by the State Bank of India in collaboration with 
Housing Development Finance Corporation (HDFC) and foreign technology partners. Collection and 
sharing  of  some  items  of  information  have  already  been  initiated.  Efforts  are  also  going  into  the 
collection and sharing of information on private placement of debt under the Bureau so that there is 
greater  transparency  in  such  trades.  The  possibility  of  collecting  and  disseminating  information  on 
suit-filed accounts by the Bureau (in place of the Reserve Bank) is being explored by a Working Group 
constituted for this purpose with representation from across the financial system. The Group will also 
examine  the  prospects  of  on-line  supply  of  information  and  the  processing  of  queries.  A  draft 
legislation  covering  various  aspects  of  information  sharing,  including  issues  relating  to  rights, 
responsibilities, and privacy has been prepared, which would considerably strengthen the functioning 
of the Bureau when it is enacted.  
Benchmarking the Indian Banking System by International Standards 
The impetus given to the strengthening of domestic financial systems and the international financial 
architecture by the Asian crisis has gathered momentum in recent years. An important development in 
this regard has been the move to set up universally acceptable standards and codes for benchmarking 
domestic  financial  systems.  Moreover,  multilateral  assessments  of  country  performance  are 
increasingly  focusing  on  observance  of  standards.  The  IMF’s  Article  IV  consultations,  its  Financial 
Sector Stability Assessment and the Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes of the IMF and 
the  World  Bank  are  indicative  of  the  fact  that  a  country’s  adherence  to  benchmark  standards  and 
codes is being considered integral to the preservation of international monetary and financial stability. 
While the process has begun with the predominant involvement of governments and regulators, the 
search for standards and codes is progressively encompassing the private sector with consideration of 
issues relating to market discipline, corporate governance, insolvency procedures and credit rights.  
It is important to recognise that new standards and codes are not being regarded as final goals but as 
instruments or enabling conditions for enhancing efficiency in financial intermediation while ensuring 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 5
 financial  stability.  There  are  three  levels  at  which  action  is  necessary,  viz.,  legal,  policy  and 
procedures, and market practices by participants. In several areas, fundamental changes in the legal 
and  institutional  infrastructure  are  pre-requisites.  Since  these  changes  can  impinge  upon  the 
socio-cultural  as  well  as  politico-economic  ethos,  appropriate  adoption  and  some  prioritisation  in 
implementation are unavoidable.  
We have made some noteworthy progress in generating a constructive debate on the applicability of 
international standards and codes to the Indian financial system. Participative consultation has been 
supported by internal self-assessments as well as external assessment. In several areas, the issues 
are of a technical nature. Accordingly, the Standing Committee on International Standards and Codes, 
set up in December 1999, constituted ten Advisory Groups comprising eminent experts, generally non-
official, to bring objectivity and experience into studying the applicability of relevant international codes 
and standards to each area of competence.  
The Advisory Groups have submitted their reports. They have set out a roadmap for implementation of 
appropriate  standard  and  codes  in  the  light  of  existing  levels  of  compliance,  the  cross-country 
experience,  and  the  existing  legal  and  institutional  infrastructure.  The  Advisory  Group  on  Banking 
Supervision has assessed the Indian banking system vis-à-vis the principles of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision.  It  has  found  the  level  of  compliance  to  be  generally  of  a  high  order.  The 
Advisory Group on Bankruptcy Laws has, inter alia, recommended a comprehensive bankruptcy code 
incorporating various aspects including cross-border insolvency and the repeal of the Sick Industrial 
Companies Act. The Advisory Group on Corporate Governance has made recommendations relating 
to rules and responsibilities of boards and has advised amendments to the Companies Act.  
The  Advisory  Group  on  Data  Dissemination  has  found  that  India’s  data  dissemination  compares 
favourably with many other countries and has proposed the compilation of forward-looking indicators. 
The Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency is of the view that current fiscal practices meet the IMF’s 
Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency. It has recommended amplifying the scope of fiscal 
responsibility  legislation  in  order  to  include  the  essential  elements  of  a  budget  law.  The  Advisory 
Group on Insurance regulation has recommended flexible minimum capital requirements depending 
on the class of business. With regard to actuarial and solvency issues, the Group has found the Indian 
standards to be at par with international norms. The Advisory Group on International Accounting and 
Auditing Standards has set out an agenda for the future for convergence in auditing and accounting 
practices. It has recommended a single standard setting authority  and the need for convergence of 
corporate and tax laws.  
The Advisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies has recommended inflation 
as the single mandated objective for the central bank and necessary autonomy to fulfill the mandate. It 
has also made recommendations on the operating procedures of monetary policy. The Advisory Group 
on  Payments  and  Settlement  has  recommended  legal  reforms  to  empower  the  Reserve  Bank  to 
supervise the payment and settlement system, application of the Lamfalussy standards to deferred net 
settlement (DNS) and introduction of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS). It has also recommended 
the  setting  up  of  the  Clearing  Corporation  and  a  separate  guarantee  fund  for  foreign  exchange 
clearing.  The  Advisory  Group  on  Securities  Market  Regulation  has  compared  India  against  the 
International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) principles and emphasised the need to 
strengthen inter-regulator cooperation. 
Thus, in India, we have made considerable progress in the identification of international standards and 
codes in relevant areas, expert assessment regarding their applicability, including comparator country 
evaluation  and  building  up  possible  course  of  action  for  the future.  The  next  step  is  to  sensitise  all 
concerned – policy makers, regulators and market participants – to the issues involved and to seek the 
widest possible debate on issues as well as expert assessments with a view to generating a broad 
consensus on implementation of a universally recognised set of codes and standards.  
Universal Banking 
Since the early 1990s, banking systems worldwide have been going through a rapid transformation. 
Mergers, amalgamations and acquisitions have been undertaken on a large scale in order to gain size 
and  to  focus  more  sharply  on  competitive  strengths.  This  consolidation  has  produced  financial 
conglomerates  that  are  expected  to  maximise  economies  of  scale  and  scope  by  ‘bundling’  the 
production of financial services. The general trend has been towards downstream universal banking 
where  banks  have  undertaken  traditionally  non-banking  activities  such  as  investment  banking, 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 insurance, mortgage  financing,  securitisation,  and  particularly,  insurance.  Upstream  linkages,  where 
non-banks  undertake  banking  business,  are  also  on  the  increase.  The  global  experience  can  be 
segregated into broadly three models. There is the Swedish or Hong Kong type model in which the 
banking corporate  engages in in-house activities associated  with  banking. In Germany and the  UK, 
certain types of activities are required to be carried out by separate subsidiaries. In the US type model, 
there is a holding company structure and separately capitalised subsidiaries.  
In India, the first impulses for a more diversified financial intermediation were witnessed in the 1980s 
and  1990s  when  banks  were  allowed  to  undertake  leasing,  investment  banking,  mutual  funds, 
factoring, hire-purchase activities through separate subsidiaries. By the mid-1990s, all restrictions on 
project financing were removed and banks were allowed to undertake several activities in-house. In 
the recent period, the focus is on Development Financial Institutions (DFIs), which have been allowed 
to set up banking subsidiaries and to enter the insurance business along with banks. DFIs were also 
allowed to undertake working capital financing and to raise short-term funds within limits. It was the 
Narasimham Committee II Report (1998) which suggested that the DFIs should convert themselves 
into banks or non-bank financial companies, and this conversion was endorsed by the Khan Working 
Group (1998). The Reserve Bank’s Discussion Paper (1999) and the feedback thereon indicated the 
desirability  of  universal  banking  from  the  point  of  view  of  efficiency  of  resource  use,  but  it  also 
emphasised  the  need  to  take  into  account  factors  such  as  the  status  of  reforms,  the  state  of 
preparedness of the institutions, and a viable transition path while moving in the desired direction.  
Accordingly, the mid-term review of monetary and credit policy, October 1999 and the annual policy 
statements of April 2000 and April 2001 enunciated the broad approach to universal banking and the 
Reserve Bank’s circular of April 2001 set out the operational and regulatory aspects of conversion of 
DFIs into universal banks. The need to proceed with planning and foresight is necessary for several 
reasons.  The  move  towards  universal  banking  would  not  provide  a  panacea  for  the  endemic 
weaknesses of a DFI or its liquidity and solvency problems and/or operational difficulties arising from 
undercapitalisation,  non-performing  assets,  and  asset  liability  mismatches,  etc.  The  overriding 
consideration should be the objectives and strategic interests of the financial institution concerned in 
the context of meeting the varied needs of customers, subject to normal prudential norms applicable to 
banks. From the point of view of the regulatory framework, the movement towards universal banking 
should  entrench  stability  of  the  financial  system,  preserve  the  safety  of  public  deposits,  improve 
efficiency in financial intermediation, ensure healthy competition, and impart transparent and equitable 
regulation.  
to 
the  efficiency  of 
that  proactive  and  effective  supervision  contributes 
Issues in Supervision and Regulation 
Progressive strengthening, deepening and refinement of the regulatory and supervisory system for the 
financial  sector  have  been  important  elements  of  financial  sector  reforms.  In  the  long  run,  it  is  the 
supervision and regulation function that is critical in safeguarding financial stability. There is also some 
evidence 
financial 
intermediation.  Financial  sector  supervision  is  expected  to  become  increasingly  risk-based  and 
concerned  with  validating  systems  rather  than  setting  them.  This  will  entail  procedures  for  sound 
internal  evaluation  of risk for banks. As mentioned  earlier,  bank managements will have to  develop 
internal capital  assessment processes in accordance with their risk profile and  control environment. 
These internal processes would then be subjected to review and supervisory intervention if necessary. 
The  emphasis  will  be  on  evaluating  the  quality  of  risk  management  and  the  adequacy  of  risk 
containment. In such an environment, credibility assigned by markets to risk disclosures will hold only 
if  they  are  validated  by  supervisors.  Thus  effective  and  appropriate  supervision  is  critical  for  the 
effectiveness of capital requirements and market discipline. 
In  certain  areas,  as  for  instance,  in  the  urban  cooperative  banking  segment,  the  regulatory 
requirements leave considerable scope for regulatory arbitrage and even circumvention. The problem 
is rendered more complex by the existence of regulatory overlap between the Central Government, 
the  State  Governments  and  the  Reserve  Bank.  Regulatory  overlap  has  impeded  the  speed  of 
regulatory response to emerging problems. The need for removing multiple regulatory jurisdiction over 
the cooperative banking sector has been reiterated on several occasions. In this regard, the Reserve 
Bank has proposed the setting up of an apex supervisory body for urban cooperative banks under the 
control of a high-level supervisory board consisting of representatives of the Central governments, the 
State governments, the Reserve Bank and experts. The apex body is expected to ensure compliance 
with prudential requirements and also supervise on-site inspections and off-site surveillance.  
BIS Review 3/2002 
 7
 Recent developments in certain segments of the financial sector have also brought to the fore issues 
relating  to  corporate  governance  in  banks.  As  part  of  on-going  reforms,  boards  have  been  given 
greater autonomy to prescribe internal control guidelines, risk management and procedures for market 
discipline and accountability. It is extremely important that greater vigilance over adherence to these 
norms  goes  hand-in-hand  with  greater  autonomy.  Recent  evidence  of  transgression  of  prudential 
guidelines by a few banks has raised the issue of the audit and supervisory functions of boards. As we 
move towards a more deregulated financial regime, these functions have to be transferred from either 
the  Government  or  the  Reserve  Bank  to  bank  boards.  This  imposes  a  greater  responsibility  and 
accountability on the bank management. It is in this context that a consultative group of directors of 
select banks and other experts has been set up to recommend measures to strengthen the internal 
supervisory  role  of  boards.  The  objective  is  to  obtain  a  feedback  on  how  boards  function  vis-à-vis 
compliance  with  prudential  norms,  transparency  and  disclosure,  functioning  of  the  audit  committee, 
etc., and to devise effective mechanisms for ensuring management discipline.  
Several  other  initiatives  in  improving  the  supervisory  function  have  been  undertaken,  including  a 
prudential  supervisory  reporting  system  for  financial  institutions,  improvements  in  procedures  for 
financial inspection, sensitising the general public for better regulation of the activities of NBFCs and 
enactment of appropriate legislation to protect depositor interests in some States. Major legal reforms 
have been initiated in areas such as security laws, the Negotiable Instruments Act, bank frauds and 
the regulatory framework of banking. The Reserve Bank has also accepted the principle of transfer of 
ownership to the Government in respect of some financial institutions in view of the conflict of interest 
that may arise in the conduct of its supervisory function. It is expected that these initiatives will pave 
the way for an efficient, and risk-based supervisory environment in India.  
the  computerisation  of  Government  Accounts  and  Currency  Chest 
Technology in Banking 
Nobel Laureate Robert Solow had once remarked that computers are seen everywhere excepting in 
productivity  statistics.  More  recent  developments  have  shown  how  far  this  state  of  affairs  has 
changed.  Innovation  in  technology  and  worldwide  revolution  in  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) have emerged as dynamic sources of productivity growth. The relationship between 
IT  and  banking  is  fundamentally  symbiotic.  In  the  banking  sector,  IT  can  reduce  costs,  increase 
volumes,  and  facilitate  customised  products;  similarly,  IT  requires  banking  and  financial  services  to 
facilitate its growth. As far as the banking system is concerned, the payment system is perhaps the 
most important mechanism through which such interactive dynamics gets manifested.  
Recognising the importance of payments and settlement systems in the economy, we have embarked 
on  technology  based  solutions  for  the  improvement  of  the  payment  and  settlement  system 
infrastructure,  coupled  with  the  introduction  of  new  payment  products  such  as  the  computerised 
settlement of clearing transactions, use of Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR) technology for 
cheque clearing  which currently accounts for 65 per  cent of the  value of cheques processed in the 
country, 
transactions, 
operationalisation of Delivery versus Payment (DvP) for Government securities transactions. Two-way 
inter-city cheque collection and imaging have been operationalised at the four metros. The coverage 
of  Electronic  Clearing  Service  (Debit  and  Credit)  has  been  significantly  expanded  to  encourage 
non-paper  based  funds  movement  and  develop  the  provision  of  a  centralised  facility  for  effecting 
payments.  The  scheme  for  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  operated  by  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been 
significantly  augmented  and  is  now  available  across  thirteen  major  cities.  The  scheme,  which  was 
originally  intended  for  small  value  transactions,  is  processing  high  value  (up  to  Rs.2  crore)  from 
October 1, 2001. The Centralised Funds Management System (CFMS), which would enable banks to 
obtain consolidated account-wise and centre-wise positions of their balances with all 17 offices of the 
Deposits  Accounts  Departments  of  the  Reserve  Bank  has  begun  to  be  implemented  in  a  phased 
manner from November 2001.  
A  holistic  approach  has  been  adopted  towards  designing  and  development  of  a  modern,  robust, 
efficient,  secure  and  integrated  payment  and  settlement  system  taking  into  account  certain  aspects 
relating to potential risks, legal framework and the impact on the operational framework of monetary 
policy. The approach to the modernisation of the payment and settlement system in India has been 
three-pronged:  (a)  consolidation,  (b)  development,  and  (c)  integration.  The  consolidation  of  the 
existing payment systems revolves around strengthening Computerised Cheque clearing, expanding 
the reach of Electronic Clearing Services and Electronic Funds Transfer by providing for systems with 
the latest levels of technology. The critical elements in the developmental strategy are the opening of 
8 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 new  clearing  houses,  interconnection  of  clearing  houses  through  the  INFINET;  optimising  the 
deployment of resources by banks through Real Time Gross Settlement System, Centralised Funds 
Management  System  (CFMS);  Negotiated  Dealing  System  (NDS)  and  the  Structured  Financial 
Messaging Solution (SFMS). While integration of the various payment products with the systems of 
individual  banks  is  the  thrust  area,  it  requires  a  high  degree  of  standardisation  within  a  bank  and 
seamless interfaces across banks.  
The setting up of the apex-level National Payments Council in May 1999 and the operationalisation of 
the  INFINET  by  the  Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in  Banking  Technology  (IDRBT), 
Hyderabad  have  been  some  important  developments  in  the  direction  of  providing  a  communication 
network for the exclusive use of banks and financial institutions. Membership in the INFINET has been 
opened up to all banks in addition to those in the public sector. At the base of all inter-bank message 
transfers using the INFINET is the Structured Financial Messaging System (SFMS). It would serve as 
a secure communication carrier with templates for intra- and inter-bank messages in fixed message 
formats that will facilitate ‘straight through processing’. All inter-bank transactions would be stored and 
switched at the central hub at Hyderabad while intra-bank messages will be switched and stored by 
the bank gateway. Security features of the SFMS would match international standards.  
In order to maximise the benefits of such efforts, banks have to take pro-active measures to: 
• 
further strengthen their infrastructure in respect of standardisation, high levels of security and 
communication and networking;  
achieve inter-branch connectivity early; 
popularise the usage of the scheme of electronic funds transfer (EFT); and  
institute  arrangements  for  an  RTGS  environment  online  with  a  view  to  integrating  into  a 
secure and consolidated payment system.  
 Information  technology  has  immense  untapped  potential  in  banking.  Strengthening  of  information 
technology in banks could improve the effectiveness of asset-liability management in banks. Building 
up of a related data-base on a real time basis would enhance the forecasting of liquidity greatly even 
at the branch level. This could contribute to enhancing the risk management capabilities of banks. 
Human Resource Development in Banking 
A  recurring  theme  in  the  annual  BECON  Conference  has  been  the  need  to  focus  on  developing 
human resources to cope with the rapidly changing scenario. The core function of HRD in the banking 
industry is to facilitate performance improvement, measured not only in terms of financial indicators of 
operational efficiency but also in terms of the quality of financial services provided. Factors such as 
skills, attitudes and knowledge of personnel play a critical role in determining the competitiveness of 
the financial sector. The quality of human resources indicates the ability of banks to deliver value to 
customers. Capital and technology are replicable, but not human capital which needs to be viewed as 
a valuable resource for the achievement of competitive advantage. The primary emphasis needs to be 
on  integrating  human  resource  management  (HRM)  strategies  with  the  business  strategy.  HRM 
strategies  include  managing  change,  creating  commitment,  achieving  flexibility  and  improving 
teamwork. These processes underlie the complementary processes that represent the overt aspects 
of  HRM,  such  as  recruitment,  placement,  performance  management,  reward  management,  and 
employee  relations.  A  forward  looking  approach  would  involve  moving  towards  self-assessment  of 
competency and developmental needs as a part of a continuous learning cycle.  
The  Indian  banking  industry  has  been  an  important  driving  force  behind  the  nation’s  economic 
development.  The  emerging  environment  poses  both  opportunities  and  threats,  in  particular,  to  the 
public  sector  banks.  How  well  these  are  met  will  mainly  depend  on  the  extent  to  which  the  banks 
leverage  their  primary  assets  i.e.,  human  resources  in  the  context  of  the  changing  economic  and 
business  environment.  It  is  obvious  that  the  public  sector  banks’  hierarchical  structure,  which  gives 
preference to seniority over performance, is not the best environment for attracting the best talent from 
among  the  young  in  a  competitive  environment.  A  radical  transformation  of  the  existing  personnel 
structure in public sector banks is unlikely to be practical, at least in the foreseeable future. However, 
certain improvements can be made in the recruitment practices as well as in on-the-job training and 
redeployment of those who are already employed. There are several institutions in the country which 
cater exclusively to the needs of human resource development in the banking industry. It is worthwhile 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 9
 to  consider  broad-basing  the  courses  conducted  in  these  institutions  among  other  higher-level 
educational institutions so that specialisation in the area of banking and financial services becomes an 
option in higher education curriculums. In the area of information technology, Indian professionals are 
world  leaders  and  building  synergies  between  the  IT  and  banking  industries  will  sharpen  the 
competitive edge of our banks. 
The  changing  environment,  the  forces  of  globalisation  and  liberalisation  and  the  advances  in 
information and communication technology have major HR implications for the Reserve Bank as well. 
Financial products are becoming increasingly complex and diverse, while the markets in which they 
trade  get  progressively  deregulated.  The  need  to  adopt  global  best  practices  in  financial  sector 
regulation and supervision, and  adapt them to the domestic environment, places a premium on the 
skills  and  expertise  of  the  Bank’s  human  resources.  Again,  the  functioning  and  policies  of  public 
institutions, such as the Reserve Bank, are increasingly subject to public discussion and debate. This 
calls for greater transparency, more effective communication, and a high degree of professionalism in 
the  Bank’s  staff.  This  warrants  continuous  upgradation  of  human  resource  management  strategies 
with a  view to enhancing the  level of knowledge, sharpening skills and  also to instill the  necessary 
attitudes and work culture. The Reserve Bank is now devoting considerable attention to these areas at 
the entry level as well as at different levels of career development of its staff. 
The Role of Economists 
In  my  inaugural  address  to  BECON,  2000  I  had  discussed  the  crucial  role  of  bank  economists  in 
transforming  the  banking  system  in  India.  Economists  have  to  be  more  ‘mainstreamed’  within  the 
operational structure of commercial banks. Apart from the traditional functioning of macro-scanning, 
the inter-linkages between treasuries, dealing rooms and trading rooms of banks need to be viewed 
not only with the day-to-day needs of operational necessity, but also with analytical content and policy 
foresight. 
Today,  operational  aspects  of  the  functioning  of  banks  are  attracting  intensive  research  by 
professional economists. In particular, measuring and modeling different kinds of risks faced by banks, 
the  behaviour  of  risk-return  relationships  associated  with  different  portfolio  mixes  and  the  impact  of 
fluctuations  in  financial  markets  on  the  financial  performance  of  banks  are  areas  which  lend 
themselves to analytical and empirical appraisal  by  economists and  econometricians. They,  in turn, 
are  discovering  the  degrees  of  freedom  and  room  for  analytical  maneuver  in  high  frequency 
information  generated  by  the  day-to-day  functioning  of  banks.  It  is  vital  that  we  develop  an 
environment where these synergies are nurtured so as to serve the longer-term strategic interests of 
banks.  Even  in  real  time  trading  and  portfolio  decisions,  the  fundamental  analysis  of  economists 
provides an independent assessment of market behaviour, reinforcing technical analysis. 
A  serious  limitation  of  the  applicability  of  standard  economic  analysis  to  banking  relates  to  the 
inadequacies of the data-base. Absence of long time series data storage in the banking industry often 
poses serious problems to the quest for the formal analytical relationships between variables. Even if 
such data exist, the presence of structural breaks may blur meaningful analysis based on traditional 
formulation. Economists need to think innovatively to overcome this problem. Use of panel regression, 
non-parametric  methods  and  multivariate  analyses  could  go  a  long  way  in  understanding  and 
validating behaviourial relationships in banking.  
Another  important  challenge  for  the  economics  profession  is  to  develop  proper  models  for 
measurement of various risks in Indian conditions. This is a necessity  in  view  of the move towards 
risk-based  supervision.  Quantification  of  operational  risks  and  calibration  of  Value  at  Risk  (VaR) 
models pose major computational challenge to bankers and policy makers alike, particularly in India. A 
major difficulty lies in identifying the right statistical model that determines the underlying distribution 
suited to the particular category of operational loss, and building the necessary database for deriving 
operationally meaningful conclusions.  
In my inaugural address last year, I had also emphasised the need for bank economists to come out of 
their narrow specialisation and address operational issues relating to banking and finance. In order to 
make  a  meaningful  contribution  to  banking,  economists  must  have  the  experience  of  working  in 
operational areas of banks. For this purpose, economists need to ‘soil their hands’ in dealing rooms, 
treasuries and investment units, credit authorisation and loan recovery, strategic management groups 
and management information systems of the banks to understand the ground realities. There are also 
‘economies’ to be gained from field-level credit appraisal, asset recovery, debt restructuring, market 
10 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 and consumer behaviour in which banks are involved. Thus, the profession needs to amalgamate the 
objectivity  and  theoretical  soundness  of  economics  with  the  functional  dimensions  of  banking  and 
finance. It is this combination of specialist training with operational experience, which is going to make 
the economics profession relevant to the changing face of banking in India.  
Conclusion 
How close are we to the vision of a sound and well-functioning banking system that I outlined a year 
ago? It is fair to say that despite a turbulent year and many challenges, we have made some progress 
towards  this  goal.  There  has  been  progressive  intensification  of  financial  sector  reforms,  and  the 
financial  sector  as  a  whole  is  more  sensitised  than  before  to  the  need  for  internal  strength  and 
effective management as well as to the overall concerns for financial stability.  At the same time, in 
view of greater disclosure and tougher prudential norms, the weaknesses in our financial system are 
more apparent than before. 
There  is  greater  awareness  now  of  the  need  to  prepare  the  banking  system  for  the  technical  and 
capital  requirements  of  the  emerging  prudential  regime  and  a  greater  focus  on  core  strengths  and 
niche  strategies.  We  have  also  made  some  progress  in  assessing  our  financial  system  against 
international  best  practices  and  in  benchmarking  the  future  directions  of  progress.  Several 
contemplated changes in the surrounding legal and institutional environment have been proposed for 
legislation.  
Nevertheless, several sources of vulnerability persist. The NPA levels remain too large by international 
standards  and  concerns  relating  to  management  and  supervision  within  the  ambit  of  corporate 
governance are being tested during the period of downturn of economic activity. There is also a sense 
that we have a lot to acquire and adapt in terms of the technical expertise necessary to measure and 
manage risks better. The structure of the financial system is changing and supervisory and regulatory 
regimes  are  experiencing  the  strains  of  accommodating  these  changes.  Certain  weak  links  in  the 
decentralised  banking  and  non-bank  financial  sectors  have  also  come  to  notice.  In  a  fundamental 
sense,  regulators  and  supervisors  are  under  the  greatest  pressures  of  change  and  bear  the  larger 
responsibility for the future. For both the regulators and the regulated, eternal vigilance is the price of 
growth with financial stability.  
We  should  strive  to  move  towards  realising  our  vision  of  an  efficient  and  sound  banking  system  of 
international  standards  with  redoubled  vigour.  Our  greatest  asset  in  this  endeavour  is  the  fund  of 
technical and scientific human capital formation available in the country. The themes which are being 
covered  in  this  Conference  under  structural,  operational  and  governance  issues  should  help  in 
defining  the  road  map  for  the  future.  Once  again,  I  commend  the  choice  of  the  theme  for  BECON 
2001, and wish you success in your deliberations.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 11
