 Yutaka Yamaguchi: Central banking in uncharted territory 
Remarks  by  Mr  Yutaka  Yamaguchi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Japan, Tokyo, 3 July 2002. 
 Introduction 
1. 
It is my great honor and pleasure to address the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Japan today. 
Recalling last year’s experience at this Club, my colleague, Deputy Governor Fujiwara, warned me to 
be prepared for a high risk of receiving very tough questions today. I think there are two cases when a 
cautious central banker willingly takes such a risk. The first is when the economy is doing so well and 
the  central  banker  wants  to  display  a  good  job.  The  other  is  when  he/she  really  wants  to  ensure 
listeners better understand the state of the economy. 
Unfortunately, my decision to be here today is the latter case. Japan’s economy now faces a broad 
range  of  difficulties.  Various  comments  are  made  on  Japan’s  economy  and  monetary  policy  by 
economists both in Japan and abroad. Listening to some of them, I sometimes feel a perception gap 
which is difficult to remedy. 
Using the limited time given today, I would like to discuss the challenges facing Japan’s economy and 
the role of monetary policy. I would also like to touch upon the perception gap in the context of the 
transparency of monetary policy. 
Economic and financial developments in Japan 
2. 
Just like other economies, from the end of 2000, Japan’s economy experienced a sharp downturn in 
exports and production against the background of a slowdown in the US economy and the collapse of 
the global IT boom. Downward pressure on the economy initially hit the corporate sector in the form of 
deterioration  in  profits  and  a  fall  in  capital  expenditures.  Since  summer  last  year,  the  adjustment 
process  has  gradually  spread  to  the  household  sector  through  weakening  employment  and  wages. 
Against this background, the underlying trend of private consumption remains weak. 
In recent months, we have at last seen some positive signs. Exports have clearly started to increase 
and production has been recovering. Major factors inducing such positive changes are again external 
developments  including  the  US  economic  recovery  and  the  progress  of  stock  adjustment  in  the 
IT-related industries. 
The issue here is whether such positive moves could lead to a sustainable economic recovery. The 
Bank of Japan publishes a half-yearly report entitled “Outlook and Risk Assessment of the Economy 
and  Prices”,  and  the  most  recent  April  issue  gives  the  outlook  for  this  fiscal  year.  As  a  standard 
scenario  for  Japan’  economy  for  the  rest  of  this  fiscal  year,  the  report  assumes  a  recovery  led  by 
exports and production, an outlook I still fully endorse. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  difficult  to  assume  that  the  coming  recovery  will  soon  become  a  domestic-
demand-led spontaneous one. For one, it is hard to presume that the upward momentum supported by 
exports and production will fast spread to non-manufacturing and small business sectors. Given the 
relatively  high  labor’s  income  share,  restructuring  efforts  by  firms  to  cut  labor  costs  are  likely  to 
continue. Therefore, the expected recovery in the corporate sector may not be fully transmitted into an 
improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  and,  in  that  case,  downward  pressure  on 
households may persist for a while. 
Turning to recent price developments, the Outlook report assumes that prices will continue to decline, 
albeit somewhat less compared to last fiscal year, as downward pressure will continue both from the 
demand and supply sides. The Bank of Japan saw a need to prevent such a price decline and has 
adopted strong monetary easing measures. Reviewing the debate over deflation since last  year, an 
important  question  is  how  to  interpret  the  relationship  between  prices  and  economic  activity.  To  be 
more specific, it is crucial whether a price decline associated with economic slowdown would further 
accelerate economic deterioration. In the past few years, this question has been actively discussed in 
the  context  of  the  possibility  of  a  deflationary  spiral  where  a  vicious  circle  of  price  declines  and 
BIS Review 41/2002 
 1
 economic deterioration emerges. Reviewing actual economic data, however,  we have thankfully  not 
seen the economic situation assumed by the deflationary spiral camp. 
It seems to me that price development can be better understood more as a result of economic activity 
rather  than  vice  versa.  According  to  research  by  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank,  a  loose  correlation 
between changes in CPI and the output gap is observed. But the deviation of actual CPI inflation from 
estimates  based  on  a  calculated  output  gap  could  be  as  large  as  a  full  percentage  point  in  each 
direction,  which  requires  us  to  have  an  approximate  two-percentage-point  allowance  in  total.  This 
reflects  various  factors  including  the  effects  of  structural  changes  on  the  supply  side  and  simple 
technical drifts associated with assembling the index. Our experience in 1999 and 2000 showed that, 
under certain conditions, the economy could recover while a mild decline in the CPI continued. It is my 
impression that declining asset prices, especially in the property market, has had a much more severe 
impact on economic activity rather than the moderate deflation of goods and services. 
There exist various uncertainties and risks to the standard scenario. As the Outlook report discussed 
such risks in detail, here I would just like to touch upon the following two issues. 
First is the global economic developments, especially in the US, which is expected to play a key role 
for Japan’s recovery in the near future. (Needless to say, from the US point of view, Japan’s economy 
might  be  regarded  a  risk  factor.  This  is  a  clear  evidence  that  we  are  living  in  a  world  of 
interdependence). Looking at the US developments in recent months, a large gap has been witnessed 
between macroeconomic data showing signs of recovery and the soft stock market. 
If we look at global financial and capital markets, the effective exchange rate of the US dollar reached 
its peak in January and  has been  depreciating significantly since then.  Such foreign exchange rate 
movements reflect recent changes in global capital flows such as a decline in direct investment into 
the United States in favor of the euro zone. These developments warrant careful monitoring as they 
could have a global impact. 
Second is the vulnerability of Japan’s economy to exogenous shocks and stresses. Since the 1990s, 
the  economy  experienced  sharp  downturns  triggered,  for  example,  by  concern  over  the  financial 
system,  withdrawal  of  fiscal  support,  and  the  global  economic  slowdown.  We  should  always  be 
prepared  for  such  exogenous  shocks  but,  given  the  present  condition  of  the  financial  system,  we 
should be especially aware that Japan’s economy is currently vulnerable to major shocks. 
Monetary policy by the Bank of Japan 
3. 
Against the economic and financial background that I have just described, the Bank took a series of 
easing measures in February and March last year, stepping into an unprecedented policy area in the 
history of central banking. 
Among the several pillars of this new monetary easing framework, the most important is the change in 
the target of money market operations. The target was changed from the overnight call money rate, 
that is the interest rate for the shortest term, to the outstanding balance of current accounts held at the 
Bank of Japan which represents the quantity of liquidity. This change was introduced to explore the 
possibility  of  further  monetary  easing  even  after  short-term  interest  rates,  the  starting  point  of  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy,  had  effectively  fallen  to  zero.  This  framework  is  often 
called ‘quantitative easing.’ 
Let me share with you some facts and figures to show why these are unprecedented monetary easing 
measures in the history of central banking. 
First  of  all,  the  call  money  rate  declined  to  very  close  to  zero  at  0.001%.  The  rate  on  one-year 
government bills declined below 0.01% and, since summer last year, the long-term government bond 
yield has stayed at a historically low level of 1.3-1.5%. 
Turning to ‘quantity,’ the current account balance at the Bank of Japan has increased to 15 trillion yen. 
You may not fully appreciate how large this figure is. The amount of reserves legally required to be 
held  is  only  4  trillion  yen.  Thus,  financial  institutions  are  holding  11  trillion  yen  in  excess  liquidity 
without earning any interest. 
The  size  of  monetary  base,  that  is  the  sum  of  cash  in  circulation  and  the  outstanding  balance  of 
current  accounts  at  the  Bank  of  Japan,  has  posted  dramatic  double-digit  growth  on  a  year-on-year 
basis  to  reach  almost  17%  of  GDP.  This  is  the  highest  level  over  the  last  hundred  years  with  the 
exception of a period during World War II. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2002
 The  minutes  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  in  March  2001  describe  how  Policy  Board  members 
arrived at the decision to adopt a quantitative easing framework. I will summarize the steps leading to 
this decision. First, the members felt that the effects of such a framework were uncertain and might 
have  negative  side  effects.  Second,  therefore,  whether  the  Bank  should  adopt  such  a  framework 
depended  on  the  specific  economic  situation.  Third,  they  concluded  that,  although  it  had  not  been 
appropriate  to  adopt  such  measures  in  the  preceding  two  years  when  the  economy  had  been 
gradually recovering, the worsening situation in March 2001 required the Bank adopt strong measures. 
The Bank of Japan has pursued such strong monetary easing measures while concurrently examining 
their effects, in other words, on a ‘learning by doing’ basis. Through this process, we have learned a 
lot about the new measures but, at the same time, more questions have arisen. It is said that it took a 
long time for Man to learn the concept of ‘zero’. I am increasingly convinced that it will also require a 
long time for central bankers and economists to completely understand the meaning of a zero interest 
rate. 
Let me share some of my observations and current thinking on this subject. As most evident effects, 
we  can  point  out  that  the  abundant  and  flexible  provision  of  liquidity  under  the  quantitative  easing 
framework successfully maintained extremely easy monetary conditions, thereby preserving financial 
market stability. 
You may think such effects nothing special but recall the difficulties we have experienced since the 
end of 2000, namely a global economic retreat triggered by the bursting of the global IT bubble and 
the tragic events of September 11th. Additionally, we suffered from the adverse impact of structural 
adjustment  and  rising  concerns  over  the  financial  system.  It  is  thus  significant  that  our  flexible  and 
abundant provision of liquidity contained market participants’ concerns over liquidity financing. There is 
little  doubt  such  accommodative  monetary  conditions  played  the  key  role  in  avoiding  a  deflationary 
spiral. 
Apart  from  this  role  in  mitigating  negative  impacts,  what  other  positive  effects  have  our  monetary 
easing measures had on the economy? 
The effectiveness of additional liquidity provision after the short-term interest rate reached  zero has 
not been fully examined and will continue to be discussed by economists. A key here is whether such 
additional  liquidity  provision  will  lead  to  increased  investment  in  riskier  assets,  often  called  asset 
reallocation. 
There are two theoretical  hypotheses. One interprets the situation as a liquidity trap. Caught in this 
trap, without room for a further decline in short-term interest rates, any increase in liquidity provision by 
the  Bank  will  merely  result  in  higher  idle  balances  in  the  Bank’s  current  accounts.  In  other  words, 
additional liquidity will be fully absorbed by an increase in demand as financial institutions no longer 
hesitate to hold more excess liquidity because the cost of doing so is zero. In this case, a quantitative 
increase cannot give any stimulus to economic activity. 
The  other  interpretation  sees  an  increase  in  liquidity  provision  inviting  liquidity  saturation  and, 
consequently, somehow inducing investment in riskier assets. For example, increased investment in 
stocks  would  raise  their  prices  and  more  investment  in  foreign-currency  denominated  assets  would 
promote  the  depreciation  of  the  yen.  This  camp  argues  that  such  a  change  in  asset  prices  would 
stimulate economic activity. 
What do actual data tell about the effects of quantitative easing? It is always difficult to single out the 
effects  of  quantitative  easing  because  there  always  exist  various  other  factors;  There  also  exists  a 
certain time lag in effect of monetary policy. Although I am not able to make an assertive judgment, let 
me try to present some facts related to the question based on four yardsticks. 
The  first  yardstick  is  whether  the  growth  of  monetary  aggregates  such  as  money  supply  has 
increased. The annual growth rate of M2+CDs was at the 2% level in March last year and has been at 
the 3% level in recent months. This marginal change reflects a shift of funds into cash and demand 
deposits after the massive redemption of investment trusts following the failure of Enron. In fact, the 
growth  rate  of  broadly-defined  liquidity,  which  covers  a  wider  rage  of  financial  assets,  has  been 
declining. 
The relatively high growth of monetary aggregates with higher liquidity reflects a greater preference for 
liquidity as a result of lower interest rates. It also reflects an increase in demand deposits which will be 
guaranteed even after the partial removal of the blanket guarantee of bank deposits in April. Looking 
at bank lending which plays the key role in credit creation, the outstanding amount has been showing 
BIS Review 41/2002 
 3
 a negative growth rate against the background of weak credit demand. In the meantime, the lending 
attitude of commercial banks has rather tightened reflecting their desire to strengthen profitability. 
The second yardstick is whether asset prices have changed in the direction assumed by the process 
of quantitative easing. In actuality, stock prices in Japan have declined compared to the level in March 
last year. And, while the yen began to depreciate from last autumn, it has started to appreciate since 
April  this  year.  This  appears  to  indicate  that  the  yen  rate  has  been  dominated  by  changes  in  the 
market perception of business conditions in the US and Japan. 
The third yardstick is whether prices have stopped declining. For those who claim that deflation is a 
monetary phenomenon, a significant increase in the monetary base should induce a significant rise in 
prices.  As  I  have  already  explained,  however,  we  have  so  far  seen  little  change  in  the  gradual 
declining trend of prices. 
The  fourth  yardstick  is  whether  economic  activity  has  recovered.  Although  we  are  seeing  some 
positive signs in recent months after a sharp economic downturn, it appears to largely reflect an export 
increase against the backdrop of the global economic recovery. 
I have discussed the effect of quantitative easing, that is to increase the current account balance at 
the Bank under the zero interest rate constraint. It will take some time to judge which camp is right, 
namely  the  liquidity trap  or the liquidity saturation.  Even in retrospect, it might be difficult to draw a 
clear conclusion. 
In  any  event,  having  listened  to  my  explanation  of  quantitative  easing,  you  may  come  up  with  the 
following question: If quantitative easing proves to be ineffective, why don’t you try `unconventional` 
policies of purchasing some specific assets such as stocks and property in order to affect their prices? 
By adopting such options, a central bank would significantly intervene in microeconomic resource and 
capital allocation. I am also skeptical if the central bank operations could directly affect asset prices in 
this  world  of  free  capital  flows.  I  refer  those  of  you  who  have  an  interest  in  this  subject  to  other 
speeches of mine in which I discuss this kind of policy in more detail. Today I would like to add just 
one comment. 
And  that  is,  leaving  the  issue  of  the  effectiveness  of  such  policy  aside,  the  zero  interest  rate 
environment enables those who believe in such effects, the government or private firms, to carry out 
such purchases funding at zero interest rates. Thus, the real question is what parties would be best 
suited to issue short-term debt at zero interest rates and to purchase specific assets. 
What is needed to return to a sustainable growth path? 
4. 
Next, I would like to turn to the question of what is needed to return to a sustainable growth path. To 
be  honest,  this  is  a  difficult  question.  This  is  because,  in  order  to  answer  it,  we  have  to  consider 
another difficult question. Why has Japan’s economy remained stagnant for ten years? 
The most pressing  issue for Japan’s economy  is a shortage of demand relative to supply capacity. 
Therefore, what is crucial is to increase demand to fill the output gap and make the economy grow at 
its growth potential. 
As I have discussed, with the zero interest rate constraint, the effect of monetary policy may be limited 
in  creating  demand.  But,  once  demand  starts  to  increase  responding  to  exogenous  factors,  the 
present monetary policy has the potential to strongly support such moves. In this regard, another pillar 
of our framework is going to play an important role. And this is the policy commitment of continuing the 
current easing framework until the Consumer Price Index registers stably zero or an increase. 
Monetary policy is usually conducted in a forward-looking manner based on the expected inflation rate. 
This is because the effect of monetary policy materializes with a time lag. When an economic recovery 
is  seen,  long-term  interest  rates  automatically  rise  as  market  participants  come  to  expect  the 
tightening of monetary policy. 
In contrast, the policy commitment of the Bank promises that the present strong easing framework will 
continue until the currently negative CPI inflation rate registers stably above zero. This commitment, 
by  stabilizing  short-  to  medium-term  interest  rates  at  low  levels,  is  expected  to  support  economic 
recovery as it unfolds. 
On the other hand, it is known that actively using fiscal policy in the interest of stabilization could rather 
destabilize  economic  activity  or  distort  resource  allocation.  For  this  reason,  in  recent  years,  many 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2002
 countries let monetary policy play the key role in stabilizing economic activity. At the same time, it is 
also known that, theoretically, in the face of the zero interest rate constraint, there is a role for fiscal 
policy in increasing demand. 
The outstanding balance of government debt has reached nearly 140% in terms of GDP. But, if fiscal 
funds obtained from the issuance of new debt are used effectively to boost aggregate demand, the 
associated  growth  of  income  and  production  would  lower  the  level  of  government  debt  in  terms  of 
GDP. To the contrary, if used in an inefficient way, fiscal spending funded by debt would restrain long-
term growth prospects. It is difficult to judge a priori which scenario is more likely to happen, because, 
in the end, it all depends on which policy the public will support. 
I have so far discussed demand-side policy. What about structural reform, which has  been actively 
talked about? ‘Structural reform’ means different things to different people. A very general definition 
could  be  to  regard  it  as  supply-side  policy  to  improve  productivity.  Improving  productivity  is  always 
crucial because the long-term growth path depends on productivity growth. To that end, resources - 
such  as  labor,  land,  and  capital  -  have  to  be  reallocated  in  the  most  efficient  way  to  adapt  to  a 
changing economic environment. It is a quite orthodox policy indeed. The reallocation of resources is 
required at various levels such as inside a corporation, among corporations within the same industry, 
among various industries, and among various regions. In the end, the non-performing loan problem in 
our country is the reflection of such inefficient firms and industries. 
Efforts to improve productivity are important. However, if demand is not created to meet an increase in 
supply capacity, the output gap  will  widen further. In  addition, there  is a risk that, before seeing an 
increase in supply capacity, a deflationary impact may emerge as competition, inevitably induces firms 
to exit from the market. 
On  the  other  hand,  however,  if  policy  efforts  to  promote  future  growth  are  seen  to  be  promising,  it 
could  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  current  demand  partly  through  a  rise  in  stock  prices.  Taking  the 
example of business investment, it is the key for improving productivity and, at the same time, is in 
itself  a  demand.  Therefore,  it  is  quite  important  to  promote  competition  and  improve  the  domestic 
environment for such investment. Given that the ultimate goal of such investment is to fulfill private 
consumption  demand,  it  is  equally  necessary  to  remove  public  concern  over  the  future  so  that 
consumption can increase. 
These things are easy to say but difficult to implement. Fully recognizing that this is the conundrum 
facing Japan’s economy, I want to stress here that, when pursuing ‘structural reforms,’ it should clearly 
be recognized that such reforms could cut both ways as I have explained. 
In the end, the public determines the desirable sequencing of policy change. A decision to realize the 
efficient reallocation of resources all at once will be associated with significant pain but, at the same 
time, it could pave a way for faster recovery later. To the contrary, a decision to realize reallocation in 
a gradual manner could avoid a sharp downturn but it could delay a sustainable recovery. 
An economist from abroad who had believed that Japan’s economy was almost moribund changed his 
view after arriving in Japan and was said to have called the situation here a “golden recession.” As this 
story indicates, after the bursting of bubbles, Japan has in effect chosen the latter gradualist approach 
with respect to resource reallocation. As a result, we have avoided a situation where unemployment 
has skyrocketed to double-digit figures or GDP dropping by 5 percent a year. 
It is hard to say which approach is appropriate a priori. Having said that, given the speed of change in 
today’s economy as well as the fact that the economy has recorded low growth for ten years or so, the 
shortcomings of the gradual approach are becoming more evident. 
I have so far mainly discussed how to improve Japan’s economy through policy efforts. Finally, I would 
like to touch upon the role of individuals and business firms. In a market economy, the importance of 
individuals and business firms cannot be emphasized enough. In this regard, it is impressive to review 
how Japanese players have established themselves in major league baseball in the US. 
Ten  years  ago,  there  were  no  Japanese  baseball  players  in  the  major  league  but  now  there  are 
thirteen. Have the skills of Japanese players improved dramatically in the past ten years? I don’t think 
this is the case. Rather, I suspect that one player challenged the major league and his success invited 
others to follow. 
BIS Review 41/2002 
 5
 Transparency of monetary policy 
5. 
My final topic today is the transparency of monetary policy and the perception gap between critics and 
the Bank of Japan. 
The Bank of Japan has been making efforts to improve external communication and to enhance the 
transparency of monetary policy since the new Bank of Japan Law was enacted in 1998. The new law 
includes “transparency” along with “independence” as its basic concepts. There are two reasons why 
transparency is important for a central bank. 
First,  it  is  important  from  the  viewpoint  of  accountability.  In  a  democratic  society,  an  independent 
central  bank  should  fully  explain  its  actions  to  people  and  their  representatives  in  the  legislature. 
Transparency makes a central bank keenly aware of the responsibility associated with independence. 
Second, transparency is important in helping to secure the effects of monetary policy. This has been 
the case for many years but, as economic developments in the past 15 years both domestically and 
abroad  witnessed,  asset  prices  are  increasingly  playing  an  important  role  in  the  transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  An  important  characteristic  of  asset  prices  is  that  they  fluctuate 
reflecting expectations for the future. Although a central bank cannot manipulate asset prices, given 
that  information  from  a  central  bank  could  affect  their  movements,  it  is  extremely  important  to 
accurately communicate its policy intention by enhancing transparency. 
So  far  I  have  used  the  abstract  phrase  “transparency  of  monetary  policy.”  Let  me  be  a  bit  more 
specific. I think enhancing the transparency of monetary policy has three aspects. The first concerns 
the goal of monetary policy. The second is about the central bank assessment of the economy. The 
third is, given such goals and assessment, the policy response. If there is a perception gap between 
critics and the Bank, where does such a gap exist? 
With  regard  to  the  first  aspect,  i.e.  the  goals  of  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  of  Japan  Law  clearly 
stipulates  that  policy  should  aim  “at,  through  the  pursuit  of  price  stability,  contributing  to  the  sound 
development of the national economy.” The Bank has also adopted monetary easing measures in a 
determined  manner  aiming  at  overcoming  deflation.  This  is  evident  in  our  policy  commitment  to 
continue the current easing framework until CPI inflation stably registers zero percent or a  year-on-
year increase. 
In  this  regard,  there  are  some  that  believe  the  Bank  of  Japan  should  adopt  an  inflation  targeting 
framework. As I have talked about this subject on other occasions, I will not go into detail today but 
would like to make just one comment. That is, in an environment where a zero interest rate constraint 
exists  and  a  central  bank  lacks  effective  policy  measures  to  raise  inflation  rates,  the  adoption  of 
inflation targeting would not only fail to improve the transparency of policy-making but could also hurt 
the credibility. 
Next,  on  the  second  aspect  of  transparency,  that  is  the  assessment  of  economic  and  financial 
developments, the Bank communicates the views of Policy Board members to the public in its monthly 
report.  The  Bank  also  publishes  the  Outlook  report  every  six  months  which  contains  a  forecast  of 
prices and growth rates by Board members as reference. 
How about the third aspect of transparency, that is the policy response with the given policy goals and 
economic  assessment?  Some  critics  raise  harsh  questions  as  to  how  current  monetary  policy  is 
related to the policy goal of the Bank’s monetary policy, which is price stability. On this point, the Bank 
is facing difficulty in winning full public understanding, largely due to the fact that views differ on some 
important issues,  namely  how to interpret the background  to current mild deflation and also how to 
assess the effects of quantitative easing under the zero interest rate constraint. 
For example, many of you might have heard the mantra-like argument which claims that ‘deflation is a 
monetary phenomenon.’ I think this phrase comes from the famous proposition by a Nobel laureate 
economist  Milton  Friedman.  Based  on  research  into  the  monetary  history  of  the  US,  he  said  that 
“inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.” I do not know if rampant inflation and 
mild deflation can be symmetrically treated as ‘monetary phenomenon.’ If I may quote another giant, 
John  Maynard  Keynes  offered  a  different  view  on  deflation.  In  “A  Treatise  on  Money”  published  in 
1930, Keynes referred to British deflation in the late 19th century and wrote “I consider, therefore, that 
the history  of this period is a perfect example of a prolonged commodity deflation - developing and 
persisting in spite of a great increase in the total volume of bank money.” 
As a central banker, I am increasingly convinced that, when facing an unprecedented situation, what is 
required  for  us  is  to  take  a  pragmatic  approach  without  being  dogmatic.  It  requires  considering  the 
6 
 BIS Review 41/2002
 background and possible solutions by referring to available theories and historical experience both at 
home and abroad and by analyzing the observed hard facts. 
Recalling various economic changes in the past, it is surprising that we could not recognize many such 
changes on a real-time basis. We often have difficulty in recognizing changes when they are taking 
place.  This  can  be  said  in  the  case  of  the  rise  and  bursting  of  the  financial  bubbles  and  the 
development of IT technology. Ongoing global disinflation, which is demanding the attention of central 
banks worldwide, could turn out to be a major change in retrospect. 
If we look at CPI inflation at the end of last year, in East Asia, the Taiwan Province of China, Hong 
Kong SAR, Singapore, Malaysia and China recorded negative figures. Looking at the G7 countries, all 
except two registered inflation rates below 2%. Such a trend is more evident if we look at WPI or PPI 
inflation.  The  Taiwan  Province  of  China,  Hong  Kong  SAR,  Singapore,  Malaysia,  China  and  Korea 
registered  negative  inflation  rates  as  did  all  the  G7  countries  with  the  exception  of  Canada  and 
Germany.  Such  price  developments  must  to  a  large  extent  reflect  cyclical  economic  weakness  but 
may also be affected by other factors. 
Closing remarks 
6. 
Japan’s economy currently faces various challenges. The Bank of Japan also faces an unprecedented 
economic  environment  in  the  history  of  central  banking  characterized  by  the  zero  interest  rate 
constraint  and  the  non-performing  loan  problem.  To  cope  with  the  challenges,  the  Bank  has  been 
making its utmost efforts. 
I believe that, in order to fully perform its duty, a central bank needs to be able to accurately assess 
the  economic  environment,  demonstrate  a  strong  will  to  conduct  appropriate  monetary  policy,  and 
explain its policy fully. With this in mind, we will continue to exert our best efforts. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 41/2002 
 7
