 Christian Noyer: France, Europe, the euro and the ECB 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  University  of 
Nantes, 22 March 2002. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I should like to begin by expressing my pleasure at being invited here to talk about the euro, the ECB 
and  the  single  monetary  policy  in  the  first  three  years  of  Stage  Three  of  European  Economic  and 
Monetary Union (EMU).  
The primary objective of the ECB 
The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  assigned  to  the  single  monetary  policy  the 
maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  its  primary  objective.  Monetary  policy  can  only 
pursue  one  primary  objective.  The  participating  national  central  banks  have  long  held  the  belief, 
resulting from years of experience, that it is with the credible and lasting maintenance of price stability 
that  the  single  monetary  policy  can  best  contribute  to  sustained  long-run  economic  growth, 
employment creation and better standards of living. Asking monetary policy to do more, or to serve 
other purposes, risks creating illusions about what monetary policy can do. The events of the 1970s, in 
particular, demonstrated that when a central bank aims at boosting real activity by implementing an 
excessively expansionary monetary policy, it faces higher inflation and risks of financial instability. Due 
to the need for a disinflation process afterwards, the long-run disadvantages of such an expansionary 
policy  in  terms  of  output  and  employment  losses  turn  out  always  to  be  much  higher  than  the 
immediate advantages in terms of the transitory growth push. 
Price  stability,  on  the  contrary,  contributes  to  the  efficient  allocation  of  the  economy's  resources  by 
enhancing  the  transparency  of  the  price  mechanism  and  by  preventing  both  tax  distortions  and  an 
individual misallocation of savings and wealth. Moreover, by neutralising the need to hedge against 
inflation  and  in  particular  by  minimising  the  inflation  risk  premium  in  long-term  interest  rates,  price 
stability contributes to the channelling of real resources towards production and investment. Thus it 
favours economic and employment growth. 
For the purposes of supporting and safeguarding the pursuit of price stability, the Treaty has endowed 
the ECB with a high degree of institutional independence. At the same time, to ensure transparency 
and accountability in the ECB's policy design and implementation, the Treaty has also imposed certain 
reporting requirements on the ECB. The ECB has, in fact, exceeded these, thereby setting very high 
standards.  Monetary  policy  decisions  are  regularly  explained  in  the  press  conference  given  by  the 
President and myself after the first meeting of the ECB Governing Council every month, in the Monthly 
Bulletin  of  the  ECB,  in  the  speeches  given  by  members  of  the  Governing  Council  and  in  the 
testimonies of the President and other Board members to the European Parliament. 
Key aspects of the ECB's monetary policy strategy 
To  achieve  its  Treaty  mandate,  the  ECB  has  designed  a  medium  term-oriented  monetary  policy 
strategy.  
To enhance clarity, to anchor expectations and to offer a yardstick against which the ECB can be held 
accountable, the Governing Council of the ECB provided a numerical definition of price stability as "a 
year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 
2%". This is very close to the objectives of most participating national central banks before the start of 
Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). The Banque de France, for example, in 1998 
had defined price stability as consumer price inflation "not exceeding 2%". 
The  Governing  Council  also  emphasised  that  price  stability  has  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium 
term.  The  focus  on  the  medium  term  guarantees  that  an  appropriate  orientation  be  imparted  to 
monetary policy. This ensures measured policy reactions to the threats to price stability and prevents 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 1
 unnecessary  volatility  being  introduced  into  the  economy.  The  medium-term  orientation  also 
realistically acknowledges that short-term volatility in prices cannot be controlled by monetary policy 
and  that  monetary  policy  should  therefore  only  be  held  accountable  for  price  developments  over  a 
longer horizon. 
The recognition that monetary policy has to cope with an ever changing and imperfectly known world 
has  been  a  key  consideration  in  the  design  of  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  strategy.  The  Governing 
Council chose to equip itself with a broad but robust framework for analysing economic developments 
and  shocks,  which  we  call  the  two  pillars  of  our  of  monetary  policy  strategy.  Given  the  long-term 
monetary nature of inflation, the first pillar assigns a prominent role to money. This implies the use of 
monetary analyses and of models in which monetary aggregates play an important role in analysing 
risks to price stability. In parallel, the second pillar ensures that other forms of analysis and models, 
such as the investigation of the interplay between supply and demand as well as cost-push dynamics, 
are  incorporated  into  the  analysis  of  price  developments.  Together,  the  two  pillars  ensure  a 
comprehensive assessment of the economic situation and allow a focus on the nature of the shocks 
hitting the euro area, thereby providing adequate guidance to the policy process.  
Can one size fit all? 
The  ECB's  definition  of  price  stability  should  be  seen  as  a  quantification  of  the  ECB's  primary 
objective, which applies to the euro area as a whole. This implies that for the single monetary policy to 
be considered successful in fulfilling  its primary  objective only aggregate developments matter. The 
euro area countries need not and will not always exhibit similar price developments. In the same way 
as the maintenance of price stability within a single country is consistent with divergences in the rate of 
price change among different regions and cities, price stability in the euro area is generally in line with 
inflation differentials among individual member countries. Indeed, studies of price differentials between 
major  US  cities  show  that  these  differentials  are  at  least  as  large  and  sometimes  even  larger  than 
between countries of the euro area. 
Whether  such  differentials  are  a  cause  for  concern  depends  on  their  source.  Inflation  differentials 
which result from what in public debates is often quoted as "a catching-up process", as illustrated by 
the Balassa-Samuelson theory, should be seen as part of a normal process of adjustment consistent 
with a well-functioning economy. Thus they are not a cause for concern. A catching-up process may 
start  when the  level of productivity  –  and thus  of per capita  income – of a country  in the monetary 
union is (much) lower than the other participating economies. When some of its productive sectors, 
notably the traded goods sectors, become exposed to international competition, this country typically 
goes  through  a  transitional,  catching-up  period  when  it  may  experience  in  the  same  sectors 
productivity growth faster than that attained by more mature participating countries. This catching-up 
process  may,  in  turn,  lead  to  faster  price  increases  if  the  productivity  growth  the  country  gained  in 
tradables  is  not  matched  by  a  similar  productivity  growth  in  its  non-tradable  sectors,  as  wages  in 
tradables and non-tradables tend to converge. In the euro area, the impact of pure catching-up effects 
on the price level is likely to be minor as a substantial process of convergence in per capita income 
has already taken place over the last few decades.  
However, when inflation differentials arise from excessive wage increases, unsustainable expansion of 
profit  margins  or  an  expansionary  stance  in  fiscal  policy,  the  situation  may  become  a  cause  for 
concern. Each of these factors, in fact, may well lead to losses in competitiveness and, eventually, to 
losses  in  output  and  employment  growth.  These  are,  however,  problems  that  the  single  monetary 
policy  is  not  in  a  position  to  address.  It  is  the  task  of  national  economic  policies  to  avoid  and  to 
counteract such situations. I will come back to these issues later.  
Inflation differentials may  also be induced  by  economic or policy shocks which affect the euro area 
countries  and  regions  in  different  ways  and  at  different  times.  Also,  local  economies  may  respond 
dissimilarly to a common shock because of their individual economic structures. 
Especially in the run-up to Stage Three of EMU, the quantitative relevance of asymmetric shocks has 
attracted  a  lot  of  attention  both  among  analysts  and  among  economic  observers.  The  economic 
framework they had in mind, known as the optimum currency area theory, predicts that the creation of 
a  common  monetary  area  becomes  more  costly  the  more  the  participating  countries  experience 
idiosyncratic shocks, in terms of size, nature and frequency, and the more varied their responses to 
such  shocks  are. While  asymmetric  shocks  and  adjustment mechanisms  have  to  be  recognised  as 
realities, they also have to be seen in a more general framework, within which all gains from Stage 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2002
 Three  of  EMU  are  taken  into  account.  These  gains  are  sizeable.  From  a  political  point  of  view, 
monetary unification, as part of a more general process of European integration, should be seen as 
bringing long-lasting peace and a higher level of co-operation between participating countries. From 
an  economic  point  of  view,  monetary  unification  should  be  seen  as  bringing  greater  prosperity  and 
stability. There is no doubt in fact that Stage Three of EMU has, and will have, a net positive impact on 
France and all other participating countries. 
It  is,  however,  worth  examining  its  potential  effects  resulting  from  asymmetries.  To  what  extent  do 
these asymmetries still exist and are they a concern? One useful way of approaching this problem is 
to compare the euro area with the United States. The US appears to be a fairly natural benchmark. Its 
economy is similar in several ways to that of the euro area, not least in the size of its economy and 
population.  One  line  suggested  by  this  approach  is  to  compare  the  degree  of  synchronisation  of 
economic activity among euro area countries with that of US states or regions. One interesting finding 
that emerges from the empirical literature is that asynchronous fluctuations also take place in the US. 
We therefore should not be surprised to observe a similar fact in the euro area. However, the evidence 
resulting  from  several  studies  carried  out  in  the  past  few  years  points  unambiguously  to  a  higher 
degree of co-movement in the US than in the euro area. Yet, most studies have also found a high and 
increasing degree of synchronisation within the euro area, not only over a longer period of time, but 
also in more recent years. This degree of convergence appears to be approaching the levels recorded 
in  the  US.  Similar  conclusions  can  be  reached  with  reference  to  analyses  which  estimate  the 
differentiated impact of asymmetric shocks and the resulting adjustment.  
These findings appear to contrast with the more diversified production structure of several euro area 
countries  compared  with  that  of  states  in  the  US.  However,  this  evidence  is  the  result  of  the 
combination  of  two  factors:  the  distribution  of  shocks  and  the  resulting  country-specific  adjustment 
processes to the shocks. The relative impact of these two forces across countries in Europe is unclear. 
In  addition  to  this  evidence,  it  can  been  argued  that  analysing  the  evolution  of  the  euro  area 
economies  only  over  the  years  preceding  monetary  union  in  order  to  gain  insights  into  likely  future 
developments  can  be  misleading.  Indeed,  their  entry  into  a  currency  union  may  well  have  fostered 
economic integration, enhanced intra-area trade and, with the increased interdependence, raised the 
degree of synchronisation of the participating countries' macroeconomic fluctuations. In addition, the 
adoption of the same currency eliminated one source of major external instability which affected euro 
area economies in the past, namely exchange rate shocks of significant magnitude. Moreover, higher 
synchronisation  will  follow  from  closer  trade  links.  The  adoption  of  a  common  currency,  in  fact, 
promotes  trade  among  members  of  the  Union  by  eliminating  exchange  rate  risk  and  diminishing 
transaction costs.  
In theory, an increase in trade among two or more countries could also have the opposite effect, which 
is to increase the divergence of business cycles. This could happen, for instance, if closer integration 
and trade induce a higher degree of specialisation, with the consequence that production structures 
will  become  more  heterogeneous  across  countries,  making  them  more  vulnerable  to  idiosyncratic 
shocks. The question of which effect prevails is mainly an empirical one, as both are plausible. The 
evidence for the euro area so far appears to suggest that the more countries are integrated and the 
more they trade with each other, the more correlated the respective business cycles will be.  
At  the  present  stage,  it  is  too  early  to  estimate  the  effect  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU  on  reducing  the 
severity of asymmetric shocks and on increasing business cycle synchronisation among participating 
countries. While this impact is likely to be taking place already, the period of time needed for its full 
effect to develop is very uncertain. 
Although  useful  lessons  can  be  gained  from  a  comparison  with  the  US,  these  should  not  be  over-
emphasised. As a matter of fact, some important differences between the euro area and the US can 
also  be  identified.  In  the  US,  for  example,  the  importance  of  stock  markets  is  higher,  and  these 
markets can represent a mechanism amplifying the impact of shocks in the real economy. Moreover, 
evidence has been found that in the US the adjustment to asymmetric shocks is faster than in the euro 
area, largely because of the latter's lower mobility of capital and labour. In particular, labour mobility, 
which is one of the most important adjustment mechanisms in the US, is often found to be much lower 
in  the  euro  area.  While  this  is  partly  offset  by  the  increased  mobility  of  capital,  which  has  been 
enhanced  by  the  creation  of  the  Single  Market  in  Europe,  in  many  euro  area  countries  labour  still 
remains too immobile. 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 3
 A currency union needs flexible markets 
When labour mobility is low, the efficient response to economic shocks having asymmetrical effects on 
euro area countries requires prompt adjustments in prices and wages at local levels. Flexibility in price 
and  wage  setting  is  therefore  particularly  crucial  for  the  euro  area.  More  precisely,  an  increased 
flexibility  would  allow  regions  or  national  economies  to  adjust  more  rapidly  and  smoothly  to  shocks 
affecting particular sectors. We should always bear in mind, moreover, that our economies operate in 
an increasingly competitive global environment requiring ever more frequent adjustments, particularly 
in some sectors.  
For  these  and  many  other  reasons,  structural  reforms  aimed  at  increasing  mobility,  boosting 
competition and reducing rigidities and distortions in goods, service and labour markets are needed in 
the euro area. 
In  product  markets,  some  progress  has  been  made  over  the  past  few  years.  These  markets  have 
become more integrated and some sectors, such as the network industries, are being liberalised. The 
adoption of the European Company Statute by the Council of Ministers, for example, is a step in the 
right direction. This Statute allows for, and regulates, the creation of firms operating on an EU-wide 
basis and being governed by Community law. Another ambitious reform is the liberalisation of the EU's 
postal  sector,  although  its  full  implementation  will  take  time.  Despite  these  and  other  encouraging 
developments,  the  pace  of  liberalisation  has  been  uneven  across  participating  countries  and  more 
efforts are still needed as several sectors in various areas remain burdened by excessive regulation. 
These delays act as a brake on the flexibility and competition that is required to improve the long-term 
sustainable employment and growth prospects.  
One  area  still  requiring  much  attention,  as  I  already mentioned,  is  the  labour  market. The  potential 
benefits, in terms of higher aggregate welfare and employment growth, of reforming euro area labour 
markets are high. Following the reforms implemented in the 1990s, positive effects can already be felt. 
These include the stronger employment growth and the sharp decline in unemployment rates recorded 
in the euro area in recent years.  
Progress  with  labour  market  structural  reforms  has,  however,  been  very  uneven  among  euro  area 
countries. Indeed, rigidities persist. For example, although the euro area unemployment rate in 2001 
stood at 8.5%, survey studies show that companies often had problems in recruiting workers. Such 
labour mismatches demonstrate that more reforms are needed not only to increase labour supply and 
demand and improve job creation, but also to increase the likelihood that vacancies be filled and the 
unemployed find work more quickly. In addition, an unemployment rate still above 8%, low levels of 
labour force participation and uneven labour market performances across euro area countries clearly 
indicate that further measures need to be taken. Reforms, in particular, are required to improve job 
intermediation, to enhance wage flexibility and increase wage differentiation, to improve education and 
to promote training and life-long learning in order to maintain and develop human capital. Moreover, 
reforms  of  the  tax  and  benefit  systems,  the  introduction  of  less  restrictive  employment  protection, 
working time flexibility, and measures to increase labour mobility are also needed.  
It  is  also  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  these  reforms  should  be  carried  out  in  a  broader,  more 
systematic and co-ordinated manner across sectors and countries than at present. If the objective is to 
transform the euro area into the most competitive and dynamic economy in the world, as was decided 
at the Lisbon European Council in 2000, more efforts are needed. 
Challenges for fiscal policy 
I would now like to devote my attention to fiscal policy. National fiscal policies in Europe are guided by 
the budgetary provisions contained in the Maastricht Treaty and in the Stability and Growth Pact. The 
provisions in the Maastricht Treaty, which limit the levels of government deficit and government debt, 
have been key to achieving sounder public finances. The Stability and Growth Pact, agreed upon in 
1997, introduced the target of a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus as a medium-term 
objective for Member States.  
With monetary policy being conducted for the euro area as a whole, fiscal policy can be an important 
instrument in the hands of national governments to stabilise domestic demand and output. Disciplined 
and sound fiscal policies support the ECB's stability-oriented policy by reducing risks to price stability.  
The so-called automatic stabilisers are one mechanism which can cushion fluctuations in demand and 
price developments at national level. Automatic fiscal stabilisers are mechanisms built into tax codes 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2002
 and  social  legislation.  They  lead  to  a  timely  and  symmetrical  reaction  of  the  budget  policies  to 
economic fluctuations by reducing demand pressures in an economy during periods of strong growth 
and by supporting the economy in downturns, without requiring further government action. 
The  full  benefits  of  automatic  stabilisers  can  however  only  be  secured  if  countries  preserve  the 
sustainability of public finances through prudent fiscal positions and low debt. Otherwise, the burden of 
debt servicing and the risk of excessive deficits limit their ability to let the automatic stabilisers operate. 
The  strategy  of  attaining  and  preserving  a  medium-term  position  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus,  as 
required  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  promotes  sustainable  public  finances  and  therefore  also 
fully supports the stabilising role of public finances. 
Nevertheless, there are considerable doubts about the effectiveness of discretionary fiscal fine-tuning 
as a way to manage aggregate demand due to the well-know implementation lags and problems of 
policy reversal.  
Let me finally add a few thoughts on the relationship between monetary policy and fiscal policy. The 
ECB closely monitors fiscal policy since this is one of the main areas where significant shocks to price 
stability – and also to long-term interest rates – can originate. In fact, many episodes of high inflation in 
the past were related to a mismanagement of public finances combined with a very accommodating 
monetary stance. Monetary policy is geared to maintaining price stability over the medium term and to 
this  end  it  takes  fiscal  developments  into  account.  The  ECB's  monetary  policy  framework  however 
does not envisage any mechanistic reaction to fiscal policy changes.  
Moreover, there is no further need to co-ordinate monetary and fiscal policy at euro-area level if all 
authorities act within the clear, medium-term-oriented policy framework set out in the Maastricht Treaty 
and the Stability and Growth Pact. As long as participating countries comply with the objectives of this 
European  fiscal  framework,  their  budgetary  stance  supports  a  stability-oriented  common  monetary 
policy and each of them has the fiscal instruments at its disposal to accommodate asymmetric cyclical 
fluctuations or temporary shocks. 
Some reflections on the first three years of the single monetary policy 
I will devote the rest of my speech to an overview of the ECB's experience in the first three years of 
the single currency.  
During  this  period,  the  single  monetary  policy  has  been  challenged  by,  among  other  things, 
fluctuations  in  economic  activity  both  inside  and  outside  the  euro  area,  by  a  depreciation  of  the 
exchange  rate  of  the  euro,  and  by  strong  oil  and  food  price  rises  at  various  stages.  Despite  this, 
forecasters and financial markets have remained confident about the ability of the ECB to achieve its 
primary  objective  over  the  medium  term.  Surveys  on  long-term  inflation  expectations  and  inflation 
expectations as embedded in long-term interest rates have invariably been in line with our objective of 
price stability. 
The  launch  of  the  euro  three  years  ago  and  the  euro  cash  changeover  this  year  are  two  other 
indisputable  achievements  of  the  ECB  and  its  single  monetary  policy.  The  changeover  was  a 
challenge  of  unprecedented  dimensions  and  its  success  went  far  beyond  our  own  expectations. 
People in the euro area have  been enthusiastic about the currency since the  very  beginning of the 
cash changeover.  
The  euro's  arrival  in  1999  brought  about  fundamental  changes  in  the  way  governments,  financial 
institutions and the private sector operate in the financial markets in the euro area and the rest of the 
world.  Within  the  euro  area,  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risks  and  the  lower  transaction  costs 
which  followed,  together  with  the  much more  transparent  marketplace  the  euro  has  brought  with  it, 
have been creating new opportunities for business and driven firms towards higher levels of efficiency 
and competitiveness. The euro has also acted as a catalyst in the process of financial integration by 
widening and deepening the euro area financial markets. A large, liquid and integrated money market 
rapidly came into being after 1 January 1999. This in turn triggered a considerable growth in interest 
rate instruments denominated in euro. On the unsecured money market, the EONIA reference interest 
rate, which is an interbank overnight rate index collected by the ECB, has established itself as one of 
the  most  important,  or  even  the  most  important,  reference  rate.  The  EONIA  swap  market  is  now 
considered the largest overnight swap market in the world. Also in the bond market, the euro played a 
crucial role in fostering the deeper and more liquid euro area bond market that we see today.  
BIS Review 20/2002 
 5
 At  international  level,  the  euro  has  become  the  no.  2  currency.  It  is  the  second  most  widely  used 
reserve currency after the US dollar. The gap between the two currencies is wide. Experience shows, 
however, that there is a considerable time-lag between a currency becoming important, as reflected by 
the  economic  weight  of  the  issuing  country  or  region,  and  becoming  used  as  an  official  reserve 
currency.  
As an anchor currency, the euro plays a role in the exchange rate regimes of more than 50 countries 
outside the euro area. These countries have either opted for very close or even full links to the euro, in 
some  cases  unilaterally  deciding  to  use  the  euro  as  legal  tender,  i.e.  "euroisation",  or  they  have 
chosen looser types of anchoring, such as peg arrangements and crawling fluctuation bands. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  considering  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead.  I  am  referring  in  particular  to  the 
enlargement of the European Union and, subsequently, of the euro area. Currently, 12 countries from 
central, eastern and southern Europe are negotiating to join the EU. Integrating this large group into 
the European Union will be an enormous undertaking for all parties involved, not least because of the 
considerable economic gap between most of these countries and the current Member States. Major 
efforts will be required. However, we firmly believe that both the current and future EU Member States 
will benefit significantly over the long term from political and economic integration. 
I thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 20/2002
