 Joseph Yam: A new euro clearing system for Hong Kong 
Remarks by Mr Joseph  Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary  Authority,  at the signing 
ceremony  for  the  appointment  of  Standard  Chartered  Bank  as  settlement  institution  for  the  euro 
clearing system in Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 3 July 2002. 
 We live in a financial world where boundaries and barriers are progressively collapsing, whether as the 
result of conscious policy decisions in favour of liberalisation or because of the new vistas opened up 
by the onward march of information technology. 
Thus,  restrictions  on  providing  or  using  services  across  geographic  or  political  borders  are  on  the 
decline.  Particular  transactional  services,  such  as  quoting,  dealing,  confirming,  settling,  delivering, 
paying and safe-keeping, are increasingly footloose, in the sense that many of them can be readily 
accessed  from  remote  locations.  Moreover,  the  development  of  interfaces  between  systems  in 
different parts of the world provides scope for continuous 24-hour real-time trading. 
At  the  same  time,  the  regulatory  framework  is  tending  towards  standardisation  around  the  world, 
thereby reducing the potential for regulatory arbitrage between jurisdictions. 
As a result of these various developments, the marketplace in which we can operate is potentially ever 
larger, but at the same time the potential number of competitors is ever growing. 
Against this background, financial centres must be nimble, competitive, efficient and safe, and alert to 
the changing world, if they are to thrive. One of the essentials is that they must offer an effective and 
robust financial infrastructure. Such is our aim in Hong Kong. 
But this does not mean throwing money into each and every idea which comes along - there’s no point 
in constructing highways if no-one wants to drive down them. There must be a reasonable business 
case. On the other hand, no venture no gain. The opening up of a footpath may lead to the emergence 
of  heavy  traffic.  Thus  we  have  been  selective  in  the  initiatives  which  we  support  and,  although  not 
every project may have been an unqualified success, examples such as our HKD RTGS system which 
we  pioneered  in  the  mid-90s;  the  CMU  which  provides  such  an  excellent  settlement  and  custody 
service  for  debt  securities  and  which  is  being  linked  up  with  a  growing  number  of  overseas 
counterparties;  and  the  relatively  recent  USD  clearing  system;  all  of  these  present  a  strong  track 
record. 
We  are  here  today  to  mark  another  milestone  in  this  infrastructural  development  -  in  the  field  of 
clearing and payments. Our USD clearing system, introduced in 2000, has demonstrated that a niche 
exists  for  services  of  this  type  in  this  part  of  the  world.  USD  RTGS  turnover  has  grown  to  about 
3,000 transactions a day with a value of some US$6 billion; and over 1,000 USD cheques are being 
processed daily. Enquiries and discussions with banks suggested to us that there was also a business 
case for a roughly parallel service in euro. And so it is my pleasure to welcome you to this ceremony 
today, formally to witness the appointment of Standard Chartered Bank as the Settlement Institution 
for the new euro clearing system. 
This system will enable a wide range of financial transactions in euro to be settled on a real-time basis 
here  in  Hong  Kong.  Not  only  should  this  be  useful  to  those  involved  with  trade  and  remittances  in 
euro, but it should also facilitate financial institutions to manage international liquidity and investment 
portfolios  in  Hong  Kong.  The  system  will  encompass  not  only  the  best,  internationally  agreed, 
principles  of  payment  system  design  but  also  state-of-the-art  technology.  It  will  provide  RTGS 
settlement  for  euro  denominated  fund  transfers;  a  linkage  with  the  US  dollar  payment  system  to 
provide  real-time  PvP  settlement  for  EUR/USD  transactions;  and  linkages  with  the  CMU  to  provide 
DvP  settlement  for  euro-denominated  debt  securities,  in  readiness  for  the  potential  development  of 
that market. We expect to see all these features implemented by the second quarter of 2003. For the 
moment there will be no cheque clearing capability, but this is something which could be added later if 
there was sufficient demand. 
As in the case of the US dollar clearing, we have adopted a private sector solution, with a commercial 
bank as the Settlement Institution. This is not only consistent with the tradition in Hong Kong, but is 
also  in  line  with  international  practice  and  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements. As part of the agreement between the HKMA and Standard Chartered Bank, the latter 
BIS Review 41/2002 
 1
 will in turn appoint Hong Kong Interbank Clearing Ltd, the current operator of the Hong Kong dollar 
and US dollar payment systems, to develop and operate the euro system. The role of the HKMA will 
be  to  oversee  the  design  and  implementation,  and  to  ensure  that  the  system  meets  the  highest 
international standards. 
And so, Hong Kong will shortly have a pioneering facility for the efficient and secure conduct of euro 
transactions in Asian time, as a further significant piece of our financial infrastructure. The benefits to 
both local business and international customers, in both trade and finance, should be considerable. I 
take this opportunity to thank and congratulate those who have worked hard to bring the project to its 
present advanced stage in so short a time, and especially to thank Standard Chartered Bank for the 
enthusiasm and professionalism which they have brought to the exercise. I wish every success to all 
who will be involved in translating the design into reality. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2002
