 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Luxembourg, 4 July 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Governing Council of the European Central Bank met today for the sixth 
time outside Frankfurt. First of all I would like to thank our host, Governor Mersch, and the staff of the 
Banque centrale du Luxembourg, for the invitation and for the generous hospitality offered to us. Allow 
me also to add that the Governing Council today held its 100th meeting since the establishment of the 
ECB on 1 June 1998. We have not celebrated this event in any specific way, but we are pleased to 
draw your attention to this fact. Finally, let me, on behalf of the entire Governing Council, pay tribute to 
Pierre Werner, who passed away a few days ago. He was one of the founding fathers of the single 
currency and for this we will always be grateful to him.  
At  today's  meeting,  the  Governing  Council  continued  its  comprehensive  examination  of  monetary, 
financial and economic developments and assessed new evidence that has become available over 
the past few weeks. Our conclusion was that while risks to price stability over the medium term remain 
tilted  to  the  upside,  recent  evidence  sends  mixed  signals.  Against  this  background,  the  Governing 
Council decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged.  
As regards the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average 
of the annual growth rates of M3 increased to 7.5% in the period from March to May 2002, from 7.4% 
in the period from February to April. While there was some normalisation of M3 growth in early 2002, 
M3 dynamics have strengthened again recently. This development may partly reflect renewed portfolio 
shifts  into  M3  instruments,  related  to  the  recent  increase  in  overall  financial  market  uncertainty. 
However,  more  fundamental  factors,  such  as  the  low  opportunity  cost  of  holding  money  and  the 
economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  have  also  driven  monetary  expansion  in  recent  months.  In 
addition, the rate of growth of loans to the private sector has been recovering. While due caution in 
interpreting recent short-term monetary developments is warranted, it is a matter of concern that there 
is significantly more liquidity available in the euro area than would be needed to finance sustainable, 
non-inflationary economic growth.  
Concerning the second pillar, the latest data confirm that a gradual recovery in real GDP growth in 
the euro area is under way. Information from several surveys and leading indicators for the second 
quarter of this year point to somewhat higher real GDP growth rates than in the first quarter. Looking 
ahead, an ongoing strengthening in both domestic and foreign demand continues to be the most likely 
scenario.  The  conditions  for  further  recovery  in  the  euro  area  remain  in  place.  There  are  no  major 
imbalances in the euro area and financing conditions are very favourable. At the same time, there is 
continued  economic  growth  outside  the  euro  area.  However,  in  view  of  recent  financial  market 
developments,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  strength  of  the  economic  upturn  –  both  outside  and 
inside the euro area – has not diminished over recent weeks.  
Turning to price developments, Eurostat's flash estimate indicates that annual HICP inflation fell from 
2.0% in May to 1.7% in June. However, it is too early to interpret this fall as a sign of receding upward 
pressure  on  prices,  given  that  HICP  inflation  excluding  the  more  volatile  items  of  energy  and 
unprocessed food prices has remained high throughout the first half of this year, reflecting in particular 
trends in services prices. Moreover, it is to be expected that overall HICP inflation rates will fluctuate 
around 2% in the coming months.  
The strengthening of the euro exchange rate should have a moderating effect on inflation. However, it 
is difficult to quantify the size and establish the timing of this effect. For price stability to be maintained 
on a sustainable basis it is crucial that the high wage increases resulting from recent negotiations in 
some  regions  do  not  spread  across  the  euro  area,  not  least  because  this  would  have  negative 
consequences for competitiveness, employment growth and consumption.  
Overall, the strengthening of the euro exchange rate is a new factor suggesting a potential for lower 
inflation rates. However, other factors – in particular monetary developments and wage trends – do not 
indicate  a  moderation  in  price  pressures.  Monetary  policy  therefore  needs  to  remain  vigilant  as 
regards the key factors determining the outlook for price stability over the medium term. 
BIS Review 43/2002 
 
1
 Regarding fiscal policies in the euro area, we have seen some worrying developments in the past 
few months. Against this background we call upon all member countries to honour the commitments 
made to achieve budgets that are close to balance or in surplus by 2003-04, in compliance with the 
framework  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This  is  necessary  in  order  to  maintain  and  further 
strengthen confidence in the policy framework of the euro area and to establish fiscal positions in all 
countries  that  allow  automatic  stabilisers  to  operate  efficiently  without  endangering  sound  fiscal 
positions  in  the  longer  term.  Moreover,  governments  are  encouraged  to  push  ahead  with  reforms 
relating to the size and structure of public expenditure and revenue, which will also create room for tax 
cuts and absorb the fiscal costs of population ageing. 
In  the  field  of  structural  reforms  allow  me  to  refer  briefly  to  the  adoption  of  the  Broad  Economic 
Policy  Guidelines.  If  implemented  in  a  determined  manner,  structural  reforms  will  contribute  to 
expanding  the  euro  area's  potential  for  non-inflationary  growth  and  to  reducing  its  high  level  of 
unemployment.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2002
