 Mervyn King: The Monetary Policy Committee - five years on 
Speech  delivered  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  Society  of 
Business Economists, at the Royal College of Pathologists, London, 22 May 2002. 
I would especially like to thank Claire Lombardelli, James Proudman and James Talbot for their expert help in 
conducting and analysing the experiment reported in this paper. I have also benefited from useful comments from 
Charlie Bean, Mark Cornelius, Spencer Dale and Peter Rodgers. Richard Geare provided help with the data. 
 Five  years  ago,  the  power  to  set  interest  rates  in  this  country  was  given  to  a  new  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  (the  MPC).  That  decision  is  still  widely  regarded  as  the  most  important  taken  by  the 
incoming  new  Labour  Government.  At  the  time,  the  decision  to  create  the  MPC  was  controversial. 
That  is  hardly  surprising.  Few  decisions  have  as  much  economic  impact  as  the  level  of  short-term 
interest rates. They attract the interest of politicians and the media, yet when the MPC sets interest 
rates, it acts independently of government. The government sets the target, but the Committee sets 
interest rates to meet that target. 
Compared  with  many  other  countries  central  bank  independence  in  the  UK  is  relatively  recent, 
although  not  unprecedented.  The  most  famous  cartoon  of  the  Bank  of  England  -  Gillray’s  The  Old 
Lady  of  Threadneedle  Street  -  shows  Pitt,  Prime  Minister  at  the  time,  ravishing  an  old  lady  - 
personifying the Bank - whose dress is made of one pound  notes. The Pitt Government had made 
repeated demands on the Bank of England for gold to pay for the wars against France. Eventually, the 
fall  in  the  Bank’s  reserves  forced  it  to  suspend  convertibility  of  its  notes  into  gold,  and  low 
denomination notes were issued for the first time. The Gillray cartoon - which appeared in May 1797 - 
was the origin of the moniker, the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street. Was it mere coincidence, or divine 
retribution, that it was exactly two hundred years later, to the very month, in May 1997, that the Bank 
of England regained its independence? 
In an age when governments are increasingly held responsible for more and more aspects of our lives, 
there  are  not  many  examples  of  major  decisions  being  delegated  to  a  non-political  body.  The 
Monetary Policy Committee has broken new ground in British constitutional history. Only three months 
before  the  MPC  was  set  up,  Peter  Hennessy  described  the  British  system  of  government  as 
dependent upon “a handful of inside advisers spinning between them what Phillip Ziegler has called 
‘instantly invented precedents’ from the warp and woof of past constitutional practice and experience”. 
For much of the past forty years there have been rather too many “instantly invented precedents” in 
the conduct of monetary policy. But, very occasionally, a constitutional reform occurs which leads to a 
new piece of machinery. That was the case with the MPC. 
The Committee itself has an interesting and unusual structure: five executive members of the Bank 
and four external non-executive members, all chosen for their expertise on monetary policy and not as 
representatives of different interest groups. You may wonder whether the nine members of the MPC 
have any historical antecedents. If you look carefully you can see them in one of our few remaining 
great  Jacobean  houses  -  Aston  Hall  in  Birmingham.  In  the  Great  Dining  Room  there  is  a  frieze,  a 
marvellous example of early seventeenth century plasterwork, showing a set of nine warriors. These 
are known as the “nine worthies”, described as “high-relief figures in their own niches separated by 
scrolling”, a pretty good  description of the MPC. The Nine Worthies of Chivalry  as they are known, 
comprise three groups: three honest heathens, three Old Testament heroes and three champions of 
Christendom. It is interesting to speculate into which of these groups various members of the MPC fall, 
but I will leave that to you. But, wait a moment, there are two additional figures in the frieze. One is 
Perseus  -  presumably  the  minute  taker.  The  other  is  described  as  a  “so-far  unidentified  figure, 
certainly a later pastiche”. This must be the Treasury representative. Sadly, the debates among the 
nine  worthies,  presumably  recorded  in  the  minutes  and  reported  to  Sir  Thomas  Holte  who 
commissioned the frieze, are lost to posterity. In contrast, the debates among the MPC are published 
in the monthly minutes and are the subject of much commentary in the press. 
I want, this evening, to pose four questions about the role and record of the MPC. First, why give the 
power to decide interest rates to a committee rather than an individual? Second, does it matter that the 
MPC  frequently  disagrees  about  its  decision?  Third,  has  the  Committee  communicated  clearly  the 
reasons for its decisions? Fourth, does the MPC require reform? 
Let me try to answer those questions in turn. 
BIS Review 34/2002 
 1
 Why give the power to decide interest rates to a committee? 
1. 
The  academic  argument  for  central  bank  independence  is  well  established,  but  why  delegate 
monetary policy to a committee rather than an individual? In many other situations where expertise is 
crucial, groups of experts are often regarded as superior to individuals. So one motive could be that 
committees make better decisions. The technical nature of the monthly interest rate decision gives a 
natural  division  of  responsibilities  between  a  democratically  elected  government  that  chooses  the 
target and an appointed group of experts who set rates to meet that target. 
One dissenting voice comes from Sir Alec Issigonis - inventor of the Mini - who once said, ‘A camel is 
a horse designed by a committee’. Despite this view, there is a wide range of evidence to suggest that 
in many other real-world scenarios, a committee is often the preferred decision-making body. Really 
important people are treated by teams rather than a single doctor, and when legal decisions reach the 
highest level of appeal it is to a panel of judges such as the Law Lords and the Supreme Court, not a 
single individual, to whom the case is referred. 
Decisions that depend on technical knowledge seem, by revealed preference, to be given to groups 
rather than individuals, and setting interest rates by committee is no exception. A wide-ranging survey 
undertaken by the Centre for Central Banking Studies at the Bank of England found that 79 central 
banks out of a sample of 88 use some form of committee structure when setting monetary policy.1 But 
there is, by its very nature, rather little empirical evidence on the relative merits of decision-making by 
individuals  versus  groups.  And,  even  if  one  accepts  that  some  decisions  should  be  delegated  to 
technical experts, what is the best way to weight together the opinions of those experts? 
This problem motivated Alan Blinder - a former Vice-Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board - and his 
colleague  John  Morgan  at  Princeton  to  adopt  a  different  approach:  carrying  out  two  ‘laboratory 
experiments’  using  groups  of  Princeton  students  to  test  whether  groups  do  indeed  make  decisions 
differently.2 Their first experiment was purely statistical: subjects were asked to identify when a one-off 
change  in  the  proportions  of  red  and  blue  balls  in  an  electronic  urn  took  place.  The  second  asked 
participants  to  play  a  simple  monetary  policy  game,  setting  a  short-term  interest  rate  in  order  to 
minimise a loss function described  by  deviations of  unemployment and  inflation from desired target 
levels.  The  data  generating  outcomes  for  this  hypothetical  economy  came  from  a  two  equation 
macroeconomic model of a fairly standard kind. Again a structural change - this time to the “natural” 
real rate of interest - would occur at some point during the game, and, by observing data generated by 
this economy, players would need to learn about the change in structure in order to set the appropriate 
interest rate. 
All  the  students  who  participated  played  both  as  individuals  and  in  a  group.  In  both  experiments 
success  could  be  measured  on  a  quantitative  scale,  and  both  led  to  a  common  conclusion:  that 
decisions made by committees were superior to those of individuals. How robust was this result? And 
what explained it? 
Last  year,  a  team  from  the  Bank  of  England  attempted  an  exercise  very  much  like  Blinder  and 
Morgan’s monetary policy experiments using a sample of just under 200 economics students from the 
London School of Economics.3 Using a simple macroeconomic model that was broadly representative 
of the UK economy, the experiments examined how the performance of groups differed from that of 
individuals. And again they found striking evidence that committee decisions were superior. 
In  the  Bank  study,  each  participant  was  asked  to  play  a  simple,  computer  based,  monetary  policy 
game sixteen times: four rounds as individual policy makers, followed by eight rounds in a committee 
of five players, and finally a further four rounds as individuals. The committee stages were divided into 
two  parts:  four  rounds  where  committee  members  were  not  allowed  to  discuss  their  decisions  - 
although they could observe the unattributed votes of other players - and a further four rounds where 
discussion was permitted. As a control for learning, the order of the ‘discussion’ and ‘no discussion’ set 
of games was randomised across the committees. 
                                                      
1  Fry, M, Julius, D, Mahadeva, L, Roger, S and Sterne, G (1999),“Key issues in the choice of monetary policy framework”, 
in Mahadeva, L and Sterne, G (eds.), Monetary frameworks in a global context, Routledge 
2  Blinder,  A  S  and  Morgan,  J  (2000),  “Are  two  heads  better  than  one:  an  experimental  analysis  of  group  vs  individual 
decision making”, NBER Working Paper, No. 7909, September 
3  Lombardelli, C, Proudman, A J and Talbot, J I (2002), “Committees vs individuals: an experimental analysis of monetary 
policy decision-making”, Bank of England Working Paper (forthcoming) 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2002
 Each game consisted of ten periods of play in each of which the individual or committee had to decide 
what  interest  rate  to  set  in  response  to  the  data  for  output  and  inflation  generated  in  the  previous 
period. In the committee stages, the majority - or more precisely the median - vote was implemented 
once all committee members had entered a vote into their respective computers. 
Participants were told nothing at the start of the experiment about the structure of the economic model 
with which they were playing, or the disturbances that it was subject to, other than that a structural 
change occurred at some point during each play of the game. In short, they were operating - much like 
real-life monetary policy makers - in uncertain conditions, doing their best to identify the shocks that hit 
the economy and offsetting their impact by adjusting the short-term interest rate. 
To quantify their performance, players were scored according to their ability to keep inflation close to a 
pre-specified target and to minimise output fluctuations, and were paid a modest amount for doing so. 
Chart 1 shows the pattern of average scores over the different stages of the game. Three features are 
striking: 
(i) 
The significant upward trend in the results. Players clearly learned how to play the game as 
time went on. 
The large upward movement in scores when players moved to committee decision-making. 
The large downward move in scores when participants returned to playing as individuals. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
These  results  support  the  idea  that  committee  decisions  represent  a  significant  improvement  over 
those of the individuals that comprise them. What might account for these results? The Blinder and 
Morgan and Bank studies suggest two main reasons. First, collective decision-making appears to give 
more weight to the better and less weight to the worse committee members, as judged by their scores 
when  playing  the  game  as  individuals,  than  would  be  implied  by  taking  the  mean  of  individual 
performance. The best player had some influence on the decisions of the group of which they were a 
member. And the impact of the worst player was offset by majority voting. In other words, the median 
score  of  the  players  in  the  individual  rounds  was  significantly  above  the  mean,  implying  that  the 
average was being pulled down by a minority of relatively bad players. 
Second, there was also evidence from the experiments consistent with the hypothesis that committees 
enable all members to improve their performance by sharing information and learning from each other. 
And it was striking that the performance of committees was on average somewhat better than that of 
the performance of the single best player on the committee when playing alone. So in terms of group 
decisions, it appears that the whole is different from - and generally better than - the sum of its parts. 
Producing the perfect design of a committee structure that would make the best decisions is a task 
with no simple answer. But the MPC embodies several features that seem desirable. First, there is a 
clear  objective  given  to  the  Committee  from  outside,  in  this  case  by  the  government.  Second,  the 
members  are  chosen  for  their  technical  ability.  Third,  the  votes  on  the  MPC  are  transparent,  and 
hence members can be held accountable. The merit of individual accountability is that each individual 
in the group has a genuine incentive to reach a good decision. This aspect leads us directly into my 
second question. 
2. 
Second, does it matter that there are differences of view among Committee members? 
From the outset, commentators have  been unable to resist labelling members of the Committee as 
either  ‘hawks’  or  ‘doves’.  I  have  argued  before  that  it  makes  no  sense  to  use  these  descriptions 
because  each  member  of  the  Committee  has  the  same  objective.  Members  of  the  MPC  cannot 
entertain  closet  views  about  their  desired  inflation  rate  because  they  will  be  held  personally 
accountable  for  their  judgments  about  the  level  of  interest  rates  necessary  to  meet  the  mandated 
inflation  target.  As  circumstances  change,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  that  ‘hawks’  shall  be  ‘doves’  and 
‘doves’ shall be ‘hawks’. 
But  that  is  not  to  say  that  differences  of  opinion  do  not,  and  should  not,  exist  amongst  committee 
members.  If  part  of  the  reason  for  the  improvement  of  groups  over  individuals  is  their  pooling  of 
knowledge, then differences of opinion during the discussion that takes place at each MPC meeting 
should be central to the Committee’s performance. As The Economist put it back in 1998 (when there 
were only eight serving members):4 
                                                      
4  Economist, 18 April 1998, p. 28. 
BIS Review 34/2002 
 3
 ‘With the economy on the turn, the MPC has to sift mixed evidence… It would be 
remarkable if eight intelligent, well-briefed economists could be of one mind.’ 
But this point is not always readily understood, even by the most astute commentators. In July 1998 
the Financial Times suggested: 
‘…the  MPC  bears  a  closer  resemblance  to  a  post-graduate  seminar  than  to  a 
forum  for  strategic  decision  making…  To  put  [several]  economists  in  the  same 
room is to invite what one commentator has called paralysis by analysis.’ 
And  in  the  same  month,  The  Times  described  the  MPC  as  ‘a  committee  bursting  to  the  brim  with 
individual opinions’ implying that ‘periods of badly co-ordinated and erratic behaviour are only to be 
expected’. 
But it is precisely the exploration of alternative views about what is happening in the British economy, 
and the discussion of these views by the Committee in a spirit of investigation not advocacy, that is 
central  to  the  pooling  of  knowledge  through  which  committees  reach  decisions  that  are  superior  to 
those  taken  by  individuals.  I  think  that  is  increasingly  understood  by  commentators,  and  helps  to 
explain  why  split  votes  are  now  regarded  as  normal  and  not  a  source  of  great  excitement.  It  is, 
nevertheless,  important  that  there  are  no  ideological  differences  among  Committee  members  that 
would make rational debate difficult, and, in this respect, the Committee has so far been fortunate. 
A famous 1970s laboratory experiment also showed the value of a frank exchange of views within a 
committee.5 It featured groups of senior managers working together to solve a complicated problem in 
a  game  called  ‘Lost  on  the  Moon’.  Subjects  were  asked  to  rank  a  list  of  objects  in  order  of  their 
necessity for survival after their spaceship had inadvertently crash-landed on the moon. It was found 
that the best-performing groups - or those which got closest to the ranking suggested by experts at 
NASA  -  were  those  which  were  least  consensual  in  the  early  stages  of  discussion,  exploring  all 
possible  avenues  and  ideas.  Groups  which  established  a  common  consensus  quickly  were  often 
ineffective,  suggesting  that  at  least  some  disagreement  is  beneficial  for  committee  performance 
because  it  stimulates  discussion  and  hard  thinking.  Differences  of  view  on  our  Committee  are  an 
honest reflection of the uncertainty about both the data and the structure of the economy. 
To  date  there  have  been  61  meetings  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee.  The  votes  cast  at  those 
meetings  are  summarised  in  Table  1.  It  includes  the  votes  of  this  month’s  meeting  which  were 
published  this  morning.  At  those  61  meetings,  interest  rates  were  raised  on  nine  occasions,  were 
lowered on 14 occasions, and left unchanged at 38. At the first seven meetings during 1997, decisions 
were  reached  unanimously.  The  number  of  voting  members  varied  between  five  and  eight  as  the 
membership of the Committee built up. The first dissenting vote was cast in January 1998. Since the 
beginning of 1998, the voting has been divided reasonably evenly among all possible combinations of 
votes (remember that there were nine voting members only from June 1998 following the passage of 
the Bank of England Act.) Of the 54 meetings since January 1998, four dissenting votes have been 
cast on six occasions, three on seven occasions, two on eleven occasions and one on 16 occasions. 
At only 14 meetings has the vote been unanimous, and no one - sensibly - has seen fit to abstain, so 
that during the past five years the frequency of unanimity among the Committee has been little more 
than one in four. Differences of view have become accepted as the norm, and this appears to have 
done little damage to the credibility of the Committee. 
Nor  has  there  been  much  sign  of  “blocs”  of  votes,  whether  internal  or  external.  There  have  been 
15 occasions  on  which  members  of  the  executive  of  the  Bank  have  been  on  opposite  sides  of  the 
vote, and 37 occasions when externals have found themselves divided. It is true to say that dissenting 
votes have been more common among external than executive members. Of the 83 dissenting votes 
cast  during  the  history  of  the  MPC,  25  have  been  cast  by  executive  members  and  58  by  external 
members. But of these 58, no fewer than 44 are accounted for by three of the eight external members, 
Willem  Buiter,  DeAnne  Julius  and  Sushil  Wadhwani.  For  the  remaining  five  external  members,  the 
propensity to be in the minority has been very similar to the Bank executive (excluding the Governor), 
with dissenting as a proportion of total votes at 12% and 11% respectively. 
Moreover the differences in votes have been small. On only four occasions has the difference between 
the highest and lowest interest rate voted for exceeded 25 basis points, and, interestingly, all four were 
between August 1998 and April 1999, a period of great uncertainty about whether there would be a 
downturn in the world economy that did not in fact materialise. Since then differences of view have 
                                                      
5  Hall (1971), “Decisions, decisions, decisions”, Psychology Today, November. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2002
 never exceeded 25 basis points. The average difference between the interest rate cast by the member 
voting for the highest average level of rates and the  member voting for the lowest average level of 
rates is less than 15 basis points! Such a small difference hardly corresponds to a major difference of 
view about the outlook for inflation. 
Third, has the Committee explained clearly the reasons for its decisions? 
3. 
Transparency  has  been  at  the  centre  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  since  1992  when  it  was 
recognised that clear explanations of policy would help to anchor inflation expectations on the target. 
The first major step in enhancing transparency was the Bank’s Inflation Report, which first appeared in 
February  1993,  and  was  subsequently  enhanced  by  publication  of  the  minutes  of  the  meetings 
between the Chancellor and Governor. That transparency was given a further boost by the creation of 
the Monetary Policy Committee where the votes of all members are published along with the minutes 
of the discussion at MPC meetings. 
Despite  its  record  on  transparency,  questions  have  been  raised  about  whether  the  MPC  could  go 
further.  Do  the  published  minutes  reveal  enough  about  individual  views?  Should  there  not  be 
individual  paragraphs  in  the  minutes  explaining  the  position  of  each  member?  Why  does  the 
Committee not publish a forecast corresponding to the path of interest rates that it feels most likely to 
be necessary to meet the inflation target? Why does the central projection of the forecast always seem 
to end up at close to the target of 2.5%? 
It is helpful to step back and ask three more fundamental questions. First, what is the MPC trying to 
communicate? Second, how should it communicate? Third, what is the role of the inflation forecast? 
The basic message which the MPC is trying to communicate is that, over the medium term, inflation 
should be expected to average 2.5%, and that the Committee will respond to events as they unfold in 
order to keep inflation on track to meet that target. Hence the Committee needs to explain its view of 
the current state of the economy, how and why it has reacted to events that have already unfolded, 
and what it believes are the risks lying ahead. All of this can be encapsulated in its “policy reaction 
function”.  Commentators  and  others  may  form  their  own  views  about  the  likelihood  of  various 
economic  shocks  occurring,  and  in  that  respect  it  is  more  important  for  them  that  the  Committee 
explains  its  policy  reaction  function  than  attempts  to  provide  guidance  on  the  likely  future  path  of 
interest  rates.  And  when  the  Bank  of  Canada  tried  to  anticipate  the  likely  future  path  of  monetary 
conditions, it found that, despite its clear explanations of why the future could not be easily anticipated, 
markets  took  those  anticipations  as  commitments,  and  were  surprised  when  unforeseen  events 
resulted  in  different  policy  outcomes.  In  contrast,  the  MPC  does  not  attempt  to  anticipate  its  own 
decisions. 
In addition to explaining the Committee’s views on the economy, and the balance of risks to inflation, 
there is a second important role for communication. That is to explain the views of the nine individual 
members  of  the  Committee  so  that  they  can  be  held  accountable  for  their  judgments.  There  is, 
therefore, an inherent tension between a system of nine individually accountable members, with their 
associated  views,  and  a  Committee  from  which  a  single  decision  emerges  that  requires  a  clear 
explanation  each  month.  The  former  produces,  as  I  have  argued,  better  decisions;  the  latter  is 
important for the predictability and thus the efficiency of monetary policy. The communication strategy 
of the MPC must provide a balance between these two objectives, a point acknowledged in the report 
by Don Kohn on the procedures of the MPC. 
The  need  to  achieve  such  a  balance  leads  directly  to  the  question  of  how  the  Committee  should 
communicate its thoughts. The minutes of the  MPC  meetings, now released only 13 days after the 
decision  itself,  provide  a  detailed  explanation  of  the  issues  that  confronted  the  Committee  and  the 
arguments that  were made during the meeting. They  also contain the votes  of individual members. 
The Committee has discussed, but rejected, the proposition that the minutes should contain individual 
paragraphs  summarising  the  views  of  each  member  in  turn.  The  reason  is  that  such  a  procedure 
would alter the nature of our meetings quite radically. At present, they are a free-flowing discussion in 
which members discuss propositions and counter propositions in a spirit of mutual enquiry rather than 
an  exchange  of  fixed  and  conflicting  views.  Discussion  focuses  on  the  relative  merits  of  different 
possible explanations for the current state of the economy. If each member faced a deadline by which 
they had to produce a polished paragraph summarising their views, members would enter the meeting 
with such a paragraph in draft form and the spontaneity of the discussion would be lost. 
BIS Review 34/2002 
 5
 For  the  same  reason,  it  is  not  clear  that  the  publication  of  transcripts  of  meetings  enhances 
transparency.  The  Federal  Reserve  provides  a  useful  case  study.  Prior  to  1994,  members  of  the 
FOMC were largely unaware that monetary policy discussions were being transcribed verbatim from 
audio recordings of the meetings. Congress learned of the availability of the transcripts shortly after 
this,  and  in  February  1995,  insisted  that  they  be  published  with  a  five-year  lag.  Once  committee 
members  became  aware  that  their  meetings  were  being  recorded,  the  structure  of  the  discussion 
appeared to change. Before 1995 meetings had begun  with prepared speeches followed by a free-
flowing  debate  characterised  by  a  frank  exchange  of  ideas.  But  after  1995,  there  appears  to  be  a 
much greater tendency for meetings to become an exchange of prepared statements, and some of the 
colour of the previous discussion may have been lost. 
Explanations of decisions in the form of press statements issued at the time of the announcement of 
decisions on interest rates have become less frequent. But this is principally because there have been 
fewer interest rate changes recently. In its first three years, the Committee moved rates 16 times and 
issued  press  statements  on  14  of  those  occasions.  It  also  issued  two  statements  when  it  had  not 
moved rates. Over the past two years the Committee changed rates seven times, accompanied by six 
statements, with no statements when rates were left unchanged. The purpose of a press statement is 
to explain a decision reached, by definition by a majority of the Committee. Because it is brief it cannot 
do  justice  to  the  richness  of  the  discussion  at  the  Committee,  and  the  balance  of  views  is  not 
represented. Hence the Committee has come to the view that, by and large, it is better to wait until the 
publication of the minutes when a fuller view of issues and views can be provided. That is not to say 
that press statements will not appear in future, but to stress that their purpose is limited to explaining a 
decision that might be unexpected, irrespective of whether that is a change or no change in rates. 
On  the  whole,  the  minutes  have  been  successful  in  creating  a  wider  understanding  of  the  issues 
discussed by the MPC, and have a devoted, if small, following. The Inflation Report, which pre-dates 
the  MPC,  has  a  broader  objective  in  setting  out  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  current  state  of  the 
economy, and describing the outlook for inflation in terms of a forecast over a two-year horizon. The 
Committee puts great weight on explaining the forecast in terms of probabilities. Hence it has adopted 
the famous coloured fan charts for its forecasts for both growth and inflation. But there remains some 
confusion about the role of the forecast. With the advent of the MPC, the tensions between explaining 
nine individual views and presenting a coherent account of the Committee’s view of the economy have 
complicated the production of the forecast. The Inflation Report now contains an explicit description of 
differences of view among the Committee in respect of both the central projection and the risks to the 
forecast, as well as the “best collective judgment”, or majority view, of the outlook. But the main focus 
of the Inflation Report is to present a collective view. To publish nine individual fan charts would hardly 
increase  transparency,  and  the  differences  of  judgment  have  to  date  been  sufficiently  small  that  it 
would be difficult for commentators to observe significant differences among those charts. This tension 
between the need to explain the diversity of members’ views, and the need to provide a clear rationale 
for  the  single  decision,  suggests  that  the  Committee  may  need  to  explore  further  ways  of  putting 
across its collective view. 
It  should  be  clear  that  there  are  both  benefits  and  costs  to  a  group  decision-making  process.  The 
transparency  and  accountability  of  individual  views  helps  to  make  better  decisions.  But  it  also 
complicates the communication of the decision to a wider audience, whose expectations of inflation 
matter for economic behaviour. The avoidance of confusion requires some forbearance by individual 
members  of  the  Committee,  and  a  clear  understanding  of  which  forms  of  communication  are 
appropriate to explain individual views and which forms are suitable for explaining the reasons for a 
collective  decision.  I  am  sure  that  the  Committee  will  learn  more  about  how  best  to  achieve  this 
balance as time goes by. 
Fourth, does the MPC require reform? 
4. 
Despite its youth, at least in central banking terms, the MPC has not suffered from lack of advice on 
how to improve itself. There have been six reports from the Treasury Select Committee, two reports 
from the House of Lords’ Committee on the MPC, reports by a commission of the Conservative Party 
and by the Liberal Democrats, a report by the Engineering Employers’ Federation, recommendations 
by many economists, including former MPC members, and, last but not least, the report commissioned 
by the Bank of England itself by Don Kohn, a senior staff member of the Federal Reserve Board and 
recently nominated by the President for appointment to the Board of Governors. Overall, the verdict on 
the  Committee  has  been  broadly  positive.  For  example,  in  his  2001  review  of  the  operation  of 
6 
 BIS Review 34/2002
 monetary  policy  in  New  Zealand,  Professor  Lars  Svensson  describes  the  Bank  of  England  and  the 
Swedish Riksbank as examples of “best practice” monetary policy. 
Suggestions for improvement from the various groups cover the following areas: the definition of the 
inflation target; terms, appointments and composition of the membership of the MPC; arrangements 
for  publication  of  the  minutes;  the  forecast  produced  by  the  MPC;  and,  finally,  a  miscellaneous 
collection of technical matters. 
The precise definition of the inflation target, and its numerical value, can be debated at length. What is 
important is that the target is for inflation and not additional objectives that  would lead to confusion 
about the Committee’s aims. 
On the Committee itself various suggestions have been made: to extend the terms of appointment of 
members of the MPC, to make those longer terms non-renewable, and to appoint people with more 
diverse  backgrounds.  By  far  the  most  fundamental  of  these  suggestions  is  the  proposal  to  appoint 
representatives  of  different  industries  or  regions  to  the  Committee,  as  opposed  to  monetary  policy 
experts.  That  would  change  the  nature  of  the  debate  and  undermine  the  mutual  confidence  of 
members of the Committee in each other if it were felt that some were representing a specific interest 
group. With experience of the MPC, I think that this argument has come to be accepted. 
The proposal that the minutes of MPC meetings should include more description of individual views I 
discussed earlier. The Committee has been opposed to such a change for the reasons I gave. In its 
early days the Committee was sensitive to the view that the minutes, then published six weeks after 
the meeting, should be published earlier, and it shortened that lag to 13 days in October 1998. 
The forecast process has attracted much attention, and was discussed at length in the Kohn Report. 
Presenting the forecast in terms of a fan chart, in order to highlight the balance of risks to the outlook, 
has proved successful. But it has proved more difficult to explain the role of a projection conditioned 
on  the  assumption  of  constant  official  interest  rates.  So  the  Committee  also  publishes  a  forecast 
conditioned on market interest rates, in order to provide a guide as to how the forecast depends upon 
the profile of short-term interest rates. 
The Committee has had more problems in trying to explain that there is no mechanical link between 
the central projection of the forecast for inflation two years ahead and the policy decision. This is for 
several reasons. First, the view of inflation both prior to and after the two-year horizon is important too. 
The optimal horizon over which to bring inflation back to target depends on the shock which moved 
inflation above or below target. Second, the risks to inflation around the central projection (defined as 
the mode of the distribution of inflation at future points) are also relevant to the policy decision. Third, 
there  may  be  some  risks  to  which  the  Committee  does  not  wish  to  respond  until  they  have 
materialised.  But  the  Committee  will  continue  to  explain  how  its  outlook  for  inflation  relates  to  the 
policy decision, and, over time, we hope that this educational effort will pay off. 
Finally, there have been several miscellaneous suggestions for change to the MPC. First, the MPC 
has been accused of meeting too frequently and, as a result, changing rates too often. The EEF report 
suggested that the Committee meet only eight times a year, as does the Federal Reserve, because 
“meeting once a month could lead a central bank into changing interest rates too often in response to 
potentially misleading monthly data”. In fact, since June 1997 the MPC has changed interest rates 23 
times and the FOMC 20 times. Changes in rates reflect economic developments, not the frequency of 
meetings. In any event, the Bank of England Act 1998 states that we must meet at least once a month, 
and that we shall continue to do. 
Second,  there  has  been  a  suggestion  that  a  more  formal  voting  procedure  be  adopted  for  MPC 
meetings. The current voting procedure of the MPC is straightforward: discussion continues until each 
person’s views are clear. The Governor then puts a proposition to the Committee which will command 
majority support. Some have questioned whether this procedure is robust and might bias the outcome. 
For example, the issue has been raised by the House of Lords Select Committee. But I think this is a 
misunderstanding of the way we work. It is important that our views are known to each other before we 
cast our votes because that is part of the process of making up our mind. The only complication with 
the current procedure would be if the Committee was split equally between three different courses of 
action. In theory, this could lead to a “voting paradox”. The Governor would then need to decide which 
course was eliminated, leaving two policy choices for the Committee to choose between. That would 
normally  be  straight  forward  provided  that,  in  the  economist’s  jargon,  preferences  between  interest 
rates were “single-peaked”. When this is the case the voting paradox does not apply. For preferences 
not to be single-peaked members of the Committee would have to prefer, for example, both no change 
BIS Review 34/2002 
 7
 and  a  rise  of  50  basis  points  to  an  increase  of  25  basis  points.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  under  what 
circumstances this would represent rational preferences. 
Third, the set, or as we call it suite, of models used by the Committee should be improved. They are in 
fact  under  continuous  improvement  and  the  Bank  has  commissioned  Adrian  Pagan  to  carry  out  a 
review of the technical aspects of modelling in the Bank. That review will be published in 2003. 
Fourth, it has been suggested that the MPC should meet outside London. The Court of the Bank does 
indeed  meet  once  a  year  at  a  destination  outside  London,  and  these  occasions  have  proved 
invaluable  in  expanding  contacts  between  the  Bank  and  the  MPC  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  local 
community,  on  the  other.  But  MPC  meetings  themselves,  as  highly  market-sensitive  occasions 
surrounded by a purdah period, are quite unsuitable as opportunities to interact with the local business 
and  other  community.  There  would  be  little  point  in  holding  an  MPC  meeting  outside  London  if  the 
Committee were unable to speak and meet with local people. All members of the MPC travel widely 
around the UK outside of purdah, making some 50 visits during the past year, and these contacts are 
an important part of the process by which the MPC is informed about the state of the economy. 
During  its  short  life-time  the  MPC  has  made  changes  in  its  procedures  and  remains  open  to  the 
possibility  of  further  improvements.  But  unnecessary  tinkering  would  be  a  distraction  from  its  main 
purpose. One does not have to go as far as Lord Falkland, who said in 1641 that “If it is not necessary 
to change something, then it is necessary not to change it”, to believe that, at least for the time being, 
major changes to the MPC are unnecessary. And if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, then the 
Government can draw comfort from Michael Howard’s speech in March of this year when he argued 
that  “Nor,  given  the  importance  of  stability  and  continuity,  do  I  think  it  right  to  propose  any  major 
changes in either the remit or the composition of the Monetary Policy Committee”. The fact that there 
is a broad, cross-party consensus on the objectives and broad framework of monetary policy is one 
reason to think that the stability we have experienced in the first five years of the MPC will continue in 
the future. 
Conclusions 
5. 
The  idea  behind  the  MPC  was  to  take  day-to-day  politics  out  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  now  widely 
accepted  that  this  was  desirable.  Macroeconomic  policy  in  Britain  had  been  much  too  exciting  for 
comfort for most of the post-war period. In the 1970s, inflation averaged over 13% a year, and reached 
a peak of 27% in August 1975. During the 1980s inflation averaged 7% a year, and it is only since the 
inflation  target  regime  was  adopted  in  late  1992  that  inflation  has  returned  to  both  low  and  stable 
levels. Britain tried most types of monetary regime: targeting monetary aggregates both narrow and 
broad; shadowing an exchange rate target, and an explicit exchange rate target through membership 
of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. None was pursued for long, and none carried real credibility. It was 
following  our  exit  from  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  in  1992  that  the  opportunity  arose  to  put  in 
place a new monetary framework based on an explicit target for inflation and a floating exchange rate. 
The aim of the MPC is to keep both inflation and inflation expectations at the target level of 2½%. It is 
no  small  part  of  a  central  bank’s  role  to  create  confidence  and  credibility  in  the  belief  that  it  will 
respond to any change in economic circumstances in order to maintain a broad degree of economic 
stability.  In  the  economists’  jargon,  the  public  must  believe  that  the  central  banks  “policy  reaction 
function”  is  consistent  with  stability,  and  if  it  is  predictable,  then  announcements  on  interest  rates 
should not come as news. The economic data will have led to expectations about the likely course of 
interest rates which, in most instances will prove a reasonable guide to the course of policy. A clear 
sign of the success of the MPC will be when we are no longer news. 
The  MPC  has  proved  to  be  one  of  those  rare  “instantly  invented  precedents”  that  seem  to  have 
worked.  It  may  not  achieve  the  cult  status  of  the  Nine  Worthies  who,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  inspired 
poetry, sculpture and stained glass windows. As one writer has remarked, “If one reviews the list of 
virtues  that  contemporaries  found  valuable  in  a  knight  -  courtesy,  loyalty,  prowess,  hardiness, 
largesse, and frankness - the Nine Worthies seem to meet the standard”. If that level of achievement 
is no more than an aspiration for its nine members, at least the MPC can claim a record of reasonable 
competence  during  its  first  five  years.  As  Stephen  Bayley  remarked  in  1986,  “civilisations  are 
remembered by their artefacts, not their bank-rates”. 
8 
 BIS Review 34/2002
 Chart 1: average committee scores over time1 
A v e r a g e  
s c o r e
8 0
7 0
6 0
5 0
4 0
3 0
2 0
1 0
0
T r e n d
S c o r e
In d iv id u a l 
g a m e s
C o m m itte e  
g a m e s
In d iv id u a l 
g a m e s
0
1
2
3
4
5
7
6
G a m e  N u m b e r
8
9
1 0
1 1
1 2
1 3
1 4
1 5
1 6
 1 Players are scored according to their ability to keep inflation close to a pre-specified target and to 
minimise output fluctuations across each of the sixteen, ten period games. The Chart shows the 
evolution of scores over time: 
• 
For the individual games, numbers 1-4 and 13-16, each diamond represents the mean 
individual score across the 170 participants. 
For the committee games, numbers 5-12, the diamonds represent the mean score across 
the 34 committees. In these stages, the five members of the committee vote in each period 
and the ‘majority’ - or more precisely - the median interest rate is set. Each committee is then 
scored according to this median outcome. 
 BIS Review 34/2002 
 9
 
Table 1 
 
VOTING STATISTICS  
(SINCE JUNE 1997)
MEETINGS ATTENDED
VOTED UP
VOTED DOWN
VOTED NO-CHANGE
VOTED WITH MAJORITY
VOTED DIFFERENT TO MAJORITY
VOTED NO-CHANGE WHEN CHANGE
VOTED CHANGE WHEN NO-CHANGE
CUMULATIVE MPC VOTING RECORD
Eddie
George
61
Howard Mervyn
King
Davies
61
2
David
Clementi
58
Ian
Plenderleith
61
John
Vickers
28
Willem
Buiter
36
Charles
Goodhart
36
DeAnne
Julius
45
Sushil
Alan
Budd Wadhwani
18
37
Stephen
Nickell
25
Christopher
Allsopp
25
Charles
Bean
21
Kate
Barker
13
9
14
38
61
0
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
0
17
12
32
51
10
2
8
8
14
36
54
4
1
3
9
13
39
56
5
2
3
10
7
11
23
5
0
5
17
10
9
19
17
0
17
12
7
17
33
3
0
3
2
18
25
31
14
3
11
5
6
7
14
4
0
4
3
16
18
24
13
1
12
3
7
15
22
3
0
3
0
10
15
21
4
0
4
0
8
13
20
1
0
1
0
4
9
13
0
0
0
Actual
61
9
14
38
  10 
 BIS Review 34/2002
  BIS Review 34/2002 
 11
