 Kristina Persson: On the verge of Eurosystem membership - challenges from a 
Swedish perspective 
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at a seminar organized by 
the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC), Akersruno, 1 July 2002. 
 Introduction 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  and  speak. The  issue  I  would  like  to 
highlight  is  how  a  possible  Swedish  membership  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU  could  affect  the  Swedish 
labour market. To put this issue into some kind of perspective, I shall begin by briefly describing the 
changeover in economic policy, followed by the recent developments on the Swedish labour market. 
Finally, I shall discuss the changes to the labour market that might become necessary if Sweden joins 
the Eurosystem. 
The changeover in economic policy 
Over the past two decades there has been a pronounced reorientation in Swedish economic policy. 
For instance, the credit market and foreign exchange market have been deregulated, the tax system 
has been reformed, parts  of the transfer system have been changed and competitive  pressure has 
increased. These changes have contributed to improving the way the Swedish economy functions. 
Price stability has thus become a statutory objective for monetary policy. As of 1 January 1999, the 
Riksbank has an obligation confirmed in law to maintain price stability. The Riksbank has chosen to 
operationalise  this  objective  by  means  of  an  inflation  target.  The  inflation  target  is  worded  as  the 
annual  CPI  inflation  being  two  per  cent,  with  a  tolerated  deviation  interval  of  plus/minus  one 
percentage point. Monetary policy shall thus be conducted to ensure that the purchasing power of the 
krona remains stable with regard to the basket of goods bought by the average Swedish household. 
Low inflation is important for many reasons. When a central bank’s target is to avoid high inflation and 
large  fluctuations  in  the  rate  of  price  increase,  it  also  contributes  to  stabilising  economic  activity. 
Practically all of the industrial nations that have changed over to an inflation target of the type we have 
in Sweden have seen a reduction in variations in inflation. When a central bank stabilises the rate of 
price  increase,  it  can  also  contribute  to  reducing  the  risk  of  financial  crises,  which  is  especially 
important  because  bank  crises,  as  the  experiences  of  for  example  Sweden,  Finland  Norway  and 
Japan show, are often linked to a rise in unemployment and a prolonged period of poor growth. 
Sweden’s experiences of inflation targeting are positive. Growth in the Swedish economy has been at 
an average of 3.0 per cent a year since 1994, while inflation has been low over several years. At the 
same time, open unemployment has declined from around 8 per cent in 1993 to less than 4 per cent in 
2002.  This  can  be  compared  with  the  1970s  and  1980s,  when  inflation  was  at  an  average  rate  of 
around 8 per cent and growth amounted to an average level of 2 per cent. This positive development 
is due to a large number of factors. One factor is that there were a large number of vacant resources 
to begin with, but it appears likely that a more credible economic policy also has contributed. 
Fiscal policy has also played an important role in giving credibility to the economic policy pursued. The 
value of the budget consolidation can scarcely be exaggerated. 
Concerning  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market,  the  changeover  from  fixed  exchange  rates  and  a 
relatively  high  rate  of  inflation  to  flexible  exchange  rates  and  an  inflation  target  implies  that  high 
inflation and devaluation, like those Sweden experienced during the 70s and 80s, will no longer take 
care  of  the  effects  of  excessively  high  wage  increases.  In  that  sense  one  could  say  that  the 
responsibility for employment to a greater extent has moved over to the social partners. 
Recent developments in the Swedish labour market 
During the course of 2001, growth in the Swedish economy was subdued, while inflation, excluding 
so-called transitory prices, rose slightly. This raises questions regarding the development of the supply 
BIS Review 40/2002 
 1
 side in the economy.  A possible explanation as to  why inflation has increased  at the same time as 
demand  has  weakened  is  that  the  growth  rate  in  potential  output  has  been  weaker  than  was 
anticipated earlier. 
Both  production  and  investment  are  determined  by  fundamental  factors  such  as  demography, 
households’  preferences  and  institutions,  as  well  as  regulatory  systems.  These  factors  in  turn 
determine the development of production factors such as labour, capital and production techniques. 
The  long-term  sustainable  growth  rate  is  also  very  important  to  households’  and  companies’ 
expectations  of  future  growth  in  income  and  profits. Willingness  to  consume  and  to  produce  -  both 
supply  and  demand  -  are  in  the  long  term  determined  by  the  same  fundamental  factors.  It  is 
reasonable to assume that the variations in factors such as demography and institutional conditions 
are  relatively  limited  in  the  short  term.  However,  demography  is  likely  to  become  a  constraint  on 
economic growth to an increasing extent throughout Europe. 
Deviations  between  actual  and  potential  production  can  arise.  When  consumption  or  production 
exceeds the long-term sustainable growth rate, the level of resource utilisation rises, which may exert 
inflationary pressure in the economy. 
The fact that deviations can arise between actual and potential production is due to a number of slow-
moving factors in the economy. Market imperfections, such as a lack of competition and transaction 
costs make  both  prices  and  production  factors  slow-moving,  and  mean  that  it  takes  time  for  actual 
production  and  consumption  to  adapt  to  changes  in  supply  and  demand  in  the  economy.  When 
adapting to changes in the fundamentals that determine growth or to disturbances, the rate of price 
increase often increases or declines during a period of time. 
A central factor in determining aggregate growth in the economy is the labour supply. The growth rate 
in the number of hours worked slackened from 2.5 per cent in 1999 to approximately 0.5 per cent in 
2001, while employment rose by approximately 2 per cent each year. The weak development in the 
number  of  hours  worked  during  the  period  1999  to  2001  is  mainly  connected  to  an  increase  in 
absence due to illness and a decline in the average working hours. 
The  growth  in  sick  leave  has  brought  down  the  number  of  hours  worked  over  several  years.  The 
number of persons absent due to their own illness increased by an average of 13.6 per cent per year 
during the period 1999 to 2001. There has also been an increase at the beginning of this year. During 
the first quarter, the number of persons absent due to illness rose by an average of 2.8 per cent. The 
rate of increase has thus declined. The question is whether the increase in sick leave is due to cyclical 
or  structural  factors.  Historically,  sick  leave  has  increased,  with  some  time  lag,  when  the  Swedish 
economy  has  been  operating  at  high  pressure  (see  diagram  1).  If  the  upswing  in  the  number  of 
absences is due to economic reasons, it is possible that the current high level is a repercussion of the 
economic boom during 1999-2000. In other words, we could expect the absences due to illness to fall 
when the economic slowdown makes its mark on the labour market. 
It  is  of  course  also  possible  that  regulatory  changes  and  levels  of  compensation  have  had  some 
significance for the rise in sick leave.1 The next diagram shows that if the figures for sick leave are 
divided  up  according  to  duration,  it  is  mainly  the  long-term  sick  leave  that  has  increased  in  recent 
years (see diagram 2). The number of persons who have received sickness benefit for one year or 
more increased by an average of 26.8 per cent during the period 1999 to 2001. One explanation for 
this development may be that the rules for qualifying for sickness pension, which is often preceded by 
a very prolonged period of sick leave, were made more stringent in 1997.2 
There  are  also  studies  that  show  a  connection  between  changes  in  the  levels  of  compensation  for 
sickness or other rules in the national insurance system, and behaviour with regard to reporting sick. 
For instance, when the system of no compensation on the first day of sick leave was abolished and 
sickness benefit was raised in the 1980s, sick leave increased, and when the rules were made stricter 
and  the  benefits  less  generous  in  the  1990s,  sick  leave  declined.  Incentives  connected  with  the 
interactions of unemployment insurance with sickness insurance may also play a part in the increase 
in the number of persons reporting sick. In other words, one cannot rule out the possibility that the 
                                                      
1  See, for instance, Henrekson, M. and M. Persson (2004): “The Effects on Sick Leave of Changes in the Sickness Insurance 
System”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 22, No. 1, Forthcoming. 
Lindwall, U. and P. Skogman Thoursie (2000): Sjukfrånvaro och förtidspension - En beskrivning och analys av utvecklingen 
de senaste decennierna (Sick leave and sick pensions - A description and analysis of developments over the past decades), 
2000:2, the Swedish National Social Insurance Board. 
BIS Review 40/2002
2 
2 
  increases in sickness benefit in recent years could have contributed to the increase in those reporting 
sick. 
Furthermore,  changes  in  the  age  composition  of  the  working  population  may  also  have  had  some 
significance. That is to say, there may be demographic elements in the recent increases in sick leave, 
bearing  in  mind  that  the  age  group  55-64  years  has  increased  as  a  percentage  of  the  working 
population during the greater part of the 1990s. This age group generally has a higher frequency of 
sick leave than the average. 
Another  explanation may  be connected  with the  large savings made in the  public sector during  the 
1990s in order to get to grips with the budget deficit. The savings may have affected both employees 
and,  for  example,  users  of  medical  and  childcare  facilities.  If,  for  instance,  the  quality  of  day-care 
centres  declines,  and  the  strain  on  the  personnel  increases,  reporting  in  sick  may  become  an 
alternative for both parents and personnel. 
The explanation for the increasing level of sick leave is probably both complex and difficult to get a 
grip of. The rise is probably due to both cyclical and structural reasons, with several different types of 
structural explanations. The government’s opinion is, for example, that the working environment has 
great significance. If a large percentage of the sick leave is due to structural reasons, this is obviously 
a more fundamental problem for the Swedish labour market, which may entail an increased risk of a 
labour shortage in the future, with subsequent negative effects on potential growth. 
Yet another factor that has made a negative contribution to the growth in hours worked in recent years 
is average working hours. Average working hours declined by 1.4 per cent in 2001 and continued to 
decline during the first quarter (see diagram 3). Variations in this can be explained by the occurrence 
of “labour hoarding”. This entails companies choosing to retain the labour force in the initial phase of a 
downturn in economic activity and regulating working hours instead, for instance, by reducing overtime 
- a development we have seen recently. It is only at a later stage that companies start to make cuts in 
personnel.  One  of  the  reasons  for  this  behaviour  is  that  the  labour  force  is  not  an  entirely  mobile 
production factor. Companies’ labour costs consist not merely of wages, but also of costs for recruiting 
and training new personnel. 
This is probably more common in knowledge-intensive sectors, such as some branches of the private 
services sector, and could thus become increasingly important in years to come. Institutional factors 
may  also  have  significance  for  the  development  of  average  working  hours.  For  instance,  in  the 
negotiated central wage agreements from 1998, particularly within manufacturing, working hours were 
adapted to economic activity, which may have contributed to the recent dampening of average working 
hours. 
To sum up, we do not have  a clear answer as to exactly  how  the recent  developments in average 
working hours can be explained. The response of the labour market to changes in economic activity is 
one of many fields that I think should become subject to further investigation. 
Another interesting research field is whether the Swedish labour market is able to deal with necessary 
changes in relative wages. The labour shortages in the public sector, with possible wage increases as 
a  consequence,  can  have  effects  on  inflation  pressures,  for  instance  due  to  wage  spread  between 
different  sectors.  There  is  a  concern  that  groups  of  employees  within  the  public  sector,  having  a 
favourable labour market situation, could set the norm for up-coming wage agreement negotiations. 
However, studies in this field indicate that this has not been the case before, although naturally there 
is always a possibility that this type of pattern could arise in the future.3 
EMU and the labour market 
A core issue in the current EMU debate concerns whether changes will be required in the Swedish 
labour market to prevent the inflation rate from increasing if we join the single currency system and, if 
so, what these changes might comprise. 
Unit labour costs, that is to say, wage costs adjusted for growth in productivity, have increased slightly 
more  rapidly  in  Sweden  than  in  the  Euro  area  recently.  The  statistics  in  this  diagram  are  not 
necessarily  the  best  for  studying  developments  in  Sweden  alone,  but  work  well  for  comparisons 
                                                      
3  See Tägtström, Sara (2000): “The wage spread between different sectors in Sweden, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, 
2000:4, Stockholm. 
BIS Review 40/2002 
 3
 between  countries.  The  diagram  shows  that  unit  labour  costs  have  increased  on  average  by 
1.6 percentage  points  more  in  Sweden  than  the  Euro  area  during  the  period  1999  to  2001  (see 
diagram 4). 
As  the  possibility  to  conduct  an  independent  economic  policy  declines,  the  need  for  functioning 
adjustment mechanisms increases. In addition, increased flexibility in the labour market is most likely 
necessary  to  stabilise  variations  in  production  and  employment.  Generally  speaking,  the  lack  of  an 
independent national monetary policy means that any disturbances to the Swedish economy not felt in 
the same way in other EMU countries, would require greater flexibility in factor and product markets in 
Sweden. The requirement for increased flexibility in the labour market could apply both to increased 
variability in nominal wage increases and to increased geographical and professional mobility of the 
labour force. 
Increased adaptation to the rate of wage increase in the Euro area and increased variability in 
nominal wage costs? 
The  design  of  the  negotiation  system  probably  has  significance  both  for  the  adaptation  of  wage 
increases to that within the Euro area and for the degree of nominal wage flexibility. Wage formation in 
Sweden can be characterised by a combination of centralised and decentralised agreements. During 
2001  trade  and  industry  had  a  relatively  high  percentage  of  agreements  with  local  wage  formation. 
Almost 70 per cent of employees in the private sector had wage agreements that entailed complete or 
partial local wage formation. The percentage of local wage agreements in the public sector has also 
increased during the 1990s. 
A more decentralised wage formation process could entail greater nominal wage flexibility, as wage 
costs could then be connected to a greater extent to the individual company’s situation. On the other 
hand, a more co-ordinated wage formation could also entail increased flexibility, as it would make it 
easier  for  those  determining  wages  at  a  central  level  to  take  the  overall  considerations  required  to 
enable the economy as a whole to develop favourably. It is unclear to what extent a potential Swedish 
participation  in  Stage  Three  of  EMU  would  entail  incentives  for  a  more  decentralised  or  more 
co-ordinated wage formation process. The existence of “social partnerships” in several EMU countries, 
for  instance,  the  Netherlands  and  Ireland,  where  the  social  partners  and  sometimes  even  the 
government  have  worked  out  guidelines  for  wage  formation,  could  indicate  a  development  towards 
more co-ordinated wage formation in Europe. It would be interesting to hear your views on this issue - 
whether the experiences of the social partnerships have been positive or not. 
However,  a potential  Swedish membership of the Eurosystem could also  weaken the incentives for 
restraint in wage formation, which could lead to deterioration in competitiveness and eventually higher 
levels of unemployment.4 Wage formation can be seen as a “game” between the social partners and 
the central bank. If the wage negotiations are relatively centralised, negotiators must take into account 
how the agreements will affect monetary policy. It is clear that excessively high wage increases can 
have negative effects on growth and employment. If a central bank outside of the EMU has an inflation 
target, the social partners may also estimate that excessively high wage increases will entail interest 
rate  rises,  which  will  reinforce  the  negative  effects.  This  might  not  be  the  case  in  the  event  of 
membership of the single currency. Particularly if the individual Member State is small, it is not likely, 
that the ECB will react to high wage increases in this country alone. The negative consequences of 
excessively high wage increases may thus appear much greater to the social partners in an individual 
country outside of the EMU than to a member country. 
Nominal wage flexibility can also be discussed on the basis of other different points of departure.5 One 
is the length of the central wage agreement periods. This reflects a balance between, on the one side, 
keeping down negotiating costs - including the risk of labour market conflicts - and on the other side 
ensuring  that  wages  are  not  locked  for  an  excessively  long  period,  so  that  wage  levels  can  be 
adjusted in the event of an unexpected shock. If membership of Stage Three of EMU were to give rise 
to  greater  fluctuations  in  economic  activity  than  under  a  domestic  monetary  and  foreign  exchange 
                                                      
4  See, for instance, Calmfors, L. (2000): “EMU och arbetslösheten” (EMU and unemployment), Ekonomisk Debatt, Volume 
28, no. 2. 
5  See,  for  instance,  Calmfors,  L.  (2002):  “EMU:s  effekter  på  lönebildningen”  (The  effects  of  the EMU  on  wage  formation), 
Appendix  2  to  Stabiliseringspolitik  i  valutaunionen  (Stabilisation  policy  in  the  monetary  union),  Kommittén  för 
stabiliseringspolitik  för  full  sysselsättning  vid  ett  svenskt  medlemskap  i  valutaunionen  (The  Government  Commission  on 
Stabilisation Policy for Full Employment in the Event of Swedish Membership of the Monetary Union), SOU 2002:16. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2002
 policy, there may be an increased tendency to choose shorter agreement periods. If membership were 
to lead to more stable inflation than now, the agreement periods could instead become longer, as it 
would be considered easier to predict nominal wage increases. 
The degree of wage flexibility is also affected by social norms - reductions in nominal wages are most 
often considered unacceptable. It appears that nominal wage reductions can only be implemented in 
extreme  situations,  for  instance,  if  a  company’s  survival  is  at  stake.  EMU  membership  might  not 
comprise a sufficiently major change. 
Econometric studies of how wage flexibility is affected by, for instance, ERM membership give mixed 
evidence. Wage formation thus represents an uncertainty factor. Some studies indicate greater wage 
flexibility and others show no effect at all. The conclusion reached by the stabilisation policy committee 
is that Swedish membership of the Eurosystem most likely will entail wages becoming more flexible, 
but that changes could be limited.6 The Riksbank has not yet taken a stand on the committee’s report; 
we will be presenting our views on it in the autumn. 
The consequences  of excessively  high  wage  increases in the event of Swedish membership of the 
Eurosystem can be compared to “learning the hard way”, i.e. that Sweden would lose competitiveness 
and suffer rising unemployment. This type of development could force an adaptation in wages in the 
long run. However, it risks being a costly route, particularly with regard to unemployment, which could 
stick  at  higher  equilibrium  levels  than  before.  In  other  words,  it  is  something  that  we  should  all 
endeavour to avoid. 
There is also a possibility that employers would resist demands for higher wage increases to a greater 
extent than before, as it would no longer be possible for a depreciation of the krona to help maintain 
competitiveness. 
Increased mobility in the labour market? 
If domestic prices and wages are insufficiently flexible when competitive conditions change, the labour 
force may instead choose to leave a country, region or sector and seek employment elsewhere. And if 
there is a labour shortage, overheating can to some extent be counteracted by, for instance, bringing 
in  labour  from  other  countries  or  regions  with  higher  unemployment.  An  increased  mobility  in  the 
labour  market  in  terms  of both  geography  and  profession  could  thus  compensate  for  sticky  wages. 
Increased  labour  market  flexibility  also  implies  a  better  allocation  of  resources  and  thus  a  higher 
potential  growth.  Mobility  in  the  labour  market  plays  a  major  role  in  the  way  the  labour  market 
functions today and mobility both within and between the member states will probably take on even 
greater significance if Sweden joins the Eurosystem. 
How  mobile  is  the  Swedish  labour  market?  A  high  level  of  mobility  in  the  labour  market  can  be 
characterised  by  a  good  matching  between  job  seekers  and  job  vacancies.  The  Beveridge  Curve, 
which  shows  the  relationship  between  unemployment  and  job  vacancies,  can  be  used  to  illustrate 
matching in the labour market (see Diagram 5). An increase in the number of vacancies will lead to an 
increase in the number of jobs and a decline in unemployment. This means that the curve normally 
has a negative slope. An outward shift in the curve can be interpreted as deterioration in matching in 
the  labour  market,  as  the  number  of  vacancies  for  each  given  level  of  unemployment  is  higher. 
Movements along the curve may depend on economic changes. When there is an improvement in the 
level  of  economic  activity,  the  number  of  vacancies  and  recruitment  rise,  but  at  the  same  time  the 
difficulties and time required to fill the vacancies increase. 
The large rise in the unemployment rate in Sweden at the beginning of the 1990s was followed by a 
reduction  in  the  number  of  vacancies,  which  can  be  interpreted  as  a  movement  along  the  curve. 
During the mid-1990s, unemployment appeared to have stabilised at a high level, but in recent years 
unemployment has been held back, while the vacancy ratio has risen. The Beveridge Curve appears 
to lie further out than before, which could indicate that the matching process has deteriorated and that 
the labour market has become less flexible. One reason for a possible outward shift could be that the 
persons who became unemployed during the crisis years of the 1990s have had difficulty in returning 
to the labour market. Long-term unemployment can weaken the incentives for job searching and with 
                                                      
6  See  Stabiliseringspolitik  i  valutaunionen  -  slutbetänkande  (Stabilisation  Policy  in  the  Monetary  Union  -  final  report), 
Kommittén  för  stabiliseringspolitik  för  full  sysselsättning  vid  ett  svenskt  medlemskap  i  valutaunionen  (The  Government 
Commission on Stabilisation Policy for Full Employment in the Event of Swedish Membership of the Monetary Union), SOU 
2002:16. 
BIS Review 40/2002 
 5
 that  matching  in  the  labour  market  deteriorates.7  It  could  also  be  the  case  that  demand  for  a 
professional group’s skills has permanently or partly disappeared. For instance, the number of jobs in 
manufacturing has declined during the 1990s. However, it is still too early to comment on whether the 
Beveridge Curve has shifted outwards. When the Beveridge Curve is reported for monthly data, the 
picture is partly different. The outward shift is less clear and the curve also appears to have shown a 
tendency to move inwards again during 2001. 
There  are  considerable  regional  differences  in  the  level  of  unemployment  in  the  Swedish  labour 
market, which indicates that increased mobility would be desirable. During the first quarter of 2002 the 
difference between the county with the lowest level of unemployment, the county of Jönköping, and 
that  with  the  highest  level  of unemployment,  the county  of Norrbotten, amounted to  4.2  percentage 
points  (see  Diagram  6).  However,  the  differences  have  declined  somewhat  in  recent  years. 
Unemployment  rates  also  vary  between  different  professional  groups.  For  instance,  the  number  of 
unemployed trade union members in the construction sector amounted to 7.2 per cent in April, which 
can  be  compared  with  a  figure  of  2.1  per  cent  for  the  white-collar  trade  unions.  With  regard  to 
construction  workers, it  is  striking that the percentage of unemployed trade union members in  April 
amounted to 2.0 per cent  in the county of Stockholm and to  a huge 16.4 per cent  in the county  of 
Norrbotten,  and  this  was  in  a  situation  with  a  relatively  good  level  of  economic  activity  in  the 
construction sector. 
Today’s  Swedish  economy  is  characterised  by  a  rapid  rate  of  change,  there  is  at  present  both  a 
surplus and a shortage of labour in all regions. This makes increased demands on education, labour 
market measures and mobility. 
At the same time as a greater degree of mobility increases efficiency, there may be a conflict between 
geographical mobility and regional interests. Certain regions that already suffer from the problems of a 
diminishing population will experience even greater problems for growth when parts of the labour force 
move  away.  In  addition,  it  is  often  difficult  to  achieve  the  desired  geographical  mobility  for  social 
reasons.  The  fact  that  two  persons  in  a  household  are  in  gainful  employment  is  one  reason  and 
differences in the cost of living is another. The housing situation in, for instance, the Stockholm area 
also makes it difficult for people to move to this region. 
As you already know, mobility between the EU member states is low. According to the Commission, 
less than 2 per cent of EU nationals are resident in another EU member state. The mobility, on an 
annual basis, of EU nationals within the EU is less than 0.4 per cent of the resident population (about 
1.5 million persons). In 1998, migration between states in the USA was approximately 2.4 per cent of 
the population. The low levels of mobility reflect various institutional differences (such as, for example, 
professional recognition of qualifications) as well as cultural and linguistic differences between the EU 
member states.8 
A common perception in Sweden is that the mobility of the labour force will not play any major role - at 
least within the near future - in stabilising fluctuations in production and employment that arise from 
country-specific shocks within the EMU area. 
Let me finally conclude by stating that wage formation is central to the development of the Swedish 
economy.  The  Riksbank’s  primary  task  is  to  uphold  the  inflation  target.  The  Riksbank  shall  also, 
pursuant to the background to the Sveriges Riksbank Act, safeguard growth and employment if this 
can be attained without neglecting the price stability objective. 
The challenge of maintaining price stability and a good development in employment will remain if and 
when  Sweden  takes  part  in  the  Third  Stage  of  EMU.  It  is  therefore  important  that,  for  instance, 
regulatory  systems,  traditions  and  labour  market  policy  should  lay  the  foundation  for  sustainable 
growth,  a  high  level  of  employment  and  a  low  inflation  rate.  It  is  therefore  in  the  interests  of  the 
Riksbank  to  participate  in  a  dialogue  and  the  development  of  knowledge  that  will  facilitate  this 
dialogue. 
I have here today identified a number of areas for future study and research. They have to do with the 
adaptation of wages in Sweden to the rate of wage increase in the Euro area, increased variability in 
nominal wage costs in Sweden and increased geographical and professional mobility in the European 
labour  market.  Let  me  to  this  add  the  big  issue  of  demographic  change  and  its  effects  on  labour 
supply. Another interesting question, which is of imminent importance to Sweden, has to do with what 
                                                      
7  See Björklund et al. (2000): Arbetsmarknaden (The Labour Market), SNS Förlag, Kristianstad. 
8  Communication, New European Labour Markets, Open to All, with Access for All, COM (2001)116. 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2002
 effects wage increases in the public sector will have on inflation. I hope that the trade unions in Europe 
will take an active part in initiating and carrying out research projects in these fields. 
Thank you for listening! 
 
1. Employed and persons absent due to illness, 1987:01-
2002:05
Hundreds of persons
Seasonally adjusted series expressed as moving three-month average
Absent due to illness  (left scale)
Employed (right scale)
2400
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
Source: Statistics Sweden (Labour Force Surveys)
 2. Recipients of sickness allowance, 1974-2001
30-89 days
90-364 days
over 364 days
120000
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
Source: National Social Insurance Board
45000
44000
43000
42000
41000
40000
39000
38000
120000
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
  BIS Review 40/2002 
 7
  3. Mean working time, 1988:1-2002:1
Percentage 4-quarter change
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2001 2002
For employees - Labour Force Surveys
For employed - National Accounts
For employed - Labour Force Surveys
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
Source: Statistics Sweden (Labour Force Surveys and National Accounts)
4. Unit labour cost, 1990-2001
Annual percentage change
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
Sweden
Euro area
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Source: OECD
  8 
 BIS Review 40/2002
  5. The Beveridge Curve, 1980-2002 (January-May)
Unfilled job vacancies/labour force
1980
1987
1990
1991
2002 (jan-may)
2000 
1984
2001
1,4
1,2
1,0
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0,0
1999
1992
1998
1997
1995-1996
1994
1993
0,0
2,0
4,0
6,0
8,0
10,0
12,0
Total unemployment
14,0
Source: Statistics Sweden (Labour Force Surveys) and Labour Market Board
6. Unemployment rate in different counties, Q1 1990, 
Q1 1993 and Q1 2002
Per cent
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Stockholm
Q1 1990
Q1 1993
Q1 2002
Q1 2002 for the hole economy
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Uppsala
Östergötland
Södermanland
Jönköping
Kronoberg
Kalmar
Gotland
Blekinge
Skåne
Halland
Värmland
Västra Götaland
Örebro
Västmanland
Dalarna
Gävleborg
Jämtland
Västernorrland
Västerbotten
Norrbotten
Source: Statistics Sweden (Labour Force Surveys)
  BIS Review 40/2002 
 9
