 Jürgen Stark: IT innovations and financing patterns: Implications for the 
financial system 
Statement  by  Mr  Jürgen  Stark,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  press 
conference on the release of the CGFS Report, Frankfurt, 13 February 2002. 
 Today I am presenting to you the Report “IT innovations and financing patterns: implications for the 
financial system”. The Report has been prepared under my chairmanship, by a Working Group of the 
Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (CGFS)  composed  of  senior  central  bankers  from 
13 central banks.  
The  Committee  monitors  and  examines  issues  relating  to  the  functioning  and  stability  of  financial 
systems  with  a  view  to  developing  policy  recommendations  in  line  with  the  responsibilities  of  the 
members of the central bank community. 
Much  has  been  said  about  the  possible  impact  of  information  technology  - computer  hardware  and 
software,  telecommunication  and  the  internet  -  on  growth,  productivity  and  inflation.  Regarding  the 
eventual macroeconomic outcome of the IT revolution, the jury is still out. And we will probably have to 
observe developments over a full business cycle before it would be prudent to draw conclusions. 
However, there is little doubt that IT has fundamentally changed the way economic activity is carried 
out and organised. The use of IT has facilitated a shift towards flexible production processes. A very 
broad range of firms inside and outside the tech sector has changed business models and explored 
new  markets  using  IT.  This  raises  the  question  what  these,  in  many  cases  fundamental  changes, 
imply for firms’ financing needs and the risks involved in financing business. 
Let me start with two observations that outline the possible financial dimensions of IT innovation. 
• 
The first is the boom and bust in equity prices of tech companies. The market capitalisation 
of IT firms has fallen about 6 trillion US dollar since the spring of 2000. The magnitude of 
losses  demonstrates  that  the  valuation  of  IT  firms  is  not  a  quantité  négligeable  when  it 
comes to assessments of how well financial markets have functioned in recent years. 
The second is the heavy borrowing of telecom firms, and the subsequent rapid deterioration 
of credit quality  in the telecom sector. The mounting uncertainties about the profitability of 
investments in third generation mobile phone technology in Europe and fibre optic networks 
in the United States have shown the risks and challenges that IT financing may involve for 
creditors. 
 These two observations highlight different facets of the financial implications of IT innovation, but they 
have  a  common  core:  they  reflect  changes  in  the  nature  of  firms  and  the  character  of  financial 
investment.  
One aspect is that the risk-reward profile of firms - and hence the riskiness of financial investment - 
may change quickly and in an unpredictable way. Again, it is important to recognise that such change 
is not limited to the tech sector. The general merchandise store chain that fails to adopt new IT-based 
methods of inventory management will likely lose out to those firms which master the use of IT.  
The other aspect is that risks become more firm-specific as the success of a company is becoming 
increasingly dependent on “soft” factors such as information on customers’ preferences. 
For the financial system, these changes create the need for adjustment in three areas: The design of 
financial contracts, the valuation of firms and assessment of business risk, and the risk management 
of financial institutions.  
Let  me  first  look  at  the  design  of  financial  contracts.  IT  increases  the  need  for  capital  that  bears 
business risk, and for corporate governance structures that create incentives to adapt to new ways of 
production.  This  points  to  a  greater  role  of  equity  and  of  financial  contracts  incorporating  equity 
characteristics, something that has been observed over the past couple of years.  
Venture capital has offered a way to combine funding of high-risk projects, and managerial support, in 
a  flexible  way  for  new  and  innovative  firms.  Established  firms  in  the  IT  sector,  but  also  in  other 
industries,  have  increasingly  relied  on  public  equity  and  on  debt  instruments  incorporating  equity 
BIS Review 10/2002 
 1
  2 
 characteristics.  Examples  are  convertible  bonds,  issuance  in  the  high  yield  segment  of  the  bond 
market, coupon step-up clauses, or bank loans which link the credit spreads charged to a borrower’s 
actual performance. 
One observation relevant for public policy is the importance of venture capital for the development of 
new industries.  Clearly, the venture capital market warrants the attention of public policy, including 
issues  such  as  investment  opportunities  for  institutional  investors  and  the  existence  of  market 
segments  complementary  to  a  functioning  venture  capital  market.  For  example,  a  developed  equity 
market is required as an exit route for venture capital investments, and for the provision of sufficient 
risk capital in the later stages of the corporate life cycle. 
The  second  set  of  issues  relates  to  the  valuation  of  firms  in  the  equity  markets.  Overshooting 
expectations, and swings in sentiment, are to some extent an unavoidable by-product of innovation. 
But  in  order  to  minimise  such  overshooting,  looking  ahead,  one  important  issue  is  to  identify 
mechanisms  that  support  efficient  equity  valuation.  Consistent  and  open  reporting  of  corporate 
accounts is one central issue in this respect.  
On  the  positive  side,  the  huge  loss  in  equity  wealth  has  not  triggered  any  major  default  among 
financial intermediaries. This suggests that the shift of risk from financial intermediaries to investors in 
financial markets has provided for a better, more dispersed allocation of risk.  
This  leads  me  to  the  third  aspect,  the  implication  of  IT-related  change  on  the  assessment  and 
management  of  credit  risk.  Banks  may  face  a  rapidly  evolving  credit  risk  environment.  The  credit 
quality of individual firms and the correlation of risk factors among sectors will change quickly in the 
continuing process re-positioning of firms.  
As a consequence, issues related to sectoral exposures - as in the case of telecoms - or an increasing 
reliance on credit risk transfer tools, would become increasingly relevant. This is even more important 
as  increasing  firm-specific  risk may  require  larger  portfolios  and  a  greater  range  of  exposures  than 
before.  
Another fundamental issue is that technological change challenges the reliability of backward-looking 
indicators  (such  as  default  histories)  for  credit  risk  assessment.  This  would  call  for  an  intensified 
monitoring  of  high-tech  sector  firms,  but  also  of  “traditional”  borrowers,  who  may  be  vulnerable  to 
mistakes regarding the choice of technology. 
Let me conclude. Innovation is beneficial - and it can be particularly beneficial in the case of a general 
purpose  technology  such  as  IT.  This  being  said,  public  policy  should  have  a  genuine  interest  in 
promoting entrepreneurial spirit and innovation.  
However, if one sees innovation as a process of creative destruction, it is also important to contain the 
destructive  forces  that  may  threaten  financial  stability.  The  general  challenge  in  this  respect  is  to 
properly understand and manage the risks involved in the financing of innovation.  
From the perspective of central banks in their responsibility for financial stability, the report highlights 
two areas where individual central banks and the central banking community as a whole play a part:  
• 
To employ the research capabilities and the knowledge of the financial system combined in 
central  banks  to  analyse  issues  such  as  accounting  and  transparency,  or  the  impact  of 
increasing reliance on credit risk transfer through securitisation or credit derivatives. 
To use central bank expertise for the monitoring of the financial system. Changing linkages 
between the real and the financial sphere, and across the different segments of the financial 
system, in particular the re-allocation of risk across the financial system, underline the need 
for such systemic monitoring. 
BIS Review 10/2002
