 Willem F Duisenberg: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
21 May 2002 
 I take pleasure in appearing before you today to continue our regular exchanges of views and to report 
to you on the ECB’s assessment of economic and monetary developments and on the decisions taken 
by the Governing Council. Moreover, I should like to take the opportunity to address in my introductory 
remarks  two  issues  related  to  the  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  economy  and  to  wage 
developments, which were raised, among other matters, in a letter that you, Madam Chairman, sent 
me  recently  as  a  follow-up  to  the  presentation  of  the  ECB  Annual  Report  to  this  Committee  by  the 
Vice-President of the ECB. 
Economic and monetary developments 
The evidence which has become available since my last testimony to your Committee on 23 January 
2002 has indeed made us confident that a recovery is under way in the euro area. At the same time, 
recent developments in consumer price inflation in the euro area have been less favourable than we 
expected,  mainly  due  to  specific  and  partly  temporary  factors.  Related  to  this,  the  outlook  for  price 
stability appears to be somewhat less favourable now than it was at the turn of the year. However, 
there  are  still  uncertainties  on  the  strength  of  the  economic  recovery  and  they,  in  turn,  imply  the 
existence of uncertainties regarding the inflation outlook - and these uncertainties have not diminished 
since  the  Governing  Council  meeting  on  2  May.  Let  me  now  elaborate  on  this  assessment  of  the 
economic outlook for the euro area. 
Starting with the analysis under the first pillar of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, the annual growth 
rate  of  M3  remained  high  in  the  first  quarter  of  2002.  The  high  annual  growth  rate  still  reflects  the 
portfolio  shifts  to  liquid  positions  which  occurred  last  autumn,  when  the  economic  and  financial 
environment  was  characterised  by  high  uncertainty,  and  euro  area  investors  showed  a  particularly 
marked preference for liquid holdings. At the same time, we saw some moderation in the short-term 
dynamics of M3 in early 2002. However, M3 growth has only recently started to decline and, for the 
time being, the reversal of the earlier liquidity build-up is proceeding only slowly. The persistence of 
excess liquidity could become a risk to price stability, particularly at a time of economic recovery in the 
euro area. In addition, it should also be considered that while the annual rate of growth of loans to the 
private sector continued to decline until March, there are also early indications that this decline may be 
coming to an end. Overall, the information from the first pillar therefore continues to deserve particular 
attention. 
As regards the second pillar, we are now certain that the trough in economic activity in the euro area 
was reached  at  the end  of last  year. The rise  in business confidence  in recent  months is the most 
visible indication of the improvement in economic conditions. While the recovery is expected to initially 
proceed  at  a  gradual  pace,  euro  area  real  GDP  growth  rates  should  again  be  in  line  with  potential 
growth  later  this  year.  These  expectations  for  a  rebound  in  real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  are 
shared by recently published forecasts of international organisations, which all paint a similar picture. 
A reversal of the past reduction in inventories, a process which is now under way, and higher export 
growth, driven by a more positive international environment, should contribute to the gradual economic 
upswing. Overall, domestic and external factors should foster the recovery. Sound fundamentals and 
the  absence  of  major  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  which  would  require  a  long  correction  process 
support this positive outlook for the euro area economy. 
Yet, despite all these positive elements pointing towards an economic recovery, uncertainties remain 
about the strength of the current upswing. These are partly related to the development of oil prices 
and to the speed of the recovery of consumption. In addition, some risks to the economic recovery in 
the euro area are related to imbalances elsewhere in the world economy. 
Turning to prices, recent developments in consumer price inflation have been less satisfactory than 
was expected at the end of last year, when annual inflation rates were expected to decline to levels 
safely  below  2%  in  2002  and  stabilise  thereafter.  At  present,  partly  as  a  result  of  higher  oil  prices, 
  inflation rates during 2002 as a whole could turn out to be somewhat higher than we expected at the 
end of last year. For price stability to be maintained, it is essential that past upward shocks to inflation 
rates  remain  of  a  one-off  nature  and  do  not  become  entrenched  in  the  expectations  of  economic 
agents.  Recently  published  inflation  forecasts,  developments  in  indicators  of  inflation  expectations, 
and recent trends in wages neither confirm nor contradict such an entrenchment. While we have to 
acknowledge  that  monetary  policy  cannot  affect  inflation  developments  over  the  short  term,  we  are 
determined not to put our achievements at risk. 
It  is  therefore  particularly  important  at  this  juncture  to  remain  vigilant  with  regard  to  the  further 
evolution of the key factors determining the outlook for prices. 
The  rather  protracted  upward  trend  in  services  prices  is,  in  this  respect,  one  factor  to  be  closely 
monitored. In addition, prospects for price stability depend largely on wage moderation. It is a mistake 
to believe that high wage rises per se will increase aggregate demand in real terms. On the contrary, 
excessive  wage  claims  will  increase  costs  and  create  inflationary  pressures.  By  doing  so,  they  risk 
reducing  competitiveness,  employment  growth,  and  thus  consumption.  Wage  moderation  is  a  key 
factor not only to maintain price stability, but also to support job creation and economic growth on a 
sustained basis. 
In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  key  challenge  to  the  euro  area  remains  the 
improvement  in  conditions  for  an  increase  in  productivity.  This  would  further  expand  trend  potential 
growth and thereby create, supported by wage moderation, the conditions for reducing the high level 
of  structural  unemployment  in  the  euro  area.  In  this  respect,  the  speeding-up  of  structural  policy 
measures which aim to increase productivity is of the utmost importance. For this purpose, the 2002 
Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines  should  set  the  conditions  for  stepping  up  the  pace  of  economic 
reform. This requires an acceleration and deepening of structural reforms in the labour, product and 
financial markets in order to provide economic agents with the proper incentives. 
As regards fiscal policy, it is vital that that all Member States maintain a medium-term perspective in 
compliance  with  the  framework  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  In  particular,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  that  those  that  have  not  already  done  so  manage  the  transition  to  budgetary  positions 
close to balance or in surplus in order to ensure the smooth and effective functioning of the Stability 
and Growth Pact in the future. Let me strongly emphasise that all the Member States concerned must 
honour the commitments made to achieving  balanced budgets by 2003-04. Moreover, governments 
should  pursue  ambitious  reforms  with  regard  to  the  size  and  structure  of  public  expenditure  and 
revenue, also in order to create room for further tax cuts and to absorb the fiscal costs of population 
ageing. 
Monetary policy will best contribute to the long-term growth prospects for the euro area if it remains 
firmly focused on the maintenance of price stability. This will create a stable monetary environment for 
economic  agents  to  operate  in.  At  the  same  time,  greater  flexibility  in  labour,  product  and  financial 
markets  together  with  sound  fiscal  positions  and  wage  moderation  will  support  the  objective  of 
maintaining  price  stability  and  will  create  stable  conditions  to  foster  employment  creation.  Such  an 
interaction of policies, in which policy actors, in accordance with the Treaty, consistently pursue their 
own assignments and responsibilities, is the best possible way to enhance the long-term welfare of the 
citizens of the euro area. 
I will be pleased to answer your questions now. 
 