 Bank of Japan’s March report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 22 March 2002  
 The Bank’s View2 
Japan’s  economy  still  continues  to  deteriorate  as  a  whole,  although  the  downward  pressure  from 
exports and inventories is gradually abating. 
With regard to final demand, the decline in net exports (real exports minus real imports) has almost 
ceased  amid  the  improvement  in  exporting  conditions.  Meanwhile,  business  fixed  investment 
continues to decrease and private consumption remains weak. Moreover, housing investment remains 
sluggish and public investment is also declining.  
To be sure, final demand  overall is still  weak, but exports—which have  a relatively  large  impact on 
production—have  recently  stopped  declining.  Also,  inventory  adjustment  is  progressing  further  in 
many industries including electronic parts due to the continued production cutbacks to date. Reflecting 
these developments, the decline in industrial production is moderating further. However, firms maintain 
their stance on reducing personnel expenses under strong excessiveness in employment. Under this 
situation, the severity of employment and income conditions of households is rather intensifying, with 
unemployment being on a rising trend and the rate of decline in wages expanding. 
Turning to the outlook, as for exporting conditions, the synchronized inventory adjustment in IT-related 
goods worldwide is nearing an end. Under this condition, the East Asian economies appear to have hit 
bottom.  As  for  the  U.S.,  the  possibility  is  increasing  that  the  economy  will  recover  since  household 
spending  remains  solid  and  inventory  adjustment  has  almost  finished,  although  there  still  remain 
uncertain  factors.  Furthermore,  the  yen  is  at  low  levels  compared  to  last  autumn.  Under  these 
circumstances,  exports  are  expected  to  turn  up  toward  the  middle  of  this  year.  Still,  the  pace  of 
recovery  in  exports  will  be  modest,  while  the  anticipated  expansion  in  overseas  economies  is  only 
gradual and final demand for IT-related goods worldwide remains stagnant for the time being.  
Meanwhile,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  follow  a 
downtrend reflecting the fall in corporate profits. Private consumption is also likely to remain lackluster 
mainly  due  to  worsening  employment  and  income  conditions.  While  domestic  private  demand 
generally  weakens  as  mentioned  above,  government  spending  is  basically  projected  to  follow  a 
downward  trend.  Consequently,  it  may  take  quite  a  while  for  economic  activity  as  a  whole  to  stop 
declining,  even  though  the  decrease  in  industrial  production  may  come  to  an  end  against  the 
background of the improvement in exporting conditions and completion of inventory adjustment.  
Overall,  the  economic  deterioration  in  Japan  is  projected  to  moderate  steadily,  as  production  stops 
declining due mainly to the recovery in exports. Still, while the economy continues to be in a fragile 
state,  continuous  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  risk  of  a  negative  impact  on  the  economy  from 
developments in foreign and domestic financial markets. 
With regard to prices, import prices are increasing reflecting the depreciation of the yen since around 
the end of last year and the rise in international commodity prices. The decline in domestic wholesale 
prices is recently contracting somewhat against the background of the increase in import prices and 
the progress in inventory adjustment. Consumer prices continue to decline with the effects of the fall in 
crude oil prices in the latter half of last year persisting, while the prices of imported products and their 
substitutes keep on falling. Corporate service prices continue to decline. 
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the depreciation of the yen from around the end 
of last year and the rise in international commodity prices are regarded as factors to support prices for 
the time being. However, since domestic demand is projected to remain weak for a time, the balance 
between supply and demand is expected to keep exerting downward pressure on prices. Furthermore, 
factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
March 19 and 20, 2002. 
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on March 19 and 20 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 21/2002 
 1
 of distribution channels will restrain prices. In addition, the expansion in the rate of decline in wages 
may  also  work  as  a  factor  to  push  prices  downward, mainly  in  services  prices  which  are  apt  to  be 
influenced by this factor. Overall, prices are expected to follow a gradual declining trend for the time 
being. Moreover, given the high degree of uncertainty regarding future economic developments, the 
possibility that weak demand will further intensify downward pressure on prices continuously warrants 
careful monitoring. 
In the financial market, the overnight call rate continues to move around zero percent as the Bank of 
Japan provided ample liquidity to the money market by aiming at maintaining the outstanding balance 
of the current accounts at the Bank at around 10 to 15 trillion yen. 
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  rose  somewhat  temporarily  generated  by  the  activation  of  fund-
raising beyond the fiscal year-end since mid-February, but continue to be at low levels since this rise 
was constrained due to additional measures decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting on February 28. 
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  are  mainly  moving  in  the  range  of  1.4-1.5  percent  recently. 
Yield spreads between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds are 
expanding slightly. 
Stock prices started to turn up due to tighter regulations on short-selling of stocks and the rise in U.S. 
stocks, and are subsequently increasing as domestic and foreign institutional investors bought back. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen surged temporarily in reaction to the rise in Japanese stock 
prices but is weakening once again thereafter. 
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious  in  extending  loans  to 
firms  with  high  credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip 
companies.  The  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  firms  are  becoming  more 
severe.  In  corporate  bonds  and  CP  markets,  the  fund-raising  conditions  are  generally  favorable 
particularly  for  firms  with  high  credit  ratings,  but  the  issuing  environment  for  those  with  low  credit 
ratings continues to be severe on the whole. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  continues  to  follow  a  downtrend  mainly  because  firms  are 
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline at about 2 percent on a year-
on-year basis. Meanwhile, the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is growing at around 2-3 
percent  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  The  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  amount  outstanding  of  CP 
issued continues to decline, although the amount is still well above the previous year’s level.  
The  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  monetary  base  has  increased  further  and  is  recording  a 
substantial increase of somewhat less than 30 percent. The  year-on-year growth rate of the money 
stock (M2 + CDs) has increased slightly.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole, although market funding 
costs for some firms and the long-term prime lending rate are rising somewhat. 
Overall,  the  recent  financial  environment  remains  extremely  easy  on  the  whole  in  terms  of  money 
market  conditions.  However,  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  with  high  credit  risks,  especially  of 
small firms, are gradually becoming more severe as private banks and investors continue to be more 
cautious in  taking credit risks. Hence, the  developments in the  behavior  of financial institutions and 
corporate financing continue to require closer monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2002
