David Dodge: Canada’s economic performance after an eventful year 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, 18 September 2002 
 Good afternoon. I was delighted to accept your invitation to speak to you today. I’d like to spend some 
time reflecting on the evolution of the Canadian economy and what we as Canadians have achieved in 
the  past  few  years.  Then  I  will  talk  a  bit  about  the  outlook  and  the  uncertainties  facing  the  global 
economy, and how Canada’s successes on the fiscal and monetary fronts will help us weather those 
uncertainties. 
But first, I’d like to say how much I appreciate the chance to return to the University of British Columbia 
campus. Five years ago, I was here as a Senior Fellow in the Commerce Faculty. While my current job 
is  different,  there  is  one  common  thread  that  unites  this  institution  and,  indeed,  all  Canadian 
universities, with the Bank of Canada—a commitment to excellence in research. 
The Bank of Canada fellowship program 
Indeed,  a  strong  research  environment  has  long  been  a  hallmark  of  the  Bank.  We  also  want  to 
encourage research relevant to our business, especially with respect to monetary policy and financial 
system stability, at universities all across Canada. That is why I am very pleased to announce today 
that the Bank of Canada is launching a Fellowship Program to foster high-calibre research in crucial 
economic areas. 
The  program  will  be  open  to  professors  at  Canadian  universities  who  have  a  record  of  high-quality 
research. The Bank fellowships will pay a salary stipend and provide funding for graduate research 
assistants and expenses. 
We  plan  to  award  two  fellowships  the  first  year,  and  one  each  year  after  that,  for  a  total  of  six 
fellowships by 2007. We hope the program will expand the pool of leading-edge research conducted 
across  this  country  and  strengthen  Canadian  expertise  in  areas  critical  to  our  mandate,  such  as 
macroeconomics, monetary economics, international finance, and the economics of financial markets 
and institutions. 
Expanded  research  and  a  broader  knowledge  base  will  benefit  the  Bank  of  Canada,  universities 
working  to  build  strong  economics  departments  and,  indeed,  all  Canadians.  And  I  am  particularly 
pleased to be launching our Fellowship Program here, at a university that is committed to producing 
the type of ground-breaking analysis we hope to encourage. 
Improving the policy framework 
When I first arrived at UBC in the fall of 1997, Canada was completing a decade of struggle to get our 
economic policies right. 
During  the  period  1988  through  1997,  we  took  some  important  steps  towards  improving  both  our 
monetary and fiscal policies. The Bank of Canada, responding to the high and unpredictable inflation 
rates  of  the  1970s  and  early  1980s,  adopted  at  the  end  of  the  1980s  a  monetary  policy  aimed  at 
achieving price stability. To make this commitment more concrete, the Bank and the Government of 
Canada  agreed  in  1991  on  a  series  of  inflation-control  targets  aimed  at  bringing  the  12-month  CPI 
inflation rate down to 2 per cent - plus or minus 1 per cent - by December 1995. The decline in inflation 
was achieved in fairly short order - by January 1992, inflation was close to 2 per cent. The agreement 
has subsequently been extended three times, retaining the 2 per cent target midpoint. 
For almost ten years now, inflation has been well under control, and households and businesses now 
believe we will continue to achieve the inflation targets. Inflation expectations are well anchored, not 
just for the near term, but well into the future. Almost a decade of low inflation makes it easy to forget 
how difficult it was to achieve our inflation targets, and the economic price that was paid to achieve the 
tremendous benefits of low and stable inflation. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 1
Back when I was teaching here, federal and provincial governments were in the midst of the painful 
but necessary process of fiscal consolidation. The federal government had been working to curb the 
rising debt-to-GDP ratio, but it really wasn’t until 1995 that the government had done enough to tip the 
scales decisively toward deficit reduction. And it was 1997 before the cumulative effects of all those 
deficit-reduction measures put federal fiscal policy back on a sustainable track. 
The debt-to-GDP ratio at the federal level has since fallen to less than 50 per cent, from a peak of 
71 per cent  in  1995.  And  while  some  provinces  are  still  struggling  to  maintain  budget  surpluses,  all 
have taken important steps to put their fiscal houses in order. 
Governments and the Bank of Canada were working to get public policies - the fiscal and monetary 
framework  -  right.  The  private  sector  was  also  restructuring  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities 
provided  by  the  Canada-U.S.  Free  Trade  Agreement  and  to  increase  its  productivity  and 
competitiveness. It is not surprising that during those years of adjustment we had slower growth than 
the United States. But by the late 1990s, our economy was beginning to reap the benefits of those 
restructuring  efforts.  The  end  result  of  all  this  effort  -  the  adoption  of  inflation  targets,  the  fiscal 
improvement and the private sector restructuring - was that Canada’s economy became better able to 
weather major shocks such as the Asian crisis, or last year’s global slowdown. 
Indeed,  over  the  period  from  1997  to  2001,  Canada  averaged  annual  economic  growth  of  about 
4 per cent,  while  the  U.S.  average  was  about  3.5  per  cent.  And  while  the  U.S.  economy  fell  into 
recession last year, ours did not. 
Although the productivity growth of Canadian companies has not been as strong as that of firms in the 
United  States,  we  have  seen  encouraging  signs  that  investments  in  technology  and  training  are 
leading to greater productivity gains here. Indeed, business sector labour productivity in Canada grew 
at an annualized rate of 2.0 per cent from 1997 to 2001, much higher than the 1.2 per cent average 
over  the  1990-96  period,  and  only  a  bit  below  the  revised  2.3  per  cent  rate  of  productivity  growth 
recorded in the United States. 
As  we  look  forward,  we  see  positive  signs  for  future  productivity  growth  in  Canada,  thanks  to  the 
efforts  of  Canadian  firms  to  adjust  to  new  technologies  and  incorporate  them  into  their  business 
processes. 
The shocks of 2000-2001 
Indeed, the economy has held up remarkably well when you consider that we have been hit with four 
major shocks during the past couple of  years. First,  there  was the meltdown  in the technology  and 
telecommunications industries, which began in late 2000 and the effects of which are still being felt 
today. The second was the broader economic slowdown in 2001 that affected, to various degrees, the 
economies of most countries. 
Third, and overshadowing every other event last year, was the 11 September terrorist attacks. With 
the first anniversary just passed, this seems like an  appropriate time to reflect  on the extraordinary 
events that have buffeted the North American economies since that terrible day, and to review how the 
Bank of Canada responded to those events. 
Our  most  immediate  responsibility  was  to  keep  Canada’s  financial  system  functioning.  Our  next 
responsibility was to promote consumer and investor confidence. Therefore, the Bank of Canada took 
extraordinary monetary policy action. On 17 September last year, we reduced our key policy interest 
rate  outside  our  scheduled  announcement  dates.  Between  September  2001  and  January  2002,  we 
lowered interest rates by a total of 200 basis points to help mitigate the impact of 11 September on an 
already-weakening economy. 
It turned out that consumer confidence in Canada was not as badly shaken as had been feared. As 
the immediate geopolitical and economic uncertainties diminished, consumers responded strongly and 
quickly  to  the  monetary  stimulus.  Interest  rate-sensitive  sectors,  such  as  housing  and  automobiles, 
showed remarkable strength. Indeed, in the fourth quarter of last year we saw annualized GDP growth 
of almost 3 per cent, when most analysts were expecting the Canadian economy to shrink. 
However, as we recovered from the 2001 slowdown and from 11 September, the U.S. economy was 
hit by a fourth shock - loss of confidence in the integrity of financial reporting and analysis as a result 
of  Enron,  WorldCom,  and  other  accounting  and  corporate  governance  scandals.  Unfortunately,  the 
uncertainty  caused  by  these  problems  in  the  United  States  has  spilled  over  into  other  financial 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2002
markets,  including  ours.  This  has  created  additional  caution  for  businesses  and  appears  to  have 
delayed the expected recovery in investment worldwide. 
In  spite  of  these  four  economic  shocks,  Canada’s  economic  performance  has  been,  in  comparison 
with  other  countries,  rather  good.  Clearly,  this  has  been  a  difficult  year  for  the  mining  and  forestry 
industries in British Columbia, for grains and oilseeds producers in the Prairies, and for the telecom 
industry across the country. But overall, our economy has consistently exceeded the average growth 
rates of the G-7 countries since 1997. And both the IMF and the OECD predict that Canada will post 
the strongest growth rate of the G-7 in both 2002 and 2003. 
I want to emphasize that Canada’s recent strong performance isn’t just good luck. It is the result of 
having  a  solid  policy  framework,  both  in  terms  of  inflation  and  fiscal  control.  The  benefits  of  this 
framework  are  well  understood,  not  just  by  the  government  and  the  Bank  of  Canada,  but  by 
Canadians in general. We stuck to that framework during the recent economic turmoil, and we are now 
seeing a clear payback for the tremendous investment that Canadians made in opening this country to 
free trade, and in getting our macroeconomic framework right in the 1990s. 
That  framework  holds  and  will  continue  to  serve  us  well.  If  anyone  still  needs  convincing  of  that, 
Canada’s recent economic performance provides compelling evidence. 
Canada’s economic prospects 
Canada’s  economic  growth  so  far  this  year  has  exceeded  expectations.  Real  GDP  jumped  by 
6.2 per cent at annual rates in the first quarter of 2002 and rose by 4.3 per cent in the second quarter. 
The Bank of Canada believes that keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable is the best contribution 
monetary policy can make to strong and sustained growth in Canada. We run monetary policy in a 
symmetrical way. That is to say, we pay equal attention to persistent pressures that could move us 
away from our 2 per cent target - whether above or below. 
When  strong  demand  pushes  the  economy  against  the  limits  of  its  capacity  and  threatens  to  raise 
future inflation above the target, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy and mitigate 
those inflation pressures. 
When demand is weak, as we saw in 2001, future inflation is likely to ease. So the Bank will lower 
interest rates to stimulate the economy, and absorb economic slack, consistent with keeping inflation 
on target. The significant easing of monetary policy during 2001 was a key factor behind the strong 
growth of household demand in the first half of this year. 
Let me now turn to the outlook. In our April Monetary Policy Report, we said that the recovery in the 
Canadian  economy  began  sooner,  and  was  considerably  stronger,  than  anticipated.  Consumer 
spending  and  residential  construction  were  reflecting  the  stimulus  from  both  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy.  Canada’s  export  volumes  had  begun  to  grow  once  again,  as  the  U.S.  economy  began  to 
recover. By the time of our Monetary Policy Report Update in July, we were also seeing a rebuilding of 
inventories  and  an  increase  in  spending  on  machinery  and  equipment.  These  were  suggesting  a 
broadening of the recovery across economic sectors. 
The July Update still reflects our view of the economy. As we said two weeks ago, domestic demand 
in Canada remains stronger than expected, bolstered by the substantial amount of monetary stimulus 
still in the economy. Canada’s record of job creation has been nothing short of remarkable, with almost 
400,000 new jobs since the beginning of the year. This strong job growth is reinforcing the confidence 
of Canadian consumers. In addition, medium and small businesses continue to invest. All this paves 
the way for higher output and ongoing strong domestic demand. 
But  at  the  same  time,  there  are  downside  risks  and  uncertainties,  mostly  originating  from  outside 
Canada.  Near-term  prospects  for  growth  in  the  United  States  and  the  major  overseas  economies 
appear to have weakened. Private and public sector economists have revised down their near-term 
growth forecasts for the United States, Europe, and Japan. This could imply that Canada’s exports, 
which  were  already  slightly  weaker  than  anticipated  in  the  second  quarter,  could  continue  to  be 
affected by slower growth in global demand. 
The geopolitical situation remains quite unsettled. Finally, in the United States and Canada, we are still 
working through the corporate governance issues that have contributed to this year’s financial market 
volatility. History has taught us that during periods of uncertainty, business and consumers tend to sit 
on their hands until the outlook is clearer. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 3
Let me conclude. It remains the Bank’s view that as the Canadian economy continues to expand and 
to approach capacity, further timely and measured reductions in the amount of monetary stimulus will 
be necessary. Let me remind you what I mean by “timely and measured.” “Timely” relates to the fact 
that  there  is  always  a  lag  between  our  policy  actions  and  their  effect  on  the  economy.  “Measured” 
relates to the judgments that we make at each fixed announcement date about the pace at which the 
economy is approaching full capacity, taking into account new information and data as they become 
available. 
Our  current  view  is  that  the  fundamental  underlying  strength  of  the  Canadian  economy  has  not 
changed since our July Monetary Policy Report Update. Domestic demand may well be stronger; at 
the same time, the external uncertainties bearing on the outlook appear to be greater than they were 
in early July. 
We will provide a detailed view of our outlook for the Canadian economy in our next Monetary Policy 
Report, on 23 October. 
This past year has certainly been full of challenges. Over the last decade, Canada has put in place the 
right macroeconomic policy framework to weather major shocks and take advantage of opportunities. 
We are confident that this framework will stand us in good stead in the future. 
 4 
 BIS Review 51/2002
