 Bank of Japan’s September report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 19 September 2002. 
 The Bank’s View2 
Japan’s economy, despite persistent weakness in domestic demand and large uncertainty regarding 
the  global  economy,  has  almost  stabilized  as  a  whole  with  exports  and  production  continuing  to 
increase. 
With regard to final  demand,  while the decline in business fixed investment has become moderate, 
private  consumption  remains  weak.  Moreover,  housing  investment  remains  sluggish  and  public 
investment is declining. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus real imports) continue to increase 
due to the recovery in overseas economies.  
Industrial  production  remains  on  an  upward  trend  in  response  to  the  rise  in  exports  and  adequate 
reduction  of  excess  inventory  stocks.  Against  this  background,  corporate  profits  have  started  to 
recover. In addition, the rebound in production has been effecting labor markets, albeit marginally, with 
an increase in overtime hours worked and in new job offers mainly for part-time workers. However, as 
firms are still maintaining their stance on reducing personnel expenses, household income continues 
to decrease noticeably with a plunge in summer bonuses. Thus, the employment and income situation 
of households overall remains severe. 
Turning  to  the  economic  outlook,  the  growth  in  exports  is  expected  to  slow  temporarily  with  the 
impetus  from  overseas  restocking  coming  to  a  halt,  but  the  uptrend  in  exports  will  be  maintained 
against the background of the moderate recovery in overseas economies. Thus, industrial production 
is also expected to follow a moderate uptrend despite a temporary slowdown.  
With respect to domestic demand, public investment is projected to follow a declining trend and private 
consumption  is  likely  to  remain  weak  for  some  time  due  to  the  severe  employment  and  income 
situation. Leading indicators suggest that business fixed investment will stop declining, but a distinct 
recovery  in  the  immediate  future  is  unlikely  partly  due  to  large  uncertainty  regarding  overseas 
economies. Nevertheless, if the uptrend in exports and production continues, corporate profits will stay 
on a track to recovery, and this will gradually have a positive impact on domestic private demand.  
Overall, it can be envisaged that the stabilization of Japan’s economy will gradually become definite as 
overseas economies continue the moderate recovery. However, it will take a while for the economy to 
show clear signs of recovery, as the pace of increase in exports and production is expected to slow 
temporarily while restraining forces such as excessive labor input and debt persist. Furthermore, there 
is large uncertainty regarding exports such as the developments in stock prices in the United States 
and  worldwide,  the  outlook  for  IT-related  goods,  and  geopolitical  factors  and  oil  prices.  In  these 
circumstances, the recent weakness in domestic stock prices and its potential adverse effects on the 
financial system and the economy should be monitored carefully.  
On the price front, import prices are declining mainly due to the U.S. dollar’s depreciation against the 
yen from spring toward summer, but international commodity prices including crude oil have recently 
risen.  Domestic  wholesale  prices  have  weakened,  reflecting  the  decrease  in  import  prices  to  date. 
Moreover, consumer prices remain on a gradual downtrend and corporate services prices continue to 
decline.  
As  for  the  conditions  surrounding  price  developments,  the  balance  between  supply  and  demand  is 
expected to keep exerting downward pressure on prices for a while amid persistently weak domestic 
demand, although the completion of inventory adjustment and the rise in capacity utilization rates will 
support  prices  to  some  degree.  Moreover,  factors  such  as  the  ongoing  technological  innovations  in 
machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain prices. 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
September 17 and 18, 2002. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on September 17 and 18 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 1
 Under  these  circumstances,  domestic  wholesale  prices  are  projected  to  continue  to  be  weak  for  a 
while.  Consumer  prices  are  expected  to  stay  on  a  declining  trend  for  the  time  being  at  the  current 
gradual  pace.  While  the  slower  growth  in  imports  of  consumer  goods  is  expected  to  alleviate  the 
downward  pressure  on  prices  to  some  extent,  the  faster  pace  of  decline  in  wages  may  possibly 
reinforce the ongoing decline in prices, especially for services prices.  
As for the financial market, the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan is 
moving  around  15  trillion  yen  as  the  Bank  continues  to  provide  ample  liquidity.  Under  these 
circumstances,  in  the  short-term  money  markets,  more  market  participants  have  come  to  feel  that 
there is an excess of liquidity in the market and the overnight call rate continues to move at very close 
to zero percent. Also, longer-term interest rates are declining. 
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  followed  a  downtrend  in  line  with  a  decline  in  yields  on 
overseas  long-term  government  bonds  and  in  domestic  and  overseas  stock  prices,  in  addition  to 
widespread perceptions among market participants that there is an excess of liquidity. Yield spreads 
between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds are virtually level. 
Meanwhile, stock prices have been declining since the start of September in line with a decline in U.S. 
and  European stock prices, as more investors preferred to hold off buying stocks. Stock prices are 
mainly moving around 9,000-9,500 yen recently. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen, after being fluctuating without trend until early September, 
dropped in mid-September. It is currently being traded in the range of 122-123 yen to the U.S. dollar. 
With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high 
credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip  companies.  The 
lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms continue to be severe. In the corporate 
bonds and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with low credit ratings is still severe, but the 
environment for firms with high credit ratings is accommodative. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  continues  to  follow  a  downtrend  mainly  because  firms  are 
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP issued is recently moving near the 
previous year’s level.  
The monetary base increased substantially—by around 20-30 percent—from the previous year’s level. 
The year-on-year growth rate of the money stock remained around 3.5 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Overall,  the  recent  financial  environment  remains  extremely  easy  on  the  whole  in  terms  of  money 
market conditions. The deterioration in the financing situation of firms has come to a halt. However, 
the stance of investors toward firms with high credit risks remains severe and the lending attitudes of 
private banks remain cautious. Hence, the developments in the behavior of financial institutions and 
corporate financing continue to require close monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2002
