 Svein Gjedrem: The economic situation in Norway 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to invited foreign 
embassy representatives, Norges Bank, 21 March 2002. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen 
The economic outlook 
 
 
The world economy has been experiencing a slowdown. Economic growth stagnated in the US and 
the euro area in the last three quarters of 2001. Growth remained somewhat firmer in the UK, but was 
moderate towards the end of the year. GDP has fallen in Japan. 
In  most  countries,  public  and  private  consumption  fuelled  growth  in  demand,  while  a  fall  in  capital 
formation and inventories has exerted downward pressure. Growth in the US economy came to a halt 
last spring. Overinvestment, particularly in IT and telecom equipment led to low returns on capital and 
reduced  corporate  earnings.  The  stock  market  declined  when  growth  prospects  were  revised.  The 
unemployment rate rose. Terrorism and war added to the uncertainty. 
The US economy is flexible and seldom remains in recession for a long period. There are some signs 
of an early recovery.  Monetary  policy  and fiscal easing have supported continued growth in private 
consumption. Equity prices, commodity prices and long-term interest rates have picked up since the 
sharp decline following the events of September 11. 
Oil prices plunged by around 40 per cent between autumn 2000 and the end of 2001. Developments 
towards the end of last year were marked by lower demand for oil. In December, the OPEC countries 
together with Russia, Mexico and Norway decided to limit oil production. This may have contributed to 
increasing the oil price during the last months. The risk of war in the Middle East and the decline in 
commercial oil stocks in the US may also have contributed to increasing the oil price. 
Oil prices plunged by around 40 per cent between autumn 2000 and the end of 2001. Developments 
towards the end of last year were marked by lower demand for oil. In December, the OPEC countries 
together with Russia, Mexico and Norway decided to limit oil production. This may have contributed to 
increasing the oil price during the last months. The risk of war in the Middle East and the decline in 
commercial oil stocks in the US may also have contributed to increasing the oil price. 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 1
     2 
 BIS Review 20/2002
 The  global  slowdown  started  to  have  ripple  effects  on  the  Norwegian  economy  during  autumn  and 
winter.  Prices  for  important  Norwegian  export  products  fell,  and  markets for many  export  industries 
have weakened. Salmon prices dropped by close to 20 per cent in 2001, after reaching record levels 
the previous year. The trade policy in the EU stipulates a minimum price for salmon exports, to the 
benefit  of  ineffective  and  high  cost  producers.  The  volume  of  traditional  exports  fell  in  autumn  last 
year. Fish, iron and steel exports showed the steepest declines.  
 
Employment  stagnated  early  last  autumn,  but  picked  up  again  towards  the  end  of  the  year. 
Unemployment edged up somewhat in the latter half of 2001, but has remained low. In February 2002, 
registered unemployment was 3.1 per cent, or 0.3 percentage points higher than one year earlier.  
 
 
 
Norwegian  households  seem  relatively  unaffected  by  the  international  downturn.  Overall  consumer 
confidence  rose  sharply  in  the  first  quarter  of  2002,  back  to  the  level  recorded  early  in  2000. 
Households’  confidence  in  their  own  financial  situation  remained  high  throughout  the  autumn, 
reflecting solid growth in real disposable income and a comfortable net asset position.  
 
 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 3
  
We estimate that price inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be 2½ per cent two years ahead. 
The overall uncertainty surrounding the inflation projection is illustrated in this chart. On the whole, the 
risks seem balanced around our central projection of 2½ per cent. 
Norway’s  real  disposable  income  is  highly  affected  by  export  prices.  As  most  of  the  income  from 
exports  of  oil  and  gas  is  transferred  to  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund,  the  effects  of  the  global 
downturn on the activity level in Norway have been limited. The Norwegian economy may weather the 
downturn without any substantial impact on the level of activity or employment, but with a continued 
risk of high growth in labour costs in the business and public sectors.  
Economic policy 
The  guidelines  for  economic  policy  were  revised  last  year.  Henceforth,  the  real  return  on  the 
Government Petroleum Fund shall be used over the central government budget. Central government 
petroleum revenues shall continue to be transferred to the Government Petroleum Fund and invested 
abroad. 
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation. Since March 2001 the inflation 
target  is  set  at  2½  per  cent.  When  monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  stabilising  inflation,  it  also 
contributes to stabilising aggregate demand and output. The inflation target is the nominal anchor for 
the Norwegian economy. 
Low  inflation  is  the  objective  and  the  interest  rate  is  the  instrument.  If  it  appears  that  inflation  with 
unchanged  interest  rates  will  be  higher  than  2½  per  cent,  the  interest  rate  will  be  increased.  If  it 
appears that inflation with unchanged interest rates will be lower than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will 
be  lowered.  Low  and  stable  inflation  will  be  a  fixed  feature  of  economic  developments.  This  is 
something that the social partners, businesses, borrowers and investors in property and securities can 
take as a given. 
From  1986,  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  or  the  prospect  of  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  had 
implications for interest rates. A stable krone exchange rate was the nominal anchor. In Norway, this 
has been reflected in wage determination because labour cost developments among trading partner 
countries have been an important reference. 
Exchange  rates  between  major  international  currencies  fluctuate  widely.  The  US  dollar  has 
appreciated by more than 30 per cent since 1995. The German mark – the euro since January 1999 – 
has depreciated by about  the same between 1995 and autumn 2000. The Japanese  yen  has been 
particularly volatile. 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2002
   
Smaller countries have  also experienced fairly  wide  exchange rate fluctuations. The Swedish krona 
has depreciated by more than 10 per cent since summer 2000. The Australian dollar has weakened by 
over 30 per cent since spring 1997. The UK, Canada and New Zealand have also experienced wide 
exchange  rate  fluctuations.  The  Norwegian  krone  exchange  rate,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been 
relatively stable. 
 
 
 
Countries whose exports include a large component of raw materials tend to experience considerable 
volatility  in  their  exchange  rate.  Australia  is  one  example.  Fluctuations  in  commodity  prices  entail 
changes in countries’ terms of trade, which measures the ratio of export to import prices. Changes in 
the terms of trade have an impact on the exchange rate, which in turn curbs the effects of changes in 
commodity prices on profitability in the business sector. Hence, the exchange rate serves as a buffer 
against changes in the terms of trade. 
Norway’s  terms  of  trade  also  fluctuate  considerably,  primarily  reflecting  changes  in  oil  prices. 
However,  a  substantial  portion  of  petroleum  revenues  is  invested  in  foreign  equities  and  bonds 
through the Government Petroleum Fund. Changes in oil  prices influence the size of the Fund, but 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 5
 have little effect on the use of petroleum revenues at home. The Government Petroleum Fund thus 
serves as a buffer against swings in the oil price, and thereby stabilises the krone exchange rate. 
The  Norwegian  economy  may  nevertheless  be  exposed  to  disturbances  of  a  type  that  cannot  be 
absorbed by the Petroleum Fund. In the future, fluctuations in the value of our currency will probably 
be more in line with the fluctuations observed in other countries. The exchange rate will vary.  
 
 
The increase in labour costs is important when Norges Bank’s assesses the outlook for price inflation 
and  sets  interest  rates.  Since  1997,  labour  costs  have  increased  annually  by  between  5  and  7  per 
cent. In spite of this, consumer price inflation has been close to 2½ per cent over the past few years. 
The  krone  exchange  rate  has  appreciated  as  a  result  of  a  wider  interest  rate  differential  between 
Norway  and  other  countries.  Combined  with  low  growth  abroad  and  increased  trade  with  low-cost 
countries such as China, this led to a slower rise in import prices.  
In Norway, Voluntary Export Restraints on clothing have been removed and tariffs on clothing have 
been reduced considerably. In the EU and the US, a similar tendency has not been seen to the same 
extent. This may explain why prices for clothing have fallen in Norway relative to the EU and the US. 
However, there is still a long way to go before restrictions on clothing imports to Norway are entirely 
dismantled.  For  example,  there  is  a  duty  today  on  imported  children’s  clothing  and  on  shirts,  suits, 
jackets and trousers for men and boys. 
As the world economy recovers, import price inflation will edge up. A rise in labour costs of more than 
5 per cent will then only be consistent with the inflation target if the krone continues to appreciate. 
In  the  long  run,  wages  must  be  compatible  with  the  value  added  that  is  generated  by  workers,  i.e. 
labour productivity. Over time, the increase in real wages is therefore determined by developments in 
labour productivity. In Norway, productivity growth has averaged 1½-2 per cent over the last 20 years. 
If this continues to be the case, an increase in nominal labour costs of around 4-4½ per cent in the 
long term will be consistent with the inflation target. 
There  is  an  important  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  According  to  the 
guidelines  for fiscal  policy,  petroleum  revenues  are  to  be  phased  in  approximately  in  pace  with  the 
expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. This guideline implies that fiscal policy will 
contribute  to  stimulating  aggregate  demand  in  the  Norwegian  economy  every  year  for  many  years 
ahead.  The  guideline  also  implies  that  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  will  increase  as  long  as  the 
Petroleum Fund is expanding. 
Variations  in  oil  prices  are  accompanied  by  considerable  fluctuations  in  government  petroleum 
revenues from one year to the next. It is important to prevent these fluctuations from spilling over to 
the mainland economy. Public expenditure and taxes that vary in relation to oil prices would result in 
an  unstable  economic  environment.  Financial  markets  would  be  marked  by  uncertainty  and 
turbulence, with an increase in the risk premium on Norwegian securities. This would have resulted in 
6 
 BIS Review 20/2002
 higher  and  more  variable  interest  rates.  The  risk  of  financial  crises  in  Norway  would  also  have 
increased  because  the  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  Norwegian  economy  would  have  been  more 
pronounced. It is therefore an advantage that fiscal policy is now predictable and anchored in a long-
term strategy. 
The future size of the Petroleum Fund depends on oil price developments. The guideline ensures that 
we  only  use  the  return  on  wealth  that  has  already  been  accumulated.  This  makes  policy  robust  to 
changes in oil prices and ensures that petroleum wealth will be of benefit both today and in the future. 
The  guideline  provides  a  framework  that  contributes  to  making  the  central  government  budget  an 
appropriate tool for setting political priorities. It sets a limit on the share of petroleum revenues that the 
government can use each year and does not distinguish between domestic and foreign spending. This 
eliminates the waste of resources that two separate budgets would necessarily entail. 
The  government  invests  petroleum  wealth  in  foreign  securities  through  the  Petroleum  Fund. 
Government wealth is thereby more diversified. These investments have no impact on the Norwegian 
capital market. Both mainland private saving and business fixed investment have been high in recent 
years.  In  Norway,  credit  and  capital  markets  nevertheless  feature  some  weaknesses,  with  thin 
securities  markets  and  a  narrow  investor  and  ownership  base  compared  with  other  countries.  The 
reasons, and hence the solutions, can probably be found in the structure of the taxation of dwellings, 
property and financial assets, in a high level of state ownership of enterprises and in the organisation 
of  pension  saving  in  Norway.  Investing  even  more  government  capital  in  Norway  would  reduce  the 
return  on  investments  in  the  Norwegian  business  sector  and  prompt  other  investors  to  invest 
elsewhere.  Allocating  even more  capital  to  the  Norwegian  economy  would  probably  lead  to  a  rapid 
relocation of jobs to other countries, as the krone would tend to appreciate. 
Effects on industry structure 
The  planned  use  of  petroleum  revenues  will  increase  demand  for  public  and  private  services.  The 
guidelines imply an increase in the use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget of 
around 3½ per cent of mainland GDP by 2010. This may add 2½ -3 per cent of total employment in 
the  service  sector.  As  long  as  there  are  labour  shortages  in  Norway,  a  comparable  decline  in 
manufacturing employment is likely to occur. 
Although the phasing in of petroleum revenues is a gradual process, the contest for labour resources 
will  intensify.  As  a  result,  monetary  policy  is  likely  to  remain  fairly  tight  in  the  years  ahead.  A  high 
interest  rate  level  may  in  periods  result  in  a  strong  krone.  This  may  accelerate  the  scaling  back  of 
manufacturing industry. However, in the long run monetary policy cannot influence overall employment 
or its distribution across industries. A lower interest rate would have resulted in higher price and cost 
inflation,  which  would  also  have  weakened  profitability  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  The  end  result 
would have been the same for employment and production, but in addition we would have had to face 
the costs of high inflation. 
Even  if  employment  and  production  in  manufacturing  are  affected,  the  situation  for  Norwegian 
enterprises  will  not  necessarily  be  negative.  Some  enterprises  could  be  at  the  forefront  of 
technological developments and increase efficiency in pace with the relatively high rate of growth in 
real wages in Norway. In recent years, we have also seen that many enterprises have moved large 
portions  of  their  production  abroad,  particularly  the  most  labour-intensive  production.  Norwegian 
manufacturing  companies  could  therefore  remain  profitable  even  if  the  size  of  the  manufacturing 
sector  in  the  Norwegian  economy  is  reduced.  However,  the  scaling  back  of  manufacturing  also 
involves a risk. It makes the economy more vulnerable. The growth potential  of the economy  – the 
basis for learning, innovation and development – may be impaired when less of the business sector is 
exposed to intense foreign competition. 
Over  the  last  thirty  years,  manufacturing  industry  has  been  scaled  back  in  waves.  The  sharpest 
declines were observed in the years between 1977 and 1984 and from 1987 to 1992. The declines 
were preceded by a fall in profitability in this industry. It may take time for a weakening to spill over to 
output  and  employment,  but  when  the  turnaround  first  occurs  it  takes  place  rapidly  and  on  a  large 
scale. Primary industries, in contrast, are scaled back gradually. These developments will take place in 
addition  to  the  effects  associated  with  the  increased  spending  of  petroleum  revenues.  All  in  all, 
employment  in  manufacturing  and  agriculture  may  fall  by  2  -  5  per  cent  of  total  employment  in  the 
period to 2010. Employment in manufacturing may drop towards 10 per cent of the total. Agriculture 
may employ less than 2 per cent of total employment. 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 7
   
Changes in industry structure, with an increase in the number employed in services and a decrease in 
manufacturing,  will  probably  reduce  the  role  of  pay  increases  in  manufacturing  as  a  benchmark for 
wage determination. Among many of Norway’s trading partners, similar developments have occurred. 
However,  the  share  of  employment  in  manufacturing  and  agriculture  in  Norway  is  already  relatively 
low.  
Pensions 
While  high  oil  prices  have  resulted  in  sizeable  revenues  and  surpluses  on  the  current  account  and 
government budgets, growth in mainland output has been low over the last three years, at only 1 ¼ 
per  cent  per  year.  The  sluggish  growth  rate  may  be  attributed  to  the  supply  side  of  the  Norwegian 
economy.  Extensive  labour  reforms  have  limited  the  supply  of  labour.  Measured  by  person-hours, 
employment has fallen by 0.4 per cent annually in this period. At the same time, labour shortages have 
persisted in many sectors and overt unemployment has been stable and low.  
The business sector must restructure rapidly when real wages increase sharply. Many activities will no 
longer be profitable and will be shut down. This could lead to higher unemployment. However, lower 
employment will not necessarily be reflected in unemployment figures. We may instead see a flow of 
discouraged workers into, for example, disability pensions, early retirement schemes or different types 
of  adjustment  packages.  The  extent  to  which  these  schemes  are  used  will  depend  on  financial 
incentives and entitlement thresholds. 
8 
 BIS Review 20/2002
 In Norway, the employment rate is among the highest in the OECD area. This reflects both high labour 
force participation and low unemployment. 
 
The picture becomes more mixed when average working hours are taken into account. The average is 
lower in Norway than in other countries. The sickness absence rate is high. Part-time employment is 
widespread. 
 
The average number of person-hours worked in the working-age population is relatively low, despite 
high labour force participation and low unemployment. Among OECD countries, the only countries with 
lower figures than Norway are those with very high unemployment. 
In Norway, average working hours have fallen by more than 20 per cent in the last thirty years. This 
can be partly explained by the way working life and child care are organised, but similar trends are 
also seen in many other countries, especially in Scandinavia. 
We cannot simply assume that people want to work more, even if an increased labour input will result 
in  higher  income  and  greater  prosperity.  It  is  natural  to  use  some  of  the  increase  in  prosperity  for 
leisure. The considerable share of part-time employment may reflect choices that individuals do not 
necessarily want to change. 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 9
 On  the  other  hand,  if  we  increase  our  labour  input  to  the  level  in  Sweden,  without  reducing 
productivity, our future income would increase by more than the increase resulting from a doubling of 
our petroleum wealth. 
 
The structure of the tax and pension system influences the choice between work and leisure. Lower 
tax rates on employment income could boost labour input. The pension system is also of significance 
to labour input, as it influences employers’ labour investment decisions. 
 
 
The expansion of the labour force is coming to a halt. At the same time, the number of old-age and 
disability pensioners is rising rapidly. Twenty years ago, there were nearly three persons in the labour 
force for every pensioner, whereas in 20 years, there will be fewer than two. 
Although life expectancy is high, the average retirement age in Norway is steadily falling. For men over 
50, the average retirement age fell from nearly 67 in 1970 to a little more than 63 at the end of the 
1990s. For the entire labour force, including all age groups, the average pension age in the National 
Insurance Scheme was down to 58. 
Flexibility  in  working  hours  and  in  the  retirement  age  gives  each  worker  the  opportunity  to  choose 
between work and leisure. This freedom to choose is a benefit in itself. However, the terms - wages, 
10 
 BIS Review 20/2002
 working  hours  and  pension  schemes  -  should  reflect  the  value  added  of  labour.  Pension  benefits 
should therefore depend on how long each person chooses to remain in employment. 
Many  countries  have  evaluated  and  some  countries  have  worked  out  changes  in  their  pension 
systems to cover a higher portion of pension expenditure through accumulated capital, i.e. a funded 
system. Sweden has recently implemented a pension reform that ensures that annual pension benefits 
increase in relation to the number of years the person has worked. At the same time, an increase in 
life  expectancy  for  each  age  group  will  reduce  the  annual  pension.  This  motivates  the  person  to 
remain in employment and helps to ensure that the system is sustainable. 
 
Due  to  the  duration  of  the  transfers  to  pension  reserves  in  Sweden,  the  replacement  of  the  former 
pension system by the reformed one requires a transitional period over several years. In Norway, the 
surpluses on the current account and the Government Petroleum Fund simplify any replacement of 
today’s pension system by a funded pension system.  
Labour is our most important resource. The decline in average hours worked cannot continue if we are 
to have a sustainable pension system. The current evaluation of our public pension system must focus 
on the incentives to work and the effects on the average retirement age. A fund-based system may be 
an appropriate approach and at the same time make pension savings transparent for each individual. 
This may in itself provide an incentive to increase working hours. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 11
