 Willem F Duisenberg: The role of the Eurosystem in prudential supervision 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
conference  organised  by  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  on  the  50th  anniversary  of  Dutch  banking 
supervisory legislation, Amsterdam, 24 April 2002 
 I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  tonight  on  my  (cid:147)home  ground(cid:148)  and  to  participate  in  this  conference 
celebrating  the  50th  anniversary  of  Dutch  banking  supervisory  legislation.  I  would  like  to  thank 
President Wellink for giving me the opportunity to meet with this distinguished group of experts and 
former  colleagues  who  have  come  together  to  discuss  highly  topical  issues  in  the  field  of  banking 
supervision. 
The law enacted 50 years ago formalised the role of De Nederlandsche Bank in banking supervision. 
These duties had to some extent developed (cid:147)organically(cid:148), through the history of the Bank, out of its 
original function as provider of liquidity to commercial banks and its gathering of statistical data from 
them. I should probably not boast too much as I was myself involved in overseeing the Dutch banking 
system in my former position as the President of De Nederlandsche Bank. However, the supervisory 
system in the Netherlands has been undeniably successful. Dutch banks (cid:150) like the financial system as 
a whole (cid:150) have prospered and steadily improved their efficiency, and the stability of the system as a 
whole has generally withstood structural changes and episodes of financial market turbulence. 
The fact that we are celebrating a supervisory law which was established so long ago might give an 
image of a static regulatory and supervisory system. Some sceptical observers even take the general 
view that supervisory structures are rigid and are only ever discussed critically after major disruptions 
in the financial system. 
As we know, this image does not correspond to reality. In the Netherlands, many adjustments have 
been introduced over time in response to market developments rather than crisis events. For instance, 
co-operation mechanisms between the authorities in charge of supervising banks, securities firms and 
insurance  companies  were  established  (cid:150)  in  the  form  of  the  (cid:147)Raad  van  Financiºle  Toezichthouders 
(RFT)(cid:148)  (cid:150)  in  reaction  to  the  growing  importance  of  financial  conglomerates  and  the  development  of 
close links between different financial products. Moreover, the Dutch Ministry of Finance proposed last 
year  (cid:150)  with  subsequent  approval  by  Parliament  (cid:150)  to  strengthen  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  the 
prudential supervision of banks and financial conglomerates and to establish even closer links with the 
prudential supervision of insurance companies. These responsibilities are separate from the tasks of 
overseeing the conduct-of-business and consumer protection aspects. Among other things, this model 
honours  the  close  links  between  the  systemic  stability  interests  of  central  banks  and  the  prudential 
supervision of financial institutions. Financial stability is always in the direct interest of central banks, 
because of its importance for the successful conduct of the basic central banking tasks in the fields of 
monetary policy and payment systems. Although one should always be cautious in exporting national 
institutional structures to other countries, the Dutch model might provide useful insights to others. 
The current supervisory landscape in other European Union countries, as well as at the Community 
level,  is  also  far  from  being  static.  Discussions  of  the  appropriate  institutional  structures  and 
mechanisms have intensified both at the national and European level. These debates are very healthy 
and demonstrate an active response by policy-makers to the development of cross-sectoral links in the 
financial industry, as well as to the changes brought about by the euro and financial integration.  
Tonight,  I  would  like  to  review  briefly  these  national  and  European  discussions.  As  the  issues  are 
manifold, I would like to concentrate on the role of the national central banks and the Eurosystem in 
prudential supervision. The role of the Eurosystem is rooted in the Maastricht Treaty, which gives it the 
task  of  contributing  to  prudential  supervision  and  financial  stability,  while  keeping  the  primary 
responsibilities in these areas at the national level. 
Let me first turn to national developments. Following the creation of the Financial Services Authority in 
the United Kingdom, proposals have been put forward in a number of European countries, for instance 
in  Austria,  Germany  and  Ireland,  to  set  up  a  single  supervisory  authority  in  charge  of  all  financial 
institutions.  In  some  cases  (cid:150)  unlike  here  in  the  Netherlands  (cid:150)  the  proposals  have  also  included  a 
BIS Review 27/2002 
 1
 reduced role for the central bank in prudential supervision, while increasing the responsibilities of the 
separate supervisory agency. In ten out of twelve euro area countries, the central bank is still either 
directly responsible or otherwise closely involved in the operational conduct of supervisory duties. Only 
in  Luxembourg  and  Belgium  this  is  not  the  case,  and  in  the  latter  a  reform  is  being  proposed  that 
increases significantly the involvement of the central bank. 
As we have often said, the Eurosystem strongly supports a continued involvement of national central 
banks in prudential supervision, although the institutional set-up of financial supervision needs to be 
tailored  to  the  structure  of  the  respective  national  financial  system.  Any  solution  other  than  direct 
responsibility should be coupled with close co-operation and operational involvement of central banks 
in  order  to  allow  the  potential  synergies  between  central  banking  and  prudential  supervision  to  be 
exploited. Central banks(cid:146) knowledge of the overall economy and financial system, and their information 
from  payment  and  settlement  systems  and  monetary  policy  operations,  are  valuable  for  the 
performance of the supervisory tasks. Conversely, for central banks, supervisory information can play 
an important role in the oversight of payment and settlement systems and of market infrastructures, 
and in managing liquidity crises.  
Strong comments have been made against this view. The most often used arguments against central 
bank involvement in supervision have been the increasing importance of financial conglomerates and 
the blurring of the distinction between the three segments of the financial sector. These developments 
would call for the establishment of a single financial supervisor which should not be the central bank (cid:150) 
the  argument  runs  (cid:150)  since  this  would  worsen  conflicts-of-interest  between  central  banking  and 
prudential supervision and would lead to a concentration of power. In my view, one should not be too 
dogmatic about these arguments. Situations in  which such conflicts of interest would arise are  very 
rare in practice and central banks, like all other public bodies, are subject to accountability procedures. 
In any case, these concerns are dispelled in the euro area setting  by  the fact  that  decision-making 
takes place at different levels: euro area-wide for monetary policy, national for prudential supervision. 
The  arguments  for  keeping  central  banks  closely  involved  in  prudential  supervision  are  even 
reinforced  in  the  context  of  Monetary  Union.  More  integrated  financial  markets  can  absorb  shocks 
more easily than in the past, which is a very beneficial outcome. However, if shocks do occur, they are 
likely to have a wider impact across borders through wholesale banking and capital market links (cid:150) or 
through  payment  and  settlement  systems.  Thus,  the  contribution  of  the  Eurosystem  to  monitoring 
vulnerabilities in the financial system on a euro area-wide basis will be greater if the central banks are 
extensively involved in prudential supervision. 
Let  me  move  on  to  the  European  debate.  The  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  has  already 
assessed the adequacy of the existing arrangements for prudential supervision and the safeguarding 
of  financial  stability  in  the  European  Union  in  the  two  reports  produced  under  the  chairmanship  of 
Henk  Brouwer  from  De  Nederlandsche  Bank.  I  wish  to  congratulate  him  on  these  important 
achievements. The outcome of this analysis was that the current institutional system based on national 
responsibility  is  appropriate,  but  there  is  a  need  to  strengthen  cross-border  and  cross-sectoral 
co-operation between supervisors, to enhance convergence in supervisory practices and to reinforce 
collaboration  between  supervisory  and  central  banking  functions.  The  Eurosystem  supports  these 
conclusions. There are clear benefits in keeping supervision close to the institutions being overseen at 
the national level, while financial integration requires co-operation between the relevant authorities to 
be stepped up.  
In  my  view,  positive  developments  have  already  occurred  in  the  implementation  of  these 
recommendations.  For  example,  the  Banking  Supervision  Committee  of  the  European  System  of 
Central Banks (cid:150) chaired by Deutsche Bundesbank Directorate member Edgar Meister (cid:150) has enhanced 
and  continues  to  develop  its  regular  monitoring  of  the  soundness  of  the  European  Union  banking 
system as a whole,  as  well  as its  analysis of structural banking and financial developments. These 
activities rely extensively on the close and constructive co-operation established within the Committee 
between  central  banks  and  banking  supervisory  authorities.  Indeed,  the  Eurosystem  regards  the 
promotion  of  co-operation  between  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  as  one  of  its  main 
contributions in the field of prudential supervision. However, the full implementation of the (cid:147)Brouwer 
recommendations(cid:148) requires additional work in order to establish an effective information exchange (cid:150) 
both  in  times  of  calm  and  in  times  of  crisis  (cid:150)  and  to  achieve  further  convergence  in  supervisory 
practices. 
In addition to the financial stability considerations, the issue of supervisory co-operation also needs to 
be looked at from the angle of the efficiency  of the financial system. Indeed, increasing attention is 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2001
 being  paid  by  policy-makers  and  market  participants  to  the  remaining  inefficiencies  in  the  financial 
sector  and  the  residual  obstacles  to  financial  integration.  For  instance,  the  recent  (cid:147)Gyllenhammar 
report(cid:148) drew attention to the need for greater standardisation of supervisory compliance requirements 
and practices because of the cost burden on financial institutions developing cross-border businesses. 
These  conclusions  were  further  reinforced  in  the  recent  report  by  the  Economic  and  Financial 
Committee  under  the  chairmanship  of  yet  another  compatriot  of  mine  (cid:150)  Kees  van  Dijkhuizen,  the 
Dutch Treasurer-General.  
In a similar quest for greater efficiency, considerable attention has also been paid to the Community 
regulatory  process,  with  emphasis  on  the  need  to  achieve  swift  rule-making  and  consistent 
implementation  in  different  Member  States.  The  recent  institutional  agreement  achieved  on  the 
implementation  of  the  (cid:147)Lamfalussy  procedures(cid:148)  represents  a  major  step  forward  in  the  field  of 
securities regulation. It removes the burden of detailed and cumbersome regulation at the Community 
level  by  delegating  rule-making  powers  to  a  committee  of  regulators  and  by  promoting  consistent 
implementation at the national level through a committee of supervisors. Extending such a mechanism 
to banking and insurance would probably also produce tangible benefits, though differences existing 
between  the  three  sectors  should  be  taken  into  account.  As  we  know,  a  particularly  important 
regulatory  exercise  is  ahead  in  the  transposition  of  the  new  Basel  Capital  Accord  into  the  EU 
regulatory framework, in which the European Commission will play a key role. 
All in all, there are strong reasons to continue deepening supervisory co-operation at the EU level. The 
current debate  on how to  achieve this objective  is intense, and  not  yet finished. I perceive  the  part 
played by the Eurosystem in nurturing this debate not (cid:150) as it has been suggested (cid:150) as an attempt to 
enhance  the  supervisory  role  of  the  ECB  but  instead  as  a  constructive  contribution  to  setting  up  a 
comprehensive architecture for an effective multilateral supervisory co-operation. The latter, I believe, 
is a common goal of central banks, supervisory authorities and ministries of finance.  
In the banking sector, the Eurosystem feels (cid:150) in line with what I highlighted earlier (cid:150) that there is a 
need  for  continued  involvement  of  central  banks  in  multilateral  supervisory  co-operation,  along  the 
lines of the work of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. I  would definitely not welcome a 
solution  that  would  alter  the  current  situation  by  excluding  central  banks  without  supervisory 
responsibilities from supervisory co-operation. Firewalls should not be unnecessarily created between 
central banks and supervisory bodies. The Banking Supervision Committee of the ESCB is an existing 
EU forum catering for co-operation between central banks and supervisory authorities. In principle, it 
could  also  be  suitable  as  a  forum  for  co-operation  between  banking  supervisors,  provided  that  it 
operated in a setting which ensured an adequate degree of autonomy for this activity. 
To conclude, I  would like to congratulate De Nederlandsche Bank, as well as the Dutch  Ministry of 
Finance,  on  their  constructive  contribution  to  the  recent  European  and  global  developments  in 
supervision and regulation. I also wish you the best of success for the continuation of the conference 
tomorrow.  
BIS Review 27/2002 
 3
