 Bank of Japan’s July report of recent economic and financial developments  
Bank of Japan, 17 July 2002. 
 The Bank’s view  
Japan’s economy, despite continued weakness in domestic demand, has almost stabilized as a whole 
with  an  increasing  upward  impetus  from  exports  and  production,  and  an  improvement  in  corporate 
profits and business sentiment.  
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  continues  to  decrease  and  private 
consumption,  despite  some  resilience,  remains  weak  as  a  whole.  Moreover,  housing  investment 
remains sluggish and public investment is on a downtrend. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus 
real imports) are increasing significantly due to the recovery in overseas economies and also to the 
effects of restocking abroad, mainly in IT-related goods.  
Industrial  production  is  picking  up  clearly  in  response  to  the  increase  in  exports  and  adequate 
reduction of excess inventory stocks. Against this background, corporate profits appear to be turning 
up  and  business  sentiment  is  improving.  In  addition,  the  rebound  in  production  affects  employment 
conditions, albeit marginally, with an increase in overtime hours worked and in new job offers mainly 
for  part-time  workers.  However,  firms  are  still  maintaining  their  stance  on  reducing  personnel 
expenses  and  as  a  consequence,  household  income  continues  to  decrease  noticeably.  Thus, 
employment and income conditions of households overall remain severe. 
Turning  to  the  economic  outlook,  the  upward  trend  in  exports  are  expected  to  continue  against  the 
background of the gradual recovery in overseas economies, although the pace is likely to slow as the 
impetus from overseas restocking weakens. Thus, industrial production is expected to follow a gradual 
uptrend with some fluctuations in its pace.  
On  the  other  hand,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a 
declining  trend  and  private  demand  is  likely  to  remain  weak  for  the  immediate  future.  Yet,  if  the 
increase in exports and production mentioned above continues, the recovery in corporate profits will 
become distinct, and this will gradually bring a positive impact on domestic private demand. In fact, 
leading indicators of business fixed investment show some signs of stabilizing. 
Overall, it can be envisaged that the stabilization of Japan’s economy will become more secured as 
the  increase  in  exports  and  production,  through  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits,  will  underpin 
domestic  private  demand.  However,  considering  that  forces  restraining  the  economy,  such  as 
excessive  employment  and  debt,  are  still  persistently  at  work,  momentum  for  a  self-sustaining 
recovery  will  be  subdued  for  some  time.  Furthermore,  uncertainty  regarding  external  conditions, 
particularly  in  the  IT-related  sector,  is  somewhat  rising  amid  a  fall  in  stock  prices  in  the  U.S.  and 
worldwide as well as depreciation of the U.S. dollar. In these circumstances, it should be heeded that 
further destabilization in the foreign exchange and financial markets at home and abroad would easily 
exert a negative influence on the economy.  
On the price front, import prices are turning down due to the U.S. dollar’s depreciation against the yen 
since this spring. Domestic wholesale prices are leveling off since a decline in machinery prices and a 
reduction in electricity charges are offset by the effects of the increase in import prices until recently 
and the completion of inventory adjustment. Meanwhile, consumer prices stay on a gradual downtrend 
and corporate services prices continue to decline.  
As  for  the  conditions  surrounding  price  developments,  the  balance  between  supply  and  demand  is 
expected  to  still  keep  exerting  downward  pressure  on  prices  for  a  while  amid  persistently  weak 
domestic  demand,  although  the  completion  of  inventory  adjustment  will  support  prices  to  some 
degree. Moreover, factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, 
and  the  streamlining  of  distribution  channels  will  continue  to  restrain  prices.  With  import  prices 
beginning  to  turn  down,  the  currently  unchanged  domestic  wholesale  prices  is  likely  to  edge  down 
again as they are sensitive to import prices. Consumer prices are expected to stay on a declining trend 
for the time being at the current gradual pace. This is because while the slower growth in imports of 
consumer goods is expected to alleviate the downward pressure on prices to some extent, the faster 
BIS Review 44/2002 
 1
 pace of decline in wages may possibly reinforce the ongoing decline in prices, especially for services 
prices.  
As for the financial market, in the short-term money markets, the outstanding balance of the current 
accounts  at  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  recently  moving  around  15  trillion  yen  as  the  Bank  continues  to 
provide ample liquidity to the money market. 
In  these  circumstances,  the  overnight  call  rate  continues  to  move  around  zero  percent.  Moreover, 
longer-term interest rates remain steady. 
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  inched  down  in  response  to  a  fall  in  stock  prices  and  are 
mainly moving in the range of 1.2-1.3 percent recently. As for  yield spreads between private bonds 
(bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds, the downtrend from the start of this fiscal 
year has come to a halt since mid-June. 
Stock prices fell through June in line with a decline in U.S. stock prices, but have edged up thereafter 
and are recently mixed, moving around 10,500 yen. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen continued to appreciate reflecting the overall downtrend in the 
U.S. dollar, and is currently traded around 115-117 yen to the U.S. dollar. 
With regard to corporate finance, private banks are becoming cautious in extending loans to firms with 
high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. The 
lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms continue to be severe. In the corporate 
bonds and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with low credit ratings remains severe, but 
the environment for firms with high credit ratings is on an improving trend. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  continues  to  follow  a  downtrend  mainly  because  firms  are 
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year basis. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is 
decreasing.  The  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  amount  outstanding  of  CP  issued  has  slowed, 
although the amount is still above the previous year’s level.  
The monetary base increased substantially by around 20-30 percent from the previous  year’s level, 
although the growth rate slowed slightly. The year-on-year growth rate of the money stock remained 
around 3.5 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Overall,  the  recent  financial  environment  remains  extremely  easy  on  the  whole  in  terms  of  money 
market conditions. The deterioration in the financing situation of firms is coming to a halt. However, the 
stance  of  investors  toward  firms  with  high  credit  risks  remains  severe  and  the  lending  attitudes  of 
private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious.  Hence,  the  developments  in  the  behaviour  of  financial 
institutions and corporate financing continue to require close monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2002
