 David Dodge: Canada’s experience with inflation targets and a flexible 
exchange rate: lessons learned 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Society of New York, 
New York City, 20 February 2002. 
 The Canadian economy has undergone a dramatic transformation over the past decade. And it has 
emerged  as  a  low-inflation  economy,  with  declining  levels  of  public  and  foreign  debt  and  a  private 
sector that is more cost-conscious, productive, and efficient, thanks to restructuring and investments in 
new technology. 
There is little resemblance between this economy and the one many of us had to contend with in the 
1970s and 1980s - one that was racked by high and variable inflation and by unsustainably large and 
rising public deficits and debt. 
Since  the  1990s,  Canada’s  monetary  policy  framework,  based  on  an  explicit  inflation-control  target 
and a flexible exchange rate, has contributed importantly to putting the Canadian economy back on 
the right path to longer-term prosperity. 
This is the main theme of my talk today. I will conclude with a few remarks on recent developments 
and the outlook for the Canadian economy. 
The mark of the 1970s and 1980s: high inflation and fiscal excesses  
To  put  Canada’s  inflation-targeting  approach  to  monetary  policy  in  context,  a  quick  look  into  our 
economic history over the past three decades is in order. 
Through the 1970s and 1980s, Canada, like many other countries, found that high inflation, large fiscal 
deficits, and rising public debt exacted a heavy toll on the economy. 
Indeed, those of us who had to struggle with those unhappy times do not need to be reminded that 
high, variable,  and  unpredictable  inflation  increases uncertainty about the future. That it distorts the 
key signals and information individuals and businesses rely on to make important economic decisions. 
That  it  leads  to  exaggerated  ups  and  downs  in  economic  activity  and  employment.  That  it  wastes 
valuable economic resources - resources that ought to be going into productive uses, but are instead 
diverted into hedging, as people seek protection from rising inflation. 
To make matters worse, through much of the 1970s and 1980s, Canadian governments were running 
large budget deficits. Those deficits were absorbing a major part of our national savings. The resulting 
accumulation  of  public  debt  meant  high  risk  premiums  in  our  interest  rates.  And  these,  in  turn, 
discouraged  the  investments  in  equipment  and  technology  that  were  necessary  to  improve 
productivity. 
To state the obvious, this was not a sustainable situation. 
Speaking for monetary policy, I can tell you that it took us a long time and a lot of work with different 
policy frameworks before we arrived at our current approach. 
By the late 1980s, it had become clear to the Bank that an explicit policy framework, which could be 
easily  and  clearly  communicated  to  the  public,  was  necessary  to  deal  with  the  inflation  problem.  In 
January  1988,  former  Governor  John  Crow  articulated  a  clear  need  to  focus  on  achieving  price 
stability. As the macroeconomic problems intensified through the late 1980s, it became evident that 
what we needed was an explicit commitment to a path for bringing inflation down. 
The Canadian experience: agreeing on targets for inflation control 
February  1991  marked  a  turning  point  in  this  process.  At  that  time,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the 
Government of Canada, acting on a growing shared appreciation of the economic damage caused by 
high inflation, agreed to adopt explicit targets for inflation reduction. 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 1
 Subsequently,  inflation  came  down  quickly  -  indeed,  faster  than  envisaged  by  the  agreement.  By 
January 1992, it had already fallen to close to 2 per cent. 
Now, I do not want to leave you with the impression that this was a quick and painless process. Far 
from it. Indeed, because of the magnitude of our imbalances, we had to take strong medicine and live 
with high interest rates for some time. This caused a lot of economic dislocation and pain in the short 
run. And even as interest rates came down, there was still an appreciable risk premium built into those 
rates that reflected, at least partially, our fiscal problems. But once the fiscal adjustment got underway, 
financial markets quickly took note of it and the risk premiums were reduced significantly. Thus, we 
were able to reap one of the key payoffs of low inflation. 
The  original  inflation-control  agreement  with  the  government  has  been  renewed  three  times  -  most 
recently,  in  May  2001.  The  current  agreement,  which  runs  to  the  end  of  2006,  continues  to  aim  at 
keeping inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. The fact that we aim at 
the midpoint is of the essence, as I shall explain later. 
Through  the  past  decade,  and  with  two  different  governments,  there  has  been  increased  shared 
appreciation among Canadian authorities of the important contribution that inflation control can make 
to good economic performance. 
I  want  to  underscore  that,  in  a  democratic  society,  it  is  essential  that  the  central  bank  and  the 
government share the ultimate objective of a well-functioning economy. And that they both take action, 
and work co-operatively, to contribute to that common goal - hence my repeated emphasis today on 
words like “shared” and “agreement”. 
Based on the Canadian experience, I can tell you that the combination of a monetary policy aimed at 
low, stable, and predictable inflation and a fiscal policy aimed at bringing about a significant decline in 
the debt-to-GDP ratio works to reinforce the credibility of both policies. 
Low and predictable inflation provides a credible monetary policy anchor 
When the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada jointly announced explicit inflation targets 
in 1991, the purpose was to provide a clear path for inflation over the medium term to help Canadians 
make better economic decisions. 
To make those better decisions, Canadians had to understand what their central bank was trying to 
do. At the Bank, we were expecting that the targets would help us communicate clearly the specific 
policy objectives down the road and, in that way, make our actions more understandable to everyone. 
The targets would also provide a better basis for judging the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
The importance of communication in monetary policy is also something I would like to return to later. 
Right  now,  let  me  tell  you  what  we  have  learned  from  our  experience  with  inflation  targeting.  One 
lesson we draw is that a credible monetary policy requires a credible anchor. Inflation targets fulfill that 
role successfully. They do so because they make inflation more predictable and firmly anchor inflation 
expectations well into the future. 
With  inflation  expectations  solidly  anchored,  investors  can  better  assess  the  future  value  of  their 
investments.  Savers  can  be  more  confident  that  the  purchasing  power  of  their  money  will  not  be 
unexpectedly  eroded  by  inflation.  Wage  bargaining  can  become  less  contentious  and  labour 
disruptions decrease. The duration of wage and financial contracts can lengthen considerably because 
people are confident that inflation will not greatly exceed 2 per cent over the medium term. Nor are 
they unduly concerned about the risk of deflation. Altogether, the real economy works better and is 
more stable. 
Moreover,  the  significance  of  the  increased  credibility  of  the  targets  is  that  it  changes  the  whole 
dynamic  of  the  inflation  process.  For  example,  sudden  temporary  changes  in  energy  prices,  or 
movements in the exchange rate, do not feed into other prices in the economy and into wages the way 
they did in the 1970s and 1980s. Again, this is because inflation expectations are well anchored. 
A  main  benefit  of  a  credible  monetary  policy  based  on  inflation  targets  is  that  it  has  helped  the 
Canadian economy avoid the boom and bust cycles of the past. This is because the forward-looking 
framework of inflation targeting acts as an automatic stabilizer for the economy. Let me explain how 
that works. 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2002
 When demand is too strong, pushing the economy against its capacity limits, and there is a risk that 
future inflation  will move appreciably above the target midpoint, the  Bank will raise interest rates to 
cool off the economy.  But  this  works also in the other direction. When demand is weak, and future 
inflationary pressures are likely to ease, as was the case in 2001, the Bank will lower interest rates to 
stimulate the economy, absorb economic slack, and return inflation to the target midpoint. 
Let me stress here that the midpoint of our inflation target range is a target, not a cap. That is to say, 
we  pay  equal  attention  to  any  significant  movement  away  from  the  2  per  cent  midpoint  -  whether 
above or below. 
By working in a symmetrical way in response to surprises in demand, our inflation-targeting system 
helps to smooth the peaks and valleys of the business cycle and to promote sound, and generally less 
variable, economic growth. 
In this connection, let me emphasize that our mandate, as expressed in the preamble to the Bank of 
Canada Act, is not dissimilar from that of the U.S. Federal Reserve or from those of many other central 
banks.  Our  Act  enjoins  the  Bank  “to  mitigate  by  its  influence  fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of 
production,  trade,  prices  and  employment,  so  far  as may  be  possible  within  the  scope  of monetary 
action,  and  generally  to  promote  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of  Canada”.  The  symmetry  of 
monetary action that goes with our inflation-targeting framework is the best way to achieve inflation 
control  and  thus  the  objectives  of  the  Act  with  respect  to  output  and  employment.  In  addition,  a 
monetary policy that consistently delivers low, stable, and predictable inflation is likely to provide the 
greatest contribution to sustained growth in output and employment. 
This  brings  me  to  a  key  point  I  noted  earlier.  It  is  vital  that  the  central  bank  communicate  with  the 
public and with financial markets on the goals of monetary policy. Here too, inflation targeting can play 
an important role - both in making monetary policy actions more understandable and transparent, and 
in making it possible for an independent central bank to be held accountable by the public. It can also 
provide financial markets with a clearer view of how the central bank will operate over time. 
Finally, let us not forget that monetary policy actions affect inflation with a lag of six to eight quarters. 
Because of that lag, in setting policy, one wants to emphasize those changes in prices that affect the 
underlying  trend of inflation and downplay temporary fluctuations in  very  volatile components of the 
consumer  price  index.  That  is  why,  unlike  some  other  central  banks,  we  have  explicitly  chosen  to 
focus on the underlying trend of inflation and use a core rate as our operating guide. The core rate 
excludes  the  eight  most  volatile  components  of  the  consumer  price  index  as  well  as  the  effects  of 
changes in indirect taxes. But I should add that the central bank can downplay those temporary price 
changes only if there is good reason to believe that they will not feed into other prices in the economy 
and  affect inflation  expectations. The reason  we  have been able to do that  is  because  the inflation 
targets have helped to establish monetary credibility and to anchor inflation expectations. 
Inflation targeting and a flexible exchange rate  
My review of Canada’s current monetary policy framework would not be complete without reference to 
its other key element - our flexible exchange rate. 
Monetary  policy  can  pursue  only  one  objective  -  keeping  inflation  low  as  a  means  to  promote  the 
economic well-being of Canadians. In pursuing that goal, we have chosen an inflation target as our 
anchor. And that means that we have to have a floating exchange rate. 
But I want to emphasize that Canada is a small and very open economy, with a structure of production 
and trade that differs significantly from that of the United States. A floating exchange rate is important 
because  it  facilitates  the  adjustment  to  economic  disturbances,  such  as  fluctuations  in  the  world 
demand  for,  and  prices  of,  our  products.  It  also  facilitates  adjustment  to  changes  in  savings  and 
investment flows. 
Over  the  last  few  years,  more  countries  around  the  world  have  moved  to  flexible  exchange  rate 
systems and have adopted inflation targets as their monetary policy anchor. Today, I have given you a 
flavour of the Canadian experience in this area, and I have talked about some of the lessons we have 
learned over the past decade. I hope that this has provided you with some useful insights. 
Let me now turn to recent economic developments and the outlook for the Canadian economy.  
BIS Review 13/2002 
 3
 Recent economic developments and prospects in Canada 
The  immediate  impact  and  the  fallout  from  last  September’s  tragic  events  here  in  New  York,  and 
elsewhere  in  the  United  States,  led  to  a  sharp  increase  in  economic  uncertainty  around  the  world, 
exacerbating  the  effects  of  the  global  economic  slowdown  that  had  become  more  evident  by  last 
summer. 
In those circumstances, the Bank of Canada moved quickly and aggressively to lower interest rates. 
The aim was to minimize the economic effects of the terrorist acts and to limit the loss of confidence at 
home. Since last September, we have cut our overnight rate target by 200 basis points, bringing the 
total reduction since the beginning of 2001 to 375 basis points. 
The  substantial  monetary  easing  undertaken  in  2001  will  have  its  maximum  impact  as  we  move 
through  this  year  and  into  2003.  In  addition,  tax  cuts  implemented  at  the  beginning  of  last  year 
continue to provide significant support to the Canadian economy. Further stimulus will also come from 
spending on enhanced national security. Thus, both monetary  and fiscal policies are providing  very 
significant support as we move forward. 
Moreover, with the improvement since the fall in the geopolitical climate and in consumer confidence 
in  North  America  and  Europe,  there  are  increasing  signs  that  the  global  economy  has  turned  the 
corner and will firm as the year progresses. 
For  these  reasons,  the  Bank  of  Canada  expects  that  the  Canadian  economy  will  gain  momentum 
through 2002. After growing modestly in the first half - by 1 to 2 per cent, on an annualized basis - it 
should accelerate in the second  half - to something  like 3 to 4 per cent - and  strengthen further  in 
2003. 
Once our economy starts expanding at rates exceeding the growth of potential output later this year, 
the  considerable  amount  of  slack  that  has  built  up  over  the  past  several  months  will  begin  to  be 
absorbed. Still, it could be late 2003 before the actual level of output in the Canadian economy will 
again reach its potential level. 
This implies that core inflation will probably average just under 1 ½ per cent in the second half of 2002. 
Total CPI inflation is expected to stay below the core rate until late 2002, if energy prices remain near 
their current levels. Given the profile for output growth, the Bank expects inflation to move back up to 2 
per cent in approximately two years. 
Recent  economic  indicators  for  Canada  support  the  view  that  a  recovery  is  starting.  Household 
spending, particularly on interest-sensitive purchases, has been stronger than expected. Exports have 
lately shown signs of revival. The inventory adjustment is progressing. And with early evidence of a 
firming U.S. economy, the world prices of non-energy commodities appear to have bottomed out. 
Moreover, the national accounts data for Canada may well show slightly positive economic growth in 
both the last quarter of 2001 and the first quarter of this year. All available indicators suggest that final 
demand  in  the  fourth  quarter  was  stronger  than  anticipated.  And  the  healthy  employment  data  for 
January suggest that this strength is continuing. Also notable is the fact that production, especially in 
manufacturing, did not keep up with growth in final demand in the closing months of last year. So part 
of that demand was met by running down inventories. This bodes well for the coming months, because 
it  means  that  production  will  likely  begin  to  increase.  This  is  another  factor  contributing  to  the 
momentum we expect to see in economic activity as the year unfolds. 
This is not to say that there are no uncertainties or risks in the economic outlook, or that the Bank of 
Canada will not remain alert to unfolding developments. While we expect fixed investment to begin to 
increase  in  the  second  half  of  the  year,  we  are  very  much  aware  that  this  is  conditional  upon  a 
recovery in business confidence, especially for large multinational enterprises. How quickly and how 
strongly profits and the confidence of those enterprises bounce back will have an important bearing on 
the strength and sustainability of the overall economic recovery. 
 To sum up, over the past decade, Canada has made major economic strides. We now have a solid 
anchor  for  monetary  policy,  and  inflation  expectations  are  well  grounded.  Fiscal  health  has  been 
restored  and,  even  in  the  short  run,  we  will  continue  to make  progress  in  bringing  down  our  public 
debt-to-GDP ratio. And significant business restructuring has taken place, with more to come. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2002
 Thanks  to  these  improvements,  Canada  fared  better  in  2001  than  many  other  countries.  And  with 
encouraging signs of a turnaround in the global economy and strengthening final demand at home, 
prospects for the Canadian economy are favourable. 
As we look past the current difficulties to the more positive longer-term trends and the potential of our 
economy,  I  expect  that  we  will  be  moving  forward  with  an  enhanced  sense  of  the  importance  and 
contribution of sound macroeconomic policies to good economic performance. 
I have talked at length today of how Canada has gone about fostering a climate of low, stable, and 
predictable  inflation  by  means  of  a  monetary  policy  framework  based  on  an  inflation  target  and  a 
flexible exchange rate. The inflation target and a floating exchange rate work well together - indeed 
they reinforce each other. This approach has worked extraordinarily well for us over the last decade. 
And we expect that it will continue to provide the foundation for a prosperous future. 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 5
