 Bimal Jalan: Seminar on international financial architecture 
Remarks by Dr Bimal Jalan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the symposium of Central Bank 
Governors, hosted by the Bank of England, London, 5 July 2002. 
 Today’s topic is a very large one and the time available to us is relatively short. To make the maximum 
use of the time available to me, I will make four broad points rather than deal with any specific issues 
relating to the international financial architecture. These, we can deal with later in the seminar during 
the question/answer period. 
The First point that I want to make is that we need to recognize that the period of the 90s, despite 
many gains, has seen many more financial crises than the earlier decades. The most distinguishing 
characteristic of this period is a marked increase in volatility in exchange rates and capital flows. The 
swings in these areas have not only been large, but also unpredictable and unanticipated. Thus, we 
have seen a large number of currency crises, for example, in Mexico, Russia, East-Asia, Brazil and 
currently  Argentina,  Turkey,  and  emergence  of  currency  pressures  in  Brazil  and  Paraguay  again. 
Exchange rates of industrial countries, notably dollar, Euro and Yen have also shown both short-term 
volatility and large medium-term movements. 
Capital flows, particularly to emerging markets, have similarly been volatile, with a boom phase being 
followed by an abrupt and equally large reversal. Another feature of the abrupt movement in exchange 
rate is that while crisis initially occurs in one or two countries, their adverse effects can be felt across 
the world. In the light of the recent events following the Argentina crisis, it is also not clear whether the 
contagion effect from one country’s problems to others has actually been contained, as was assumed 
only a month ago.  
As  I  said,  there  have  been  real  gains  also  in  terms  of  benefits  from  higher  capital  flows  and  more 
flexible  exchange  rates.  However,  it  is  also  a  fact  that  the  international  financial  environment  has 
become  substantially  more  uncertain,  unpredictable  and  unstable  in  the  90s  than  in  the  previous 
half-century. 
The  Second  broad  point  that  I  want  to  make  is  that  the  present  international  financial  architecture, 
which was designed at Bretton Woods after World War II, was for a different era altogether - one of 
fixed  exchange  rates,  preponderance  of  “official”  and  stable  capital  flows,  and  temporary  current 
account  deficits  which  could  be  met  with  temporary  access  to  IMF  credit.  The  Bretton  Woods 
architecture was not designed to cope with the instability and volatilities of the kind that I referred to 
earlier. 
Having said this, it has to be recognized that, particularly after the Asian crisis, there has been some 
progress in strengthening the structure of the old architecture. Various high level forums such as G-7, 
G-33,  G-20  and  international  institutions  such  as  IMF, World  Bank  and  IOSCO  have  been  busy  in 
analyzing the past experience and in introducing ways and means of imparting greater transparency, 
early  detection,  better  supervision,  higher  capital  requirements,  more  sustainable  exchange  rate 
regimes,  stronger  standards  and  codes,  and  involving  the  private  sector  in  resolving  crises.  Some 
improvement has also been effected in IMF financial facilities, such as contingency financing facility, to 
provide quick and higher access in the event of a crisis. However, it is also clear that these efforts, 
while having improved our understanding of the causes and consequences of financial volatility, and 
perhaps also helped in devising some precautionary measures, do not amount to a new international 
financial architecture which can cope with the new realities. 
I  am  also  not  sure  that  given  the  large  volumes  involved  and  short  period  over  which  a  crisis  can 
manifest itself, whether workable international solutions to the weaknesses in the present architecture 
are feasible within a reasonable time? 
My Third point is that today - whether we like it or not - most of the responsibility for coping with the 
burden of instability and volatility is that of the country itself.  
From  our  own  experience  in  India,  I  believe  that  there  are  three  fundamental  requirements  for  a 
country to prevent a financial crisis: 
BIS Review 45/2002 
 1
    Careful  monitoring  and  management  of  exchange  rates  without,  -  I  emphasis  without  -  a 
fixed target or a pre-announced target or a band. Flexibility in exchange rates is essential, 
but so as the ability to intervene, if and when necessary; 
A policy to build a high level of foreign exchange reserves which takes into account not only 
anticipated  current  account  deficits  but  also  “liquidity  at  risk”  arising  from  unanticipated 
capital movements; 
A  judicious  policy  for  management  of  the  capital  account.  Short-term  banking  capital  for 
financing  investments  and  growth  has  to  be  avoided,  while  foreign  direct  investment  and 
portfolio  investment  have  to  be  encouraged.  The  point  is  simply  that  in  respect  of  foreign 
direct investment and portfolio investment, there is a “cost” involved for the foreign investor 
in quickly reversing such flows. This cost is not present in respect of fixed-interest banking 
capital, particularly short-term capital. 
I am glad to inform you that these three broad principles have guided us in India during the 90s in the 
management of our external sector, particularly after the Asian crisis of 1997. The results have been 
extremely  positive.  We  have  doubled  our  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  the  last  three  years    -  and 
increased them several times over since the beginning of the 90s. They are now adequate to take care 
of all reversible capital flows as well as current account deficits, and are more than required under the 
conservative  “Guidotti  rule”  (which  suggests  reserves  coverage  for  one  year’s  capital  account 
liabilities).  India’s short-term debt is also very low - and Central Bank’s forward liabilities have been 
reduced to less than 1 per cent of reserves.  
This has gained us the confidence of the markets. This has been more than evident even during the 
recent period of uncertainties. 
Similarly, we have a flexible but managed exchange rate system. According to the latest assessment 
by  the  IMF  and  other  authorities,  our  exchange  rates  have  been  less  volatile  than  other  emerging 
markets. Our exchange rate by any criterion of competitiveness is also believed to be broadly realistic 
and competitive. 
We have also witnessed a substantial increase in capital flows particularly foreign direct investment, 
and much greater confidence by foreign investors in our macro-economic stability. 
Finally,  and  the  Fourth  point  that  I  want  to  make,  is  that  international  institutions  and  international 
community must play a supportive role in resolving a crisis whenever it occurs. For an agency, such as 
the IMF, to play such a role, the essential requirements are: 
• 
A  substantial  increase  in  its  lendable  resources  in  line  with  increase  in  the  size  of 
international capital flows in the 90s. 
A greater automaticity in the availability of finance, subject to a country following reasonable 
macro-economic  policies.  The  best  way  to  achieve  this  objective  would  be  to  make  IMF 
facilities “automatic” provided the annual Article IV consultations with the country have been 
positive and favourable. 
A  third  requirement  is  to  provide  developing  member  countries  with  a  much  larger  voting 
power  than  now.  It  is  one  of  the  ironies  of  the  last  forty  years  that,  although  developing 
countries as a group, have grown much faster than the developed countries and their relative 
economic  strength  in  terms  of  output  and  trade  has  increased  substantially,  their  actual 
voting power in Bretton Woods institutions has tended to decline! 
  To sum up, let us recognize that the present Bretton Woods international financial architecture was not 
equipped  to  deal  with  the  problems  of  instability  and  volatility  in  exchange  rates  and  capital  flows 
which have characterized international financial markets in the 90s. Let each country take measures to 
build its own safety walls by providing for higher reserves, more realistic policies to regulate capital 
flows,  and  careful  monitoring  of  exchange  rates.  Finally,  let  the  international  institutions  play  a 
supportive  role  through  higher  and  more  automatic  access,  subject  to  annual  performance  review. 
These  institutions  must  also  be  made  less  ideological  and  less  political  with  greater  voice  for  all 
member countries rather than for a handful of industrial countries. 
[I believe that what I have said is also in line with the “Middle Way” prescription of Mervyn King and is 
capable of being built into the present architecture.]  
2 
 BIS Review 45/2002
