 Tan Sri Dato' Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Economic and monetary developments in 
Malaysia for 2001 
Statement  by  Tan  Sri  Dato'  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the BNM 2001 Annual Report Press Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 20 March 2002. 
 In  the  tradition  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  I  have  the  pleasure  to  officially  release  the  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia Annual Report for the  year 2001. The report releases the Bank's Annual Accounts for the 
year 2001, and provides an analysis of the economic and monetary developments in 2001, and gives 
the forecast for the Malaysian economy for year 2002.  
The  country's  economic  performance  in  2001  was  significantly  influenced  by  the  unprecedented 
external developments during the year that had widespread implications on the global economy. Being 
a  highly  open  economy,  Malaysia  was  affected  by  the  weak  external  economic  environment.  The 
impact was compounded by the effects of September 11. Malaysia's strong economic fundamentals 
and the promotion of domestic sources of growth have however, reduced the impact of the external 
developments on the domestic economy. The strengthened macroeconomic fundamentals have also 
increased  policy  flexibility  to  implement  pro-growth  policies  without  creating  imbalances  in  the 
domestic  economy.  With  adequate  domestic  resources,  stability  in  domestic  financial  markets  and 
prompt  pre-emptive  actions,  Malaysia  has  been  able  to  weather  this  global  economic  slowdown  to 
record a positive growth for the year at 0.4% and to contain unemployment at below 4%. This growth 
was sustained with a strengthened balance of payments position.  
Macroeconomic policies during the year were focused on supporting domestic activities as the main 
driver of economic growth. Private consumption remained resilient despite the lower export earnings. 
National savings remained high at about 35% of GNP. Public sector investment increased by 15.5%, 
while  consumption  expenditure  increased  by  11.9%,  mitigating  the  impact  of  the  contraction  in 
domestic private investment. The more diversified economic structure of the Malaysian economy also 
moderated the impact of the decline in external demand faced by the export-oriented industries. The 
weaker growth in the export-oriented manufacturing sector which contracted by -10.2% was mitigated 
by  positive  growth  in  all  other  sectors.  Stronger  growth  in  the  domestic-oriented  industries,  which 
increased by 7.4% compensated for the shortfall from declining external demand. The agriculture and 
the  mining  sectors,  which  expanded  by  2.5%  and  0.2%  respectively,  accounted  for  15.5%  of  GDP. 
Domestic-oriented industries in the manufacturing sector now accounts for more than one-quarter of 
total output. Domestic content in the services sector is now higher, at about 80%. The construction 
sector, which has high local content and multiplier effects, also performed better during the year. The 
pro-growth  policies  to  stimulate  domestic  activities  benefited  in  particular  the  services  sector  which 
sustained a growth of 4.9% in 2001. The expansion was broad-based, with strong increases recorded 
for  intermediate  services,  particularly  finance  and  insurance  as  well  as  communication  sub-sectors. 
Strong expansion was also recorded in the final services group, particularly government services and 
utilities sub-sectors.  
While  the  overall  growth  had  moderated  during  the  year,  the  overall  balance  of  payments  turned 
around to a surplus position of RM3.7 billion in 2001. While the current account surplus narrowed in 
2001,  the  surplus  remained  large  at  RM27.4  billion  or  equivalent  to  8.9%  of  GNP.  This  reflected  a 
moderate decline in the trade account and an improvement in the income and services accounts.  
As at end-2001, BNM's international reserves was higher at US$30.8 billion. Subsequently, reserves 
have  increased  further  to  US$32.6  billion  as  at  14  March  2002,  sufficient  to  cover  5.5  months  of 
retained imports and cover 5.3 times the short-term external debt. While the external debt increased 
during the  year, the  outstanding  amount has remained low  at  55.4% of GNP. The debt profile  also 
remained sound with short-term debt accounting for only 13.7% of total debt.  
In  2001,  Malaysia's  macroeconomic  fundamentals  continued  to  strengthen.  Inflation  moderated  to 
1.4%; international reserves continued its increasing trend, driven by sustained inflows of trade surplus 
and long-term capital flows; the overall fiscal position of the Federal Government improved; domestic 
savings  remained  high  and  the  financial  system  strengthened  significantly.  These  stronger 
fundamentals  have  increased  the  economy's  resilience  in  the  face  of  a  more  difficult  external 
environment. The pegged exchange rate regime continued to be well supported by the fundamentals 
and facilitate international trade and investments during the  year. The stability in the exchange rate 
BIS Review 21/2002 
 1
 also  allowed  for  the  effective  implementation  of  pro-growth  policies  and  the  accelerated  pace  of 
banking and corporate restructuring.  
The Malaysian banking sector strengthened further and remained resilient to perform its intermediation 
function  efficiently  and  effectively  throughout  2001.  The  capital  position  of  the  banking  system 
improved with the risk-weighted capital ratio increasing to 12.5% as at end-January 2002. Although 
non-performing loans had increased in 2002, it has remained at manageable levels. The net NPL ratio 
of the banking system stood at 8.4% as at end-January 2002, cushioned with a loan loss provision of 
58.7% on the NPL amount or 146.5% if collateral are taken into consideration. The banking system 
continued to record profits in 2001 amounting to RM7.5 billion, which will further strengthen the capital 
position of the banking sector. In terms of potential risk to the banking sector, total outstanding loans in 
arrears have stabilised and continued to remain at manageable levels. Significant progress has been 
achieved  in  the  financial  restructuring  undertaken  by  Danaharta  and  Danamodal.  Progress  in 
corporate  debt  and  non-debt  operational  restructuring  under  the  arrangement  of  the  CDRC 
progressed at a more rapid pace in 2001 with the implementation of the new framework introduced in 
August.  As  part  of  debt  restructuring,  a  number  of  large  corporations  have  undertaken  rigorous 
restructuring exercises in terms of management and ownership structure, and the disposal of non-core 
businesses and assets. The satisfactory progress of corporate debt restructuring under the new CDRC 
framework is expected to have a positive impact on the NPLs in the banking sector. The successful 
resolution of the larger CDRC cases has contributed towards reducing the NPL in the banking system. 
With the completion of the debt restructuring process under CDRC envisaged by July 2002, the asset 
quality of banking institutions can be expected to improve by approximately 3 percentage points.  
The  consolidation  programme  for  the  domestic  banking  institutions  represents  a  major  structural 
enhancement of the banking system. The successful completion of the consolidation and integration of 
the banking groups in 2001 has benefited the industry and the banking public. The merged banking 
groups are now more well capitalised to meet future calls for capital expenditure as well as undertake 
a wider scope of business activities. The operational business integration process and rationalisation 
exercise have been an important part of the merger to reduce duplication of resources and to attain 
higher levels of economies of scale and efficiency in the banking institutions.  
The year 2001 marked a significant period for the Islamic banking industry. In terms of performance, 
the  industry  registered  encouraging  growth  during  the  year.  Total  assets  of  the  Islamic  banking 
increased  by  25.2%,  amounting  to  RM58.9  billion  as  at  end-2001  representing  8.2%  of  the  overall 
banking system. In terms of profitability, significant growth was recorded with an increase in pre-tax 
profits by 69.9% to RM905.9 million during the  year. Among the measures implemented in 2001 to 
further  develop  and  strengthen  the  regulatory  framework  of  the  Islamic  banking  industry  were  the 
adoption  of  Risk Weighted  Capital  Ratio  (RWCR) framework;  the  implementation  of  Rate  of  Return 
(ROR)  framework;  and  the  implementation  of  training  and  awareness  programmes.  In  the  area  of 
research  and  training  in  Islamic  banking  and  finance,  an  industry-owned  institute  named  Islamic 
Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM) was established. IBFIM will become a one-stop centre 
for the purposes of education, training and research.  
On  the  international  front,  significant  progress  was  achieved  on  two  initiatives,  namely,  the 
International  Islamic  Finance  Market  (IIFM)  and  the  international  standard-setting  body.  BNM 
participated actively in both initiatives. The standard-setting body, to be located in Malaysia, will focus 
on  developing  international  best  practices  and  prudential  standards  governing  the  supervision  and 
regulation of Islamic financial institutions. These encouraging developments will contribute further to 
the overall development of the global Islamic financial system.  
The insurance industry maintained a positive growth trend in premium income for the third consecutive 
year since the Asian crisis. Premium income grew by 12.4% in 2001 while the capitalisation of insurers 
strengthened  further  to  RM4.9  billion  as  at  the  end  of  2001.  The  increase  in  the  minimum  capital 
requirement  to  RM100  million,  with  effect  from  30  September  2001,  has  been  instrumental  in 
advancing the consolidation of the industry. Since 1999, a total of eight mergers and acquisitions were 
completed. Seven other M&As involving 13 insurers are currently at various stages of implementation.  
In  2001,  macroeconomic  policy  was  focused  on  managing  the  downside  risks  arising  from  the 
slowdown in the major economies. Macroeconomic policies were targeted at creating a positive and 
enabling  environment  for  domestic  demand  to  support  growth.  The  strengthened  economic 
fundamentals provided Malaysia the policy flexibility to implement pro-growth policies without creating 
imbalances in the economy.  
2 
 BIS Review 21/2002
 Fiscal policy was expansionary to stimulate domestic economic activity. As the external environment 
became more adverse, the Government implemented a series of fiscal stimulus programmes in March, 
and  again  in  September  2001.  The  fiscal  deficit  has,  however,  been  kept  at  manageable  levels  to 
ensure long-term fiscal sustainability. Revenue performance was strong in 2001 resulting in a lower 
fiscal deficit at 5.5% of GDP, compared with earlier estimates of 6.5% of GDP.  
While the 3-month Intervention Rate was maintained at 5.5% for the first nine months of the year, the 
low interest rates ensured that monetary conditions were conducive to reinforce other counter-cyclical 
measures  to  promote  domestic  activity.  Following  the  events  of  September  11  and  the  heightened 
risks towards further weakness in the domestic economy, BNM reduced the Intervention Rate by 50 
basis  points  to  5%  on  20  September.  Low  and  stable  interest  rates,  ample  liquidity  and  the  low 
inflation rate contributed towards providing a positive domestic environment. In the low interest rate 
environment  during  the  year,  bank  lending  and  financing  via  the  bond  market  increased.  Total 
financing  through  loans  extended  by  the  banking  system  and  PDS  issued  by  the  private  sector 
increased  by  RM33.5  billion  or  6%  in  2001.  At  the  same  time,  financing  to  the  small  and  medium 
enterprises (SMEs) was sustained.  
The  significant  progress  that  was  achieved  in  financial  sector  reform  and  restructuring  in  2001  has 
enabled BNM to shift its focus from managing banking sector problems to the medium and longer-term 
issues of developing a more competitive and resilient banking sector. The Financial Sector Masterplan 
that  was  launched  in  March  2001  aims  to  provide  the  blueprint  for  the  development  of  (cid:31)financial 
sector over the next ten years. To date, 9 out of the 119 recommendations under the FSMP have been 
fully implemented. In addition, 22 recommendations are being implemented on an on-going basis.  
Outlook and Prospects for the Malaysian Economy in 2002  
As we enter the year 2002, indications are that world trade is expected to recover to about 2.5% in 
2002. Growth in the major industrial countries as a group is expected to stabilise at 1.1%, reflecting a 
stronger growth of 1.4% in the US economy.  
Malaysia is well positioned to benefit from the emerging recovery in the global economy. Real GDP 
growth in the Malaysian economy is projected to recover to 3.5% in 2002. The projection is based on 
stronger  growth  in  private  consumption,  a  modest  recovery  in  private  investment,  sustained  public 
sector expenditure and moderate growth in exports.  
Current domestic indicators suggest that the Malaysian economy is in the early stages of recovery. 
The index of leading indicators has shown positive growth for six consecutive months. Both the decline 
in exports and manufacturing production have also begun to moderate. While inflation is expected to 
edge up slightly, it is forecast to remain below the 2% level. On the domestic front, resilient domestic 
demand  and  the  recovery  in  external  demand  is  expected  to  result  in  a  more  broad-based  and 
diversified  growth.  All  sectors  of  the  economy  are  forecast  to  show  positive  growth  in  2002.  More 
encouraging is that private investment is expected to recover in 2002 to register a positive growth of 
1.2%. Specifically, capital investment in the manufacturing sector is expected to increase following a 
more  strengthened  global  recovery  in  the  second  half  of  2002.  Foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  is 
expected to show stronger growth in the year.  
In 2002, the current account surplus is forecast to remain large at 7.9% of GNP. The financial account 
is expected to be supported by sustained inflows of long-term capital, including higher inflows of FDI. 
In view of the improved global economic conditions, FDI inflows are expected to be higher due to the 
projected  inflows  of  equity  from  strategic  alliances  as  well  as  inflows  for  expansion  and  new 
investment, in the manufacturing, services and oil and gas sectors.  
In recent years, FDI has become more broad-based with higher investment in the services sector. In 
addition, foreign investments are not only through equity, but also at the management level, especially 
in sectors such as information and communication technology, telecommunications, ports and financial 
services  sectors.  Factors  supporting  higher  inflows  in  2002  include  the  further  liberalisation  of 
domestic  regulations  especially  in  the  services  and  construction  sectors;  open  and  liberal  trade 
regime; 
low  cost  of  doing  business;  overall  macroeconomic  stability;  high  quality  physical 
infrastructure; and efficient financial system. The Government emphasis on customizing incentives to 
meet the specific needs of industries and investors has also provided added stimulus.  
BIS Review 21/2002 
 3
 Economic, Monetary and Financial Management in 2002  
The immediate policy concern in 2002 is to ensure that recovery of the Malaysian economy gathers 
momentum and that any downside risks are minimised. Given Malaysia's strengthened fundamentals, 
Malaysia is well positioned to tap the emerging global recovery.  
Macroeconomic  measures  have  provided  a  positive  environment  that  contributes  to  improving  the 
enabling  environment  for  businesses.  Malaysia  macroeconomic  policies  are  essentially  already  in 
place.  The  focus  of  policy  is  therefore  on  supply  side measures  to  enhance  Malaysia's  competitive 
advantage. Emphasis is therefore on policies to accelerate further structural adjustments.  
Supply side measures aim to address the issues of enhancing efficiency and productivity to reduce the 
cost  of  business  operations  in  Malaysia.  Improving  efficiency  requires  strengthening  institutional 
infrastructure  as  well  as  more  specific  measures  that  contribute  to  increasing  efficiency  of  public 
services, lowering cost of inputs to be in line with international prices, raising education and skill levels 
and  enhancing  use of information technology  to  widen technical capacities. These measures would 
essentially reduce operational costs and improve the nation's competitiveness.  
In this more uncertain environment a stable exchange rate is a major competitive advantage. For an 
open  trade-dependent  economy,  stability  in  the  exchange  rates  accords  significant  advantage  in 
enhancing trade and investment opportunities. By eliminating wide swings in the exchange rates, the 
pegged  exchange  rate  regime  has  provided  a  stable  environment  for  businesses  to  plan  their 
investments and to undertake their operations. At the same time, stability of the exchange rate also 
provides an environment that facilitates continuous structural reform to improve Malaysia's competitive 
position.  It  is  through  long-term  structural  adjustments  rather  than  frequent  adjustments  in  the 
exchange rate that a country can build a strong business foundation, improve efficiency and create the 
enabling environment that encourage competition and innovation.  
As a small open economy, Malaysia does not have influence over the external factors that affect the 
economy. However, by working on strengthening domestic economic fundamentals, Malaysia will be in 
a stronger position to manage and mitigate the impact of the volatility  in the external sector. Three 
elements  are  important  in  ensuring  that  an  exchange  rate  regime  continues  to  operate  effectively. 
First, it needs to be well supported by the domestic fundamentals. Second, there must be flexibility in 
domestic  markets  to  enable  the  economy  to  adjust  and  absorb  the  impact  from  external  volatility. 
Third,  increased  competitiveness  is  achieved  through  efficiency  and  productivity  gains  rather  than 
relying on currency depreciation.  
In respect to the conditions prevailing in Malaysia, Malaysia's strong economic fundamentals, with low 
rate  of  inflation,  strong  external  balance,  low  level  of  foreign  debt,  strong  reserves  levels  and 
strengthened  banking  sector  have  provided  strong  support  for  the  pegged  exchange  rate  regime. 
Malaysia  also  has  sufficient  flexibility  to  undertake  adjustments  on  all  sectors  of  the  economy  to 
remain competitive. The diversified economic structure, the enhanced mobility  of capital and  labour 
has also provided Malaysia with increased resilience to weather external shocks. Malaysia also had 
the flexibility of policy to respond to the circumstances. In all cases, when an exchange rate regime 
has  failed,  it  was  not  due  to  the  regime  itself,  but  due  to  the  weaknesses  in  the  economy  and  the 
financial system.  
Having  undergone  significant  transformation  and  emerging  with  a  much  strengthened  set  of 
fundamentals,  the  Malaysian  and  regional  economies  are  better  able  to  absorb  the  volatility  in  the 
exchange rates. Countries are also more cognizant of the costs of currency depreciation, particularly 
on confidence.  
As  an  example,  comparing  the  response  of  regional  currencies  during  the  two  episodes  of  yen 
depreciation, one in the early part of 2001 and the other towards the end of 2001 and early 2002, it is 
clear  that  the  response  of  regional  exchange  rates  was  significantly  more  muted  during  the  most 
recent  episode.  The  experience  has  shown  that  periods  during  which  many  of  the  countries  in  the 
region  had  experienced  significant  declines  in  their  exchange  rates,  it  was  difficult  to  find  clear 
evidence of a relationship between the degree of depreciation of the exchange rate and the growth in 
exports.  The  exchange  rate  has  not  been  a  dominant  influence  in  determining  export  performance. 
More  important,  it  is  the  overall  competitiveness  of  the  economy  that  will  ensure  sustained  export 
performance. Current conditions favour monetary policy in 2002 to remain accommodative, reinforcing 
the  continuing  counter-cyclical  policies.  Monetary  policy  will  build  on  the  gains  from  the  cumulative 
monetary  easing  initiated  since  1998,  to  ensure  that  the  economic  recovery  process  becomes  well 
entrenched.  Emphasis  will  be  placed  on  creating  an  environment  of  stability  and  predictability  to 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2002
 facilitate investment decisions. With low inflation and stronger economic fundamentals, Malaysia has 
the ability to exercise greater policy flexibility to preserve longer-term sustainability and stability.  
In strengthening the resilience and competitive position of banking institutions, BNM will continue to 
further strengthen the regulatory and supervisory framework. The objective is to provide a conducive 
environment for banking institutions to be more efficient through innovation and competition amongst 
players  in  the  financial  market.  The  challenge  is  to  manage  the  trade-offs  between  encouraging 
innovation in the financial system and preserving overall financial stability. Towards this end, a total of 
14 recommendations under the FSMP, involving 36 projects, are targeted to be fully implemented in 
2002.  These  projects  relate  to  building  the  capacity  and  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  financial 
institutions as well as the development of consumer education and protection.  
Policy measures for the insurance industry in 2002 will continue to focus on promoting incentives for 
improved  performance,  encouraging  the  adoption  of  best  practices  and  strengthening  consumer 
protection. Towards this end, 10 recommendations under the FSMP involving 13 projects are targeted 
to  be  fully  implemented  in  2002.  The  recommendations  include  the  introduction  of  independent 
financial  advisers  (IFAs)  and  the  adoption  of  'best  advice'  practices  in  the  sale  of  life  insurance 
products  that  will  enable  Malaysian  consumers  to  obtain  professional  independent  advice  on  their 
financial options. Given the right strategic focus, there is tremendous potential for future growth in the 
life  insurance  sector,  particularly  in  products  and  services  that  provide  for  retirement  needs,  capital 
accumulation  and  long-term  care.  Given  the  right  strategic  focus,  there  is  tremendous  potential  for 
future  growth  in  the  life  insurance  sector,  particularly  in  products  and  services  that  provide  for 
retirement needs, capital accumulation and long-term care.  
To  achieve  sustainable  growth,  there  is  a  need  for  insurers  to  intensify  research  and  development 
efforts  to  provide  consumers  with  a  broader  range  of  innovative  and  competitively-priced  products. 
Furthermore,  there  is  a  need  to  establish  and  continuously  strengthen  minimum  underwriting 
standards  and  controls,  particularly  in  new  lines  of  business.  This  is  to  ensure  that  business  is 
underwritten  on  sound  and  prudent  insurance  principles.  Finally,  insurers  need  to  adopt  prudent 
pricing policies and investment strategies that are properly matched with insurers' long-term financial 
commitments  as  illustrated  to  policyholders.  Malaysia  remains  committed  to  strengthening  the 
domestic  corporate  and  financial  infrastructure.  The  corporate  sector  is  expected  to  continue  to 
restructure to enhance competitiveness, to be in a stronger and better position to support economic 
growth. At the same time, while a number of large corporations have undertaken rigorous restructuring 
exercises,  focus  will  also  be  channelled  on  SME  development  in  2002.  The  SMEs  are  important  in 
providing the linkages between the various subsectors within the economy and represent a potential 
source of dynamism and driving force. SMEs also represent indigenous enterprises with potential to 
grow  and  evolve  into  larger  and  listed  companies,  with  the  potential  to  become  regional  or  global 
players. For the SMEs, the focus of its development will be placed in creating an enabling business 
environment that is not confined only to providing access to financing to the SMEs, but also to efforts 
towards enhancing their technological capabilities, provide training and access to advisory services, as 
well  as  channels  to  market  their  products  and  services.  The  formulation  of  a  comprehensive 
framework  for  the  development  of  SMEs  will  be  based  on  a  survey  of  SMEs  conducted  by  BNM 
through the banking system.  
As part of the effort to strengthen the economy's institutional structure further, a new legislation, the 
Development  Financial  Institutions  Act  2002  (DFI  Act),  has  been  enacted  and  came  into  force  in 
February 2002. The new Act empowers BNM to enforce the various provisions of the Act and to date 6 
DFIs have been placed under the purview of the Act. DFIs, as a component of the financial sector will 
continue to play an important role in the socio-economic development of the country, in particular, in 
providing  financing  facilities  to  certain  targeted  sectors  of  the  economy.  Strategies  are,  therefore, 
formulated to promote the development of efficient and effective DFIs. The ultimate objective for the 
DFIs is to achieve their mandated functions at minimum cost to the Government. Moving forward, the 
focus  will  be  on  strengthening  the  overall  financial  and  structural  capacity  as  well  as  improving  the 
operational efficiency of the DFIs.  
Bank  Negara  Malaysia's  financial  position  in  2001,  has  been  examined  and  certified  by  the  Auditor 
General. Total assets of BNM rose to RM149.7 billion as at end 2001 (RM148.9 billion at end-2000). 
The major increase in assets is attributed to an increase in international reserves. BNM's international 
reserves increased to RM117.2 billion (US$30.8 billion) as at end-2001. BNM registered a net profit of 
RM0.7  billion  in 2001 for the financial  year ended 31 December 2001. BNM declared a dividend of 
RM0.5 billion to the Government for the year 2001.  
BIS Review 21/2002 
 5
