 Lars Nyberg: IT in the financial sector 
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at UNISYS, Executive Business 
Conference, 16 September 2002. 
 To  begin  with,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  come  here  today  and  discuss  how 
information  technology  has  affected  the  financial  sector.  This  is  a  very  large  subject,  with  many 
possible  approaches  and  my  aim  is  merely  to  illustrate  a  few  of  these.  I  have  also  been  given  the 
chance of selecting which of them I wish to discuss, which I especially appreciate. 
IT and the stock market 
Probably  the  first  thing  one  thinks  of  when  one  hears  the  words  IT  and  the  financial  sector  is  the 
“bubble”  on  the  stock  market,  the  increasingly  unrealistic  assessment  of  the  profits  that  would  be 
generated  by  the  new  technology  and  the  “new  economy”  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  and  the  painful 
sobering up process when the stock market took a downturn in winter 2000. Although we all feel some 
unease  with  regard  to  the  stock  market  fall  when  we  read  our  old  age  pension  forecasts,  this  is 
perhaps in the long term the least interesting aspect of IT in the financial sector. I therefore intend to 
limit myself to two reflections regarding the “bubble issue”. 
The first is that it has happened before and will probably happen again. Let me remind you of the first 
“IT  bubble”,  at  the  beginning  of  the  previous  century  when  the  new  technology  was  wireless 
telegraphy.  No  less  than  150  companies  with  some  connection  to  this  information  technology  were 
introduced onto the New York stock exchange in 1901 and early 1902. In 1907 there was only one of 
these companies left that was making a profit and paying dividends, and even this company’s stock 
market  value  had  halved  since  its  introduction.  As  far  as  I  know,  no  one  then  spoke  of  a  “new 
economy” that would follow on from the technical developments, but this may be due to insufficient 
research on my part. Otherwise, the similarities are both striking and depressing. As we all know, if we 
cannot learn from history, we are doomed to repeat it. 
My other point is that the burst bubble has certainly made one of the stock market’s main tasks more 
difficult, namely conveying risk capital between savers and companies - it is no easy task at present to 
acquire risk capital through new share issues. However, this does not mean that the financial system 
as a whole is under threat. On the stock market, the banks act as intermediaries and are not directly 
affected by the downturn, as they only to a limited extent own or mortgage stock market shares. Of 
course,  the  income  from  portfolio  management  and  share  trading  is  declining,  and  many  operators 
outside of the banks may experience problems, but this does not comprise a threat to the system. It is 
a  completely  different  situation  when  a  bubble  on  the  property  market  bursts,  as  was  the  case  in 
Sweden in the early 1990s. Then the value of the banks’ collateral declines and this can lead to an 
acute crisis, if the price fall is sufficiently severe. We have seen the effects of this in practice, as I hope 
we all remember. 
Yet another issue is what effect the downturn on the stock market may have had on the real economy 
and thereby on economic activity. Of course, a deep recession could comprise a threat to the stability 
of the banking system, but this seems an unlikely prospect at present and I do not intend to take up 
that issue today. 
Is a financial sector a good thing to have? 
It  is  easy  to  express  irritation  in  sweeping  statements  about  the  financial  sector  in  general  and  the 
banks in particular; especially when the value of mutual funds falls or we feel that the banks want us to 
carry out all of our own banking services over the Internet without the aid of knowledgeable bankers in 
an office. I shall return to the latter issue later, but let me first remind you that the financial system is 
actually  an  essential  part  of  the  economic  infrastructure  in  every  modern  society.  It  is  possible  to 
manage  without  a  steel  industry  or  shipyards,  but  for  society  to  function  one  must  have  an 
infrastructure, a transport sector, an energy sector and also a financial sector. The most obvious task 
for the financial sector is to ensure that the payment system functions. We must all be able to pay our 
bills in a secure manner, preferably also in a simple and speedy manner, i.e. we must know that the 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 1
 party to which we are sending money actually receives it. There are many countries in the world where 
this does not function and this is as much of an obstacle to development as when roads and railways 
do not function. 
The banks are the institutions that handle the major part of the payments. It is because they are so 
important to the financial sector that they are subject to such comprehensive legislation and that they 
are the companies most closely monitored by Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory 
Authority). We may have views on how the banks should set charges, handle their customers and so 
on, but without them our lives would certainly be more complicated. 
In this context it is worth noting how much IT in a broad sense has helped the banks to develop and 
simply means of payment. It is not so long ago that one received a weekly wage in the form of a brown 
envelope  containing  banknotes,  handed  out  on  a  Friday  afternoon.  Nowadays  our  wages  are  paid 
directly into our bank accounts and we receive notice of this in a bank statement. Nor do we have to 
go very far to pay our bills; we can sit at our desks and fill out giro forms or - even easier - pay through 
the computer. The time we used to spend queuing at the bank can now be used in a more fun or more 
productive manner, or hopefully both. I am not one of those who enjoyed standing in a queue at the 
post office on a Saturday morning to pay my bills. 
The savings in resources attained through improvements in the efficiency of the payment system since 
the days of the brown envelopes have actually been estimated at around five per cent of GDP. This is 
a productivity gain from which we all benefit. In many emerging economies the potential productivity 
gains from a functioning payment system would of course be even greater. 
Sweden - an IT country 
Sweden and the other Nordic countries are currently, alongside the USA, world leaders in the use of 
IT. If one looks at the percentage of households with access to the Internet, in 2000 Sweden with an 
estimated 61 per cent held second place in the EU. Only the Netherlands had a higher percentage. If 
we instead look at expenditure on IT in relation to GDP, Sweden came top among the EU countries in 
2001. Sweden is an IT country. 
Why have developments moved so quickly in Sweden? There are many answers to this question, but 
allow  me  to  mention  a  couple  I  believe  to  be  important.  One  concerns  the  deregulation  of  the 
telecommunications  market.  The  Swedish  Telecommunications  Administration’s  monopoly  began  to 
break up as early as the 1980s, but the real turning point came in 1993, when the Administration was 
privatised as Telia. The market was opened up and exposed to competition; new challengers could 
gradually  take  over  more  than  a  quarter  of  the  total  market  and  a  significantly  greater  part  of  the 
mobile  telephony  and  Internet  telephony  segment.  At  the  same  time,  technical  developments  were 
very rapid. Fiberoptics enabled lower costs for long distance calls and increased the speed of transfer 
of  large  amounts  of  data,  which  benefited  the  development  of  the  Internet.  Together,  increased 
competition and rapid technological developments led to a fall in prices with regard to both telephony 
and Internet connection. The lower prices for users have probably contributed to the widespread use 
of the Internet in Sweden. 
The new technology was perhaps available in all essentials to all developed countries, but the views 
on  deregulation  varied.  Only  eight  of  the  25  member  countries,  today  30,  of  the  OECD  allowed 
competition  in  the  telecommunications  market,  while  the  remaining  countries  retained  a  monopoly. 
There is also a clear connection between use of the Internet and competition. Competition is allowed 
in the telecommunications markets of six of the nine countries with the highest Internet usage. These 
countries have also experiences an increase in access to the Internet six times as fast as countries 
that have a monopoly market. 
Another  reason  for  the  rapid  development  in  Internet  usage  in  Sweden  could  be  connected  to  the 
structure  of  the  Swedish  banking  system.  The  banking  sector  in  Sweden  is  dominated  by  a  small 
number of large operators, all listed on the stock market and with a strong incentive to rationalise their 
operations. They have also had the resources to rapidly implement new technology. The same applies 
in the Netherlands, which has a similar bank structure. The more Internet services a bank can offer its 
customers, and the better they are, the more customers will use the Internet bank and the cheaper the 
administration costs will be for the bank. If we compare this with the USA, which has a bank market 
consisting of a large number of small operators, developments there have not been anything like as 
rapid.  Only  a  few  US  banks  offer  advanced  Internet  services.  The  range  of  services  is  also  much 
smaller than in Sweden. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2002
 There  is  a  lot  to  be  gained  by  making  payments  via  the  Internet,  both  for  the  banks  and  for  their 
customers. Sweden, like the other Nordic countries, has a giro-based payment system. Giro payments 
corresponded  to  more  than  95  per  cent  of  the  total  value  of  payments  made  in  2000  and  to  over 
70 per cent of the number of transactions. Giro instruments are traditionally paper-based. However, 
the  Internet  enables  the  paper-based  giro  system  to  be  speeded  up  by  making  it  paperless. 
Preliminary figures indicate that approximately 130 million giro payments were made over the Internet 
during  2001.  Between  1998  and  2000  the  number  of  giro  payments  initiated  over  the  Internet 
increased by a good 890 per cent. Today all Swedish banks offer Internet banks with rapidly growing 
range of services. Studies also indicate that Sweden is way ahead with regard to utilisation of Internet 
services. At the end of 2001 there  were more than 3 million bank customers subscribed to Internet 
banks. 
For the banks the electronic payments entail considerable opportunities for rationalisation, probably to 
a much greater extent than could be foreseen just a few years ago. Some time ago I met the manager 
of a banking office in Stockholm who told me that he now had the same number of employees as five 
years ago, but his turnover was almost 50 per cent higher. This was largely due to the fact that the 
companies (including small and medium-sized companies) that had earlier been serviced by the bank 
could now carry out many of their transactions themselves via the Internet bank, which simplified their 
work and facilitated cash management. The companies could, for instance, with one click (as we say 
nowadays) pay all wages through a paperless transfer from the company’s account to the employees’ 
accounts and at the same time do the bookkeeping and pay slips, all without the long paper strips that 
needed to be manually checked. Already today, the Internet banks contain much more than merely the 
opportunity to make payments and check one’s account balance. 
One function on the Internet that will probably lead to increased competition within the finance sector 
is  the  existence  of  companies  that  offer  price  comparisons.  There  are,  for  instance,  several 
independent companies on the Internet today which enable a simple comparison of mortgage costs or 
provide  assistance  in  finding  the  most  beneficial  insurance  policies.  Competition  will  increase  with 
regard to share trading, mutual funds, insurance and mortgages, even from abroad. One reason for 
this  is  that  the  Internet  will  cause  a  reduction  in  entry  barriers,  i.e.  that  the  costs  connected  with 
starting a business and achieving critical mass with regard to customers will not be as high as before. 
New  companies  today  do  not  need  to  establish  far-reaching  office  networks,  which  is  proved  by 
companies such as Skandiabanken and companies known as Internet stockbrokers. 
Finally, it is perhaps worth pointing out that IT in the financial sector does not merely consist of the 
Internet.  Many  of  the  instruments  that  are  currently  traded  in  the  markets,  particularly  derivative 
instruments such as options and swaps, are completely dependent on modern information technology 
to be priced and traded at all. As derivative instruments are mainly used to buy and sell financial risks 
in  a  cost-efficient  manner,  it  is  possible  to  say  that  IT  comprises  a  base  for  modern  financial  risk 
management,  as  it  is  put  into  practice  on  dealers’  tables  around  the  world.  IT  is  also  a  necessary 
condition for the methods used to calculate financial risks in portfolios of securities or credits. The new 
Basel Committee rules on capital adequacy in banks, to take an example, are entirely dependent on 
such calculations. 
Network effects in the payment system 
The  banking  sector  in  Sweden  is,  as  we  know,  strongly  concentrated.  This  can  raise  questions  in 
certain contexts as to how well competition functions. However, the concentration has also enabled, 
as I pointed out earlier, a more rapid exploitation of network effects and economies of scale connected 
with IT developments. Let me go into this in more depth, hopefully without becoming too abstract. 
The development of payment services is governed, just as on other markets, by supply and demand. 
Supply  is  affected  by  costs  and  technology,  while  demand  is  affected  by  factors  such  as  price, 
acceptance, comfort and accessibility. 
Advantages  of  scale  within  the  production  of  payment  services  arise  as  these  services  are  often 
connected with high fixed costs and relatively low flexible costs. Building up a new computer system is 
expensive, but every transaction that passes through the system costs less. The economies of scale 
effects  provide  incentive  for  various  types  of  co-operation  and  joint  solutions,  where  producers  join 
forces  to  utilise  the  economies  of  scale  and  spread  costs  over  greater  volumes.  There  are  also 
advantages of scale on the demand side, the in the form of positive network effects. Positive network 
effects mean quite simply that a particular system becomes more usable the more people who use it. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 3
 The  classical  example  is  the  telephone  -  who  wants  one  if  no  one  else  has  one?  With  regard  to 
payments,  positive  network  effects  mean  that  the  benefit  for  the  consumer  of  using  a  particular 
payment system grows in relation to the size of the system. This means that their willingness to pay 
also increases. 
Network  effects  also  influence  the  introduction  of  new  technology  and  here  the  consumers’ 
expectations of the future scope of the system play a decisive role. Consumers can continue using a 
certain  payment  instrument  or  system,  even  if  a  superior  alternative  is  available,  because  the  old 
system/instrument is established and accepted  and  has a large market share. To continue  with the 
telephone analogy, imagine you were the only one with a new GSM telephone, what use would it be to 
you if everyone else was still using NMT? The fact that GSM is considered to be a superior system is 
hardly any comfort. The producers therefore have greater opportunity to reach a critical mass when 
new systems are being introduced if they co-operate with one another. The ATM co-operation, where 
customers can withdraw money from an ATM regardless of whether they have an account with that 
particular bank, is a good example of this. It also shows that co-operation, even if it essentially benefits 
the  customers,  may  come  into  conflict  with  the  Competition  Act.  The  Swedish  banks’  approach  to 
launching e-money in the Cash system is another example, to which I will return shortly. 
One  example  where  the  banks  did  not  co-operate  in  the  payment  market  is  the  service  of  digital 
invoicing systems. Up to spring 2002 the banks were offering two different, non-compatible systems, 
“e-giro” and “e-faktura”. The existence of two digital invoicing systems was an obstacle with regard to 
getting both companies and households to utilise the new technology. Today the banks are investing 
in making the systems compatible with one another and the goal is that invoicers and invoicees will be 
able  to  reach  one  another  regardless  of  which  bank  they  use.  If  this  succeeds,  it  should  lead  to 
increased acceptance from customers and enable critical mass to be achieved more easily. 
Will cash disappear? 
The  use  of  cash  in  Sweden  has  halved  since  the  mid-1950s,  which  is  of  course  a  result  of  the 
technological developments with card payments and later Internet payments offering good substitutes 
for payment with banknotes. However, the decline in the use of cash has slowed down in recent years 
and the M0 money supply is currently around SEK 90 billion, or 4 per cent of GDP. Cash is suitable for 
certain  types  of  transaction,  including,  unfortunately,  those  that  people  don’t  want  registered,  and 
there is perhaps a lower limit for the demand for banknotes. In addition, the alternative cost for cash 
has been low in recent years, as a result of low inflation and low interest rates. However, the use of 
cash in Sweden is higher than in other Nordic countries. 
The important alternatives to cash are charge cards (or credit cards) and Cash cards. Charge cards 
and credit cards currently account for more than one quarter of all transactions, which is a lower figure 
than for the other Nordic countries. With regard to purely electronic money, there is currently only a 
national issue in Sweden, and that is the Cash card. This project involves every bank issuing its own 
e-money that is downloaded into a chip in the respective bank’s charge card or credit card. The Cash 
system  has  not  yet  attained  sufficient  critical  mass  to  become  accepted,  which  also  applies  to  the 
corresponding systems in other countries. Perhaps the old cash and new charge cards offer too good 
substitutes. 
In  this  context  it  may  be  interesting  to  note  one  aspect  of  how  cash  is  distributed.  The  dominant 
quantity of withdrawals is through ATMs, but the ATM network in Sweden differs considerably from the 
networks in other countries. In Sweden we have only approximately 300 ATMs per million inhabitants; 
in Europe only Greece and Turkey have fewer. On the other hand, we have by far the largest number 
of transactions per ATM. We thus have fewer ATMs, but use them more. 
This ATM structure is probably due primarily to the fact that the banks have placed their ATMs by bank 
offices and only there. In many other countries, cash dispensers are located in shopping centres and 
other places where people are active, regardless of the location of bank offices. This development is 
also  beginning  to  appear  in  Sweden,  at  least  in  the  larger  cities.  Abroad  the  ATMs  often  have 
independent owners, who charge a small sum (SEK 10-15) to customers wanting to use their ATMs. 
The customers are happy to pay this for the benefit of being able to withdraw cash on the spot rather 
than having to go several blocks to find a bank and stand in line there. 
One may wonder why both the use and distribution of cash show different patterns in Sweden than in 
other countries. Evidently, we like cash, even if it is difficult to get hold of. So although developments 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2002
 are clearly moving towards increased use of cards and paperless payment instruments, the cashless 
society still lies some way in the future. 
IT reduces the risks 
IT  makes  the  payment  system  more  efficient  in  a  number  of  different  ways,  some  of  which  I  have 
already  indicated, but technology can also contribute to reducing risks. Trade in shares, bonds and 
currencies with the accompanying derivative products entails, for instance, that large credit risks arise 
between  the  banks managing  the  payments,  what  are  known  as  settlement  risks.  The  necessity  of 
reducing these risks has become increasingly clear. 
Let me take foreign exchange trading as an example. The foreign exchange market has a huge daily 
turnover. On two occasions the credit risks in foreign exchange trading have become uncomfortably 
evident; when Bankhaus Herstatt was declared bankrupt in 1974 and when Barings Bank fell in 1997. 
These risks can easily be passed on through the global financial system, because of the different time 
zones, and can bring about serious disturbances. There has therefore been a global collaboration on a 
project called CLS,  Continuous Linked  Settlement, for some  years now.  All of the dominant foreign 
exchange banks in the world are taking part in this project, with the aim that a joint system will settle all 
of the members’ foreign exchange transactions. This will enable payment in one currency to be made 
directly against payment in another, which will entail the credit risk that arose earlier disappearing. 
IT  in  a  broad  sense  has,  of  course,  also  been  necessary  for  the  security  of  the  systems  for  large 
payments that central banks around the world develop or oversee, where the trend in recent years has 
been towards real time gross settlement. Our own RIX system is an RTGS system, as is the TARGET 
system used by the ECB. I would be happy to discuss this, but it would involve a deviation from my 
subject here. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  make  two  reflections.  Firstly,  it  is  of  course  the  case  that  IT,  while 
increasing both the efficiency and security of the financial system in general and the payment system 
in  particular,  also  increases  risks  of  a  purely  operational  nature.  Operational  risks  were  strongly  in 
focus prior to the new millennium, particularly in the financial sector, and extensive preparations were 
made  to  guard  against  them.  With  hindsight,  it  is  easy  to  talk  about  making  a  mountain  out  of  a 
molehill, but the lack of problems was of course largely due to the fact that they had been foreseen 
and due precautions taken. One positive consequence of all the fuss around the new millennium was 
that openness regarding security and IT was increased and that attention was drawn to the need for 
routines to manage crises. At the same time, it can also be concluded that the IT systems proved to be 
fairly robust. The consequences of the terrorist attacks in the USA on 11 September last year could 
actually  be  handled  to  a  large  extent  as  there  were  security  arrangements  for  most  of  the  central 
financial  systems.  However,  these  events  emphasised  the  importance  of  taking  into  account  such 
potential  threats  as  terrorism  and  other  physical  threats  to  the  financial  system  when  establishing 
security routines. 
My  second  reflection  is  of  a  more  human  nature.  After  having  given  a  whole  speech  on  IT  in  the 
financial sector it is easy to give the impression that the banks and other institutions operating on the 
financial markets consist merely of technology and money. That is not the case. Fundamentally they 
are not about technology or money, but about people and the relations between people. All successful 
managers  of  financial  companies,  particularly  bank  managers,  are  aware  of  this.  Technology  is  a 
useful aid, but a customer who does not receive a respectful, personal  and competent reception at 
one bank will choose another next time. That is the way things will probably remain and we should be 
glad of it. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 5
