 Urban Bäckström: In the wake of financial turmoil 
Speech  by  Mr  Urban  Bäckström,  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Conference  on WorldCom 
and Enron - aftermath in the US and lessons for Sweden, held in Stockholm, 5 September 2002. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  discuss  this  interesting  topic.  The  circumstances  connected  with 
WorldCom and Enron unquestionably raise some burning questions to do with the roles of the owners, 
the boards and the auditors, as well as with construction of the rule system. There is a risk, however, 
that a drive for quick solutions will result in hasty conclusions. Experience shows, in my opinion, that 
when  dealing  with  complex  problems,  there  is  often  much  to  be  said  for  reflection  and  closer 
consideration.  In  many  cases  it  is  not  until  some  time  has  passed,  enabling  us  to  gain  a  better 
understanding of what happened, that we are in a position to take the steps that are truly important 
and crucial. 
My  starting  point  here  is  that  the  events  to  do  with  WorldCom  and  Enron  are  a  part  of  a  broader 
context. In the first place they are, of course, directly connected with the recent years’ stock-market 
bubble.  But  at  a  deeper  level  I  believe  they  stem  from  two  major  processes  and  that,  as  so  often 
happens when things go quickly, our current institutions - in a wide sense - have not quite kept up with 
the course of events. 
• 
One major process that left its mark on the 1990s is the breakthrough in technology, above 
all  for  computers  and  telecommunications.  This  had  been  on  the  way  for  a  number  of 
decades and began to flourish  in many  parts  of the  world as  it became increasingly  clear 
what the microchip had to offer. It can be likened to the development of the steam engine in 
the late 18th century or the combustion engine and the electric motor a century later. As we 
know,  those  earlier  technical  breakthroughs  had  far-reaching  consequences  for  the 
development and transformation of our society. The process is not - either then or today - a 
simple progression. But the setbacks are manageable and pave the way for new advances. 
Many of the setbacks originate in faulty expectations of the new technology’s impact. 
The  other  major  process  has  to  do  with  the  financial  system’s  deregulation  in  recent 
decades.  As  a  result,  we  now  have  a  world  where  capital  markets  and  capital  flows  are 
about  as  free  as  they  were  before  the  outbreak  of  World  War  One.  With  the  Great 
Depression and World War Two, the idea of returning to a less restricted financial system 
failed to catch on. It was not until the 1980s that deregulation reached Sweden, after starting 
somewhat earlier in many other industrialised countries, including the United States. A free 
financial system is needed in  order to promote the development of new technology and  a 
genuine social transformation. But it does also entail a number of risks. 
 It was the new technology that provided the driving force behind companies such as WorldCom and 
Enron, just as it was the supply of capital from the deregulated financial system that enabled them to 
grow  as  they  did.  But  these  were  not  the  only  enterprises  that  exploited  the  new  technology  and 
benefited from the free capital market. It was the euphoria and even hysteria about many companies 
that  led  to  the  formation  of  a  stock-market  bubble.  According  to  some  measurements,  the  average 
levels that share prices reached in relation to more fundamental values in the late 1990s were higher 
than ever before. So it is hardly surprising that the falling trend in recent years has involved such large 
losses  around  the  world.  Share  prices  tend  to  return  sooner  or  later  to  values  that  are  a  better 
reflection of fundamental factors. 
A closer look at the recent stock-market bubble reveals a number of more specific features that call for 
special  reflection.  It  looks  as  though  share  prices  for  IT  and  technology  oriented  companies  were 
driven primarily by new and rather inexperienced investors, cheered on by managements in need of 
capital to cover current spending as well as by analysts from banks and investment companies that 
handled the share issues. Media around the world also seem to have lent their voice to this tendency. 
Seen in this wider perspective, events in recent years raise a number of questions that I now want to 
consider briefly. How should we view financial bubbles, what causes them and what can we do about 
them? What drove the latest bubble, what can we learn from it and what is needed more generally to 
make stock markets function more efficient? 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 1
      Nothing new about periods of undue optimism 
One important lesson is that in a deregulated world, waves of excessive due optimism can arise and 
result in pronounced financial cycles. In the 1990s there were several periods of financial turbulence. 
One was Sweden’s own bank and currency crisis about a decade ago. At the same time there were 
problems in other countries and turbulence in the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM). That 
was followed by the crises in Asia and Mexico, the problems with the major hedge fund Long Term 
Capital  Management,  Russia’s  suspension  of  payments,  the  IT  bubble  and,  most  recently,  the 
difficulties in Latin America. 
Further  back,  there  have  likewise  been  periods  of  excessive  optimism  and  financial  crises.  Here, 
briefly, are the most spectacular items in Sweden’s economic history. 
• 
The  first  real  financial  crisis  in  Sweden  occurred  back  in  1857.  It  mainly  involved  the  real 
estate  market  and  obliged  the  government  to  support  the  banking  system  for  the  second 
time  in  our  history.  The  first  occasion  had  been  in  1668,  when  the  Palmstruch  Bank  was 
taken over by parliament and ultimately became what we now call the Riksbank. 
Not  long  after,  in  the  1870s,  the  next  wave  of  excessive  optimism  had  to  do  with  rapid 
industrial development, not least the construction of railways. Stockholms Enskilda Bank, for 
example, was in difficulties at the height of the crisis in 1878. 
Another  serious  setback  for  what  was  then  the  “new  economy”  occurred  in  1907.  The 
potential  profits  from  hydroelectric  power  and  electrification,  forest  industries  and  iron  ore 
had been exaggerated. 
Then we have the undue optimism after the end of World War One, with a major investment 
boom  and  speculation  in  real  estate  and  shares  that  peaked  in  1921.  It  may  be  worth 
mentioning that measured in constant prices, it was not until the 1980s that turnover on the 
Stockholm stock exchange again reached the level in 1918. That says something about the 
strength of the speculation at that time. 
After that, as we all know, there was 1929 and the early 1930s, with a falling stock market, 
banking problems and the Kreuger crash as prominent events in Sweden. 
More  than  fifty  years  then  passed  before  Sweden  experienced  another  period  of  genuine 
financial  turbulence  in  the  late  1980s.  The  world,  including  Sweden,  was  hit  by  the  stock 
market collapse in October 1987. A bubble developed in Sweden’s real estate market and 
subsequently burst, severely damaging the financial system. Resolute action by the political 
system  in  the  early  1990s  did,  however,  prevent  a  financial  meltdown  that  might  have 
plunged our country into an even deeper crisis. 
This brief review shows, I believe, that in periods with a heavily regulated financial system, the world 
economy has been somewhat less prone to generate pronounced financial cycles. It should be born in 
mind,  however,  that  the  regulations  also  created  other  problems  which  impeded  long-term  growth. 
Innovations and new enterprises are hardly stimulated when banks and markets are closely regulated. 
So it is symptomatic that the high growth in the 1950s and ‘60s came mainly from the rationalisation of 
existing  firms  rather  than  from  new  enterprises. When  the  deregulation  of  trade  and  of  markets for 
goods and services got under way again in the decades after World War Two, attention was naturally 
drawn  to  the  financial  barriers  that  the  tight  regulations  had  set  up  against  future  growth.  An 
awareness of the need for new, expanding companies and the emergence of new markets made it 
natural to promote this with a freer financial system. 
While this financial deregulation was probably both natural and necessary, it also meant that the world 
economy  again  became  vulnerable  to  the  kind  of  exaggerated  optimism,  with  the  attendant  risk  of 
pronounced financial cycles, that had characterised the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Meanwhile, 
the  institutions  connected  with  the  financial  system  had  lagged  behind.  By  “institutions”  I  mean 
everything in and around the financial system that affects its development. Examples are sets of rules, 
the banking system as such, the general public, the political system, the authorities and the media. 
The shortcomings took various forms. Important rules were wrongly formulated or non-existent. The 
banking system lacked the necessary know-how for risk management, both for its own institutions and 
for its clients. People had become used to credit being rationed and were now suddenly able to borrow 
large  amounts.  The  political  system,  the  authorities  and  professional  economists  all  stressed  the 
advantages of deregulating the financial system but were less clear about the risks. In their struggle 
for  readers,  listeners  or  viewers,  the  media  sometimes  forgot  to  question  and  scrutinise  important 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2002
 elements of what was happening. Think how much advice about share transactions has been passed 
on airily in recent years without a careful scrutiny. 
In the early 20th century these financial cycles and the risks of major crises were given a lot of thought 
by economists, not least those of the Austrian School. They pointed to the existence of transitory risks 
in  the  process  of  adjusting  to  a  higher  rate  of  productivity  growth  in  connection  with  technological 
breakthroughs. At first there is a good circle: rising productivity tends to pull share prices up, making it 
easier to finance new investments. New investments and a growing capital stock lead through capital 
deepening  to  even  higher  productivity  growth.  When  productivity  goes  on  rising,  however, 
expectations may become excessive and push share prices up still more. In certain cases, moreover, 
expectations  of  increased  profits  may  lead  to  higher  lending.  All  this  can  generate  a  vicious  circle 
where a further increase in asset prices results in a continued expansion of credit. 
With excessive euphoria, the expansion of the capital stock may go too far. Sizeable investments are 
made  in  sectors  that  will  never  yield  the  expected  return.  The  subsequent  adjustment  accordingly 
involves a marked fall-off in investment activity and thus a  weak development of demand. Both the 
excessive  investment  earlier  and  the  inevitable  correction  of  asset  prices  contribute  to  this.  The 
setback can also lead to problems in the financial system in general. 
Much of what the Austrian School had done was forgotten during the half-century of regulation from 
the  crisis  in  the  1930s  to  the  1970s.  Political  economy  was  dominated  instead  by  Keynesianism.  It 
may also be the case that the efficient market hypothesis has been interpreted too freely. This theory 
largely amounts to a warning that the market is basically the best judge of a share’s real value. Under 
normal  conditions  that  is  probably  true.  When  a  bubble  has  got  under  way,  however,  the  market’s 
normal  information  processing  tends  to  be  disrupted  and  prices  are  driven  instead  by  impenetrable 
forces of a psychological nature. 
In  many  respects  the  financial  turbulence  in  the  1980s  and  ‘90s  was  a  rude  awakening  for  many 
economists,  decision  makers  in  economic  policy,  authorities,  representatives  of  the  business  and 
banking communities and people in general. I find it important to underscore how broad was this lack 
of insight into how financial problems arise. One cannot single out a person or group as being solely 
responsible  for  how  things  took  a  turn  for  the  worse.  Perhaps  a  society  has  to  undergo  a  learning 
process on a broad front so that earlier mistakes yield new insights. 
Economic  policy  decision-makers  like  myself  are,  of  course,  no  exception  here.  But  as  financial 
turbulence does not inevitably lead to a serious crisis in the real economy, we need to ask why it is 
that in certain cases output and employment do suffer severe setbacks and the attendant deflation. 
Much  will  have  been  gained  if we can learn  to  tell  whether or  not an extensive share price fall, for 
example,  besides  being  troublesome  enough  for  many  people,  is  likely  to  result  in  a  situation  with 
general  deflation,  rapidly  falling  output  and  rising  unemployment.  An  answer  to  that  question  was 
suggested in the summer of 1999 by the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan: 
While  bubbles  that  burst  are  scarcely  benign,  the  consequences  need  not  be 
catastrophic for the economy. The bursting of the Japanese bubble a decade ago 
did  not  lead  immediately  to  sharp  contractions  in  output  or  a  significant  rise  in 
unemployment. Arguably, it was the subsequent failure to address the damage to 
the  financial  system  in  a  timely  manner  that  caused  Japan’s  current  economic 
problems. Likewise, while the stock market crash of 1929 was destabilising, most 
analysts attribute the Great Depression to the ensuing failures of Policy. 
Most things indicate that when banks run into trouble on account of financial turbulence, the supply of 
credit  may  dry  up  and  the  payment  system  cease  to  function.  It  is  under  such  circumstances  that 
output and employment have tended to suffer severely, leading to actual deflation. That, of course, is 
what prompted the Swedish political system’s resolute intervention at the time of the bank crisis here 
about a decade ago. It was a matter, not of protecting the banks as such or their owners from losses, 
but  of  safeguarding  the  banks’  central  function  in  our  economy.  Maintaining  a  modern  market 
economy would be virtually impossible/ without an efficient credit supply and payment system. In the 
present  context  it  is  positive  that  the  banking  sector  is  functioning  well  even  though  stock  markets 
around  the  world  have  fallen  steeply  in  recent  years.  There  are  also  many  signs  that  the  banking 
sector has learnt a good deal from the financial problems in the last few decades. 
As regards general economic policy, we know that focusing on low and stable inflation creates a better 
and  securer  environment  for  economic  policy  decisions  on  the  whole.  A  credible  long-term 
commitment  to  low  inflation  does  away  with  some  of  the  uncertainty  about  future  income  streams, 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 3
 which  are  what  ultimately  determine  the  fundamental  value  of  various  kinds  of  asset.  Such  a 
commitment should also provide better conditions for financial decisions. But there is more to it than 
that. As representatives of the Austrian School pointed out, business cycles are not exactly alike. As a 
result of exaggerated euphoria, a basis for risks that may lead to future instability can be created even 
before the threat of inflation becomes more visible. In the event of rapidly rising asset prices, with the 
associated risk of financial instability, a central bank should therefore keep a watchful eye on credit 
expansion in the economy. Under such circumstances the central bank may need to intervene in the 
interests of financial stability. In my opinion, interest rate adjustments should certainly not be ruled out 
if they are judged to be effective. In other contexts I have mentioned the desirability of such a “flexible 
inflation  targeting  policy”  and  believe  that  support  for  action  of  this  type  is  to  be  found  in  current 
legislation. The recent share price bubble  was not accompanied by  any undue expansion of credit. 
This was no doubt partly because the Swedish bank crisis is still so fresh in people’s minds and banks 
here have made the process of providing credit much more rigorous. 
The IT and telecom bubble in the 1990s 
So much for financial bubbles in general and what general economic policy can do. There is, however, 
more to learn from WorldCom, Enron and the whole of the IT and telecom bubble. 
American studies suggest that the new technology which enabled people to do their own share trading 
on the Internet attracted many people who were unfamiliar with saving in shares. These new and less 
experienced players concentrated in particular on shares that are quoted on the technology oriented 
Nasdaq exchange, which greatly influenced the pricing of similar shares around the world. While more 
professional  and  institutional  investors  accounted  for  90  per  cent  of  trading  on  the  New  York 
exchange,  during  the  stock  market  boom  around  half  of  Nasdaq’s  turnover  came  from  private 
individuals. 
Studies  also  indicate  that  companies,  analysts  and  banks  had  incentives  to  use  somewhat 
questionable means of attracting inexperienced investors to buy shares in new enterprises. Lacking an 
adequate cash flow, many new technology companies were dependent on raising money from new 
share  issues  to  pay  their  employees  and  procure  equipment.  That  in  turn  called  for  a  high  share 
valuation.  This  gave  managements  an  inducement  to  “doctor”  reports  and  statements  about  their 
company’s  future  performance.  The  disclosures  about  WorldCom  and  Enron  clearly  show  how  an 
environment  developed  in  which  managements  also  stood  to  gain  from  stretching  the  accounting 
regulations in order to meet market expectations. It also looks as though the same environment left its 
mark on the large corporations’ auditors, who likewise needed to modify the extent and direction of 
their  services  in  order  to  generate  income  and  profits  and  survive  in  the  new  economy.  In  certain 
respects it amounted to breaking the law. In other instances it was the law that was not sufficiently 
clear or extensive. 
Analysts  and  investment  banks  that  earned  money  by  arranging  share  issues  evidently  lacked  an 
incentive  to  make  a  critical  appraisal  of  corporate  reports  and  statements.  This  deprived  the 
inexperienced investors of the necessary help and support. A look at, for example, the advice that was 
provided before stock markets began to fall tells the same tale: recommendations to sell made up less 
than one per cent of all advice. 
The media latched onto the stock market boom with reports of rapidly rising share prices. Instead of 
taking  a  critical  look  at  what  was  happening,  the  notion  that  the  new  economy  offered  chances  of 
earning  a  quick  profit  became  the  conventional  wisdom.  The  part  played  by  human  psychology  for 
herd  behaviour  in  financial  markets  has  in  fact  given  rise  to  a  new  school  of  financial  knowledge, 
known as Behavioural Finance. Two key concepts in this analysis are just conventional wisdom and 
wishful  thinking.  There’s  nothing  odd  about  that.  When  people  make  investment  decisions  they 
function  in  much  as  the  way  as  in  other  contexts.  A  familiar  example  is  our  reluctance  to  enter  a 
restaurant that is empty - we generally prefer one that already has many guests, particularly if there is 
a  long  queue  outside.  We  simply  rely  on  the  good  judgement  of  others  and  assume  that  all  those 
inside have made the right choice. By arriving at a better understanding of how people behave, we 
can certainly do a good deal to prevent unduly large mistakes in market pricing and perhaps ultimately 
reduce the occurrence of financial bubbles. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2002
 Functional institutions are crucial for economic development 
Today  as  well  as  earlier,  the  financial  turbulence  is  an  additional  inducement  to  create  better 
conditions  in  many  parts  of  the  economy  for  the  institutions  involved  in  the  financial  system  and 
corporate management. It would be wrong to suppose, however, that regulations and other measures 
are capable of eliminating financial turbulence altogether. Like the business cycle in the real economy, 
cyclical movements in the financial world cannot be excluded as long as a market oriented distribution 
of saving and investment is considered desirable. The learning process in which we are all involved 
does at least help us to understand the mistakes that have been made and what they can teach us. 
The focus at present is very much on the roles and actions of the owners, boards and managements 
of listed companies. Self-preservation alone will no doubt lead to much being done to restore investor 
confidence in these corporations. Auditors around the world are presumably also devoting a good deal 
of thought to their various functions. Accounting issues are very much on the agenda. Many banks are 
also  considering  ways  of  providing  clients  with  better  analytical  advice  about  share  investment.  A 
one-sided  producer  oriented  approach,  with  the  emphasis  on  getting  clients  to  buy  the  bank’s 
products, is unlikely to work in the longer run. Bank managements are tending to look instead at how 
to make their approach more consumer oriented. What is good for the client is presumably good for 
the bank as well. The structure of internal incentives also needs to be adapted to encourage a long-
term relationship. It seems reasonable to suppose that some newspaper managements are likewise 
thinking about how their readers’ interests can best be served. 
Without in any way claiming to be exhaustive, these examples illustrate the major forces that are at 
work  in many  parts  of  our  society  with  a  view  to  making  things  function  better  than  they  did  in  the 
recent  stock  market  boom.  In  addition  there  are  of  course  the  deliberations  of  economic  policy 
decision-makers, authorities and international institutions. 
The  message  I  want  to  put  across  today  is  primarily  that  there  are  no  simple  solutions  that  would 
prevent a repetition of what we have been through. We must also realise that the spontaneous healing 
mechanisms in a market economy can take time to work. They probably need the support of better 
institutional rule systems, for example in accounting practice. At the same time, I would be cautious 
about intervening too much, for instance by complicating matters with rule systems or unduly detailed 
supervision  by  authorities.  It  is  a  question  of  striking  a  balance  so  that  the  sound  forces  in  the 
economy are free to act while tendencies that may develop into a crisis are held in check. How this is 
to be achieved is something that market players and the competent authorities continuously have to 
consider and try out in the light of experience. 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 5
