 Urban Bäckström: Perspective on the inflation target 
Speech  by  Mr  Urban  Bäckström,  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Swedish  Economics 
Association, Stockholm, 17 April 2002. 
In the work on this paper I have been greatly assisted by Claes Berg, Anders Borg, Jörgen Eklund, Staffan Viotti 
and Anders Vredin. I am also grateful for valuable comments from members of the Executive Board and other 
colleagues at the Riksbank. At the same time, I am solely responsible for any remaining errors and shortcomings, 
as well as for the opinions expressed here. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank’s website. 
 First  I  want  to  express  my  thanks  for  the  invitation  to  attend  your  Association  and  discuss  various 
aspects of the Riksbank’s assignment. I truly look forward, in keeping with recent years, to a dialogue 
on economic policy issues both with my two opponents and with other scholars and students in this 
Association. 
The theme for today’s discussion, “Perspective on the Inflation Target”, has led me to take the past 
year’s increase in the rate of inflation as my starting point. To many forecasters, including those of us 
at the Riksbank, the increase has come as a surprise. This may raise questions about the intellectual 
framework, which rests on forecasts, for monetary policy’s formation. Although I believe most people 
would  agree  that  in  the  period  of  almost  a  decade  in  which  it  has  been  implemented,  the  inflation 
target  has  on  the  whole  functioned  quite  well,  it  is  still  important  that  monetary  policy’s  analytical 
framework  is  continuously  discussed.  The  economy  is  constantly  exposed  to  complex  shocks,  with 
repercussions which are so difficult to predict that we need to develop our thinking all the time. 
The question I shall be considering initially is whether there are alternatives to the way in which the 
Riksbank has chosen to conduct monetary policy. Simplifying somewhat, the Riksbank’s approach can 
be described with a rule of thumb: if the forecast rate of inflation 1–2 years ahead is above the 2 per 
cent target, then the repo rate should normally be raised and vice versa. The work accordingly focuses 
on  a  forecast  of  future  inflation.  But  as  forecasts  are  liable  to  be  wrong,  they  carry  an  element  of 
uncertainty. It can therefore be reasonable to discuss and compare alternative strategies in order to 
see whether the uncertainty can be reduced. 
It  might  be  argued  that  economic  science  is  not  sufficiently  developed  or  that  the  interactions  of 
economic agents and markets are far too complex to be forecast. Since monetary policy is not capable 
of influencing price developments directly, instead of taking its cue from inflation forecasts, the central 
bank  could  choose  to  set  the  interest  rate  in  the  light  of  some  variable  that  is  currently  known. 
Examples  of  such  intermediate  variables  could  be  current  price  tendencies,  the  money  supply  or 
resource  utilisation.  I  intend  to  discuss  such  possibilities  and  then  conclude  by  harking  back  to  the 
Riksbank’s current monetary policy strategy. 
Alternatives to basing monetary policy on forecasts 
Actual price movements 
One  alternative  to  the  present  rule  of  thumb  could  be  to  set  the  interest  rate  in  the  light  of  the 
prevailing rate of inflation. The Riksbank would then adjust the instrumental rate every time Statistics 
Sweden publishes a CPI outcome that is above or below the 2 per cent target. 
The primary argument against such an arrangement is perhaps that, compared with the present rule of 
thumb, it would lead to larger fluctuations in real economic activity. This is because the repo rate and 
inflation  are  not  directly  linked.  The  Riksbank’s  possibility  of  influencing  price  movements  is  more 
indirect  and  works,  in  simple  terms,  via  market  interest  rates,  credit  flows  and  asset  prices  before 
impinging  on  demand  in  the  real  economy  and  such  variables  as  employment,  profits,  investment, 
consumption  and  net  exports.  Demand’s  impact  on  prices  depends  in  turn  on  potential  output  and 
resource utilisation. We still do not know exactly how this complex transmission mechanism functions, 
how quickly it works or how it varies both over time and in its effects on the economy. 
Concerning the time lag, the view adopted by most central banks is that most of the effect materialises 
after an interval of one to two years. It is conceivable that for various reasons monetary policy’s impact 
BIS Review 24/2002 
 1
 via market interest rates may have become quicker in recent years. Financial markets have become 
more  responsive  to  expectations,  many  households  have  flexible  mortgage  rates  and  so  on.  There 
are, however, other factors at work in the opposite direction. One is that the exchange rate, which in a 
small open economy is a central component of the transmission mechanism, does not always respond 
to instrumental rate adjustments in the same way as before. Moreover, on account of the associated 
menu costs, in a low inflation regime it seems that firms adjust prices less frequently. Still, until further 
notice most things speak in favour of the established view that the greater part of monetary policy’s 
impact on inflation shows up after one to two years. That naturally does not rule out the possibility that 
a part of the effect materialises either sooner or later than this. 
From this it follows that basing monetary policy on current inflation can lead to problems because the 
economic situation that may have changed completely by the time the repo rate adjustment elicits its 
full effect. A rather abrupt change of course may then be needed to deal with the situation that then 
prevails. 
Perhaps a parallel can be drawn with piloting a car ferry among the islands en route from Stockholm to 
Finland. If those  in command concentrated on  what lies just ahead of the ship’s stern, their course 
would  have  to  be  rather  erratic  in  order  to  avoid  the  numerous  islands,  skerries  and  shallows  that 
suddenly come into view; and considering the time it takes to alter such a large ship’s course, she may 
inevitably  run  aground  and  in  any  event  the  journey  would  hardly  be  pleasant  for  the  passengers. 
Matters will be different if those on the bridge look further ahead and alter the course gradually so as 
to follow the smoothest line. What lies several nautical miles ahead may not be all that clear but it is 
possible  to  arrive  at  a  reasonable  view  of  the  optimum  course  and  make  gradual  changes  as  the 
picture becomes more distinct. In this way, not only will the ship reach its destination but the voyage 
will be fairly comfortable for its passengers. 
One of the questions a central bank faces in the construction of a strategy for monetary policy is the 
choice between variations in real economic activity and in the rate of inflation. If the bank acts so that 
the  real  economy  fluctuates  sharply,  sooner  or  later  the  political  system  and  people  in  general  will 
probably  want  to  change  the  basic  premises  for  the  central  bank’s  independence  and  primary 
assignment.  Conversely,  if  real  economic  stability  always  has  priority  and  the  central  bank  accepts 
large deviations from the inflation target, confidence in the low inflation regime will soon be eroded. 
Against  this  background,  most  central  banks  aim  for  a  reasonable  compromise  between  these  two 
extremes.  They  strive  to  fulfil  the  inflation  target  in  the  medium  run  by  being  forward-looking  and 
accept  the  occurrence  of  limited  deviations  (downwards  as  well  as  upwards)  in  the  short  term.  A 
monetary policy that acts on current inflation is by definition not forward-looking. 
Similar arguments apply to a strategy whereby the central bank is guided by nominal GDP outcomes, 
a  question  that  was  discussed  last  year  in  this  Association.  Besides  the  disadvantages  I  just 
mentioned  from  not  looking  ahead,  a  nominal  GDP  strategy  has  the  drawback  that  the  national 
accounts frequently have to be revised. Whereas the CPI figures are mostly definitive when they are 
first published, the GDP outcome data are often changed substantially, sometimes after an interval of 
several years. 
The relatively long time lag before monetary policy affects the economy makes it necessary to accept 
that inflation will sometimes deviate from the target. The alternative would be marked fluctuations in 
employment and output. This is clear from what happens when one of the Riksbank’s models is run 
with a monetary policy for correcting inflation quickly. We assume that the rate of inflation suddenly 
rises from 2 to 3 per cent and the Riksbank immediately tries to counter this by raising the repo rate in 
a single step of between 4 and 5 percentage points. Inflation would then admittedly fall back from 3 to 
around 2 per cent in the course of twelve months but that would be achieved at the expense of very 
weak growth and employment. GDP growth drops a couple of percentage points in the first year and 
between  30,000  and  40,000  jobs  are  lost.  So  when  the  year  is  over  a  dramatic  interest  rate  cut  is 
needed to restabilise the economy. 
This  example  shows  that  while  an  increase  in  inflation  could  be  countered  quickly  and  resolutely, 
doing so would lead to an appreciable destabilisation of the real economy. In that the Riksbank looks 
ahead instead and, in the event of deviations from the inflation target, directs monetary policy for a 
smoother  adjustment,  such  abrupt  shifts  in  the  repo  rate  do  not  normally  occur  and  real  economic 
development can be more stable. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2002
 The money supply 
It  is  a  well-established  fact  that  in  the  long  run  inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon.  Sizeable, 
permanent changes in the rate of price increases can be explained by  growth  of the money supply 
having been excessively high or low. An alternative to basing policy on forecasts might therefore be to 
use the money supply as an intermediate target. This presupposes an acceptable correlation between 
the money supply and inflation in the medium run. 
Using  the  money  supply  as  the  guide  has  the  advantage  that  monetary  policy  can  be  conducted 
systematically  and  predictably.  The  intermediate  variable  –  the  money  supply  –  is  known  when 
decisions  are  made  and  provided  it  is  closely  correlated  with  the  path  of  inflation  one  to  two  years 
ahead, monetary policy will be very transparent. 
However, basing monetary policy on a money supply target is not a simple matter. It is questionable 
whether a straightforward and stable relationship between the money supply and inflation also exists 
in the short and medium term. This is because the relationship has been disturbed by various factors. 
Financial innovations have contributed, for example, to changes in the pattern of household payments 
and investment. Moreover, a number of major factors still have to be forecast in order to arrive at what 
may be an appropriate target for the money supply. So in practice even a money supply strategy has 
to be based on forecasts of a number of variables and an assessment of, for example, the output gap. 
Moreover,  when  the  strategy  was  used  in  a  number  of  countries  in  the  1970s  and  ‘80s,  it  was  not 
particularly successful. 
In the absence of a straightforward, stable relationship between the intermediate variable (the money 
supply)  and  the  ultimate  objective  (price  stability),  a  conflict  may  arise  between  them  because  the 
central  bank  has  only  one  instrument,  its  interest  rate.  If  the  central  bank  chooses  the  minimise 
fluctuations in the money supply, a probable consequence – given that the relationship is not exact or 
stable – will be increased fluctuations in inflation and output. It is intuitively hard to see why a central 
bank would prefer to stabilise the money supply, which does not directly affect public prosperity, rather 
than stabilising price movements and output more directly. 
If  the  relationship  between  the  money  supply  and  inflation  is  not  exact  and  stable  over  time,  the 
significance of the money supply should be demoted to that of one of several indicators in an inflation 
targeting strategy based on forecasts. While the money supply is an important indicator of inflationary 
pressure,  it  is  not  the  only  one.  There  may  be  grounds,  on  the  other  hand,  for  highlighting  the 
significance  of  the  money  supply  (or  rather  perhaps  its  mirror  image  of  the  loan  stocks  in  bank 
balance-sheets) as a source of information about the financial system’s future stability. In the past, the 
build-up of a sizeable financial bubble has nearly always coincided with a major expansion of credit in 
the  financial  system.  Sweden’s  bank  crisis  about  a  decade  ago  is  a  case  in  point.  Against  this 
background,  the  money  supply  and  credit  flows  should  belong  to  the  arsenal  of  indicators  of  both 
monetary and financial stability that a central bank ought to follow closely.  
Inflation and the output gap 
Yet another alternative way of conducting monetary policy is to set the interest rate as a function of the 
rate  of  price  increases  and  some  measure  of  the  difference  between  actual  and  potential  growth. 
Professor  John  Taylor,  currently  a  Treasury  under-secretary  in  the  Bush  Administration,  has 
formulated  a  simple  rule  for  interest  setting  that  has  come  to  be  named  after  him  and  been  widely 
recognised. 
With the Taylor rule, the instrumental rate varies around an equilibrium rate with a correction for actual 
inflation’s relationship to targeted inflation and resource utilisation (GDP growth’s divergence from an 
estimated trend). Given that the economy is in equilibrium, inflation is 2 per cent and the output gap is 
zero, in Taylor’s version of the rule for the United States the nominal instrumental rate is 4 per cent. 
Divergences  in  resource  utilisation  or  inflation  prompt  the  central  bank  to  raise  or  lower  the 
instrumental rate, depending on the size and direction of the deviations. 
The  Taylor  rule  is  popular  for  several  reasons;  besides  being  relatively  simple,  it  seems  to  give  a 
relatively good account of monetary policy in many different countries. In that way it has contributed to 
a better understanding of how monetary policy is conducted. To date, however, no central bank has 
explicitly  stated  that  it  has  chosen  to  base  its  monetary  policy  on  the  type  of  rule  John  Taylor 
advocates. 
BIS Review 24/2002 
 3
 One result that a money supply target and the Taylor rule have in common is that monetary policy’s 
responses to the various shocks to which an economy is constantly being exposed are systematic and 
predictable. The fact that the variables to which monetary policy responds are assumed to be known 
at the time of decisions contributes to this. 
The conceivable objections to basing monetary policy on simple rules of this type concern their very 
simplicity.  An  economy  is  constantly  being  hit  by  shocks  of  different  types.  Neither  firms  nor 
households behave mechanically. It is therefore not to be expected that economic policy can be boiled 
down to some kind of auto-pilot. Allow me to illustrate this with a couple of examples. 
A first objection to basing monetary policy on a simple Taylor rule is that the rule assigns too much 
weight to a particular indicator of the output gap. The output gap is a central concept in macro theory 
and economic policy but that does not lessen its complexity. 
Potential output tends to vary over time. Changes in such factors as demography, technology, tax and 
transfer systems or other important components temporarily or permanently affect productivity growth 
and  labour  supply,  with  an  impact  in  turn  on  potential  output.  Although  considerable  progress  has 
been  made  in  real  business  cycle  theory  when  it  comes  to  the  importance  of  supply  shocks,  we 
unfortunately  do  not  have  a  clear  intellectual  framework  for  the  forces  behind  potential  output’s 
variations in the short and medium term. Changes in the output gap are therefore difficult to pin down 
exactly in stable measurements. The methods used to estimate potential growth and the output gap 
from econometric models tend to yield conflicting results that are also unstable over time. This familiar 
fact,  demonstrated  in  numerous  studies,  can  be  exemplified  with  the  Riksbank’s  alternative 
estimations of the output gap as presented continuously in the Inflation Report. 
A Taylor rule relies on a single measurement of resource utilisation. This contrasts with the Riksbank’s 
conception  of  the  output  gap  or  resource  utilisation.  We  try  to  combine  a  number  of  different 
measurements  and  indicators  into  a  weighted  overall  assessment.  Alternative  estimations  of  the 
output gap are presented in connection with the Inflation Report’s discussion of resource utilisation. 
Studies  of  different  industries’  assessments  of  resource  utilisation  are  considered  in  detail.  Other 
indicators  that  can  add  to  the  picture  of  resource  utilisation  and  its  relationship  with  inflation  are 
obtained by analysing current wage trends (both negotiated wage increases and wage drift) and data 
on the labour market situation. We usually also emphasise the need for a flexible approach to and a 
continuous reassessment of different indicators of resource utilisation. In recent years our views about 
the  level  of  resource  utilisation,  the  interval  within  which  potential  growth  lies  and  the  relationship 
between growth and inflation have been revised continuously. The point I want to make is thus that the 
analysis stands to gain from decision-makers using a perception of resource utilisation that is broader 
than a mechanical application of the Taylor rule provides. 
In addition to these objections to the simple Taylor rule it can be noted that there is a lot of evidence to 
the  effect  that  instead  of  being  stable,  the  equilibrium  interest  rate  in  the  equation  varies  with  the 
potential growth rate. This is a view that can be traced back to the Swedish political economist Kurt 
Wicksell’s notion of a “natural interest rate”. 
A monetary policy based on forecasts 
I should now like to present some reflections on the forecast-based monetary policy we undertake at 
the Riksbank. 
First of all, an inflation targeting policy based on forecasts has several basic characteristics in common 
with the other alternatives I have been discussing. (This, however, does not apply to the alternative of 
basing policy solely on CPI outcomes.) One common denominator is the fundamental philosophy and 
aim  of  safeguarding  the  value  of  money.  Monetary  policy  strives  for  price  stability  as  a  way  of 
providing a nominal anchor for the economy. Another similarity is the medium-term perspective rather 
than short-term activism. This in turn calls for a forward-looking perspective when the instrumental rate 
is set. A further resemblance is that in the Riksbank’s strategy, monetary policy reacts systematically, 
though  neither  automatically  nor  mechanically;  this  helps  households  and  firms  to  base  their 
expectations of inflation on a monetary policy that is predictable. We have followed our rule of action 
relatively closely, as is evident from Diagram 1. 
 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2002
 1. Actual and estimated repo rate
Estimates with a simple forecast-based rule
it = 1.29 + 0.66it - 1 + 0.50(πF
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1993
1994
1995
1996
t , 1 – 2) + 0.26(πF
t , 2 – 2) + et 
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Source: The Riksbank  
 
Diagram  1,  published  in  our  latest  Inflation  Report,  shows  the  actual  path  of  the  repo  rate  and 
estimations obtained with a simple forecast-based rule. It seems that on the whole, our actions can be 
explained  fairly  well  by  applying  an  equation  based  on  the  Riksbank’s  own  series  of  forecasts  of 
inflation  one  to  two  years  ahead  plus  a  term  for  the  repo  rate’s  “inertia”.  Considering  the  rule’s 
simplicity,  the  deviations  from  it must  be  said  to  be  small.  The  diagram  accordingly  shows  that  the 
Riksbank’s actions have been reasonably systematic and based on the Bank’s inflation forecasts. 
It  is,  of  course,  too  early  for  a  more  thorough  evaluation  of  explicit  inflation  targeting  regimes 
compared  with  other  monetary  policy  strategies.  It  is  also  the  case  that  Taylor  rules,  albeit  in  a 
somewhat modified form, likewise give comparatively good explanations for a number of central banks 
that have not explicitly adopted an inflation target, for example Deutsche Bundesbank and the U.S. 
Federal  Reserve.  Thus,  there  are  similarities  between  the  strategies  of  these  central  banks  and 
inflation  targeting  regimes.  If  the  differences  are  greater  rhetorically  than  in  practice,  it  is  therefore 
difficult to establish that one of the arrangements has performed better or worse than the others. 
Diagram 2 presents the variations in growth and inflation for a number of industrialised countries in two 
periods.  One  is  the  years  from  1970  to  1990,  when  central  bank  policy  –  except  in  Germany  and 
Switzerland  –  tended  to  concentrate  excessively  on  stabilising  employment  and  demand  instead  of 
aiming to maintain price stability in the medium term. In a majority of these countries the transition to a 
stability-oriented  monetary  policy  had  at  least  not  been  completed.  By  the  time  of  the  other  period, 
1995–2000, in a number of countries the transition to price stability had been successfully completed. 
The choice of periods and countries as well as methods is, of course, debatable but in all the countries 
it  looks  as  though  the  situation  had  become  considerably  more  stable  in  the  more  recent  period 
compared with the earlier. 
That  conclusion  applies  to  Sweden,  where  much  hard  work  has  been  devoted  to  making  the  new 
regime  credible.  What  I  have  in  mind  is,  course,  the  ambitious  consolidation  of  the  government 
finances and the Riksbank’s own efforts to generate confidence in the new and initially fragile regime 
with an explicit inflation target. The Swedish economy appears to have become more stable with the 
new regime. From 1995 onwards the average rate of inflation, measured with UND1X, has been fairly 
close to the 2 per cent target. This has been accompanied by higher GDP growth than before. A part 
of the higher growth is of course explained by there being plenty of unutilised resources after the crisis 
in the early 1990s. 
BIS Review 24/2002 
 5
 Variations in inflation and GDP growth
Thirteen industrialized countries
1970-90
1995-00
n
o
i
t
a
l
f
n
i
 
.
v
e
d
 
.
t
S
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Sweden
USA
Germany
n
o
i
t
a
l
f
n
i
 
.
v
e
d
 
.
t
S
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Sweden
USA
Germany
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
St. dev. GDP growth
St. dev.GDP growth
Source: The Riksbank  
 
It cannot be argued that inflation targeting countries would have done worse if they had followed the 
same strategy as Germany and Switzerland, or that those two countries would have done equally well 
if they had targeted inflation. It is also conceivable that similar results would have been achieved with 
other monetary strategies, such as the pragmatic procedure at the U.S. Federal Reserve or the fixed 
exchange  rate  regimes  – amounting  in  practice  to  a  delegation  of monetary  policy  to  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank – that were used at times in, for example, France, Italy and Denmark. Other changes, for 
example a clearer long-term orientation of fiscal policy, with an appreciable reduction of budget deficits 
as a major component, can also explain the more stable picture. 
But  it  does  seem  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  stronger  focus  on  price  stability  in  a  number  of 
countries, accompanied by a delegation of monetary policy to independent central banks, has helped 
to reduce inflation in many industrialised countries. In Sweden the average rate of inflation (UND1X) 
dropped from around 8 per cent in the period 1970–90 to about 1.8 per cent in 1995–2000. 
It is also reasonable to believe that the transition to targeting inflation contributed to the reduction of 
fluctuations  in  growth  and  inflation  in  countries  such  as  Sweden,  the  United  Kingdom,  Canada, 
Finland,  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  Neither  can  it  be  denied  that  these  regime  shifts  may  have 
played a part in the somewhat higher growth that was achieved in the 1990s compared with the two 
preceding decades. 
Flexible rule of action 
I  like  to  think  that  our  inflation  targeting  policy  and  rule  of  action  are  flexible,  by  which  I  mean  that 
monetary  policy  is  characterised  by  a  rule  of  action  that  is  simple  and  clear,  making  our  actions 
reasonably  easy  to  follow  and  foresee,  at  the  same  time  as  we  are  sufficiently  flexible  to  alter  our 
behaviour if this is called for by unexpected economic shocks. The important thing then is to be explicit 
about the motives behind our actions. As I just said, the basic considerations in monetary policy are 
inflation in a medium-term perspective and a reasonable degree of stability in the real economy. 
In  recent  years  a  common  topic  in  the  discussion  of  inflation  and  monetary  policy  has  been  the 
concept  of  transitory  effects.  A  sudden  and  unforeseen  increase  (or  decrease)  in  the  general  price 
level  on  account  of  some  type  of  shock  leads  to  inflation  being  temporarily  higher  (or  lower)  in  the 
following twelve months. That shocks of this type should influence monetary policy is not self-evident. 
On  the  one  hand,  reacting  to  transitory  shocks  that  do  no  mirror  changes  in  resource  utilisation  or 
inflation  expectations  would  be  liable  to  result  in  demand  being  affected  by  instrumental  rate 
adjustments in ways that contribute to future, more permanent deviations from the inflation target. On 
6 
 BIS Review 24/2002
 the other hand, future deviations from the inflation target can also occur if one disregards the fact that 
supply  shocks  may  mirror  more  or  less  transitory  changes  in  productivity  or  that  temporary  price 
effects  may  have  consequences  for  other  prices  and  influence  inflation  expectations.  Determining 
whether or not monetary policy ought to respond to a change in the rate of price increases calls for 
detailed analyses of the underlying causes. 
This is another circumstance that illustrates the disadvantages of a strategy that only considers current 
price tendencies and is likely to lead to appreciable fluctuations in the development of prices as well as 
demand. Neither, for that matter, is there any price index that is so constructed that it only measures 
factors  of  central  importance  for  monetary  policy  and  works  in  any  situation.  The  discussion  also 
brings out the drawback of working with rigid rules of action for monetary policy, for example a money 
supply target or a Taylor rule. Here is another instance. 
At this Association’s monetary policy meeting last spring I discussed how the Riksbank ought to react 
if the economy is exposed to various types of structural change. I concluded that the “flexible inflation 
targeting policy” as defined by the Riksbank does provide for temporary departures from our simple 
rule of action. It should be underscored that in the event of such departures from the rule of action, it is 
important to be particularly explicit about what is guiding monetary policy. I also pointed out last year 
that it is not difficult to envisage a situation, for example rapidly rising asset prices, where the rule of 
action  and  the  inflation  target  must  defer  to  a  tighter  monetary  stance.  This  view  is,  of  course, 
connected  with  my  time  as  under-secretary  at  the  Finance  Ministry  during  the  banking  crisis  in  the 
early 1990s. If rising asset prices are a symptom of a wider build-up of imbalances, such as a rapid 
expansion of credit, then  monetary  policy must endeavour to limit the risks that expanding financial 
sector  bubbles  may  affect  the  real  economy.  That  does  not  mean  that  determining  when  such  a 
situation  is  on  the  way  is  particularly  easy.  The  point  I  want  to  make  is  that  our  monetary  policy 
strategy provides for such a contingency. 
Forecasting is difficult 
So  far  I  have  been  discussing  advantages  of  the  Riksbank’s current monetary  policy  arrangements 
and  the  drawbacks  alternative  strategies  may  have.  In  doing  so  I  hope  I  have  indicated  that  the 
alternatives  also  have  some  advantages,  too.  But  I  still  consider  that  the  advantages  with  the 
Riksbank’s way of conducting monetary policy outweigh the disadvantages. But something should also 
be  said  about  what  is  perhaps  the  current  regime’s  greatest  drawback,  namely  the  difficulty  in 
forecasting future inflation, not least in such a comparatively distant perspective as one to two years 
ahead. 
Completely reliable forecasts of future inflation presuppose success in two respects. One is managing 
to predict how shocks in the current situation will spread successively through the economy and affect 
the future rate of inflation. The other is managing to predict the shocks that subsequently occur in the 
forecast period and generate a future increase or decrease in the rate of inflation. While the first task is 
certainly difficult but maybe not completely out of the question, given that the course of events stays 
reasonably close to historical patterns, the second is virtually impossible. 
In other words, forecasts can err and we must bear that in mind. So I want to make it particularly clear 
that  even  though  forecasting  errors  occur,  I  still  consider  that  most  things  indicate  that  our  present 
forecast-based inflation targeting regime functions satisfactorily. 
An important issue is, of course, the size of the forecasting errors it is reasonable to expect. Some 
colleagues at the Riksbank studied this about a year ago by evaluating 52,000 forecasts which 250 
institutions around the world had presented over a period of almost a decade. They concluded that the 
errors in forecasting inflation were somewhere between a half and one percentage point, depending 
slightly on the country in question. 
The historical errors in the Riksbank’s forecasts have been of approximately this magnitude except in 
three periods. The first was 1996–97, when large interest rate cuts, for example, lowered CPI inflation 
via  house  mortgage  expenditure.  The  second  was  in  the  late  1990s,  when  the  deregulation  of 
electricity  and  telecom  markets,  for  example,  led  to  a  relatively  large  one-off  downward  shift  in  the 
price level and temporarily lowered inflation. The third is the past year, when the greater part of the 
increase  in  inflation has  had to do  with various supply shocks, for instance on  prices for electricity, 
meat,  fruit  and  vegetables  last  spring.  The  background  to  these  price  disturbances  is  a  poor  water 
supply for hydroelectric power on account of low precipitation, livestock diseases and poor harvests on 
BIS Review 24/2002 
 7
 account of unusually cold weather in Europe. As I mentioned, shocks of this type are liable to raise the 
price level and lead to a transitory increase in the rate of inflation. 
Perhaps the most pertinent question, however, is whether these historical “forecasting errors” would 
have had any decisive consequences for monetary policy if they had been anticipated well in advance. 
The answer in my opinion is: probably not. Even if we had allowed for the interest expenditure item’s 
downward effect on CPI inflation in 1996–97, we would still have lowered the repo rate. Neither would 
it be realistic to suppose that the Riksbank would have, as it were, chased its own tail and lowered the 
interest rate appreciably more on the grounds that CPI inflation was below the target. In the period in 
the  late  1990s,  resource  utilisation  was  already  rising  rapidly  and  an  even  more  expansionary 
monetary  policy  would  hardly  have  been  justified.  The  instrumental  rate  in  Sweden  was  a  good  bit 
lower than in the United States in these years and also lower at times than in the euro area, at the 
same time as the Swedish krona was comparatively weak. 
Concerning  the  past  year’s  increase  in  inflation,  it  was  not  the  supply  shocks  that  prompted  the 
decision in March to raise the repo rate but the picture that was beginning to emerge of the Swedish 
economy being rather close to or even somewhat above full resource utilisation. This may be a major 
problem, not for current inflation but rather for future inflation as activity continues to strengthen. 
Conclusion 
I  began  by  considering  whether  the  problems  associated  with  making  forecasts  for  the  Riksbank’s 
current policy of targeting inflation could be avoided by changing to a different strategy. What I have 
said  hopefully  shows  that  this  does  not  seem  to  be  the  case,  at  least  with  the  knowledge  that  is 
available today. 
A less forward-looking policy, based for example on outcome data or forecasts that only illuminate the 
near future, would be liable to have destabilising effects on the real economy. 
Even a policy based on the money supply is dependent on forecasts of resource utilisation; it, too, can 
have destabilising consequences if the correlation between the intermediate variable and the ultimate 
objective breaks down. 
Neither  would  it  be  realistic  or  even  appropriate  to  have  a  strategy  whereby  monetary  policy  is 
determined by automatic and mechanical rules; in the worst case, the simplicity of such a strategy can 
lead to unduly large fluctuations in both inflation and GDP. 
I  therefore  conclude  that  the  problems  connected  with  forecasting  inflation  cannot  be  avoided  by 
choosing a different monetary strategy, at least with the present state of knowledge. As I see it, the 
problems with forecasts are manageable and relatively slight compared with the regime’s advantages 
in other respects.  As the discussion has also shown, most monetary strategies have drawbacks as 
well as advantages. 
Most  people  will  no  doubt  agree  when  I  say  that  on  the  whole,  Sweden’s  experience  of  targeting 
inflation is favourable but of course that does not mean that we can rest content or smug. We do not 
claim to have found the ultimate monetary strategy. But by being transparent about the information on 
which  our  monetary  policy  is  based  and  by  being  prepared  to  discuss  the  policy’s  formation,  the 
Riksbank can offer a guided tour of the complex world in which we live and are constantly learning 
new things. So when we wake up each morning, let us ponder a while on the mistakes we may have 
made and do not yet understand. 
However, since  the  world  and  its  inhabitants do not  behave in  a mechanical and rigid fashion,  one 
cannot  expect  monetary  policy  to  be  perfect.  Monetary  policy  is  not  an  exact  science,  perhaps  not 
even a science. Still, by acting systematically and predictably in accordance with a clear intellectual 
framework, while we may not entirely avoid the risk of making mistakes, it does seem – and that is 
maybe what matters – that we can avoid making mistakes that are serious. 
8 
 BIS Review 24/2002
