 Y V Reddy: Legal Aspects of International Financial Standards - National Law 
Perspective 
Paper circulated by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the International 
Seminar  on  Legal  and  Regulatory  Aspects  of  Financial  Stability  sponsored  by  the World  Bank,  the 
International Monetary Fund, the Bank for International Settlements and the Financial Stability Forum 
at BIS, Basel, Switzerland on 23 January 2002. Dr Reddy is thankful to Mr N V Deshpande, Principal 
Legal Adviser of the Reserve Bank of India, who was associated with parts of the work; for presenting 
the paper in the Seminar on his behalf. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of India’s website. 
 Professor Giovanoli and friends, 
I  am  thankful  to  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  for  giving  me  opportunity  to  make  this 
presentation on the national law perspective, though a large number of presentations in the Seminar 
relate to international law. The presentation is based on Indian approach and Indian experience and 
focus is on processes and current status of various legislative changes that evolve in the consideration 
of  international  standards  and  codes.  Some  generalisations  are  attempted  on  the  link  between 
domestic  law  and  international  law.  The  first  section  captures  general  observations  in  regard  to 
international financial standards and codes with particular reference to Indian approach. The second 
section  attempts  some  generalisations  on  the  domestic  legal  framework  in  this  regard.  The  third 
section describes the processes of consideration in India while the fourth narrates the changes in legal 
and  policy  framework  that  are  addressed  in  the  processes.  The  daunting  agenda  for  legal  reform 
arising out of the process is covered in the fifth section. The penultimate section deals with the current 
legislative  processes  and  responsibilities  for  implementation.  The  final  section  attempts  some 
generalisations on national law perspective and international law. 
Indian Approach to International Financial Standards and Codes 
The  development  of  international  standards  and  codes  in  the  current  context  has  five  important 
features,  viz.,  it  is  part  of  the  reform  of  the  international  financial  architecture;  it  represents  a 
consolidated  view  of  several  interrelated  standards  and  codes;  it  is  a  collaborative  effort  involving 
different  groups  of  countries,  markets  and  international  financial  institutions  and  standard  setting 
agencies  and  bodies;  it  has  elements  of  both  external  and  internal  assessments  of  degree  of 
compliance; and, finally there is an assumption of linkage between the implementation of standards 
and codes and financial stability. 
There are several reasons for the widespread interest in international financial standards and codes. 
Among  them,  the  most  notable  are  the  increasing  cross-border  flows;  improvements  in  technology 
making such capital flows faster thereby enhancing both efficiency and hard behaviour; large private 
corporate entities operating significant resources, particularly, highly leveraged institutions impacting 
on  both  efficiency  and  stability,  and  the  large  institutional  funds  such  as  pension  funds  and  mutual 
funds  replacing  to  some  extent  the  severely  supervised  banks’  dominance  in  the  financial 
intermediation in a relatively closed economy. In such a situation, public policy has every reason to 
minimise  systemic  risks  by  encouraging,  to  the  extent  desirable,  transparency  of  operations  and 
uniformity in definitions to minimise risks of misunderstandings among the participants. 
The extent of relevance of international financial standards and codes, the task of implementation and 
the  legal  as  well  as  other  processes  by  which  these  standards  are  implemented  would  necessarily 
depend  on  the  country  concerned.  For  example,  in  India,  the  major  challenge  in  designing  and 
implementing  the  standards  has  been  to  chart  a  course  of  financial  sector  related  reform  in  the 
domestic arena, which ties up closely with the overall economic reform. At the same time, the need for 
gradual  harmonising  with  international  standards  has  to  be  kept  in  view.  Further,  in  taking  a  global 
view  and  charting  domestic  reforms,  there  is  need  for  built-in  flexibility.  The  implementation  of 
international standards involves a virtual paradigm shift say, from a strong centralised planning system 
(where  the  objectives  are  pre-determined  and  Fabian  socialism  dominated  along  with  suspicion  of 
markets)  to  a  system  where  contracts,  prices  and  well  defined  inter-institutional  relationships  work. 
BIS Review 10/2002 
 1
 The  legal  framework  built  on  the  socialist  principles  is  being  reformed  and  standards  and  codes 
become a part of such changes. 
While there is a strong case for considering international best practices, to the extent they exist and 
are perceivable, there are several reasons to be circumspect about the role of standards and codes as 
primary instruments of enhancing international financial stability. The recent efforts have focussed on 
measures mainly designed to discipline debtor countries. While it is conceded that all the reforms that 
are being prescribed have their merits, there is an overriding presumption in the prescriptions that the 
causes of the crisis rests primarily with policy and institutional weaknesses in the debtor countries and 
hence  place  the  onus  of  responsibility  of  reform  on  the  debtors.  The  obligations  contained  in  the 
standards and codes seem to reflect the view that the main flaws in the system for international capital 
movements are to be found in recipient countries which should thus bear the burden of adjustment 
needed to prevent or contain financial crisis. The UNCTAD Report (2001) states: “the reform process 
rather  than  focussing  on  international  action  to  address  systemic  instability  and  risks  has  placed 
emphasis on what should be done by national institutions and mechanisms. Even in this regard, it has 
failed  to  adopt  an  even-handed  approach  between  debtors  and  creditors.  Thus,  it  seems  as  if 
standards  and  codes  are  being  pressed  upon  developing  countries  to  improve  transparency  and 
disclosure without corresponding obligations for disclosure by financial institutions and hedge funds”.  
The  link  between  implementation  of  standards  and  codes  and  financial  stability  by  itself  is  neither 
theoretically  established  nor  backed  by  sufficient  empirical  evidence  though  on  the  basis  of  first 
principles  and  judgement,  the  linkage  between  the  two  elements  is  apparent.  Despite  the  apparent 
emphasis  on  their  voluntary  adoption,  there  is  a  danger  that  incentives  and  sanctions  linked  to 
standard  setting  will  become  features  of  IMF  surveillance  and  conditionality.  In  such  a  scenario, 
publication of information on the compliance status, particularly the information presented in the ROSC 
reports,  is  fraught  with  the  danger  of  classifying  the  countries  into  performers  and  non-performers. 
Even  when  the  international  agencies  associated  with  the  work  on  standards  and  codes  may  not 
intend so, once the information is disseminated, it is possible that credit rating agencies may assign 
country ratings on the basis of the levels of achievement of standards.  
Briefly stated, the recent international initiatives in regard to standards and codes provide at best a 
partial  solution  to  the  problems  of  existing  international  financial  architecture.  Furthermore,  in  the 
context of a crisis, they provide solutions at domestic level for issues that may often originate outside 
the country. Finally, they do not assure international financial stability although they may contribute to 
it.  Yet,  there  are  several  reasons  why  public  policy  and  national  authorities  need  to  focus  on  the 
international  standards  and  codes  and  these  reasons  centre  around  both  efficiency  and  stability  of 
financial  sector  in  the  country.  In  this  context,  a  desirable  approach  to  the  consideration  of 
international standards and codes can be explored in national interest. 
Although  the  standards  have  evolved  in  the  context  of  international  stability,  they  have  enormous 
efficiency-enhancing value by themselves. Standards by themselves may be presumed to be, prima 
facie,  desirable,  and  it  is,  therefore,  in  the  national  interest  to  develop  institutional  mechanisms  for 
consideration of international standards. Thus, the implementation of standards needs to be given a 
domestic  focus  with  the  objectives  of  market  development  and  enhancing  market  efficiency.  Often, 
there are significant differences among the standards adopted, as in the case of accounting, and in 
any case, mere existence of a set of codes does not guarantee either transparency or integrity of the 
institutions  concerned  and  transactions  -  a  matter  amply  illustrated  by  the  recent  events  involving 
Enron and Arthur Anderson. Many standards keep evolving and it is important to keep a close track of 
development in these areas. It also needs to be recognised that the process is evolutionary and say 
two years down the line, present standards themselves can change, in degree and detail though not in 
kind. 
Role of Domestic Legal Framework 
It may be possible to classify the standards in a conceptual framework under three broad elements, 
viz.,  technical,  policy  and  socio-cultural.  Standards  like  SDDS,  accounting  and  auditing,  and 
supervision may be classified as purely technical and, therefore, easily amenable to implementation. 
Standards  on  monetary  and  financial  policies,  fiscal  transparency  and  securities  regulation  have 
certain policy implications  and  would form an integral part of the economic reform process in many 
developing countries. The changes in these areas depend on timing, sequencing and complementarity 
in  related  areas  and  availability  of  institutional,  technological  and  legal  infrastructure.  Nevertheless, 
while it is desirable to adopt these standards as soon as possible, it actually boils down to an issue of 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2002
 managing  policy  reforms  in  a  non-disruptive  fashion.  Finally,  standards  in  the  areas  of  corporate 
governance,  insurance  and  to  a  certain  extent,  insolvency  and  bankruptcy  practices  take  a  socio-
cultural dimension and pose challenges of design, adoption and implementation. 
It  would  thus  follow  that  the  scope  and  need  for  reviewing  legal  framework  will  vary  depending  on 
whether it is technical, policy- oriented or socio-cultural. In technical issues, legal framework should 
not  be  prohibiting  appropriate  standards,  while  policy  should  enable,  and  procedures  ensure  their 
adaptation.  The  policy-oriented  standards  have  significant  link  with  conduct  of  policy  and  legal 
framework may either enable or even assure policies that are consistent with international standard. 
Those  with  predominant  socio-cultural  dimension  would  need  significant  legal  backing,  policy  and 
procedural  elements.  In  other  words,  legal  framework  is  of  significance  in  varying  degrees  among 
different standards and codes.  
It is also possible to attempt a construct of the link between transparency and macroeconomic policy. 
Good  macroeconomic  policy  and  good  standards  is  perhaps  an  ideal  situation  for  a  country.  Good 
macroeconomic  policy  and  poor  transparency  though  not  ideal  is  perhaps  not  risky  by  itself.  Bad 
macroeconomic  policy  and  good  transparency  has  large  elements  of  risk  and  warrants  change  in 
policy before launching into transparency. The most risky combination perhaps is bad macroeconomic 
policy  and  bad  standards.  In  a  more  dynamic  sense,  it  can  be  argued  that  transparency  provides 
incentives to adopt good macroeconomic policies. 
In this background, it is necessary to make it clear that a legal framework can address the issue of 
transparency,  and  for  that  matter  codes,  in  a  variety  of  ways.  First,  it  may  be  possible  to  ensure 
adoption  of  such  standards  and  codes  within  the  existing  legal  framework.  The  issue  would  be 
whether  such  compliance  be  made mandatory  by  law  or  the  disclosure  of  the  extent  and  nature  of 
compliance  be  mandated  by  law.  Second,  legal  framework  may  have  to  be  put  in  place  to  enable 
compliance as and when considered appropriate. Third, legal framework could mandate compliance 
but from a date to be specified. In fact, role of delegated legislation in the legal framework needs to be 
explored in the context of standards and codes that keep evolving and need adoption. Fourth, legal 
framework  could  provide  for  institutional  arrangements  that  would  assure  a  continuous  basis  for 
compliance.  Finally,  legal  framework  may  enable  or  mandate  independent  regulatory  bodies  that 
happen to be relevant for the purpose to ensure compliance. 
While  transparency  and  financial  stability  appear  fundamentally  complementary,  there  could  be  a 
trade-off at some point. Therefore, codes should be treated as milestones and the exact manner and 
timing of dissemination of information including the structure of reporting should depend not only on 
constitutional,  legal  and  institutional  mechanisms  but  also  the  likely  impact  of  dissemination  on  the 
financial sector soundness and stability in a given context. 
Many codes emphasise legislative provisions in a concrete manner and legislation provides the shield 
or back up for such actions. The emphasis should be to promote a general effort to improve legislative 
provisions  and  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  that  the  process  of  legislation  is  time  consuming  and 
complex.  While  it  is  essential  to  recognise  the  importance  of  legislation,  given  its  complexity,  it  is 
essential  to  appreciate  that  sound  practices  also  could  be  as  satisfactory.  For  example,  in  India, 
several regulatory prescriptions in respect of banks' investment in Commercial Paper brought about 
changes in the money market though legal framework did not provide for mandating such prescriptions 
on  all  the  participants.  Broadly  speaking,  the  legal  framework  is  one  element  of  set  of  actions  that 
should be considered in regard to public policy on the issues of adoption of transparency and codes. 
The others relate to actual conduct of policy and detailed procedures. In fact, apart from critical roles 
for  different  regulations,  there  is  a  significant  role  for  self-regulatory  bodies  in  matters  relating  to 
documentation,  common  procedures  and  promoting  market  discipline  in  favour  of  best  practices.  In 
brief, the need for, scope of, and limits to the legal framework should be explicitly and continuously 
appreciated.  
The emphasis on the implementation of standards and codes and accountability thereof is still heavily 
concentrated in the official sector. An optimal balance between regulation and competitive efficiency in 
the  financial  system  and  markets  can  be  achieved  only  with  equal  emphasis  on  responsibility  and 
accountability of the private sector. The focus of IMF is also with regard to codes mostly in respect of 
regulators and not so much with private sector. International accounting standards and standards set 
by  securities  market  associations  are,  no  doubt,  expected  to  cover  issues  relating  to  private  sector 
market  participants.  Every  effort  should  be  made  to  recognise  and  correct  the  asymmetry  in 
considering legal framework. 
BIS Review 10/2002 
 3
 Processes 
Inspired  by  own  reflection  on  the  subject  and  the  likely  gains  from  implementation  of  international 
financial standards, the Reserve Bank, in consultation with the Government, constituted a high level 
Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes in December 1999. The terms of 
reference of the Committee entrusted it with the task of monitoring developments in global standards 
and codes and assessing aspects of their applicability to the Indian financial system. The Committee 
was, inter alia, required to reach out its Reports to a wide range of audience including relevant public 
and financial sector organisations and institutions to sensitise public opinion and create awareness in 
different subject areas. The approach of the Committee, therefore, was unique as it recognised public 
consensus and concord as essential precursors to facilitate a voluntary adoption rather than merely 
mechanical compliance. 
The Standing Committee formed Advisory Groups in ten different subject areas in the financial system 
by drawing intellectual resources in the form of groupings of eminent non-official experts. The Advisory 
Groups  were  entrusted  with  the  task  of  studying,  in  detail,  (a)  the  present  status  of  applicability, 
relevance and compliance of standards and codes, (b) reviewing the feasibility of compliance and the 
time-frame  over  which  it  could  be  achieved,  given  the  prevailing  legal  and  institutional  practices, 
comparing levels of adherence in India, vis-à-vis in industrial countries and emerging economies, and 
(c) to chalk out a course of action for achieving the best practices. 
The ten different core subjects areas identified by the Standing Committee corresponds to the official 
list  of  codes  suggested  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  for  implementation.  These  were  : 
Transparency  in  Monetary  and  Financial  Policies,  Data  Dissemination,  Payments  and  Settlement 
Systems,  Banking  Supervision,  Securities  Market  Regulation,  Accounting  and  Auditing,  Fiscal 
Transparency, Insurance Regulation, Bankruptcy Laws and Corporate Governance. At this juncture, 
the  Committee,  however,  did  not  consider  the  set  of  codes  on  market  integrity  as  fortified  in  the 
40 recommendations  of  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF),  though  a  technical  report 
commissioned on the subject has been finalised presently. 
All  Advisory  Groups  of  experts  had  the  option  of  interacting  amongst  themselves  on  matters  of 
overlapping or common concerns to evolve a consensus approach. The Advisory Groups also had the 
option to include officials from regulatory and Government organisations as special invitees to discuss 
and understand the prevailing position in the relevant standards and codes, for bringing improvements 
in the existing practices. They also had the benefit of deliberations with market participants, members 
from  professional  bodies  as  well  academics.  The  arrangement  afforded  the  Advisory  Groups  an 
independent  or  impartial  status  and  prompted  a  critical  evaluation  of  the  relevance  and  compliance 
with  each  of  the  aforesaid  standards  and  codes.  The  work  of  the  Advisory  Groups  in  some  cases 
happened to continue alongside similar subjects addressed by groups constituted by the Government 
or other regulatory bodies. In any case, the work of the Advisory Groups was considered unprejudiced 
and non-intrusive to any such official or non-official initiatives taken by others. The Advisory Groups 
were requested to take cognisance of these parallel efforts and to provide inputs, wherever necessary. 
All ten Advisory Groups have already submitted their reports to the Standing Committee. The Standing 
Committee  has  made  efforts  to  disseminate  these  Reports  as  widely  as  possible  including  their 
expeditious  posting  to  the  Reserve  Bank  website.  The  Committee  has  also  requested  the  Advisory 
Groups  to  organise  seminars  for  creating  awareness  and  concretising  views  on  recommendations. 
The  Committee  would  also  take  up  regular  annual  review  of  the  status  and  progress  regarding 
compliance with, and implementation of standards and codes and submit it to the Ministry of Finance. 
to  concerned 
Changes in Legal and Policy Framework 
The implementation of the recommendations of Advisory Groups in relevant sectors would require a 
co-ordinated approach based on elements of consensus, incentives, technical support, resources and 
encouragement 
the 
recommendations  of  Advisory  Groups  can  be  categorised  into  three  levels,  viz.,  requiring  (a) 
constitutional,  (b) 
legislative  and  (c)  procedural  and  policy  changes.  Quite  a  number  of 
recommendations require new legislative enactments or amendments to existing laws, while several 
others  could  be  implemented  by  making  appropriate  changes  in  the  existing  policy  and  procedures 
under the powers vested to relevant bodies under the law. A few recommendations could also require 
changes in the Constitution of India. Some of the issues pertaining to the financial system are also 
being  addressed  by  the  National  Commission  to  Review  the  Constitution.  Of  these  changes, 
amendments to the legal framework of the country assume utmost importance as they institutionalise 
regulatory  bodies.  Broadly  speaking, 
institutions  and 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2002
 changes as formal laws with parliamentary endorsement and, therefore, provide clear-cut mechanisms 
for enforcement.  
There are several overlaps in the recommendations of Advisory Groups with concomitant relevance 
for legislative changes keeping in view such overlaps. Some of the notable overlaps are between (a) 
Monetary  and  Financial  Policies  and  Fiscal  transparency;  (b)  Corporate  Governance  and  Banking 
Supervision;  (c)  Payment  and  Settlement  System  and  Securities  Market  Regulation;  (d)  Accounting 
and Auditing and Banking Supervision. The issues of regulatory overlap were highlighted by several 
Advisory Groups which has a bearing on the policy and procedures though not on legal framework as 
such. 
Daunting Agenda for Legal Reform 
The Reports of Advisory Groups have identified several areas requiring legislative actions to ensure 
enhancement in standards and codes relating to financial sector. The agenda arising out of the reports 
is daunting as will be clear from the description below.  
First, the improvements suggested by the Advisory Group on Payment and Settlement System would 
necessitate  amendments  to  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act  and  Banking  Regulation  Act.  While  a  new 
enactment viz. The Payment Systems Regulation Act may also be needed, the implementation of the 
rest of the recommendations would require notification of Regulations under all the above enactments 
as well as in the Information Technology Act and the Indian Contract Act.  
Second,  on  matters  covered  by  the  Advisory  Group  on  Banking  Supervision,  amendments  and 
appropriate notifications under Reserve Bank of India Act and Banking Regulation Act would suffice.  
Third,  in  respect  of  Securities  Market  Regulation,  amendments  are  needed  in  respect  of  Securities 
Exchange Board of India Act; Unit Trust of India Act, and The Companies Act. It may also be desirable 
to  consider  a  new  enactment  to  deal  with  financial  frauds.  Several  policy  and  procedural  changes 
would, no doubt, be needed by the Securities Regulator. The self-regulatory bodies are also required 
to enunciate Code of Conduct and best practices in securities transactions.  
Fourth,  in  respect  of  the  Report  of  Advisory  Group  on  Transparency  in  Monetary  and  Financial 
Policies, a possible amendment to Constitution of India was expressed in the context of an ongoing 
review by a National Commission. More important, several amendments to Reserve Bank of India Act 
and Banking Regulation Act supplemented by policy and procedural changes on the part of RBI and 
Government of India would be essential. 
Fifth, the Report of Advisory Group on Corporate Governance covers a wide spectrum of institutions 
and practices warranting actions in three broad areas. Amendments in Companies Act accompanied 
by  stipulations  in  regard  to  listing  agreements  of  Stock  Exchanges  by  securities  regulators  would 
address  the  set  of  issues  governing  private  shareholders  in  corporates  in  general.  Amendments  in 
Banking  Regulation  Act  and  other  statutorily  established  but  Government-owned 
financial 
intermediaries,  especially  public  sector  banks  would  be  needed  to  bring  entities  in  financial  sector 
under the overall best practices for corporate governance, especially in financial sector. In regard to 
several  other  government  owned  enterprises  also,  there  may  be  need  for  amendments  in 
Memorandum and Articles of Association, and in some cases the special laws that may govern their 
establishment  and  functioning.  In  any  case,  substantial  changes  would  also  be  needed  in  the 
management practices and relationship between Government and the entities concerned where both 
Government and private shareholders co-exist. 
Sixth, the Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency took account of the ongoing efforts to enact a Fiscal 
Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, and expressed that such an enactment would fulfil most 
of the requirements of transparency, when supplemented by appropriate rules and regulations, under 
the proposed legislation. There is also a reference to proposed amendments to Reserve Bank of India 
Act and Banking Regulations Act, which would, inter alia, address the issue of quasi-fiscal deficits. 
Seventh, in regard to insurance, the Advisory Group found the legal framework to be upto international 
standards though a couple of amendments are suggested. However, several of the recommendations 
relate to the issuance of regulations by the Insurance Regulatory Authority.  
Eighth,  on  issues  relating  to  auditing,  amendments  are  needed  in  respect  of  Companies  Act, 
Income-tax Act and Chartered Accountants Act. 
Ninth, the compliance with the Report on Data Dissemination needs no legislative change.  
BIS Review 10/2002 
 5
 Finally,  in  regard  to  Bankruptcy  Law,  a  new  legislation  on  a  comprehensive  bankruptcy  code  is 
advocated. In addition, repeal of Sick Industries Companies Act, substitution of the institution of official 
liquidator  with  professional  trustees,  creation  of  dedicated  bench  of  High  Court  etc.  have  been 
recommended.  A  special  chapter  on  cross-border  insolvency  in  line  with  the  UNCITRAL  model  law 
has  also  been  suggested.  Similarly,  in  respect  of  market  integrity,  a  new  legislation  relating  to 
terrorism is under consideration while legislation to prevent money laundering is at an advanced stage 
of  consideration.  Procedural  actions  by  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in  regard  to  strengthening  of  Know-
Your-Customer are also contemplated. Amendments to Banking Regulation Act are also expected to 
enhance the powers available to Reserve Bank in this regard. 
to 
insolvency  and  winding  up  of  Companies,  and  based  on 
Current Legislative Process and Responsibilities 
It must be recognised that the legislative process is complex, particularly in a democratic polity. Many 
of the proposals are at different stages of processing. Thus, while Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management Bill and  Prevention  of Money  Laundering Bill have been returned  to Government  with 
opinion of Parliamentary  Standing Committee, the  Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance is  likely to be 
re-promulgated in a modified form. Proposals for amendment of Reserve Bank of India Act; Banking 
Regulations  Act  are  already  at  final  stages  of  consideration  in  Government.  Matters  relating  to 
amendments  to  Indian  Contract  Act  are  still  in  the  drafting  stage.  Some  of  the  amendments  to 
Companies  Act  are  being  processed  in  the  Government,  though  some  of  them  are  not  strictly  in 
consonance  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Groups  on  Bankruptcy  and  Corporate 
Governance.  Independent  of  this  process,  the  Government  had  also  created  a  Committee  on  law 
relating 
the  Committee's 
recommendations,  the  Government  has  introduced  amendments  to  the  Companies  Act.  On  others, 
particularly  in regard to Income Tax Act, action  has  not been initiated. On several aspects such as 
separation  of  debt  management  from  monetary  policy,  policy  decisions  have  been  taken  but  the 
legislative  process  is  yet  to  be  commenced.  There  are  several  recommendations  relating  to 
transparency of monetary policy and publicly owned entities where consensus is yet to emerge. 
It is interesting to note that the Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) BY IMF, 
World Bank etc. draw heavily from the work of the Advisory Groups. These include fiscal transparency, 
monetary  and  financial  policy  transparency,  banking  supervision,  securities  market  regulation, 
payments system and corporate governance. 
On the whole, much of the responsibility of implementing the standards and codes falls on authorities 
charged  with  the  responsibility  of  regulating  various  areas  of  the  financial  system  such  as  the 
Department  of  Company  Affairs  (DCA)  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Reserve  Bank,  Securities  and 
Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA). A large 
number of recommendations could be implemented by self regulatory organisations specific to market 
segments such as the Indian Banks' Association (IBA), Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives 
Association of India (FIMMDA), Association of Merchant Bankers (AMBI), Association of Mutual Funds 
of India (AMFI), Foreign Exchange Dealers' Association of India (FEDAI), Primary Dealers' Association 
of India (PDAI), and stock exchanges among others. 
National Law Perspective and International Law on Standards and Codes 
The  contribution  of  Professor  Mario  Giovanoli  is  pioneering  and  unique  to  the  legal  aspects  of 
international  financial  standard  setting.  As  mentioned  by  him,  the  standards  currently  monitored  by 
Financial Stability Forum, by and large, belong to the category of rules which it has become customary 
to designate as "soft law". In this context, the three criteria suggested for positioning the standards in 
the gradation between "soft law" and "hard law" are very valid. These relate to degrees of obligation, 
precision and delegation.  
On a very judgmental basis, most of the current processes relating to international financial standards 
(described in this paper in the Indian context) appear to be at the soft law end of the spectrum. The 
recent  suggestion  floated  by  Ms  Ann  Kreuger,  First  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  IMF,  on  new 
approach to Sovereign Debt restructuring, however, appears to be closest to the 'hard law' end of the 
spectrum. After describing the four key features of the proposed formal sovereign debt restructuring 
mechanism, the question of legal basis for such a mechanism is raised and answered in the following 
words. "If we are to restrict the ability of creditors to enforce their claims in national courts, then the 
mechanism  must  have  the  force  of  law  in  those  countries  where  enforcement  might  be  sought.  It 
6 
 BIS Review 10/2002
 would not be enough to pass laws in a few leading countries. In practice, the mechanism must have 
the  force  of  law  universally.  Otherwise,  creditors  will  deliberately  seek  out  the  jurisdictions  in  which 
they have the best chance of enforcing their claims". While it is not appropriate to comment on this 
proposal which is still evolving, it is proposed to make some very general statements on the issue of 
national law in the overall setting of international law, based on the current approach and experience 
of India in regard to standards considered by Financial Stability Forum.  
The approaches and processes in India clearly bring out the challenges being faced even in regard to 
the  domestic  legislative  processes  in  India  at  this  stage  of  national  development  and  global 
integration. Further, there is clearly a significant 'soft law' element within the national legal framework 
for financial architecture, and much of the legal framework, if not the whole of it, is enabling rather than 
binding,  thus  circumscribing  the  scope  for  moving  towards  hard  law  in  the  foreseeable  future. 
Moreover, the regulatory bodies have significant role in the implementation of many standards, thus 
imparting  some  discretion  or  considerable  flexibility  in  regard  to  application  of  general  principles.  In 
particular,  the  inevitable  role  of  self-regulatory  bodies  in  regard  to  many  of  the  standards  makes  it 
difficult to impact large elements of hardness to their soft law nature. 
However, there are several ways in which greater harmonisation could be encouraged. For example, 
model  legislations  like  the  one  by  Commonwealth  Secretariat  on  money  laundering  will  help  both 
expeditious  processing  and  relative  clarity  of  concepts  as  well  as  definitions.  This  approach  is  of 
particular significance due to the predominant cross-border nature of money laundering operations. 
Similarly, there can be a special chapter in bankruptcy law only in so far as cross-border insolvency 
issues are involved. Such an approach could be considered, keeping in view the UNCITRAL model 
law. For example, the Report of the Advisory Group on Bankruptcy Laws enunciates the scope of the 
special Chapter on cross-border insolvency. The Chapter applies where assistance is sought in India 
by a foreign court or a foreign representative in connection with foreign proceedings; or assistance is 
sought in a foreign State in connection with proceedings under the laws of India relating to insolvency; 
or foreign proceedings and proceedings under the laws of India relating to insolvency in respect of the 
same debtor are taking place concurrently; or creditors or other interested persons in a foreign State 
have an interest in requesting the commencement of, or participating in, proceedings under the laws of 
India relating to insolvency.  
Finally, the recent experience of Enron and Arthur Andersen gives a new dimension to the institutional 
dynamics  in  financial  structures  and  transactions  revolving  around  'conflicts  of  interests'  among  the 
participants and political or diplomatic forces operating at transnational level on matters which should 
strictly be commercial. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, the complexities relating to the global financial system in the context of strong national 
interests continuing to dominate public policy viewed in the light of Indian experience warrant, more 
than a legal basis, emphasis on three aspects, namely (i) the standards may be set domestically with 
a  recognition  that  they  have  some  international  dimension  also;  (ii)  the  processes  of  setting, 
prioritising,  incentivising,  monitoring  and  reorienting  should  be  consultative  and  participative  in  both 
domestic  and  international  dimensions;  and  (iii)  effective  implementation  is  a  complex  and  varied 
process with domestic legal framework being one enabling factor at this juncture. 
BIS Review 10/2002 
 7
