 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Shafts of light amidst the general gloom of the 
global economy 
Speech  by  The  Rt  Hon  Sir  Edward  George,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Bankers 
Club/Guild Banquet, London, 4 February 2002. 
 President,  My  Lord  Mayor  -  locum  tenens,  Excellencies,  My  Lords,  Aldermen,  Sheriff,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen 
I'm sure you've noticed that time passes more quickly as you get older. I explain it with my own pet 
theory of relativity based on the fact that each year that passes is a smaller proportion of what's gone 
before. But I must confess I'm beginning to have my doubts. It seems much more than 12 months ago 
that we last came together for this great annual gathering. 
The fact is, it's been a very long, hard, year, not just for policy-makers around the world but also for 
many of you in the financial services industry - particularly the international financial services industry. 
We've had to cope with the synchronised global economic slowdown; the extension of the fall in equity 
prices - with dotcoms spreading to telecoms and beyond - even now to Enron; with increasing credit 
risks;  and  then  with  the  vicious  terrorist  attacks  of  11th  September  and  their  aftermath,  and,  finally 
around the turn of the year with the very sad climax to Argentina's long drawn out crisis. I could easily 
go on. It really has been a long, hard, year. 
But  there  have  been  shafts  of  light  amidst  the  general  gloom  -  and  I  prefer  to  focus  on  those  this 
evening.  
In terms of the global economy there are now tentative signs that the worst may soon be over, with the 
prospect  of  gradual  recovery  as  we  move  through  this  year.  That  should  provide  some  support  for 
global equity markets. With inflationary pressures subdued, monetary policy generally can, for the time 
being at least, afford to remain reasonably supportive - though I make no predictions as to what that 
may mean for interest rates. And crucially, for all of us, the international financial system has so far - 
and  I  recognise  that  problems  are  often  slow  to  surface  but  it  has  so  far  -  stood  up  well  to  the 
successive shocks.  
Much  more  broadly,  I  am  encouraged  that  -  as  with  the  Asia  crisis  a  few  years  ago  -  the  recent 
pressures have not generally called into question the real benefits of the market economy, in terms of 
growth,  and  employment,  and  rising  living  standards,  but  have  rather  contributed  to  a  growing 
recognition  that  those  benefits  can  by-pass  poor  countries,  and  poor  communities  within  countries, 
and that  it  is in  our collective  interest that those  who are  excluded, one  way  or another, should be 
helped to help themselves to participate in those benefits.  
In the context of globalisation, that was reflected in the Doha agreement on a new round of world trade 
negotiations; and development financing will be the theme of the Monterrey Summit next month.  
But there has been increasing recognition, too, that the private sector has its role to play, alongside 
governments,  and  it  was  to  encourage  and  promote  the  engagement  of  private  sector  firms  with 
disadvantaged, excluded, sectors of our society, through charitable and community involvement, that 
the Heart of the City campaign was launched, very successfully under Andrew Buxton's leadership, 
last year. 
I'm encouraged, too, by the evidence of clear community of interest between the financial authorities 
and  the  private  sector  in  its  commercial  activity.  Their  co-operation  enabled  the  system  to  cope 
remarkably well with the potential dislocation following the 11th September attacks - and I congratulate 
the  Federal  Reserve  in  particular  and  all  of  you  who  played  a  part  in  that  achievement.  The  same 
co-operation  is  contributing  now  to  the  international  financial  war  against  terrorism,  and  to  the 
strengthening of our disaster contingency plans. It contributed, too, to the flawless introduction of Euro 
notes and coin into the Eurozone - so well managed by the ECB and in which many of you, again, 
played your part. Another example is the intensive consultation and co-operation on the development 
of the Basel 2 regime for banking supervision. 
I'm  encouraged  finally  by  the  continuing  sense  of  community  among  financial  professionals  here  in 
London.  This  was  movingly  evident  in  their  spontaneous  demonstration  of  solidarity  with  their 
counterparts in New York following 11th September. But it was evident too in the formation earlier last 
BIS Review 8/2002 
 1
 year of the Guild of International Bankers, our co-hosts this evening, and of which you, Lord Mayor - 
locum tenens, are the Founding Master. It takes on the mantle - or, perhaps more appropriately, takes 
over  the  ledger  -  from  the  Bankers  Club  which  has  contributed  so  much  to  the  City's  professional 
esprit de corps over so many years. 
So it has, as I said, been a long, hard year, President, but it has certainly had its positive moments. 
And I should like to conclude by paying tribute this evening to the role of the City Corporation and of 
the Mayoralty,  and their contribution to many  of the  positive developments  we  have seen - through 
their own example in promoting community  involvement, including their support for the Heart of the 
City  campaign;  through  their  own  role  in  maintaining  security  and  co-ordinating  the  "public" 
infrastructure - both vital to all our contingency plans; and through their support for the fundamentally 
international character of the City, not least in opening the way to the Guild. I am profoundly grateful to 
them for all the help and support they give to us all. 
It is in that context that I ask you now to rise and join me in a toast to "the Rt Hon The Lord Mayor, the 
Corporation of the City of London and the Sheriffs." 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2002
