 Masaru Hayami: Toward Revitalization of Japan's Economy  
Speech by Mr Masaru Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Keizai (Economic) Club, Tokyo, 
29 January 2002. 
 Introduction  
I am grateful to have the opportunity to talk to this meeting. Japan's economy will enter a critical phase 
this year to establish a basis for sustainable growth by pushing forward with structural reforms in the 
economy and by restoring a sound financial system. Today I would like to express my views frankly 
from the standpoint of the central bank on what needs to be done for Japan's economy to revitalize it 
in the rather longer term.  
I. 
Economic and Financial Developments in 2001  
in 
the  background  of  global  adjustments 
Economic Developments in and outside Japan  
A. 
First, I would like to look back briefly on economic developments in and outside Japan in 2001, a year 
in which Japan and the global economy were in a very severe situation.  
When I made a speech last time to this Club in December 2000, I pointed to two downside risks to 
Japan's economy that needed careful monitoring: first, developments in overseas economies, the U.S. 
economy in particular; and second, the volatile movements in stock markets. What I emphasized was 
that due attention should  be paid to a possible  downswing  of the economy  arising from these risks 
especially  when  the  economy  had  structural  problems  and  was  vulnerable  to  external  shocks. 
Unfortunately, these downside risks actually materialized in 2001.  
The  most  notable  feature  of  economic  developments  in  2001  was  a  simultaneous  slowdown  of 
economies  worldwide  against 
information  and 
communications  technology  (ICT)-related  industries.  And  in  September  2001,  the  tragic  terrorist 
attacks  occurred  in  the  United  States.  The  authorities  responsible  for  macroeconomic  policy  were 
compelled to deal with both economic deceleration and the negative shocks to their economies.  
The  worldwide  decline  in  demand  for  ICT-related  goods  caused  a  significant  fall  in  exports  and 
production  in  Japan  from early  2001.  This  led  to  adjustments  in  the  corporate  sector,  as  seen  in  a 
decrease in corporate profits and business fixed investment. These adjustments then spread to affect 
employment  and  income  conditions  in  the  household  sector,  and  recently  they  have  been  exerting 
downward pressure on private consumption.  
However,  some  positive  signs  have  been  observed  very  recently.  Global  inventory  adjustments  in 
ICT-related  industries  have  made  progress  gradually.  Accordingly,  shipments  of  semiconductors 
worldwide  are  showing  signs  of  bottoming  out,  and  some  semiconductor  prices  are  recovering. 
Exports of East Asian countries, which had declined earlier than those of other areas, are starting to 
show signs of bottoming out. In financial markets overseas, stock prices and long-term interest rates 
generally indicate an expectation of economic recovery in the near future.  
It is, however, still uncertain whether the progress of inventory adjustments in ICT-related goods will 
be  followed  by  a  recovery  of  final  demand  overseas.  Thus,  we  need  to  monitor  carefully  whether 
overseas economies, especially the United States, will recover steadily.  
In Japan, weakness in final demand such as business fixed investment and private consumption has 
become conspicuous, and the severe adjustment phase will inevitably continue for some time. On the 
other hand, conditions for exports are showing some positive signs. In addition, inventory adjustments, 
especially those in ICT-related goods, have been making progress gradually. Accordingly, downward 
pressure on production arising from inventories is expected to be fading.  
Given  the  positive  factors  such  as  the  subsiding  downward  pressure  on  exports  and  production 
together with the negative factors such as intensified adjustments spreading to the household sector, 
Japan's economy will enter a critical phase in the near future in terms of finding a way to recover.  
BIS Review 7/2002 
 1
 Adoption of the New Monetary Easing Framework  
B. 
Next, I will outline the Bank's conduct of monetary policy since the beginning of last year.  
In early 2001, we forecasted that Japan's economy would have to undergo severe adjustments, given 
the simultaneous slowdown of economies worldwide.  
In addition to the severe economic outlook, we were in a very difficult position in regard to room for 
further policy actions. There was almost no room for further rate reduction because the call rate, which 
was our operational target, was as low as 0.25 percent at the beginning of 2001 due to the series of 
drastic monetary easing measures taken in the 1990s.  
In this situation, we adopted a new policy framework for monetary easing in March 2001. We changed 
the main operating target from call rates to a quantitative indicator of liquidity, that is, the outstanding 
balance of current accounts at the Bank of Japan, and we have substantially increased the balance.  
Because  this  was  a  very  drastic  easing  measure  and  was  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  central 
banking worldwide, we had to consider various issues very carefully before deciding it. Above all, it 
was uncertain whether and how expansion of liquidity provision in a situation where the rate is virtually 
zero percent would influence the economy. Needless to say, the mechanism through which such an 
expansion affects the economy has not been demonstrated either theoretically or empirically.  
It  is  particularly  important  to  gain  public  confidence  to  make  monetary  policy  effective.  Public 
confidence  in  economic  policy  is  hard  to  gain  in  the  short  term.  First  of  all,  the  authorities  should 
faithfully explain to the public the expected effects and risks of each policy measure to be taken. Then, 
people will monitor the effects achieved and how the risks turn out, and verify whether they have been 
in  line  with  the  authorities'  explanation.  Public  confidence  can  be  gained  only  through  continuous 
efforts  to  fulfil  the  requirement  to  be  accountable.  Thus,  the  authorities  should  be  careful  not  to 
introduce  measures  in  a  piecemeal  manner  based  on  the  shortsighted  idea  that  "it  is  better  to  do 
something than nothing."  
When the new framework of monetary easing was adopted in March 2001, I believed that the Bank 
should continue to faithfully fulfil its duty of accountability. In other words, the Bank should explain the 
necessity  of  entering  uncharted  territory  by  taking  unprecedented  measures  given  the  severe 
economic outlook, together with the fact that the effects were uncertain to some extent, and try to gain 
the public's understanding.  
Monetary policy cannot directly generate demand nor can it be a substitute for measures to advance 
structural reforms. Also, its stimulative effects on the economy will be very limited in the quantitative 
sense  in  the  situation  where  interest  rates,  both  on  short-  and  long-term  instruments,  are  at  their 
lowest possible levels and cannot decline further.  
When the Bank decided the new frameworks in March 2001, I believed that the Bank should continue 
to make best efforts on its part, and should continue to call strongly for the structural reforms that are 
indispensable and also one of the prerequisites to make monetary easing effective. In other words, the 
Bank decided to take such drastic and unprecedented easing measures ahead of structural reforms, in 
the hope that other measures would follow to advance structural reforms significantly.  
The Bank of Japan had already taken easing measures twice in February 2001. Since March 2001, 
the  Bank  has  decided  on  as  many  as  four  further  easing  measures,  under  the  new  framework  of 
monetary easing. In view of further deterioration of the economy and financial conditions, we decided, 
in December 2001, to expand the balance of current accounts at the Bank and utilize new financial 
instruments such as asset-backed securities as tools for the Bank's market operations and as eligible 
collateral.  
Experiences in the Course of the Unprecedented Monetary Easing  
C. 
As the Bank has continued its unprecedented monetary easing, it has accumulated experience with 
regard to its effects.  
A series of monetary easing measures since 2001 has been effective to a certain degree in reducing 
short-term interest rates and in alleviating anxiety about liquidity.  
The  overnight  call  rate  is  currently  as  low  as  0.001-0.003  percent.  This  is  lower  than  the  level  of 
0.02-0.03 percent under the "zero interest rate policy."  
2 
 BIS Review 7/2002
 Moreover, the Bank's ample provision of funds and its strong commitment in terms of policy duration 
that  the  Bank  would  continue  the  new  monetary  easing  framework  until  the  inflation  rate  registers 
stably  zero  percent  or  above  have  led  to  a  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates.  For  example,  the 
interest rate on one-year Japanese government securities is also very close to zero, at 0.001 percent 
recently.  
In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks, liquidity problems did not arise in Tokyo markets, due to the 
Bank's ample provision of funds. Also, there was no serious disruption in trading and settlement at the 
end of 2001 when concerns over the financial system heightened reflecting the failure of several large 
firms. And currently, there is no liquidity shortage in sight as we move toward the end of the fiscal year 
in March 2002.  
However, expanding the quantity of liquidity provision as seen in the balance of current accounts has 
not yet markedly affected economic activity, prices, or people's expectations.  
Under the new monetary easing framework, monetary base has expanded drastically by as much as 
15 percent or more year on year. This is the largest growth since the hyperinflation period at the first 
oil  crisis  in  the  1970s,  except  for  the  period  when  there  was  the  irregular  factor  of  the  "Year  2000 
Problem." Private banks' lending, however, remained sluggish, and economic growth and prices have 
continued to be on a downtrend.  
Strong  monetary  easing  and  large-scale  fiscal  spending  were  employed  continuously  during  the 
1990s. Reflecting such monetary easing, monetary base and money stock continued to increase at a 
fairly  rapid  pace  compared  to  the  level  of  economic  activity.  Japan's  economy,  however,  failed  to 
return to a sustainable growth path. This clearly demonstrates that monetary easing cannot change 
banks' lending attitude, economic activity, and prices when there are various structural problems, such 
as the nonperforming-loan (NPL) problem, in the economy.  
These experiences under the unprecedented monetary easing highlight how grave Japan's structural 
problems are. I believe it is necessary to accept this fact and have a constructive debate about what 
should  be  done  to  change  this  situation.  Based  on  such  thoughts,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  been 
emphasizing  that  the  primary  tasks  to  be  accomplished  for  revitalization  of  Japan's  economy  are 
advancing  structural  reforms  in  the  economy  and  industry,  and  restoring  the  soundness  of  Japan's 
financial  system.  I  now  would  like  to  move  on  to  these  two  issues  of  structural  reforms  and  the 
financial system.  
II. 
Structural Reforms and Japan's Economy  
Goals of Structural Reforms  
A. 
Japan and other industrialized countries are facing intense international competition arising from rapid 
industrialization of emerging economies such as those in East Asia.  
As a country develops and grows wealthier and accordingly the level of people's income rises, it will 
constantly  be  exposed  to  stronger  competition  from  countries  with  lower  wages.  This  is  a  natural 
development for industrialized countries, and they must accept it as inevitable challenges. They need 
to  continue  adapting  flexibly  to  change  by  industrial  restructuring  and  fostering  high  value-added 
industries to lead the economy.  
Moreover,  if  industrialized  countries  can  continue  to  foster  such  promising  industries,  this  will  bring 
about  an  expanding  equilibrium  in  the  global  economy  through,  for  example,  development  of  new 
markets and establishment of an efficient international division of labor. Japanese manufacturers have 
increased  the  share  of  production  carried  out  overseas,  and  this  has  recently  become  a  matter  of 
concern,  being  viewed  as  a  hollowing-out  of  Japanese  industry.  However,  the  share  for  Japanese 
manufacturers stands at around 15 percent, which is lower than U.S. and European manufacturers' 
share  of  around  20-30  percent.  Manufacturers'  shifts  to  overseas  production  could  adversely  affect 
certain  regions  or  industries  in  the  short  term.  However,  we  cannot  stop  firms'  moves  to  utilize  an 
international division of labor more efficiently amid globalization. Furthermore, these movements could 
bring benefits to the economy as a whole, in the medium to long term.  
In  fact,  in  the  1990s  the  United  States  and  Europe  achieved  fair  growth  using  innovations  in 
ICT-related  areas.  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  had 
BIS Review 7/2002 
 3
 advanced  reforms  since  the  1980s  to  realize  small  and  efficient  government.  The  Continental 
European countries had also made efforts to address structural reforms toward monetary union.  
In  contrast,  grave  problems  including  the  NPL  problem  had  mounted  in  Japan's  economy,  in  the 
course of the emergence of the "bubble" economy of the 1980s and its bursting in the early 1990s, 
and Japan fell behind other industrialized countries in dealing with structural problems.  
The key to a brighter economic outlook for the medium to long term is whether a sufficient number of 
high-productivity  industries or projects that can point  a direction for the economy  will emerge in the 
private  sector.  To  revitalize  Japan's  economy,  it  is  essential  to  create  the  conditions  where  private 
initiatives and vigor are fully encouraged.  
The Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy, of which I am a member, drafted blueprints of structural 
reforms last  year, such  as the Solid Policy Framework and  the Medium-Term Economic and Fiscal 
Perspectives. Detailed measures as well as progress in their implementation will be discussed further. 
I believe that the most fundamental  yardstick to be applied to evaluate each policy measure will be 
whether it could work to stimulate private demand.  
This  year,  issues  concerning  the  taxation  system  and  government  financial  institutions  will  be 
discussed in the council.  
In the discussion regarding the tax system, the conventional principles of taxation, that it should be 
fair, neutral, and simple, will continue to apply. In addition, new perspectives will be vital in deciding on 
its reforms, for example, whether the tax reform can stimulate free and creative economic activity in 
the  private  sector,  and  whether  the  new  system  would  comply  with  globalization  of  economies  and 
corporate activities.  
Since the beginning of the 1990s, government financial institutions have increased their share in the 
total lending to the private sector, especially loans extended to large firms, and it has now reached 
around 20 percent. If their share of lending is too large, the market mechanism may not work properly 
in  the  setting  of  lending  rates.  Moreover,  the  developments  of  capital  markets  can  be  held  back 
because large firms will likely rely on government lending. In vitalizing the economy utilizing the market 
mechanism, the reform of government financial institutions is also one of the essential tasks. I think 
such reform should be advanced by letting the private sector do what it can do. In this regard, one 
reasonable  way  to  do  this  would  be  to  change  the  functions  of  government  financial  institutions  to 
focus mainly on guarantee and refinancing.  
"Pain" Accompanying Structural Reforms  
B. 
There  are  those  who,  while  acknowledging  the  need  to  undertake  structural  reforms,  ask  whether 
some policy measures could "alleviate the pain" accompanying structural reforms in the short term. 
We fully understand the background to such opinions given the current severe economic situation and 
the negative impact of structural reforms in the short term.  
Many people talk about "alleviating the pain of structural reforms," but the meaning is often unclear 
because it gives scope for various interpretations. It is sometimes used to mean stopping structural 
reforms or simply postponing facing the "pain."  
In evaluating various policy measures proposed for alleviating the "pain" of structural reforms, I feel it 
is necessary to examine them from the viewpoint of whether they are consistent with the ideal socio-
economy to be achieved by structural reforms.  
For example, in the process of consolidating firms and restoring the soundness of Japan's financial 
system, bank lending is likely to decrease and lending spreads will expand reflecting credit risk. Under 
these  circumstances,  calls  for  financial  institutions  to  increase  their  lending  volumes  are  likely  to 
emerge. We also sometimes hear extreme requests to the central bank to lend directly to firms.  
However, in the process of restoring the soundness of Japan's banking system, lending rates must be 
adjusted to appropriate levels according to the risks on loans, and loans to inefficient firms must be 
reduced.  Needless  to  say,  any  contraction  of  corporate  financing  must  not  go  so  far  as  to  make  it 
difficult for viable firms to obtain financing. In viewing these points, I believe the following measures 
are very important. First, it is necessary to encourage the entry of new firms into the market as well as 
increase  the  pace  of  industrial  restructuring,  which  will  be  accompanied  by  withdrawal  of  nonviable 
firms  from  the  market.  Second,  it  is  also  useful  to  foster  new  ways  of  financial  intermediation,  in 
addition to indirect financing. For this reason, the Bank of Japan is making efforts to develop financial 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2002
 markets to improve funds intermediation by utilizing new financial instruments, such as asset-backed 
securities, as tools for market operations and as eligible collateral.  
On  the  other  hand,  direct  financing  of  firms  by  a  central  bank  is  an  apparent  deviation  from  its 
designated role. Moreover, such operations are not consistent with the objective of structural reforms, 
which is reviewing financing through government financial institutions in order to ensure full utilization 
of the market mechanism and private initiatives.  
As a measure to alleviate the "pain" of structural reforms, there are also calls for artificially controlling 
the exchange rate of the yen so that it depreciates.  
Since the end of December 2001, the yen has depreciated to around 130-135 yen against the U.S. 
dollar. In the short term, such movements of the exchange rate reflect the view of market participants 
who  are  increasingly  expecting  a  recovery  of  the  U.S.  economy  while  becoming  more  concerned 
about the structural problems of Japan's economy. One concern is that some insist that the currency 
authority should cause the yen to depreciate by artificial means. However, it is not at all feasible to 
control  exchange  rates  artificially  where  the  flow  of  foreign  exchange  transactions  and  capital 
movements  are  liberalized.  Moreover,  if  Japan  with  its  large  economy  were  to  artificially  lower  the 
value  of  its  currency  in  order  to  resolve  its  own  economic  problems,  the  credibility  overseas  of  its 
overall economic policies and currency could be damaged.  
Foreign exchange rates reflect the market's evaluations of the economic performance of each country 
in the medium or long term. If Japan were not able to foster high value-added industries, or if foreign 
exchange markets believed Japan unable to do so, market forces would work in the direction of yen 
depreciation.  However,  this  means  that  economic  adjustments  would  take  place  by  diminishing 
Japan's  purchasing  power.  Structural  reforms  are  not  at  all  intended  to  cause  adjustments  in  this 
pessimistic way.  
It  is  therefore  desirable  that  foreign  exchange  rates  move  stably  reflecting  fundamentals  of  the 
economy.  A  depreciation  of  the  yen  will  not  solve  the  problems  of  Japan's  economy  that  must  be 
overcome.  
We have sometimes been asked whether there is a way to stop the downtrend of prices during the 
structural reforms. We have also received suggestions that prices should be made to increase so that 
structural reforms can be implemented smoothly.  
First of all, I want to stress that we have already made a strong commitment to continue the current 
framework of monetary easing until the inflation rate registers stably zero percent or above, and we 
have  been  implementing  drastic  easing  measures  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  central  banking. 
Therefore, criticism that the Bank is tolerating price falls or deflation is a complete misunderstanding.  
At  the  same  time,  the  basic  relationships  between  structural  reforms  and  prices  must  be  correctly 
understood. The recent price decline is attributable to various factors such as technological innovation, 
deregulation,  and  an  increase  in  low-priced  imports.  But  above  all,  the  major  factor  is  that  Japan's 
economy was not able to achieve a full-scale recovery in the 1990s and that the negative output gap 
expanded due to lack of demand.  
Needless to say, there is a strong correlation between economic activity and prices. First, the level of 
economic activity and the balance of supply and demand change, and then prices respond to these 
changes. In short, prices rise after economic recovery begins, and not vice versa.  
Structural reforms aim to directly tackle the problems that have long prevented a sustained growth of 
the  economy  and  improvement  in  productivity,  and  thus  boost  private  demand.  Needless  to  say, 
structural reforms are chosen and supported by the people, and they  are indispensable for Japan's 
economy  to  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  In  the  short  term, 
however, downward pressures on prices are inevitable if the economy must endure a low growth rate 
temporarily in the course of structural reforms and fiscal consolidation, because the negative output 
gap would widen as a result. An increase in prices, if it were the sole objective, could be achieved by a 
significant  fiscal  expansion  that  could  tighten  in  the  balance  of  supply  and  demand.  However,  this 
would be inconsistent with the objective of structural reforms.  
It may seem contradictory, but I believe that the most effective and credible prescription to alleviate the 
pain  accompanying  structural  reforms  is  to  steadily  implement  reform  measures  and  to  gain  the 
confidence  of  economic  entities  and  the  markets  regarding  the  objective  and  the  direction  of  the 
reforms.  
BIS Review 7/2002 
 5
 If, by undertaking solid structural reform measures, households' concerns about future pension and 
social  security  systems  are  reduced,  and  if  firms  foresee  an  increase  in  productivity  in  the  future, 
spending activities of firms and households will be stimulated. And furthermore, if Japan's efforts in 
tackling structural reforms are received favorably by financial markets, we can expect some positive 
effects of structural reforms to appear much earlier, for example, via a rise in Japanese stock prices. 
For  this  reason,  I  attach  great  importance  to  clearly  explaining  the  schedules  of  concrete  reform 
measures  and  visibly  demonstrating  their  expected  effects  so  that  people  can  have  confidence  in 
them.  
III. 
Issues concerning Japan's Financial System  
Current Condition of Japan's Financial System  
A. 
I would like to move on to discuss Japan's financial system, another important part of structural reform 
of Japan's economy.  
First, let us take a look at overall stock prices. Until September 11 last year, the U.S. and Japanese 
stock  markets  had  trended  the  same  way.  However,  Japanese  stocks  have  become  weaker  since 
October, and the two markets started to trend in a different direction. In the meantime, the structure of 
stock markets has been changing. The presence of foreign investors in Japanese stock markets has 
been  increasing.  For  example,  the  volume  of  stock  transactions  by  foreign  investors  has  been 
increasing year on year at the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE), while the daily turnover of transactions at 
the TSE has maintained a considerable amount of some 600 to 800 million shares. Amid weakening 
stock  prices  and  the  changing  structure  of  stock  markets,  I  hope  that  Japanese  stock  markets  will 
become  more  transparent  and  fair  through  various  measures  such  as  the  recently  tightened 
regulations on short sales of stocks.  
Now, if we take a look at stock prices by industry, we see a clear trend. While stock prices of firms in 
electrical  appliances  and  transportation  equipment  industries  are  rising,  stock  prices  of  those  in 
construction, real estate, and banking industries are falling. The trend shows that market participants 
are taking a harsher view of Japan's financial system.  
Three factors seem to determine the weakness of bank stocks. First, the banking sector is suffering 
from the NPL problem. Second, there has been a series of failures of borrower firms and there are 
concerns  that  such  failures  might  continue.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  more  time  is  required  for 
restructuring  of  borrower  firms  amid  business  reorganization  in  the  banking  industries.  And  third, 
unwinding of cross-shareholding is progressing due to introduction of mark-to-market accounting.  
The  biggest  concern  is  the  NPL  problem  of  Japanese  financial  institutions,  which  places  a  heavy 
burden on Japan's economy overall.  
Japanese financial institutions have been making efforts in various ways to resolve this problem. In the 
past  decade,  many  have  disposed  of  an  amount  of  NPLs  exceeding  their  annual  operating  profits 
each year. However, the amount outstanding of NPLs has not declined as the amount of new NPLs 
has been more than that of ones disposed of.  
For  some  time  after  the  bursting  of  the  "bubble,"  a  large  majority  of  NPLs  were  loans  extended  to 
nonbanks  and  firms  in  the  real  estate  and  construction  industries.  Recently,  however,  NPLs  are 
increasingly  emerging  from  loans  extended  to  firms  in  service  industries  such  as  retail,  as  well  as 
some in manufacturing industries. It seems that new NPLs are emerging in the industries challenged 
by structural adjustments.  
The emergence of NPLs implies progress in structural adjustments. In this regard, not only financial 
institutions,  the  lenders,  but  also  borrower  firms  are  required  to  implement  major  reforms  of  their 
business management for the resolution of the NPL problem.  
Financial Institutions' Measures to Address the NPL Problem 
B. 
The NPL problem, which is related to both financial institutions and borrowers, should be addressed 
primarily by the former. In fact, large banks announced the major steps they would take to achieve the 
projected results of disposal of NPLs for fiscal 2001 in autumn 2001 when announcing their financial 
results for the first half of fiscal 2001.  
6 
 BIS Review 7/2002
 The major steps include (1) larger disposal of NPLs than planned for before the start of fiscal 2001, (2) 
further cost-cutting, (3) review of their lending conditions, especially interest rates, in light of different 
credit qualities of borrowers, and (4) improvement of profitability by way of these steps. These steps 
are highly welcome, and I hope that they will be elaborated into concrete measures and implemented 
promptly so that the markets' confidence in Japanese financial institutions will be restored.  
In the last phase of the resolution of the NPL problem, the removal of NPLs from financial institutions' 
balance sheets is necessary in addition to loan-loss provisioning.  
Financial institutions are increasingly promoting liquidation of their loans by selling them to third parties 
while instituting reconstruction proceedings against distressed firms under the Civil Rehabilitation Law. 
For  example,  some  Japanese  banks  are  making  use  of  the  "investment  funds  for  corporate 
reconstruction," which also includes foreign investment funds, for financial resources and expertise on 
how  to  liquidate  their  NPLs.  Moreover,  it  is  expected  that  methods  that  have  not  been  common  in 
Japan, such as debt equity swaps, will be used. It is also expected that the Resolution and Collection 
Corporation (RCC) will be utilized more, as its functions to reconstruct firms have been strengthened, 
and  its  terms  and  conditions  for  purchases  of  loans  have  been  made  more  flexible  through  recent 
amendments to the Financial Reconstruction Law.  
I hope that the use of various measures will speed up the disposal of NPLs.  
There is a view that if banks were to speed up their disposal of NPLs too much, the economy could be 
negatively  affected.  To  some  extent,  NPLs  are  simply  the  result  of  an  economic  slump.  But,  as  I 
mentioned  earlier,  many  are  loans  extended  to  firms  in  industries  facing  structural  adjustments.  If 
banks postpone the disposal of their NPLs, this could delay the structural adjustments, and ultimately 
delay the revitalization of the overall economy. Further, the resolution of the NPL problem, which has 
been placing a burden on financial institutions' business, could have great significance in that it would 
contribute to restoring the financial intermediary function, an essential part of the infrastructure of the 
economy. If, however, the disposal of NPLs is delayed, this might threaten the stability of the entire 
financial system through a further decline in markets' confidence in the soundness of Japanese banks.  
The Importance of Strengthening Profitability  
C. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  another  important  task  that  Japanese  financial  institutions  are 
working at, that of improving their profitability. As financial institutions have been required to dispose of 
NPLs  amounting  to  more  than  their  annual  operating  profits,  their  financial  strength  has  been 
weakened. To recover their financial strength, the disposal of NPLs--a legacy of the past--alone is not 
sufficient. They need to improve their profitability.  
To improve financial institutions' profitability in the long run, the financial institutions themselves need 
to establish new business models. I understand that this is easier said than done, but there seems to 
be room for further improvement. Financial institutions should first identify areas where they have an 
advantage  over  other  competitors,  and  develop  a  business  strategy  taking  full  advantage  of  their 
strong areas, and reallocate their business resources.  
Business consolidation and reorganization through various measures such as mergers, establishment 
of bank holding companies, and business alliances have become common in the financial sector in the 
past few  years.  Business reorganization is  taking  place in various different forms, such as mergers 
between financial institutions beyond the confines of their own corporate groups, integration of trust 
bank  business  and  that  of  securities  business  within  financial  groups,  and  plans  for  super-regional 
banks.  The  most  important  thing  is  for  financial  institutions  to  find  ways  to  take  full  advantage  of 
business reorganization to reform their business management.  
I hope that financial institutions' efforts to improve their profitability will contribute to pushing forward 
both the disposal of NPLs and the corporate rehabilitation, and to revitalizing the financial system. The 
progress in NPL disposal, corporate rehabilitation, and financial system revitalization will bring about 
positive synergy effects, such that markets' confidence in financial institutions will be restored, which in 
turn will have positive effects on stock prices.  
It cannot be denied, however, that it will take time for measures implemented by financial institutions to 
have positive effects.  
BIS Review 7/2002 
 7
 Injection of Public Funds and the Ending of the Blanket Guarantee on Bank Deposits  
D. 
As the disposal of NPLs progresses, we need to prepare for an emergency where concerns about the 
stability of the financial system as a whole are raised despite the efforts made by financial institutions. 
The  amended  Deposit  Insurance  Law,  which  came  into  effect  in  April  2001,  states  that  in  such  an 
event, the Prime Minister may, following deliberation by the Council for Financial Crisis, acknowledge 
the necessity of injecting public funds.  
It  is  necessary  to  expeditiously  advance  the  resolution  process  of  financial  institutions  that  cannot 
reconstruct their business.  
In addition to the injection of public funds by the Government, if it is necessary from the viewpoint of 
maintaining  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  the  Bank  will  for  its  part  fulfil  its  responsibility  of 
providing liquidity as the lender of last resort, which is one of its fundamental roles.  
As  the  last  topic  on  the  financial  system,  I  would  like  to  comment  on  the  ending  of  the  blanket 
guarantee on bank deposits scheduled for the end of this March.  
There is little time left before the ending of the blanket guarantee on bank deposits. I hope that each 
financial  institution  will  further  accelerate  the  resolution  of  various  business  management  problems 
and  regain  the  market's  confidence,  thereby  enabling  smooth  transition  to  the  limited  guarantee 
system. Then, things would go back to the way they should be.  
Conclusion  
I have talked about the tasks for Japan's economy and the thinking behind the policy of the Bank of 
Japan.  
I have to admit that we are still only halfway to the goal of a revitalized economy, and the path ahead 
will  not  be  smooth.  But  I  am  not  pessimistic  about  the  potential  of  Japan's  economy  and  its  future 
course in the medium to long term.  
For example, Japan's personal financial assets have reached around 1,400 trillion yen. As the largest 
holder  of  net  external  assets  of  1.2  trillion  U.S.  dollars  that  amount  to  almost 30  percent  of  annual 
GDP,  Japan  is  receiving  huge  investment  income  from  these  assets,  as  a  part  of  Japan's  current 
account surplus that amounts to 2-4 percent of annual GDP since the 1980s. And I believe we also 
have  ample  potential  in  terms  of  technical  background  to  cope  with  new  businesses  such  as  ICT-
related industries.  
The purpose of advancing structural reforms is to revitalize such potential so that it materializes in a 
visible  form.  In  doing  so,  we  have  to  face  a  low  growth  rate,  declining  prices,  and  "pain"  such  as 
increasing unemployment and bankruptcies in the short term. However, we have to bear in mind that 
such a painful process is inevitable if Japan is to demonstrate its potential and establish a basis for 
new development in the long run.  
I would like to conclude my speech by making two important points regarding the conduct of economic 
policies during the process of structural reforms.  
First,  from  the  viewpoint  of  minimizing  the  short-term  pain  of  structural  reforms,  it  is  important  to 
withdraw some positive effects of structural reforms as early as possible by steadily advancing specific 
measures.  
And  second,  since  a  low  growth  rate  and  declining  prices  would  be  inevitable  temporarily, 
macroeconomic  policies  during  the  period  of  intensive  structural  reforms  should  aim  at  preventing 
these from leading to a deflationary spiral.  
Given the relationships between the economy and prices as I explained earlier, the economy can be 
expected  to  exit  from  the  downtrend  of  prices  if  it  can  achieve  sustainable  growth  led  by  private 
demand  after  the  period  of  intensive  adjustments.  However,  the  future  positive  effects  of  structural 
reforms might not be achieved if the economy were to fall into a deflationary spiral where price falls 
and a decrease in demand accelerate in interaction with each other.  
In order to prevent such a deflationary spiral, it is important to improve the content of fiscal spending to 
stimulate private demand effectively, and to provide a better safety net for the unemployed. It is also 
essential to strengthen the financial system.  
8 
 BIS Review 7/2002
 The  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  to  make  the  utmost  effort  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  financial 
markets  and  enhance  penetration  of  the  monetary  easing  effect  into  the  economy  by  continuing  to 
provide ample liquidity. With regard to the financial system, the Bank will also perform its duty as the 
lender of last resort if necessary. As I stated at the beginning of this speech, this year will be especially 
important for Japan's economy. I would like to conclude my speech by restating our firm stance on the 
revitalization of Japan's economy.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 7/2002 
 9
