 Svein Gjedrem: Economic perspectives 
Annual address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank, at the meeting of the Supervisory 
Council of Norges Bank, Oslo, 14 February 2002.  
 Introduction 
The world economy is experiencing a slowdown. Growth in the US economy came to a halt last spring. 
Overinvestment,  particularly  in  IT  and  telecom  equipment,  led  to  low  returns  on  real  capital  and 
reduced corporate earnings. Stock markets declined when growth prospects were revised. Terrorism 
and war added to the uncertainty. These developments had contagion effects on European and Asian 
economies. Japan is in a deflationary recession. 
The US economy is flexible and seldom remains in recession for a long period. There are some signs 
of an early recovery. However, there is a risk of a longer period of stagnation. Companies are highly 
leveraged  and  vulnerable.  Household  saving  is  at  a  low  level.  There  is  uncertainty  associated  with 
household wealth as it is invested in stocks and the housing market. 
Oil prices have plunged by about 40 per cent since autumn 2000. Prices for other Norwegian export 
goods  have  declined  since  spring  2001.  Exports  fell  in  autumn  of  last  year.  The  global  economic 
downturn and the prospect of low import price inflation induced Norges Bank to reduce its key interest 
rate in December. 
In spite of this, the effects of the global downturn on the activity level in Norway have been limited. 
Private and public consumption and housing investment continue to show strong growth. The fall in oil 
prices has not deterred oil companies from investing eagerly. Both the central government budget and 
the current account are in surplus. The Norwegian economy may weather the downturn without any 
substantial impact on the level of activity or employment, but with a continued risk of high growth in 
labour costs in the business and public sectors. 
Economic policy 
The  guidelines  for  economic  policy  were  revised  last  year.  Henceforth,  the  real  return  on  the 
Government Petroleum Fund shall be used over the central government budget. Central government 
petroleum revenues shall continue to be transferred to the Government Petroleum Fund and invested 
abroad. 
Monetary policy shall be oriented towards low and stable inflation. The inflation target is 2½ per cent. 
When  monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  stabilising  inflation,  it  also  contributes  to  stabilising 
aggregate demand and output. The inflation target is the nominal anchor for the Norwegian economy. 
Low  inflation  is  the  objective  and  the  interest  rate  is  the  instrument.  If  it  appears  that  inflation,  with 
unchanged  interest  rates,  will  be  higher  than  2½  per  cent,  the  interest  rate  will  be  increased.  If  it 
appears that inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be lower than 2½ per cent, the interest rate 
will  be  lowered.  Low  and  stable  inflation  will  be  a  fixed  feature  of  economic  developments.  This  is 
something that the social partners, businesses, borrowers and investors in property and securities can 
take as a given. 
From  1986,  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  or  the  prospect  of  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  had 
implications for interest rates. A stable krone exchange rate was the nominal anchor. In Norway, this 
has been reflected in wage determination because labour cost developments among trading partner 
countries have been an important reference. 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 1
  
Exchange  rates  between  major  international  currencies  fluctuate  widely.  The  US  dollar  has 
appreciated by more than 30 per cent since 1995. The German mark – the euro since January 1999 – 
has depreciated by about  the same between 1995 and autumn 2000. The Japanese  yen  has been 
particularly volatile. 
Smaller countries have  also experienced fairly  wide  exchange rate fluctuations. The Swedish krona 
has depreciated by more than 10 per cent since summer 2000. The Australian dollar has weakened by 
over 30 per cent since spring 1997. The UK, Canada and New Zealand have also experienced wide 
exchange  rate  fluctuations.  The  Norwegian  krone  exchange  rate,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been 
relatively stable. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2002
  
Countries whose exports include a large component of raw materials tend to experience considerable 
volatility  in  their  exchange  rate.  Australia  is  one  example.  Fluctuations  in  commodity  prices  entail 
changes in countries’ terms of trade, which measures the ratio of export to import prices. Changes in 
the terms of trade have an impact on the exchange rate, which in turn curbs the effects of changes in 
commodity  prices  on  profitability  in  the  business  sector.  The  exchange  rate  therefore  serves  as  a 
buffer against changes in the terms of trade. 
Norway’s  terms  of  trade  also  fluctuate  considerably,  primarily  reflecting  changes  in  oil  prices. 
However,  a  substantial  portion  of  petroleum  revenues  is  invested  in  foreign  equities  and  bonds 
through the Government Petroleum Fund. Changes in oil  prices influence the size of the Fund, but 
have little effect on the use of petroleum revenues at home. The Government Petroleum Fund thus 
serves as a buffer against swings in the oil price, and thereby stabilises the krone exchange rate. 
The  Norwegian  economy  may  nevertheless  be  exposed  to  disturbances  of  a  type  that  cannot  be 
absorbed by the Petroleum Fund. We have to be prepared for fluctuations in the value of our currency 
that  are more in line  with the fluctuations observed in other countries. The exchange rate  will vary. 
This means that economic agents cannot assume that the krone will be stable against the euro, the 
US dollar or a weighted average of foreign currencies. It is the inflation target that is the economy’s 
nominal anchor. 
The increase in labour costs is important when Norges Bank’s assesses the outlook for price inflation 
and  sets  interest  rates.  High  wage  growth,  both  in  manufacturing  and  other  sectors,  will  affect  the 
internationally exposed sector through two channels. First, high wage growth will weaken earnings and 
employment. Second, the interest rate will be increased. Normally, this will lead to an appreciation of 
the krone, with a further weakening of earnings and  employment. Manufacturing will, therefore, feel 
the effects of high wage growth to an even greater extent than earlier. 
Since  1997,  labour  costs  have  increased  annually  by  between  5  and  7  per  cent.  In  spite  of  this, 
consumer price inflation has been close to 2½ per cent over the past few years. The krone exchange 
rate  has  appreciated  as  a  result  of  a  wider  interest  rate  differential  between  Norway  and  other 
countries.  Combined  with  low  growth  abroad  and  increased  trade  with  low-cost  countries  such  as 
China, this led to a slower rise in import prices. As the world economy recovers, import price inflation 
will edge up. A rise in labour costs of more than 5 per cent will then only be consistent with the inflation 
target if the krone continues to appreciate. 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 3
  
In  the  long  run,  wages  must  be  compatible  with  the  value  added  that  is  generated  by  workers,  i.e. 
labour productivity. Over time, the increase in real wages is therefore determined by developments in 
labour productivity. In Norway, productivity growth has averaged 1½-2 per cent over the last 20 years. 
If this continues to be the case, an increase in nominal labour costs of around 4-4½ per cent in the 
long term will be consistent with the inflation target. 
In general, an unexpected upward shift in labour costs will prompt an increase in interest rates in order 
to avoid higher inflation. With a floating exchange rate and unchanged interest rates, an increase in 
wage  growth  of  one  percentage  point  will  eventually  translate  into  a  comparable  increase  in  price 
inflation,  unless  this  increase  is  based  on  higher  productivity.  The  interest  rate  increase  must  be 
adjusted accordingly. First, the nominal interest rate must be increased to maintain the real interest 
rate.  Second,  the  real  interest  rate  must  also  be  increased  in  order  to  prevent  inflation  from 
accelerating. 
When wage growth reaches a level that is inconsistent with the inflation target, the result will be higher 
interest  rates,  lower  employment  and  higher  unemployment.  Similarly,  when  wage  growth  is  lower 
than the level consistent with the inflation target, the result will normally be lower interest rates, higher 
employment and lower unemployment. The sharp growth in labour costs in recent years is a source of 
higher  unemployment.  When  real  wage  growth  is  higher  than  productivity  growth,  corporate 
profitability  declines.  As  a  result,  businesses  will  recruit  less  and  shed  more  labour.  In  the  public 
sector, we will see a growing conflict between budget limits and service production requirements. 
A  monetary  policy  that  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation  will  contribute  to  stabilising 
aggregate demand and output. As a result, the central government budget will not normally have to be 
used actively to stabilise the economy. An increase in unemployment that is due to a higher rate of 
increase in labour costs than implied by productivity growth cannot be offset by low interest rates or 
higher public spending and tax cuts, but requires changes in the functioning of the labour market. 
There  is  an  important  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  According  to  the  new 
guidelines  for fiscal  policy,  petroleum  revenues  are  to  be  phased  in  approximately  in  pace  with  the 
expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. This guideline implies that fiscal policy will 
contribute  to  stimulating  aggregate  demand  in  the  Norwegian  economy  every  year  for  many  years 
ahead.  The  guideline  also  implies  that  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  will  increase  as  long  as  the 
Petroleum Fund is expanding. 
Variations  in  oil  prices  are  accompanied  by  considerable  fluctuations  in  government  petroleum 
revenues from one year to the next. It is important to prevent these fluctuations from spilling over to 
the mainland economy. Public expenditure and taxes that vary in relation to oil prices would result in 
an  unstable  economic  environment.  Financial  markets  would  be  marked  by  uncertainty  and 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2002
 turbulence, with an increase in the risk premium on Norwegian securities. This would have resulted in 
higher  and  more  variable  interest  rates.  The  risk  of  financial  crises  in  Norway  would  also  have 
increased  because  the  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  Norwegian  economy  would  have  been  more 
pronounced. It is therefore an advantage that fiscal policy is now predictable and anchored in a long-
term strategy. 
The future size of the Petroleum Fund depends on oil price developments. The guideline ensures that 
we  only  use  the  return  on  wealth  that  has  already  been  accumulated.  This  makes  policy  robust  to 
changes in oil prices and ensures that petroleum wealth will be of benefit both today and in the future. 
The  guideline  provides  a  framework  that  contributes  to  making  the  central  government  budget  an 
appropriate tool for setting political priorities. It sets a limit on the share of petroleum revenues that the 
government can use each year and does not distinguish between domestic and foreign spending. This 
eliminates the waste of resources that two separate budgets would necessarily entail. 
The  government  invests  petroleum  wealth  in  foreign  securities  through  the  Petroleum  Fund. 
Government wealth is thereby more diversified. These investments have no impact on the Norwegian 
capital market. Both mainland private saving and business fixed investment have been high in recent 
years.  In  Norway,  credit  and  capital  markets  nevertheless  feature  some  weaknesses,  with  thin 
securities  markets  and  a  narrow  investor  and  ownership  base  compared  with  other  countries.  The 
reasons, and hence the solutions, can probably be found in the structure of the taxation of dwellings, 
property and financial assets, in a high level of state ownership of enterprises and in the organisation 
of  pension  saving  in  Norway.  Investing  even  more  government  capital  in  Norway  would  reduce  the 
return  on  investments  in  the  Norwegian  business  sector  and  prompt  other  investors  to  invest 
elsewhere.  Allocating  even more  capital  to  the  Norwegian  economy  would  probably  lead  to  a  rapid 
relocation of jobs to other countries, as the krone would tend to appreciate. 
Effect on industry structure 
The  planned  use  of  petroleum  revenues  will  increase  demand  for  public  and  private  services.  The 
guidelines imply an increase in the use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget of 
around 3½ per cent of mainland GDP by 2010. This may entail an additional 60 000 person-years in 
the  service  sector.  As  long  as  there  are  labour  shortages  in  Norway,  a  comparable  decline  in 
manufacturing employment is likely to occur. 
Although the phasing in of petroleum revenues is a gradual process, the contest for labour resources 
will  intensify.  As  a  result,  monetary  policy  is  likely  to  remain  fairly  tight  in  the  years  ahead.  A  high 
interest  rate  level  may  in  periods  result  in  a  strong  krone.  This  may  accelerate  the  scaling  back  of 
manufacturing industry. However, in the long run monetary policy cannot influence overall employment 
or its distribution across industries. A lower interest rate would have resulted in higher price and cost 
inflation,  which  would  also  have  weakened  profitability  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  The  end  result 
would have been the same for employment and production, but in addition we would have had to face 
the costs of high inflation. 
Even  if  employment  and  production  in  manufacturing  are  affected,  the  situation  for  Norwegian 
enterprises  will  not  necessarily  be  negative.  Some  enterprises  could  be  at  the  forefront  of 
technological developments and increase efficiency in pace with the relatively high rate of growth in 
real wages in Norway. In recent years, we have also seen that many enterprises have moved large 
portions  of  their  production  abroad,  particularly  the  most  labour-intensive  production.  Norwegian 
manufacturing  companies  could  therefore  remain  profitable  even  if  the  size  of  the  manufacturing 
sector  in  the  Norwegian  economy  is  reduced.  However,  the  scaling  back  of  manufacturing  also 
involves a risk. It makes the economy more vulnerable. The growth potential  of the economy  – the 
basis for learning, innovation and development – may be impaired when less of the business sector is 
exposed to intense foreign competition. 
Over  the  last  thirty  years,  manufacturing  industry  has  been  scaled  back  in  waves.  The  sharpest 
declines were observed in the years between 1977 and 1984 and from 1987 to 1992. The declines 
were preceded by a deterioration in profitability in this industry. It may take time for a weakening to 
spill over to output and employment, but when the turnaround first occurs it takes place rapidly and on 
a large scale. Primary industries, in contrast, are scaled back gradually. These developments will take 
place in addition to the effects associated with the increased spending of petroleum revenues. All in 
all, employment in manufacturing and agriculture may fall by some 50 000-100 000 person-years in 
the  period  to  2010.  Employment  in  the  manufacturing  sector  may  drop  to  below  250  000.  In  the 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 5
 agricultural sector, the number employed may be less than 50 000 person-years. Changes in industry 
structure, with an increase in the number employed in services and a decrease in manufacturing, will 
probably reduce the role of pay increases in manufacturing as a benchmark for wage determination. 
Wage formation and the labour market 
The structure of wage and income formation, the laws and rules governing the labour market and the 
social safety net are the main determinants of business costs and employment. 
If the cost level is too high, the business sector will find it unprofitable to employ everyone who wants 
to  work.  The  business  sector  must  restructure  rapidly  when  real  wages  increase  sharply.  Many 
activities will no longer be profitable and will be shut down. This could lead to higher unemployment. 
However,  lower  employment  will  not  necessarily  be  reflected  in  unemployment  figures.  We  may 
instead  see  a  flow  of  discouraged  workers  into,  for  example,  disability  pensions,  early  retirement 
schemes or different types of adjustment packages. The extent to which these schemes are used will 
depend on financial incentives and entitlement thresholds. 
6 
 BIS Review 11/2002
 labour  market 
In  many  European  countries  unemployment  has  remained  relatively  high.  By  contrast,  the  US 
managed  to  reduce  unemployment  rapidly  following  the  period  of  high  unemployment  early  in  the 
1980s.  The 
local  wage  agreements  and 
market-determined  wages.  Fluctuations  in  the  economy  rapidly  spill  over  to  employment  and 
unemployment,  as  reflected  in  developments  over  the  last  year.  Labour  costs  are  adjusted,  so  that 
periods of high unemployment seldom last long. Because employment is easily adjusted, the business 
sector can quickly reap the gains of new technology. This makes investments more profitable and the 
economy more dynamic. 
is  decentralised,  with 
the  US 
in 
The  US  economy  also  features  considerable  wage  and  income  differentials.  In  Europe,  the 
differentials  are  smaller,  particularly  in  the  Nordic  countries.  Coordinated  wage  determination  in 
Norway has probably raised the income level of those workers who would otherwise have fared poorly 
in wage settlements. Unemployment benefits, sick pay and pensions provide a shield against income 
losses. 
Differences  exist  in  qualifications  and  work  capacity.  A  compressed  wage  structure  can  lead  to  an 
exclusion of those with the lowest work performance from the labour market, with increased numbers 
moving into social security. Labour markets in continental Europe are experiencing this, as is Norway 
to an increasing extent. Small wage differentials can also lead to a shortage of labour - bottlenecks - in 
some sectors and occupations. 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 7
 The Nordic labour market has made a significant contribution to eliminating the bottlenecks observed 
in  Norway  in  the  1990s.  The  import  of  labour  from  other  Nordic  countries  has  been  considerable, 
particularly  to  hospitals,  hotels,  restaurants  and  construction.  When  unemployment  in  Sweden  was 
high in the mid-1990s, migration to Norway was also substantial. As unemployment in Sweden has 
gradually declined, the migration to Norway has come to a halt. 
Norway  emerged from the crisis at the end of the 1980s  and the beginning of the 1990s  without  a 
persistent  fall  in  employment.  This  is  because  wage  formation  functioned  well.  Wage  determination 
was  coordinated,  with  substantial  emphasis  on  overall  employment.  Wage  discipline  provided  the 
authorities with the leeway to stimulate the economy, with limited risk of higher inflation. This policy 
yielded  positive  results.  As  regards  unemployment  and  inflation  in  Europe  in  the  1990s,  Norway  is 
among the top performers. 
There  may  be  many  explanations  for  the  wide  differences  in  labour  market  performance  across 
countries.  Historical  and  cultural  factors  may  play  a  significant  role.  On  the  other  hand,  certain 
common  features  and  systematic  differences  should  be  duly  noted.  Among  other  things,  the 
effectiveness  of  labour  market  programmes,  the  degree  of  coordination  in  wage  formation, 
employment protection legislation (EPL), social security schemes and the education system may be 
important factors. 
8 
 BIS Review 11/2002
 As in Norway, labour markets in continental Europe are marked by extensive employment protection 
legislation,  which  implies  substantial  restructuring  costs  for  companies.  The  higher  the  level  of 
employment protection, the more an employee is perceived as a long-term investment and the more 
cautious the employer must be with regard to hiring. On the other hand, a high level of employment 
protection can motivate employers to develop skills among their employees.  
With a centralised and coordinated wage formation process, the social partners can take account of 
overall  employment  in  wage  negotiations.  The  Scandinavian  countries  and  Austria  have  organised 
wage determination in this way. Generally speaking, unemployment in these countries remained low in 
the 1990s and employment is high. 
Many countries with decentralised wage determination and a low level of employment protection have 
also  experienced  high  employment  and  low  unemployment. Wages  are  determined  on  the  basis  of 
each company’s profitability and the supply of labour. This system can be found in countries like the 
US, Canada, the UK and Switzerland. 
By contrast, a decentralised wage formation system that is combined with a strong bargaining position 
at the local level and extensive employment protection can produce unfavourable results. Countries 
with this type of structure include France, Italy and Spain. In these countries unemployment is high, 
with substantial flows out of the labour market into various pension and social security schemes. Nor 
have  countries  such  as  Germany,  Belgium  and  Finland,  where  employment  protection  is  relatively 
extensive and  wage determination only partly decentralised, achieved particularly favourable results 
even though the results are somewhat more mixed. 
Extensive employment protection and a tightly knit social safety net reinforce the perception that the 
risk of an income loss is limited. Employees can take advantage of the bargaining power these rights 
afford to obtain high wages without taking into account the effects on overall employment. For their 
part,  employers  may  have  incentives  to  promote  exclusion  through  government-financed  social 
security schemes. Those who are not employed will be interested in finding employment, even at a 
lower wage level. However, it is not the unemployed who negotiate local wage agreements. This gives 
rise to a conflict of interests between the employed and the unemployed. 
However,  local  wage settlements also feature a  number of positive  aspects.  Wages are adapted to 
companies’  capacity  to  pay,  which  enhances  the  flow  of  labour  between  industries,  regions  and 
occupations. Labour market bottlenecks are eliminated. 
Coordinated  wage  determination  in  Norway  had  many  advantages,  but  also  limited  the  scope  for 
eliminating bottlenecks or remedying imbalances across occupational groups, regions and industries. 
Groups that were not included in the coordination, such as liberal professions and salaried employees, 
were able to exploit companies’ capacity to pay. The system of coordination came under pressure. It 
now  appears  that  wages  will  increasingly  be  determined  at  the  local  level  on  the  basis  of  each 
company’s profitability, its need for labour and the supply of various types of labour.  
BIS Review 11/2002 
 9
 The wage formation process functioned  well for a long period  because  of the  strong emphasis that 
was placed on overall employment. A precondition for this has been that employees do not fully use 
the bargaining power provided by employment protection and the social safety net. Coordinated wage 
determination  requires  discipline.  With  a  more  locally  based  and  less  coordinated  wage  formation 
structure,  the  profitability  of  the  individual  enterprise  and  labour  market  conditions  will  be  the  main 
source of discipline. Extensive employment protection and a tightly knit social safety net may then lead 
to  high  unemployment  and  a  substantial  rise  in  flows  of  discouraged  workers  into  social  security 
schemes. 
In  the  public  sector,  there  are  no  absolute  requirements  as  to  profitability  and  efficiency.  Public 
enterprises do not go bankrupt, and in many cases the authorities cannot allow a public enterprise to 
discontinue operations. This is a demanding starting point for a shift to more locally determined wages. 
The possibility of granting local pay increases might, however, increase efficiency if there are binding 
nominal budget limits for these entities and clear production requirements. 
When a higher share of wages is determined at the local level and coordination is reduced, it will be 
even more important to promote flexibility in the labour market and the labour supply. Otherwise, an 
increasing number of workers may be excluded from working life and unemployment may rise on a 
permanent  basis,  while  the  foundation  for  production  is  weakened.  Effective  labour  market 
programmes,  supported  by  a  sound  system  for  education  and  infrastructure,  can  facilitate  these 
adjustments. It is also important to assess working environment and labour market legislation with a 
view  to  fostering  greater  flexibility.  Hiring  costs  may  be  reduced  and  flexibility  enhanced  through 
greater scope for temporary  employment and labour  contracting. The throughput in universities and 
colleges can be  improved. The financial  incentives and entitlement thresholds in our social security 
system are also of substantial importance to employment. 
Pensions 
In Norway, the employment rate is among the highest in the OECD area. This reflects both high labour 
force participation and low unemployment.  
10 
 BIS Review 11/2002
 The picture becomes more mixed when average working hours are taken into account. The average is 
lower in Norway than in other countries. The sickness absence rate is high. Part-time employment is 
widespread. 
The average number of person-hours worked in the working-age population is relatively low, despite 
high labour force participation and low unemployment. Among OECD countries, the only countries with 
lower figures than Norway are those with very high unemployment. 
In Norway, average working hours have fallen by more than 20 per cent in the last thirty years. This 
can be partly explained by the way working life and child care are organised, but similar trends also 
exist in many other countries, especially in Scandinavia. 
We cannot simply assume that people want to work more, even if an increased labour input will result 
in  higher  income  and  greater  prosperity.  It  is  natural  to  use  some  of  the  increase  in  prosperity  for 
leisure. The considerable share of part-time employment may reflect choices that individuals do not 
necessarily want to change. 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 11
 On  the  other  hand,  if  we  increase  our  labour  input  to  the  level  in  Sweden,  without  reducing 
productivity,  our  future  income  would  increase  by  more  than  the  wealth  increase  resulting  from  a 
doubling of our petroleum wealth. 
The structure of the tax and pension system influences the choice between work and leisure. Lower 
tax rates on employment income could boost labour input. The pension system is also of significance 
to labour input, as it influences employers’ labour investment decisions. 
The expansion of the labour force is coming to a halt. At the same time, the number of old-age and 
disability pensioners is rising rapidly. Twenty years ago, there were nearly three persons in the labour 
force for every pensioner, whereas in 20 years, there will be fewer than two. 
Although life expectancy is high, the average retirement age in Norway is steadily falling. For men over 
50, the average retirement age fell from nearly 67 in 1970 to a little more than 63 at the end of the 
1990s. For the entire labour force, including all age groups, the average pension age in the National 
Insurance Scheme was down to 58. 
Flexibility  in  working  hours  and  in  the  retirement  age  gives  each  worker  the  opportunity  to  choose 
between work and leisure. This freedom to choose is a benefit in itself. However, the terms - wages, 
working  hours  and  pension  schemes  -  should  reflect  the  value  added  of  labour.  Pension  benefits 
should therefore depend on how long each individual chooses to remain in employment. 
When  the  National  Insurance  Scheme  was  introduced  in  1967,  the  scheme  called  for  a  clear  link 
between  labour  input  and  future  pensions.  Supplementary  pensions  depended  on  earned  pension 
points. However, supplementary pensions have gradually been reduced in relation to labour income. 
For most employees who are approaching the age of retirement, additional work effort results in little 
or no change in their future pensions. The relationship between labour input and future pensions has 
weakened.  
The link is especially weak in the contractual early retirement scheme (AFP). For most workers, the 
annual pension does not depend on when they choose to retire, as long as they are between 62 and 
67 years of age. Nor does the age of retirement affect the size of the national insurance benefits after 
the age of 67. Hence, the earlier an employee retires, the higher the total pension benefit will be. 
A  clearer  link  between  labour  input  and  future  pensions  may  be  achieved  in  a  defined-contribution 
pension  scheme.  The  total  pension  for  individual  employees  will  then  be  determined  by  the 
employee’s contributions and the return on these contributions. The annual pension is determined by 
the individual’s age of retirement and the total contribution. For every extra year of employment, the 
employee  increases  his  pension  wealth.  In  addition,  the  total  pension  wealth  will  be  spread  over  a 
shorter  retirement  period.  This  means  the  longer  a  person  remains  in  employment,  the  higher  the 
annual pension will be. 
12 
 BIS Review 11/2002
 The main principle is that there should be a clear link between labour input and pensions. Such a link 
may also be established in a system where the individual receives an annual pension that is stipulated 
in advance. 
Sweden  has  recently  implemented  a  pension  reform  that  ensures  that  annual  pension  benefits 
increase in relation to the number of years the individual has worked. At the same time, an increase in 
life expectancy for each cohort will reduce the annual pension. This motivates the individual to remain 
in employment and to ensure that the system is sustainable. 
The National Insurance Scheme’s expenditure is financed directly over the central government budget. 
Decisions about national insurance benefits have a substantial influence on future taxpayers. These 
costs are not transparent  when the budget is  decided. Developments since 1967 show that such  a 
pay-as-you-go system is not robust. Benefits change over time and costs can easily be pushed into 
the future.  
The  alternative  is  a  system  where  pension  expenditure  is  covered  by  accumulated  capital,  i.e.  a 
funded system. In a funded system, a decision to increase pensions or reduce the age of retirement 
will require the allocation of capital today to cover future expenditure. Such a fund provides a measure 
of the cost of increasing pension expenditure. 
Our  pension  system  is  complicated.  In  addition  to  the  National  Insurance  Scheme,  many  other 
operators, including the central government, have established additional pension schemes. There are 
different  rules  for  coordination  and  entitlement.  Any  shift  to  a  fund-based  system  for  the  National 
Insurance Scheme will probably require transitional rules for many  years ahead. However, I believe 
that it will be possible to find solutions to these practical problems. 
Distributional and practical considerations imply that minimum benefits in the pension scheme cannot 
depend  on  earlier  employment,  but  should  apply  to  everyone.  On  the  other  hand,  supplementary 
pensions may be financed by a fund where the pension is determined by the individual’s contribution 
to the pension fund and the return on the fund’s investments.  
Labour is our most important resource. The decline in average hours worked cannot continue if we are 
to have a sustainable pension system. The current evaluation of our public pension system must focus 
on the incentives to work and the effects on the average retirement age. A fund-based system may be 
an appropriate approach and at the same time make pension savings transparent for each individual. 
This may in itself provide an incentive to increase working hours. 
Conclusion 
The Norwegian economy is changing. Even a gradual increase in the use of petroleum revenues will 
change the industry structure substantially in the next decade. It appears that we may see an increase 
in locally determined wages. This will generate considerable gains, but in the absence of reforms in 
the  labour  market  and  in  the  social  security  and  pension  system,  the  growth  potential  and 
sustainability of our economy may weaken, labour may be displaced and unemployment may rise. 
Monetary policy provides the economy with a nominal anchor. The guidelines hold the promise of a 
fiscal policy that is anchored in a long-term strategy. When fiscal policy is predictable, monetary policy 
can  also  contribute  to  stability  in  aggregate  demand  and  output.  The  social  partners,  businesses, 
borrowers and investors can act on the assumption that the inflation rate will be 2½ per cent. Over 
time, the inflation target and labour productivity set the standard for wage growth. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 13
