 Willem F Duisenberg: Presentation of the ECB’s Annual Report 2001 to the 
European Parliament 
Introductory statement by  Dr Willem F Duisenberg,  President of the European Central Bank, to the 
European Parliament, Strasbourg, 2 July 2002 
 Six months ago we witnessed a milestone in European history: the launch of “the euro, our money”, in 
its visible form. European citizens are now able to perceive - and benefit from - the tangible reality of 
the euro, and the rapid substitution of legacy currencies at the beginning of this year bears witness to 
the successful launch of the euro banknotes and coins. 
The  year  2001  provided  a  particularly  challenging  environment  for  the monetary  policy  of  the  ECB. 
The worsening economic outlook was accompanied by short-term upward pressures on prices from 
various sources, which complicated the conduct of monetary policy. This task was made more difficult 
by the extreme uncertainty which followed the terrorist attacks in the United States on 11 September. 
As usual, the monetary policy response of the ECB to such a situation had to look beyond short-term 
developments, focusing on the risks to price stability over the medium term. From this perspective, we 
could see that medium-term inflationary pressures were in fact receding. The ECB took account of this 
by reducing interest rates four times in 2001, by a total of 150 basis points. As a consequence, the 
minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations of the ECB - the most important among our key 
interest  rates  -  reached  3.25%  in  November  2001.  The  key  ECB  interest  rates  have  remained 
unchanged  since  November  and  short  and  long-term  real  interest  rates  have  been,  in  a  historical 
perspective, very low. 
The average annual inflation rate in 2001, as measured by the HICP, was 2.5%. Inflation in 2001 was 
affected  by  the  lagged  effects  of  the  increases  in  import  prices  in  2000,  and  by  the  new  impact  of 
livestock diseases on unprocessed food prices. We are not satisfied with such an outcome, which is 
not in line with price stability. However, it has to be recognised that the factors which contributed to 
shaping this outcome could not be controlled by the ECB. In fact, monetary policy only affects inflation 
with a lag and cannot control it in the short term. 
We  are  satisfied  that  our  policy  in  2001  was  very  well  understood  by  our  observers  and  by  the 
markets. In fact, the level of bond yields, as well as various other indicators of inflation expectations of 
economic  agents,  pointed  to  continued  confidence  throughout  2001  in  the  ECB  maintaining  price 
stability in the medium term. 
There were some concerns about the possible impact of the cash changeover on euro area inflation, 
which  have  also  been  echoed  in  the  draft  resolution  on  the  ECB  Annual  Report  prepared  by  your 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs. Indeed, the increase in annual consumer price inflation 
in  the  euro  area  from  2.0%  in  December  2001  to  2.7%  in  January  2002  has  unfortunately  been 
associated, in many people’s minds, with the cash changeover. In reality, other factors contributed to 
this increase, such as the rise in vegetable prices related to adverse weather conditions and higher 
tobacco taxes in several euro area countries. But it has to be recognised that, in particular in some 
sectors  with  a  low  level  of  competition,  some  upward  price  adjustments  might  have  occurred  in 
connection  with  the  cash  changeover.  However,  there  were  also  price  reductions  in  the  euro  area 
associated with the cash changeover and statistical evidence has so far confirmed that the effect on 
the overall price level has been contained. 
Turning  now  to  the  current  economic  situation,  over  the  past  few  months  the  economic  conditions 
have  gradually  changed.  The  impact  of  the  terrorist  attacks  on  economic  confidence  has  gradually 
faded away  and economic activity  has stabilised. While the strength  of the  ongoing recovery  is still 
subject  to  uncertainty,  the  most  likely  scenario  is  for  economic  activity  to  gradually  accelerate  and 
reach levels in line with trend potential growth later this year. 
Regarding monetary developments, we saw a high demand for liquid and safe assets in the autumn of 
last  year, particularly associated  with financial market uncertainty following the  terrorist attacks. We 
saw some moderation in early 2002 but recent data indicate a new increase in the demand for liquid 
assets.  In  addition,  the  decline  in  the  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  has  come  to  a  halt  and 
credit demand has recently strengthened. These developments need to be closely monitored, as they 
may start to point to upward risks to price stability, in particular during a period of economic recovery. 
BIS Review 40/2002 
 1
 Overall, the outlook for price stability is now less benign than it was in November 2001, when we last 
adjusted the key ECB interest rates. Inflation has so far declined less steeply and less rapidly than we 
expected at the turn of the year. This has been partly due to the temporary factors I mentioned before, 
and  to  the  renewed  increase  in  oil  prices  in  the  first  quarter  of  2002.  At  the  current  juncture,  even 
though  the  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  will  contribute  to  easing  inflationary 
pressures, we will continue to closely monitor all relevant developments, against the background of the 
risk that the deviations from price stability, which followed the exceptional clustering of upward shocks 
on inflation over the past couple of years, may be transmitted into longer-term inflation expectations, 
thereby potentially affecting wage and price-setting behaviour. 
In  order  to  maintain  price  stability,  it  is  crucial  that  wage  moderation  prevails  in  the  future.  In  this 
respect, we are concerned about recent trends in wages. The importance of wage developments in 
line with our definition of price stability cannot be overemphasised. Wage moderation is a key factor in 
favouring  the  expansion  of  employment  and  in  helping  to  create  the  conditions  for  a  sustainable 
increase in the potential growth rate of the euro area economy. 
Current estimates for trend potential growth in the euro area are in the order of 2-2½%. There is much 
scope for raising potential growth in the euro area. The ECB will make its contribution by focusing on 
maintaining  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  But  other  policy  actors  also  have  to  take  up  their 
responsibilities. The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines for 2002, which have just been approved in 
Seville, place the emphasis quite rightly on the need for further structural reforms in the euro area. I 
understand that this view is also shared in the draft resolution. 
The future welfare of euro area citizens will also depend to a large extent on the prudent conduct of 
fiscal policies. The solidarity pact of our monetary union requires all participants to maintain a medium-
term perspective in compliance with the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact. This implies that 
budgetary positions in all countries should be close to balance or in surplus over the business cycle as 
a whole in order to allow sufficient room for a smooth functioning of automatic stabilisers. We have 
seen  some  worrying  developments  in  fiscal  policy  in  some  countries  over  the  last  few  months. We 
therefore  recall  the  importance  for  those  countries  that  still  have  not  achieved  a  balanced  budget 
position to honour their commitments to catch up with the other countries of the euro area by 2003/04. 
Let me now turn to some other issues raised in the draft resolution on the ECB’s Annual Report. We 
welcome  the  draft  resolution’s  clear  support  for  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy.  The  draft 
resolution  concludes 
in  monetary  aggregates  should  not  be 
overemphasised and that there should not be any mechanical reaction to deviations of M3 growth from 
the reference value. This is fully in line with the ECB’s monetary policy strategy and practice. The first 
pillar of our strategy, which gives a prominent role to the analysis of monetary developments, is based 
on the empirical evidence of a close and stable relationship between money and prices in the euro 
area over the medium term. There is no evidence yet to suggest that this link has weakened over time. 
The ECB is fully aware that monetary developments may be subject to portfolio shifts in the short term, 
which  are  not  directly  related  to  future  spending  decisions.  Indeed,  what  matters  is  to  identify  and 
understand the underlying reasons for monetary developments in order to assess the implications for 
the  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  In  this  respect,  the  analysis  of  monetary 
developments has provided useful guidance to the ECB’s monetary policy also over the past year. 
This leads me to another point mentioned in the draft resolution, namely the importance for a central 
bank to take account of asset prices when assessing risks to price stability, while not introducing moral 
hazard  in  financial  markets  through  inappropriate  reactions  to  excessive  asset  price  developments. 
The  ECB  fully  shares  this  view.  It  closely  monitors  asset  price  developments  as  indicators  for 
monetary policy but it does not target them or react to them mechanically. 
As regards the proposed endorsement of macroeconomic projections by the Governing Council of the 
ECB, allow me to clarify once again the role of those projections in the process of monetary policy-
making at the ECB. These projections play an important role for us, but they have by no means an 
all-encompassing role. They are an important technical input by ECB and national central bank staff in 
summarising  and  assessing  the  implications  of  a  large  body  of  information  for  future  inflation  in  a 
consistent way. However, we are also fully aware of the difficulties of making projections. In particular, 
we  recognise  that  it  is  impossible  to  summarise  all  the  relevant  information  for  assessing  the 
maintenance  of  price  stability  in  one  single  projection.  Given  the  difficulties  of  forecasting  over  the 
longer term and the uncertainty regarding the appropriate economic model, we do not advocate the 
use of a single projection to analyse the risks to price stability. We therefore explicitly look at many 
that  short-term  movements 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2002
 other indicators and analyses in the context of our two-pillar strategy, and we do not try to hide the 
complexity of monetary policy-making behind the production of a single Governing Council forecast. 
The projections reflect the expert judgement of Eurosystem staff and we prefer to keep this distinct 
from the judgement of the Governing Council regarding the overall assessment of the risks to price 
stability. Therefore, our decision to clearly separate the production of the projections from the analysis 
of the Governing Council is fully transparent as it honestly reflects the decision-making process within 
the ECB. 
As  regards  communication,  we  have  always  taken  an  approach  that  ensures  a  high  level  of 
transparency and clarity of our message. Our monthly press conferences are key in this respect. The 
timeliness  and  detail  of  our  communication  is  without  comparison.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  not 
changed our view regarding the publication of minutes. We fear that, given the multi-country context in 
which the Governing Council works, published minutes - or a procedure in which dissenting views of 
Council members are published (even without mentioning names) - could lead to undue pressure on 
national central bank governors to deviate from a euro area perspective. This cannot be in the interest 
of the euro area, no more than if the Governing Council were to end its approach of speaking with one 
voice. 
The draft resolution also suggests that the balance of votes within the Governing Council should be 
published anonymously. As I stated in my last testimony, I have some doubts whether this would give 
more clarity to the markets or more transparency than is the case now. In any event, I believe it is 
crucial that we continue to place the emphasis of our communication on the economic rationale behind 
monetary policy decisions, rather than on a pattern of differing views in the Governing Council. 
To  conclude  my  statement,  I  should  like  to  briefly  refer  again  to  the  euro  cash  changeover. With  a 
single currency, our citizens now have a common symbol of European identity which they use in their 
daily lives. Indeed, the euro has created the foundations that may stimulate further integration - in both 
the political and the economic and financial fields. In this sense, “the euro, our money” can provide a 
new and more solid basis on which to build an “ever closer union”. 
BIS Review 40/2002 
 3
