 T T Mboweni: Prospects for the global economy in 2002 
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Nieman Society of 
Southern Africa Annual Dinner, Cape Town, 9 February 2002. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and Gentlemen. I thank you for inviting me to speak at this, your annual dinner. I congratulate 
you as a group of individuals who have been recognized for your excellence. You have a responsibility 
to continue this pursuit of excellence. Indeed, this should be a guiding characteristic for all of us.  
The year 2001 can appropriately be described as a depressing year. It started with the sudden cut in 
the US Federal Funds rate, which marked the first official acknowledgement of the unexpectedly sharp 
and sudden downturn in the US economy. The slowdown of the US growth juggernaut after almost a 
decade of exceptional growth had a profound effect on most countries and regions. Initially there was 
a  widespread  belief  that  the  euro  area  would  be  insulated  from  the  fallout,  given  the  high  levels  of 
intra-regional trade. It soon became clear that this optimism was misplaced, and that Europe would not 
replace the US as the locomotive for world growth. Not surprisingly, most emerging markets followed 
soon  after.  This  was  particularly  the  case  in  the  technology-dependent  Asian  countries  which  were 
badly  affected  by  the  bursting  of  the  Nasdaq  bubble.  The  generalised  slowdown  was  further 
exacerbated by the tragic events of September 11, which turned out to be the low point of a bad year.  
Although 2002 started off with many economies either in recession or close to it, the mood is one of 
cautious  optimism  that  the  worst  of  the  global  downturn  is  behind  us.  Growth  forecasts  are  being 
continually revised by all the major fund managers and multilateral organisations. The latest forecast 
from the International Monetary Fund in December is for world growth of 2,4 per cent, the same as for 
2001.  However  this  figure  was  marked  down  significantly  from  the  3,5  per  cent  predicted  in  the 
October  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO).  The  latter  forecasts  had  been  prepared  before  the 
September  11  events.  Despite  the  significantly  lower  global  growth  forecast,  these  numbers  do 
assume a recovery from the second half of the year. 
Increase synchronisation of cycles 
2. 
The current downturn has strongly reinforced the pivotal role of the US economy. Strong US growth 
had  been  instrumental  in  overcoming  the  Asian  crisis  of  1997/8.  The  story  could  have  been  very 
different had the US and Europe not been growing strongly at the time. In 2001 it was the locomotive 
itself that had stalled, resulting in a generalised world downturn.  
The  nature  of  this  downturn  has  implications  for  the  future  prospects  for  the  world  economy.  Few 
analyses of the current downturn fail to mention the increased synchronicity of economic cycles across 
regions.  In  April  2001  the  UNCTAD  Trade  and  Development  Report  had  argued  that  without  a  co-
ordinated  global  policy  response,  the  slowdown  in  the  United  States  would  produce  a  synchronous 
cyclical downturn in the world economy. In December the IMF World Economic Outlook remarked that 
a particularly disturbing feature of the current slowdown is its synchronicity across nearly all regions, 
"the  most  marked  for  at  least  two  decades."  The  WEO  attributes  this  partly  to  common  shocks, 
(including the sharp oil price increases) and the bursting of the information technology bubble, both of 
which  had  a  world-wide  impact.  Furthermore,  increased  international  linkages,  particularly  in  the 
financial and corporate sectors, have played an important role, and this is expected to be a continuing 
trend.  Finally  it  is  argued  that  the  synchronicity  of  the  downturn  may  also  reflect  delays  in 
implementing structural reforms, notably in Japan and the euro area, resulting in these countries being 
less well placed to take up the slack when the long expansion in the United States came to an end. 
Although  the  downturn  was  strongly  synchronised,  there  is  less  agreement  as  to  whether  this  will 
apply to the recovery. There seems little doubt, though, that the US will lead the global upturn. Some 
analysts  argue  that  although  the  downturn  was  synchronised,  the  US  recovery  would  considerably 
precede the European and Japanese recoveries. Others argue that synchronisation on the downside 
means synchronisation on the upside as well. Early indications are that the emerging Asian economies 
are likely to be in the best position to follow a US manufacturing upturn. 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 1
 Outlook for the United States 
3. 
The general consensus is that the US economy is likely to make a significant recovery by the middle of 
the year. If the forecasts are correct, it will have been one of the mildest US recessions ever. Although 
the WEO forecasts a US growth rate of only 0,7 per cent for the year, this assumes a considerable 
strengthening during the year and growth in the fourth quarter of 2002 is expected to be 2,5 per cent 
compared to the fourth quarter of 2001. A number of factors appear to confirm this imminent recovery. 
The lower oil price will play its part, and there are also signs that the US has reached the bottom of the 
inventory  cycle.  Higher  equity  prices  and  more  positive  consumer  and  business  sentiment  are  also 
apparent in various surveys.  
Added to this is the fact that a significant amount of macroeconomic stimulus is on the way. Although 
the  Fed  appears  to  have  ended  its  cycle  of  monetary  easing,  the  full  effects  of  the  progressive 
declines  in  interest  rates  are  still  to  be  felt.  Furthermore,  fiscal  policy  changes  are  still  being 
implemented.  Although  the  tax  reform  bill  got  held  up  in  Congress,  the  increase  in  government 
expenditure in the fourth quarter will compensate for this in the meantime. 
A further indicator of the turnaround is the recently released fourth quarter growth figures which were 
unexpectedly high and point to the possibility that the US recession may be over, or at the least that 
the worst is over. Underpinning this low but positive growth number of 0,2 per cent are sustained high 
levels of consumer expenditure, which account for almost two thirds of economic activity in the US.  
However we should be rather cautious before jumping to premature conclusions on the basis of these 
figures.  Firstly,  expenditure  on  durable  goods  increased  by  an  unsustainable  38.4  per  cent 
(quarter-on-quarter annualised) compared with an increase of 0,9 per cent in the third quarter. This 
was  mainly  due  to  the  zero  interest  financing  incentives  offered  on  durables,  particularly  motor 
vehicles. Secondly, we should not be too surprised if the revised figures for the fourth quarter (due on 
28 February) are significantly different to that of the provisional data which are "advance estimates". 
We need only think back to the third quarter of 2001 when the initial estimates for quarterly US GDP 
growth were an unexpectedly high at –0,4 per cent, whereas the final estimates were –1,3 per cent, 
more in line with the original expectations. Therefore the chances are good that the final figures for the 
fourth  quarter  will  be  significantly  different  to  what  has  been  published.  Whatever  the  final  figures, 
consumer  confidence  surveys  do  suggest  that  consumer  confidence  indices  have  reached  their 
highest levels since August, suggesting that the worst may well be over. 
Despite  increasingly  positive  indicators,  analysts  are,  however,  divided  about  the  strength  and  the 
sustainability of the recovery in the US. There is a widely held view that the turnaround will either be 
subdued, or of limited duration, or even turn out to be a "double dip" if final demand does not respond 
to  the  initial  inventory  build-up.  The  basis  for  this  view  is  the  historically  high  level  of  debt  of  US 
households and corporations. It is argued that for a sustained recovery, consumer spending needs to 
rise significantly. However this will be constrained by the fact that debt-strapped consumers will have 
little scope for increasing levels of consumption  which remained uncharacteristically  high during the 
recession (and which contributed to the mildness of the recession). As The Economist recently noted, 
‘the root cause of this recession was the bursting of one of the biggest financial bubbles in history. It is 
wishful  thinking  to  believe  that  such  a  binge  can  be  followed  by  one  of  the  mildest  recessions  in 
history- and a resumption of rapid growth.’ 
Notwithstanding the fears about private and corporate debt build-ups, the US Fed is fairly sanguine 
about the state of the banking system, a view widely shared by the optimists. At a meeting at the Bank 
for International Settlements earlier in 2001, US Fed officials argued that relative to other recessions 
the  banking  system  was  in  a  very  healthy  position.  This  could  allow  for  a  quick  recovery  as  the 
banking  system  would  not  have  to  go  through  a  period  of  restructuring  and  consolidation.  Such 
restructuring inevitably holds up the pace of recovery for which bank credit is an important element. 
The relatively healthy state of the banking system is a major reason why the US recession is unlikely 
to become a Japanese-type deflation. 
The Euro area 
4. 
The  current  downturn  has  shown  that  the  euro  area  is  more  dependent  on  the  fortunes  of  the  US 
economy  than  was  previously  believed.  Despite  the  high  level  of  intra-regional  trade,  a  significant 
proportion of trade between the US and Europe was between subsidiaries of multinational companies. 
According to IMF estimates, this related-party trade accounted for approximately 65 per cent of all US 
imports from Germany in 2000. Apart from this trade channel, increased European investment in the 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2002
 US made the euro area more vulnerable to declines in US profits and equity prices. These factors also 
make the euro area increasingly dependent on the US for a recovery stimulus. 
The  IMF  forecast  for  the  euro  area  is  1,2  per  cent  for  2002,  a  full  percentage  point  lower  than 
projected  in  October.  However  within  the  euro  area  a  fairly  wide  dispersion  of  growth  rates  is 
expected,  with  German  growth  expected  to  be  a  weak  0,7  per  cent,  compared  to  1,3  per  cent  in 
France. 
A widely held view, echoed by the OECD Economic Outlook and the IMF is that in order to underpin a 
recovery and to raise potential output, Europe requires more structural reforms to overcome existing 
rigidities that characterise the region. The OECD Economic Outlook for example had argued that more 
needs to be done "to reduce rigidities, encourage labour supply, lower structural unemployment and 
improve  the  entrepreneurial  climate.  Product  markets  are  also  still  too  segmented  and  financial 
markets not well integrated….." 
Unlike in the US, there will be less reliance on direct macroeconomic stimulation. There appears to be 
little scope for fiscal stimulation in the face of increased budget deficits as a result of lower tax receipts 
and the need to maintain fiscal sustainability. As in many countries and regions, a disproportionately 
heavy  burden  for  adjustment  has  been  placed  on  monetary  policy  for  macroeconomic  stabilisation. 
The ECB has, correctly in my view, maintained a determined focus on inflation outcomes, and has had 
to  endure  criticism  from  a  wide  variety  of  quarters.  But  the  bottom  line  is  that  the  euro  area,  as 
elsewhere, cannot rely on its central bank to be the growth engine. 
Japan 
5. 
Japan  experienced two recessions and  persistently  low growth throughout  the  1990s.  Unfortunately 
the outlook for Japan remains negative, partly because restructuring of the banking system is taking 
longer than anticipated. Although the IMF expects a modest recovery later on in the year, for the year 
as a whole the economy is expected to contract by 1 per cent with continuing deflation. This outlook 
has a high level of risk, particularly on the downside. According to the WEO, a key concern is of a 
vicious cycle involving weakening growth, increased corporate bankruptcies and increasing concerns 
about the health of the banking sector.  
The roots of the Japanese crisis lie in the deregulation of the bond market which meant that the banks’ 
traditional  corporate  customers  found  cheaper  financing  elsewhere.  The  need  for  the  banks  to  find 
new lines of business resulted in increased speculative property lending, at the height of the Japanese 
property bubble. In addition, lending was increased to borrowers in emerging Asian countries and the 
banks  also  bought  equity  at  the  height  of  the  stock  market  boom.  When  the  stock  and  property 
markets crashed, and the Asian crisis hit, the results for the financial sector were disastrous. 
Even before September 11, the Japanese economy had entered a new period of weakness, and is 
now effectively caught in a situation where the traditional macroeconomic responses are constrained. 
The  low  levels  of  interest  rates  mean  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  limited  scope  for  an  effective 
response. Fiscal policy was seen as the main policy tool, but very quickly the debt to GDP ratio rose to 
alarmingly high levels at about 135 per cent, the highest in the OECD. This of course puts a brake on 
further fiscal stimuli, although tax reform measures have been mooted for later this year. At the same 
time  the  new  reform  programme  committed  the  government  to  a  reduced  deficit  at  a  time  when 
unemployment had reached the highest levels in 34 years. Furthermore, discretionary fiscal actions 
could  well  be  offset  by  higher  household  saving,  due  to  increased  concerns  about  long-term  fiscal 
sustainability. 
Japan  is  not  only  in  trouble  due  to  problems  with  its  banking  sector,  it  also  has  suffered  from  the 
bursting  of  the  IT  bubble.  Exports  have  declined  significantly  over  the  past  year  and  continued 
weakness in the electronics market is expected. Most indicators remain negative, particularly  in the 
manufacturing  sector  which  is  characterised  by  excess  capacity,  declining  employment  and  falling 
inventories.  Japan  will  be  helped  to  some  extent  by  an  upswing  in  the  US  and  Asia. What  is  clear 
however is that Japan will not be one of the locomotives of that upswing. Despite the rhetoric to the 
contrary, there does not seem to be the political will deal with the problem of the non-performing bank 
loans. This will have macroeconomic costs in the short-run, but the reform of the banking system and 
corporate restructuring is essential for the overall recovery of Japan. 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 3
 Emerging markets 
6. 
Not surprisingly the downturn in the industrial countries resulted in widespread declines in economic 
activity in developing countries and a less favourable environment for international trade and financial 
flows.  Weak  global  growth  hits  those  economies  most  that  are  dependent  on  trade,  irrespective  of 
whether  they  are  exporters  of  technology  or  manufacturing,  or  commodity  exporters.  Furthermore 
emerging  markets  are  negatively  affected  by  the  decline  in  capital  flows  and  the  increased  risk 
aversion  of  investors.  The  Institute  of  International  Finance,  for  example,  estimated  inflows  to 
emerging markets for 2001 at US$106  billion, compared  with the earlier forecast of US$140 billion. 
The decline is ascribed to heightened risk aversion. Similarly, while world exports were expected to 
rise by 2,5 per cent last year, earnings of emerging markets were projected to decline by 2 per cent. 
Asia 
7.  
The weakness of Japan is not only a problem for the broader global recovery, but for emerging Asia in 
particular. Most of the Asian countries have strong export ties to Japan and the continued weakness 
blocks  off  an  important  export  destination.  One  factor  that  could  offset  this  is  the  continuing 
emergence of China which has to a large extent been shielded from the downturn. At the East Asia 
regional summit of the World Economic Forum held in Hong Kong in October of 2001, developments 
in the Chinese economy dominated the discussions. Although the emergence of China was seen as 
positive for the region, it was also viewed with some trepidation in some of the countries, particularly 
Hong Kong. It is an irony that the most closed economies in Asia i.e. China and Japan, determine the 
future prospects of some of the most open economies in the world. 
Growth projections for Asia were also revised down by the IMF, with recovery delayed into 2002. The 
newly  industrialised  economies  of  Asian  and  ASEAN  were  badly  affected  by  the  lower  European, 
Japanese  and  US  growth  and  the  collapse  of  the  global  electronics  cycle,  with  Hong  Kong  and 
Singapore being particularly vulnerable, and Taiwan experiencing its first recession since World War 
II.  These  countries  are  only  expected  to  grow  by  around  1  per  cent  in  2002.  The  forecast  for  the 
ASEAN countries for 2002 is 2,9 per cent, although for developing Asia the forecast is 5,6 per cent, 
buoyed  by  a  6,8  growth  forecast  for  China.  Although  the  outlook  for  this  region  is  relatively  bright, 
particularly given the lower dependence on external capital flows, its heavy exposure to the electronics 
cycle make it vulnerable to developments in that industry.  
Latin America 
8. 
The outlook for Latin America remains overshadowed by developments in Argentina, but it appears 
that  the  worst  of  the  contagion  effects  appear  to  be  over.  Although  the  Argentinean  crisis  was  not 
caused by the general world downturn, the satisfactory resolution of the crisis in Argentina does have 
an implication for the general ‘risk appetite’ in the industrial countries, and therefore for capital flows to 
emerging markets in general. The adjustment in Argentina is likely to be painful, and drawn-out, and is 
likely to remain a source of economic uncertainty and instability for some time and the recession is 
expected to persist through 2002. 
Latin American growth in general is forecast to be 1,7 per cent in 2002, with Mexico having the lowest 
growth forecast at 1,2 per cent (apart form Argentina). Mexico’s membership of NAFTA makes it more 
vulnerable  to  economic  downturn  in  the  US,  whereas  other  Latin  American  countries  have  greater 
trade  exposure  to  Europe.  External  financing  requirements  are  relatively  large  in  this  region,  and 
growth prospects will therefore be affected by a resumption of ‘normal’ capital flows. 
Africa 
9. 
The IMF’s growth forecast for Africa is a relatively high 3,5 per cent for this year. But a wide dispersion 
of growth rates is expected, reflecting variations in the mix of commodity dependence, economic policy 
developments and other country-specific influences. For example Mozambique is expected to grow by 
8  per  cent  while  the  Zimbabwean  economy  is  forecast  to  contract  by  around  6  per  cent.  Africa  is 
expected  to  be  affected most  by  developments  in  commodity  prices.  Oil  exporters  such  as  Algeria, 
Angola, Nigeria will be negatively affected by lower oil prices, although this will provide a cushion to oil 
importers. The view of the WEO however is that the growth outlook for many African economies is 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2002
 expected to be held back by falling prices of almost all non-fuel commodities, especially coffee and 
cotton. 
The stronger the general global recovery, the quicker these commodity prices are expected to recover. 
However  the  problem  is  that  a  strong  global  recovery  could  result  in  oil  price  developments  that 
swamp the positive impact on many of the commodities that African countries are dependent upon. 
The IMF forecasts growth for South Africa at 2,3 per cent for 2002. Just as the rest of Africa will be 
affected by developments in commodity prices, so too will South Africa.  
Conclusion 
10. 
In conclusion, the United States appears to be on the brink of a turnaround from what will have been a 
relatively  short  and  mild  recession.  Unfortunately  other  countries  were  not  so  fortunate,  and  their 
recoveries remain dependent on the strength and duration of the US recovery. From a South African 
perspective,  this  bodes  well  for  a  recovery  in  commodity  prices,  and  therefore  an  improved  export 
performance. However there is always the risk that the prophets of doom will be correct and that the 
recovery in the US and therefore in the rest of the world will be short-lived. 
What the current recession has highlighted is the increased dependence of the world on the health of 
the US economy. Whereas there had been a view that the emergence of different trading blocs such 
as  the  EU  and  an  Asian  bloc  (a  tri-polar  solution)  could  reduce  dependence  on  the  US,  trade  and 
financial  linkages  have  become  even  stronger,  thereby  increasing  the  degree  of  synchronicity.  The 
recession has also highlighted the disproportionate burden placed on monetary policy to bring about 
the required real adjustments. 
This raises a question of the efficiency of the current international financial architecture that renders 
the  whole  world  increasingly  dependent  on  the  state  of  the  US  economy.  Emerging  markets  are 
hardest hit as capital flows dry up precisely at times when they are needed. There is a need for global 
mechanisms to inject international liquidity into the world economy during times of stress. Reform of 
the  international  financial  system  is  always  on  the  agenda,  but  very  little  progress  gets  made. 
Discussions are intensified during times of crisis - following the Asian crisis there was much talk about 
reforms that would prevent a repeat of such crises. The resolution of the crisis reduced the urgency for 
such reforms. Similarly, the end of the current global recession will reduce the pressures for reform, 
particularly of financing arrangements, for emerging markets. But there is clearly something amiss with 
a  system  that  is  increasingly  centralised.  Unless  there  is  concerted  pressure  for  reform  in  the 
multilateral  organisations,  little  will  be  done  until  the  next  crisis  is  upon  us.  There  is  a  growing 
recognition that the fate of the world economy cannot and should not be left to the policy responses of 
the US to events in that country. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 5
