 Mervyn King: Rebalancing the United Kingdom(cid:146)s economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  British  Chambers  of 
Commerce National Conference, London, 23 April 2002. 
 For a decade now, the British economy has grown at an average rate of close to 3% a year, just above 
its long-run trend rate. The spare capacity created by the recession of the early 1990s has gradually 
been used up. Unemployment has more than halved from over 10% in early 1993 to around 5% now, 
on the internationally standardised measure. And growth has been more stable than for decades. But 
overall this stability has concealed the contrasting fortunes of different sectors in the economy. 
Since  1997  household  spending  on  consumption  has  risen,  on  average,  by  4%  a  year  in  volume 
terms. It is most unlikely that consumer spending can continue to rise at this rate. The trade deficit has 
widened sharply in recent years, reaching some 3% of GDP at the end of last year. And the increase 
in the trade deficit would have been even larger had it not been for an improvement in the terms of 
trade, the ratio of export to import prices, which rose by 8% over the past five years. The result of the 
widening trade deficit, and the improvement in the terms of trade, is that domestic demand has been 
able to grow faster than output. Over the past five years, domestic demand has risen by over 6% more 
than output - slightly more than the excess of demand over output in the late 1980s. In turn, net trade 
has made a negative contribution to output growth for six years in succession. A continuation of that 
trend would be unprecedented in Britain’s modern economic history.  
The  strength  of  consumption  and  the  weakness  of  net  exports  have  led  to  an  imbalance  between 
manufacturing and services. Manufacturing profitability has fallen by more than half over the past five 
years, while in less easily traded services profitability has been broadly unchanged. We, on the MPC, 
understand the problems facing many of you. So, let me explain what we can and cannot do about 
them. 
The need to rebalance the British economy is clear. Domestic demand is likely to be able to grow at no 
more than the rate of growth of total output; indeed, if the trade position is to improve it will have to 
grow by less. And within that figure, we need to allow room for the growth of public services. 
How will this re-balancing of demand come about? That is not yet clear. There are four key prices that 
will determine the extent of the re-balancing that occurs. They are the sterling exchange rate, the oil 
price, real wages, and interest rates. It is these prices that will provide the incentives for the required 
shift in resources. Let me consider them in turn. 
Of  course  there  are  many  exchange  rates  for  sterling  against  different  currencies,  but  the  relative 
strength of sterling and the dollar against the euro has been surprising. Over the past five years or so, 
sterling has risen by almost 40% against the euro. No doubt part of this euro weakness is accounted 
for by the strength of domestic demand in the US and UK, which, at least in the case of the US, has 
been  driven  by  higher  productivity  growth.  But  the  resulting  current  account  deficits  cannot  be 
sustained at their present levels indefinitely.  
Following the sharp slowdown of the  world economy last  year, it  is those countries  with the  largest 
current account deficits, the US and UK, which are experiencing a more robust recovery than that in 
countries, such as the euro area and Japan, with current accounts close to balance or in surplus. In 
the  short  run,  this  pattern  of  growth  could  exacerbate  current  account  imbalances.  But  it  is 
encouraging that the slowdown has proved more short-lived than  was feared. US GDP growth  was 
positive in the final quarter of last year, following only one quarter of falling output, and is expected to 
be substantially positive in the first quarter of this.  
Here at home, growth is expected to be positive in the first quarter, following one quarter of growth 
close to zero. And manufacturing output has now started to rise in both the US and UK. Surveys of 
business  confidence  have  turned  round  markedly.  Only  last  November,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee concluded that it was very unlikely that business confidence would bounce back as it did in 
1998.  But  the  quarterly  survey  of  the  British  Chambers  of  Commerce,  published  last  Thursday, 
showed that manufacturing confidence had returned to levels last seen in 2000, and there were further 
BIS Review 26/2002 
 1
 improvements in the services sector. And the CBI survey, published this morning, showed the highest 
level of business optimism for eight  years.  So the recent news has  been  encouraging. It  is still  too 
soon though to be confident that recovery is entrenched. The sharp inventory run down of last year 
appears to have come to an end, but investment has not yet picked up, either in the UK or the US. 
And  consumption,  which  has  remained  strong,  may  well  decelerate.  So,  as  the  G7  Ministers  and 
Governors  noted  in  their  communiquØ  on  Saturday,  downside  risks  to  the  world  economy  remain. 
These  risks,  and  the  current  account  imbalances  I  referred  to  before,  mean  that  we  need  to  be 
prepared  for  the  possibility  of  large  changes  in  exchange  rates,  although  no  one  can  predict  the 
magnitude or timing of those changes.  
The second price I want to consider is the oil price. Yesterday the spot price of Brent crude closed at 
$26 a barrel, up 34% from the level at the time of the Bank’s February Inflation Report. Volatility of oil 
prices has been a feature of the past few years. At the start of 1999 the price was $10, by the autumn 
of 2000 it was $37, six months ago $20, and today $26. Uncertainty about oil prices is likely to persist 
for  some  time.  The  recent  jump  in  the  oil  price  reflects  uncertainty  in  the  Middle  East,  rather  than 
expectations of a sharp recovery in the world economy, as can be seen from the fact that the price of 
oil to be delivered at future dates, in two years time for example, is much closer to $20. Nevertheless, 
higher oil prices raise inflation in the short run, and depress consumption and activity further ahead.  
The third price that matters for domestic demand is the average real wage rate. Real wages from the 
employers’  perspective  -your  perspective-  the  cost  of  employing  an  additional  person,  have  been 
growing at an annual rate of under 2% over the last couple of years, which is approximately equal to 
the  underlying  rate  of  productivity  growth  and  so  appear  sustainable.  But  real  wages  from  the 
employees’  perspective,  the  real  value  of  take  home  pay,  have  been  rising  at  a  much  higher  rate, 
around 4‰% over the past year or so, partly as a result of the more favourable terms of trade, which 
seems unsustainable. This difference in growth rates is likely to reverse. The terms of trade will not, in 
all likelihood, continue to rise. And last week’s Budget raised National Insurance contributions.  
In the long run, the higher levels of both employer and employee National Insurance contributions will 
result in lower growth of real take home pay - that is simply the price of better public services. Real 
incomes  need  not  fall  but,  for  a  short  time  simply  grow  more  slowly  than  otherwise.  Indeed,  if 
productivity  growth  rose,  then  real  wages  growth  need  not  fall  at  all.  Profits  may  bear  some  of  the 
brunt in the short run, but over the longer term the adjustment will be to wages because firms will need 
to  earn  the  going  rate  of  return  on  new  investment.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  additional 
National Insurance contributions will lead to attempts by firms to push up prices to recoup the higher 
employers’ contributions and by employees to push up wages to offset their higher contributions. The 
commitment  of  the  MPC  to  keeping  inflation  on  track  to meet  the  target,  and  its  track  record  since 
1997,  should  help  to  anchor  expectations  of  inflation  to  2.5%,  thus  encouraging  the  adjustment  to 
occur without a rise in inflation. It is certainly helpful that the increased contribution rates have been 
announced well in advance so that expectations of real wage rises can adjust. 
In recent months the rate of increase of average earnings per person has been extremely low, partly 
because of a fall in average hours worked. For the economy as a whole, average earnings rose by 
only 0.9% in the year to February - the lowest figure recorded since April 1967. And in private services 
earnings actually fell. But this reflects the impact of significantly lower bonus payments this year than 
last, and is likely to unwind as the bonus season comes to an end. If output growth were to pick up 
during the course of this year, then some of the recent fall in average hours worked - which appears to 
reflect  a  degree  of  labour  hoarding  -  would  be  likely  to  unwind,  leading  to  an  increase  in  earnings 
growth. So the MPC will continue to monitor carefully developments in both wages and prices.  
The fourth and final price I want to discuss is the level of interest rates. The MPC sets interest rates in 
order to try to maintain an overall balance between demand and supply in the economy, thus keeping 
inflation close to the target. What will happen to interest rates depends, in part, on the response of the 
three other prices - the exchange rate, the oil price and wages - to developments in the economy. As 
resources shift from private consumption into both the public sector and net exports, there might be 
considerable  movements  in  the  exchange  rate,  the  oil  price,  and  even  wages.  The  path  of  interest 
rates that will be necessary to keep inflation close to the target will depend on what happens to those 
prices. That is why it is extremely difficult to predict what that path will be. The MPC will take decisions 
on rates one month at a time. But what should not be in doubt is that the MPC will take whatever steps 
are necessary in order to keep inflation on track to meet the 2.5% target. 
The  challenge  for  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  is  to  restore  domestic  demand  growth  to  sustainable 
levels. This would permit the stabilisation and eventual reduction of the trade deficit, while maintaining 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2002
 low and stable inflation, and high and stable employment, at the same time as resources move from 
private consumption to the provision of better public  services. It  is possible, perhaps likely, that the 
transition to lower growth rates of consumption will occur smoothly. And lower inflation now than in the 
past may ease the adjustment - the future is not what it was. For the Monetary Policy Committee the 
challenge is to keep inflation close to the target during a period in which a significant re-balancing of 
the British economy will take place. That will be a challenge, not just for the MPC, but for all of us.  
BIS Review 26/2002 
 3
