 I J Macfarlane: Overview of the Australian economy 
Opening statement by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House of 
Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public  Administration,  Sydney, 
31 May 2002. 
 Mr Chairman, with the normal timetable interrupted by  last November’s election, it is slightly over a 
year since we appeared before this Committee. Since it has been an extremely eventful  year, I will 
have a fair bit of work to do today to fill the gap. 
Looking back over the Hansard of the last meeting in May 2001, I see that I was explaining why we 
had lowered interest rates three times (in February, March and April). At the time of our meeting, I was 
pretty  confident  that  the  Australian  economy  was  on  a  recovery  path  after  a  short  housing-induced 
setback in the second half of 2000, but none of us were sure about what was going to happen in the 
United States and the rest of the world. External events were seen to be crucial to our fortunes and to 
the evolution of our monetary policy. 
As it turned out, these events unfolded in two distinct phases: 
– 
Over the rest of 2001, the world  economy continued to  weaken. The United  States had a 
mild recession, with consumer spending holding up and so preventing it from being as deep 
as earlier ones. On the other hand, the business sector had a pronounced recession judging 
from the fall in industrial production, business investment and corporate earnings. Most other 
major  countries  had  negligible  growth  during  the  year,  so  that  for  the  G7  countries  as  a 
whole, growth was virtually zero over the year. Even so, it looked for a time that it could have 
been much worse. 
For most of last year, therefore, we were receiving gloomy news on the world economy. After 
a brief respite in mid-year, bad news began to re-emerge in July-August, so much so that we 
in  Australia  eased  monetary  policy  on  5  September.  Then  the  events  of  11  September 
induced  a  new  bout  of  gloom,  and  there  was  a  real  fear  that  the  world  economy  would 
weaken further in 2002 and so experience a prolonged and deep recession. Monetary policy 
was  eased  virtually  everywhere.  In  our  case,  even  though  our  own  economy  remained  in 
good shape, we eased in anticipation that the weakening prospects for the world economy 
would eventually flow through to the domestic economy. 
The second phase began in the early months of this year, when it became increasingly clear 
that our earlier fears about 2002 were not going to be realised. The US economy grew more 
quickly in the final months of 2001 and the first quarter of 2002 than anyone had expected. In 
addition,  we received  better news from non-Japan  Asia and  Europe. It is  now  pretty clear 
that 2002 will be a year of recovery for the world economy, and the IMF is forecasting good 
growth through the year. The debate is no longer about whether there will be a recovery, but 
about whether it will be an average or below-average recovery. There is still a good deal of 
uncertainty  about  how  robust  the  US  recovery  will  be  once  the  inventory  correction  has 
passed,  i.e.  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  Some  of  the  bubble-type  distortions  have  not 
been  fully  unwound  so  there  is  still  a  fair  bit  of  caution  around,  including  in  the  Federal 
Reserve Board. 
  So we are in a world economy with a more comfortable outlook than a year ago, but with still some 
uncertainties  remaining.  What  of  the  Australian  economy?  The  story  here  has  been  much  less 
exciting, but the results a lot more satisfying. 
As you know, GDP grew by 4.1 per cent over 2001, which was the highest among comparable OECD 
countries.  We  can  now  safely  claim  that  the  Australian  economy  has  weathered  a  world  recession 
without  itself  experiencing  one.  This  is  the  first  time  in  my  experience  that  such  an  outcome  has 
occurred, and it must give us confidence in the soundness of our economy. But before getting carried 
away, we should concede: 
• 
By the standards of earlier world recessions, last year’s was a mild and short one, and some 
observers may be reluctant to classify it as a fully-fledged recession. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 1
  We did not escape scot-free. If you average our growth in 2000 and 2001, it comes out at 
3 per cent so we did experience a modest slowing. 
As well as good GDP growth, we have experienced quite good employment growth over the past year. 
It  appears  that  the  slowdown  in  our  economic  activity  resulted  in  a  trough-to-peak  rise  in 
unemployment from 6 to 7 per cent, and that half of the rise has already been whittled away so far in 
2002. This is extremely good news because it is the first time for three decades that we have been 
through an international downturn that has resulted in the peak unemployment rate in Australia being 
lower than its predecessor. 
At this point in proceedings, I usually review the previous set of forecasts I gave the Committee and 
then present a new set for the period ahead. I will continue that tradition, but we should bear in mind 
there is a full year of new data available to us so there is more to review. Last May, when we had only 
two of the four quarters of 2000/01 available to us, I said we expected year-on-year GDP growth in 
that year to be about 2 per cent; in the event, it came in at 1.9 per cent. My forecast for year-on-year 
GDP growth in 2001/02 was 3 to 3½ per cent, and our current forecast (still with two quarters yet to 
come) is 3.6 per cent. So, even though there have been big swings in the international outlook in the 
meantime, the last 18 months seem to have turned out much as we expected (unlike the previous six 
months where the extent of the housing-induced setback took us largely by surprise). 
On the prices front, we still had not seen the GST bulge pass through the system when we met last 
May. The forecast I presented at the time was that when it had passed through, the rate of inflation 
measured by the CPI would settle at 2½ per cent. In fact, that was “spot on” for the four quarters to the 
September quarter of 2001, but by the December quarter inflation had risen to 3.1 per cent, and by the 
March  quarter  2002  it  was  2.9  per  cent.  So,  on  average,  we  slightly  underestimated  the  rise  in 
inflation. 
For the year ahead, i.e. 2002/03, we are forecasting the economy to continue growing at 3½ to 4 per 
cent as it completes the eleventh year of its expansion and enters the twelfth. The outlook for inflation 
over  the  same  period  could  best  be  summarised  as  remaining  near  the  top  of  our  target  range, 
although  we expect it to go down slightly for a time, and then to come back up. This was the view 
expressed in our quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy released earlier this month. 
In short, the outlook for economic growth and inflation is such that the economy no longer needs the 
boost provided by an expansionary stance of monetary policy. We took the first step towards returning 
monetary  policy  to  a  more  neutral  setting  earlier  this  month,  and,  unless  unforeseen  developments 
intrude,  we  should  continue  the  process  as  we  go  ahead,  while  all  the  time  carefully  examining 
incoming data, both from here and abroad, to ensure that developments remain on track. I will return 
to this theme later in my presentation, but before doing so I should examine the economic outlook in a 
little more detail. 
In looking ahead, we always have to ask ourselves where the balance of risks lies. Another way of 
expressing this is to ask: what is the main risk for the economy if we did not adjust monetary policy? In 
our  view,  the  most  important  risk  would  be  that  the  expansionary  forces  in  the  economy  would 
increase to an excessive degree, bringing with it the likelihood that inflation would rise from its present 
position  at  the  top  of  our  target  range  to  something  in  excess  of  it.  In  the  process,  we  would  also 
expect other imbalances to emerge which would ultimately bring the current expansion to an end. Of 
course,  we  cannot  entirely  rule  out  the  alternative  outcome  whereby  the  economy  slows  and  puts 
sufficient downward pressure on inflation that it threatens to fall below the bottom of our range, but we 
would put a low probability on that outcome. 
As has been the case now for some time, to the extent we can identify risks on the downside, they 
come mainly from abroad. Even though the US economy grew quickly in the first quarter of the year, 
the  strength  of  its  recovery  is  still  uncertain,  and  there  are  risks  to  the  world  economy  from  the 
unstable  political  situations  in  the  Middle  East  and  Indian  sub-continent.  On  the  domestic front,  the 
most easily identifiable area of spending that will exert a dampening influence later in the year is likely 
to be house-building, largely because so many houses will have been built that construction will not be 
able to continue at its former rate. But overall, barring some unforeseen international event, we find it 
hard  to  see  serious  risks  on  the  downside  for  the  Australian  economy. We  cannot  rule  out  slightly 
below-average growth, but we would regard anything significantly more adverse as unlikely. 
Instead,  conditions  are  much  more  conducive  to  stronger  economic  growth  than  last  year.  The 
turnaround  in  the  world  economy  will  mean  that  it  will  be  a  positive  force  for  growth  over  the  year 
ahead rather than a dampening influence. This should be good for exports, investment and confidence 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2002
 in general. As well, both consumer and business confidence have returned to quite high levels after a 
couple of setbacks last year. Business investment has been quite restrained over the past couple of 
years but is about to pick up according to the plans businesses supply to the ABS’s Capex Survey. 
This is not surprising given the relatively healthy profit situation, the high level of business confidence 
and  the  expected  growth  in  spending.  These  more  buoyant  conditions  may  also  encourage 
businesses to attempt to rebuild profit margins, which will be a factor underpinning inflation over the 
next year or so. 
Thus, we believe that if monetary policy maintained its present stance for too much longer, there is 
little risk of a serious slowdown, but a high risk that the economy in time would overheat. This provides 
the basis for our view that monetary policy should be returned to a more neutral setting. I think there is 
widespread agreement with this assessment of the situation, but inevitably there will be people who do 
not  agree.  One  doubt  you  sometimes  see  expressed  is  the  fear  that  any  rise  in  interest  rates  will 
“choke off the expansion”. 
Not  surprisingly,  we  feel  that  this  fear  is  misplaced.  At  one  level,  it  amounts  to  saying  that  the 
expansion  is  so  fragile  that  it  can  only  be  continued  if  monetary  policy  is  kept  permanently  at  an 
expansionary setting. We also care about continuing the expansion, but feel that the least risky way of 
doing so is with a more neutral interest rate setting. At another level, the fear may be that we at the 
Reserve  Bank  will  err  on  the  tight  side.  Of  course,  that  is  possible,  but  our  track  record  does  not 
support this view. Over the past decade or so, the thing that stands out about our monetary policy is 
the fast rate of economic growth it has permitted compared with other comparable countries, not any 
tendency to over-achieve with inflation reduction. Where we differ from some observers is that we are 
mainly interested in the medium run, i.e. we want to sustain the expansion rather than to maximise its 
speed over the next year. We have been consistent in this approach for the best part of a decade, and 
it has served us well. 
I would now like to change to a subject that was highlighted by this Committee in its press release 
announcing today’s hearing, namely credit card reform. 
The  Reserve  Bank  released  its  consultation  document  in  December  last  year.  In  it,  we  proposed, 
subject to further consultation, three major changes to the four party credit card schemes that operate 
in Australia: 
– 
first,  a  new  and  transparent  standard  for  setting  the  interchange  fees  on  credit  card 
transactions which would lead to a reduction in those fees, and thus in the merchant service 
fees paid by businesses; 
second, the ending of the prohibition imposed by the card schemes that prevents merchants 
from passing the cost of accepting credit cards on to cardholders; and 
third,  the  elimination  of  the  restriction  on  entry  to  the  credit  card  schemes  that  keeps  out 
potential competitors that are not deposit-taking institutions. 
  After we released our document, we allowed interested parties till mid-March to prepare submissions, 
and we have been going through those submissions thoroughly with them since then. We want to give 
each party every opportunity to put their view forward, even if it involves multiple meetings. We are still 
in this process and,  when  we have finished,  we  will release our findings sometime after the end of 
June. 
During this period, we at the Reserve Bank have not engaged in public debate on this subject, even 
though some of the other participants in the credit card industry have been quite vocal. We see our 
role  during  this  stage  essentially  as  the  umpire  adjudicating  between  the  competing  views  of  the 
financial institutions and card schemes on one side, and the consumers, retailers, billers, etc. on the 
other side. Of course, our umpire role should not inhibit the Committee from asking any questions it 
wishes to. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 3
