 Nout Wellink: 50th anniversary of the Dutch Act on the Supervision of Credit 
Systems 
Opening remarks by Mr Nout Wellink, President of De Nederlandsche Bank and President of the Bank 
for International Settlements, at the conference on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the Dutch 
Act on the Supervision of Credit Systems, Amsterdam, 24 April 2002. 
 It is a great privilege to welcome you here in Amsterdam at the conference (cid:145)Banking Supervision at the 
Crossroads(cid:146).  This  conference  has  been  organised  to  celebrate  the  adoption  of  the  Act  on  the 
Supervision  of  the  Credit  System  in  the  Netherlands  50  years  ago.  That  was  when  banking 
supervision  in  our  country  was  first  formalised.  It  replaced  a  system  of  voluntary  arrangements 
between De Nederlandsche Bank and the private banks. In my opening remarks today, I will look back 
at the past half century, that has taken us from informal gentlemen(cid:146)s agreements to the phenomenal 
complexity of Basel II. We still aim for agreement and most of the time try to behave like gentlemen, 
but the world has become a different place. And it will continue to change rapidly! The question we are 
faced with is how supervisory practices should respond and in particular - and that is the theme of the 
conference - to what extent they should converge. 
I am very happy that we have a number of prominent speakers that are willing to shed light on this 
important  question.  First  of  all,  I  must  inform  the  audience  that  due  to  unforeseen  obligations  in 
Parliament, Minister Gerrit Zalm will unfortunately not be able to join us this afternoon. However we 
are  happy  that  in  his  place  Mr  Kees  van  Dijkhuizen  is  willing  to  deliver  the  keynote  speech  this 
afternoon.  As  the  highest  civil  servant  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Mr.  van  Dijkhuizen  takes  a  keen 
interest in financial supervision in this country. 
We  furthermore  are  very  honoured  to  have  in  our  midst  Mr  William  McDonough,  President  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  and  chairman  and  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision, Mr Jochen Sanio, Chairman of the new Federal Office for the Supervision of Financial 
Services in Germany and Mr Tom de Swaan, Chief Financial Officer of ABN AMRO. 
As mentioned, the Dutch Act on the Supervision of Credit Systems formalised the supervisory task of 
De  Nederlandsche  Bank.  It  was  a  response  to  the  major  changes  in  the  financial  and  economic 
environment  that  took  place  between  the  two  World  Wars.  The  banking  crises  of  the  nineteen 
twenties,  the  Glass  Steagall  Act  in  the  United  States,  the  growing  role  of  the  banking  sector  in  the 
economy: they all made it clear that a sound functioning of the banking system was too important to be 
arranged  informally.  In  this  respect  it  is  noteworthy  that  supervision  on  the  insurance  sector  was 
formalised even further back in time and exists almost 80 years now. But, of course, in the decades 
that  have  passed  since  then  the  financial  environment  has  kept  on  changing,  and  with  it  the 
challenges that supervisors face. Two trends have been particularly prominent in the past decades. 
The  first  is  the  enormous  increase  in  cross-border  activities  made  possible  by  the  liberalisation  of 
capital  markets.  The  second  is  the  blurring  of  the  borderlines  between  banking,  insurance  and 
securities activities. These fundamental developments are the driving force behind the increasing need 
for convergence of supervisory practices across borders and sectors. 
Let me illustrate by looking at our experiences in the Netherlands. The international dimension of our 
major financial institutions has increased dramatically. As a result, in some cases nowadays more than 
half  of  assets  and  profits  are  related  to  activities  in  foreign  countries.  There  are  no  signs  that  the 
internationalisation of the financial industry  will slow down, rather on the contrary.  In a  world  where 
national financial systems and institutions are increasingly dependent upon one another, it is obviously 
crucial  for  financial  stability  that  high  and  comparable  supervisory  standards  are  maintained 
everywhere. 
This  has  long  been  recognised  in  the  field  of  banking  regulation.  Indeed,  it  was  reflected  in  the 
establishment  and  the  work  of  the  Basel  Committee,  as  well  as  in  the  work  of  the  European 
committees  in  this  field.  In  this  context  I  would  like  to  express  my  great  respect  for  the  leadership 
shown by Bill McDonough in steering the ship (cid:145)Basel II(cid:146) through stormy seas to a save haven. This 
difficult task could not be in better hands than those of a former US Navy officer! Importantly, as part of 
Basel II, there is wide recognition that besides having convergence in regulation, it is equally important 
that  supervisory  practices  (the  implementation  of  the  rules!)  converge.  The  creation  of  the  Accord 
BIS Review 27/2002 
 1
 Implementation Group by the Basel Committee, and the work being done by the Groupe de Contact in 
Europe reflect this understanding.  
It is important to keep in mind that the importance of cross-border convergence is not confined to the 
banking industry. It equally applies to other parts of the financial sector, such as insurance. This brings 
me  to  the  other  main  trend  that  I  mentioned,  i.e.,  the  blurring  of  the  borderlines  between  banking, 
insurance and securities activities.  
Here too, the development in this country is a case in point. We have been frontrunners when it comes 
to  financial  conglomerates  or  bank  assurance,  institutions  that  combine  banking,  insurance  and 
securities activities. As is well known, the Netherlands houses a couple of world(cid:146)s major internationally 
active financial institutions. Most of the major Dutch banks currently combine banking, insurance and 
securities activities. The emergence of these conglomerates was made possible by the lifting, in 1990, 
of the prohibition on combining banking and insurance activities in one financial institution. 
As the importance of cross sectoral financial activity increases, so does the need of the supervisory 
response. The main challenge in this field is to achieve a consistent approach in the supervision at the 
group level as well as at the level of the entities within the conglomerate. Consistency does not imply 
that  the  approaches  should  be  identical.  It  should  be  interpreted  as  avoiding  the  potential  for 
regulatory arbitrage as well as regulatory overlap.  
Again, we try to take the lead in the way we organise supervision in the Netherlands. Co-operation 
between  bank  and  insurance  supervisors  dates  back  to  the  early  nineties  and  has  performed  well. 
Nevertheless in anticipation of a continuation of the trend that I have described, we have come to the 
conclusion that a cross sectoral approach to supervision is the right way forward. In this approach we 
make  a  clear  distinction  between  prudential  and  conduct  of  business  supervision.  It  assigns  the 
responsibility for these inherently different objectives to separate authorities.  
This  is  not  to  say  that  this  is  the  only  way  to  address  this  challenge.  It  depends  on  the  specific 
characteristics of the financial sector in a country which design is best suited. In our case, for instance, 
we  have  a  highly  concentrated  financial  sector  with  institutions  that  are,  almost  by  definition, 
systemically  relevant.  As  a  consequence  we  considered  it  essential  to  link  prudential  banking 
supervision with the central bank and its other functions such as oversight of the payment system and 
providing lender of last resort facilities. But as I said, circumstances and the solutions chosen will vary 
from country to country. This is fine, as long as the approaches have at least one thing in common: 
they should be designed with the aim of ensuring consistency. Consistency not only in regulation, but 
also in supervisory practice. This is an important precondition for achieving a level playing field for the 
international financial industry.  
Let me add, as a final observation, that in achieving this goal, there is an important complementary 
role to be played by market discipline. Meaningful disclosure by financial institutions is a potentially 
powerful tool in furthering the cause of a level playing field between countries and across institutions. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
Looking  back  in  history,  we  are  a  far  cry  now  from  where  we  were  fifty  years  ago,  when  our 
predecessors  introduced  formal  banking  supervision  in  the  Netherlands.  Looking  forward  into  the 
future,  I  am  pretty  sure  that  our  successors  will  not  be  celebrating  the  centenary  of  the  Act  on  the 
Supervision of Credit Systems, or even the centenary of insurance supervision 20 years from now. We 
will have entered a cross sectoral world long before then! And as to the topic they will be discussing, 
that could well depend on the turning we take on the crossroads that we are at now.  
Thank you for your attention. I wish you all an interesting and entertaining conference.  
2 
 BIS Review 27/2001
