 Jean-Claude Trichet: Asset price bubbles and their implications for monetary 
policy and financial stability 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Asset  Price 
Bubbles conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 23 April 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour and pleasure for me to talk today in Chicago at the invitation of the World Bank and 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in front of such a distinguished audience on the theme of asset 
price  bubbles.  As  a  central  banker,  my  main  focus  will  be  on  the  implications  of  asset  price 
developments and bubbles for both monetary policy and financial stability. 
The  far-reaching  changes  observed  over  the  last  decade  on  financial  markets,  the  growing  role  of 
these markets for the financing of the economy, and the evidence gathered over the recent period on 
the key role that financial factors may play in shaping and amplifying the business cycle, have drawn 
attention to the relative importance of asset prices and wealth effects on the real economy. 
There  are  at  least  two  reasons  why  asset  prices  and  wealth  effects  may  have  grown  over  the  last 
decade: 
  first, changes in asset valuations, mainly driven by the rise in the new economy stock prices 
from the mid-1990s and their subsequent collapse in 2000, have been dramatic. This is well 
documented for the United States. But, even in Europe, where the influence of the so-called 
(cid:147)new economy(cid:148) is more modest, the rise in stock prices has also been significant; 
second,  these  changes  have  probably  influenced  private  spending  more  than  past  asset 
prices  movements  did  because  of  the  more  widespread  share  ownership  observed  in  a 
number of industrialised countries. As far as France is concerned, market capitalisation as a 
percentage  of  GDP  increased  approximately  fourfold  between  1990  and  2000  (28%  to 
110.5%)  and  we  have  some  evidence  that  the  share  of  Households(cid:146)  equity  holdings  in 
financial assets has also risen. 
All of these developments have recently raised the issue of whether monetary policy should react to 
financial asset prices, and more generally to asset prices. The motivation is two-fold: not only could 
the large swings, misalignments or even bubbles, on asset prices endanger price stability, which is the 
main objective of most central banks, but also they could impinge upon financial stability, which is an 
other important goal of central banks. Let me now develop these two points. 
1. 
Implications for monetary policy 
Transmission channels of monetary policy 
The  role  asset  prices  may  play  in  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  is  well  known 
theoretically,  although  quite  difficult  to  characterise  empirically.  Monetary  policy  mainly  controls  the 
interbank overnight rate, which is not directly relevant for any material economic decision. The way to 
which  monetary  policy  affects  the  real  economy  is  when  it  impacts  on  relevant  financial  prices,  i.e. 
when it moves the whole yield curve, or when it affects the exchange rate and other assets prices. 
There  might  be  several  channels  through  which  the  policy  rate  can  affect  asset  prices  or  asset 
valuations:  
   first,  changes  in  interest  rate  modify  people(cid:146)s  expectations  about  future  economic  growth, 
and thus their profit expectations; 
second, monetary policy decisions may change the set of discount factors economic agents 
apply  to  their  profit  expectations  or  to  the  future  stream  of  services  or  revenues  from  the 
asset they hold (housing for instance); 
finally, interest rate changes may induce portfolios(cid:146)  shifts amongst assets that may in turn 
affect their relative prices. 
BIS Review 28/2002 
  
1
 Besides this, and for the sake of simplicity, I will call it the (cid:147)interest rate channel(cid:148), changes in asset 
prices  also  generate  wealth  effects  that  may  have  a  significant  impact  on  several  components  of 
aggregate  demand,  namely  consumption  and  investment.  These  wealth  effects  feed  through  to  the 
economy via various channels, such as a direct increase in net wealth, which may lead to a rise in 
consumption  because  of  households(cid:146)  inter-temporal  smoothing  behaviour;  via  Tobin(cid:146)s  Q,  which 
activates firms(cid:146) investment; or via an increase in the  value of collaterals,  which  may reduce agents 
external  financing  constraints  and  enhance  final  spending,  in  accordance  with  the  (cid:147)broad  credit 
channel(cid:148). Although the evidence is mixed about the effectiveness of the wealth channel, even in the 
United States1 , it is likely to have increased over recent years. Moreover, asset prices fluctuations or 
changes  might  also  activate  some  confidence  or  expectations  channels  that  may  in  turn  influence 
households(cid:146) or firms(cid:146) spending decisions. For all of these reasons, asset prices have a particular role 
in the conduct of monetary policy.  
How should central banks react? 
Does this mean that monetary policy should react directly to asset prices? Or, more precisely, should 
asset prices be directly taken into account by the central bank(cid:146)s reaction function? This issue is still 
debated amongst researchers and academics; my feeling is that we should remain extremely cautious 
about it, perhaps because it would be like opening Pandora(cid:146)s Box if we started setting our key policy 
rates according to asset price changes. Another reason for being extremely cautious is that assessing 
asset prices(cid:146) valuations is a very challenging exercise. And what matters is not only the asset price 
level per se, or the pace of its change, but also its deviation from a highly hypothetical fundamental 
value, which basically is hard to measure or determine. 
Although, from time to time, it may seem that asset price dynamics are not really correlated to overall 
economic  development,  it  is  generally  hard  to  assess  whether  these  dynamics  are  rooted  in  some 
deep fundamental changes or whether asset prices evolve according to some (cid:147)pathological path(cid:148). The 
recent (cid:147)tech-stock bubble(cid:148) provides us with an illustration of such a difficulty: while one was witnessing 
the (cid:147)irrational exuberance(cid:148) in 1996, the surge in capital spending associated with the development of 
new technologies resulted in a faster productivity growth, which in turn boosted equity prices. At that 
time,  uncertainties  about  fundamentals  (was  there  an  American  miracle?)  made  difficult  a  proper 
assessment of asset valuations, although the large movements in asset prices where a concern for 
central banks. 
However, when expectations reverse, for example due to the reassessment of expected profitability in 
the economy, and consequently asset prices decrease, the point is to determine whether the attitude 
of the central bank ought to be different in order to preserve monetary and financial stability. That is, 
some could argue that the central bank(cid:146)s response should be asymmetric. In the booming phase, as 
long  as  price  stability  is  not  endangered,  central  banks  do  not  react  to  the  rise  in  asset  prices. 
Conversely, in the recession phase or when a bubble bursts, central banks could consider reacting if 
they  deem  that  monetary  and  financial  stability  is  endangered.  What  could  then  restrain  them  from 
doing it? Such an asymmetric reaction, all the more if it seems to be systematic, has actually a cost, 
pointed out in the literature, since it may generate some moral hazard problems: as long as economic 
agents  believe  the  central  bank  will  ultimately  make  use  of  its  (cid:147)safety  net(cid:148),  there  is  an  incentive  to 
invest on riskier projects in order to magnify expected returns, keeping in mind that potential losses 
are likely to be limited. 
Would then, a systematically symmetric reaction by a central bank to asset price changes solve this 
problem? I would not share that view, because central banks cannot accurately assess the deviation 
of asset prices from their highly hypothetical fundamental value. To illustrate my point, let us consider 
a situation in which the central bank fails to diagnose the presence of a bubble, and therefore does not 
react appropriately to the surge in asset prices, then agents may become involved in riskier projects 
without having consciously taken the decision to accept greater risk, but on the ground of what they 
                                                      
1  Cf. Martin LETTAU and Sydney LUDVIGSON (2001): (cid:147)Understanding trend and cycle in asset values: bulls, bears and the 
wealth effect on consumption(cid:148), CEPR discussion paper, n(cid:176) 3104, December. 
2 
  
BIS Review 28/2001
 have interpreted as a sound financial and economic environment. As a result, we have shift to another 
problem, which is close to the idea of (cid:147)disaster myopia(cid:148).2 
The issue of measuring price stability 
However, this raises another issue, especially in the current context of muted inflationary pressures 
but ample fluctuations in asset prices: are we measuring inflation accurately? Is price stability being 
ensured,  in  the  context  of  large  movements  in  asset  prices?  Shouldn(cid:146)t  asset  prices  be  taken  into 
account when defining price stability? Up to now, this debate has focused on the role asset prices may 
play as leading indicators of inflation: one rationale behind this thinking may be that asset valuation is 
computed in a forward looking manner, and therefore asset prices embed expectations about future 
economic growth and future inflationary pressures. Empirical evidence gathered on such an issue tend 
to support the idea that some asset prices, housing prices in particular, may actually play such a role. 
However,  this  theory  has  to  be  qualified  by  the  fact  that,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  wealth  effects  are 
difficult  to  establish  in  a  definitive  manner.  This  is  probably  less  true  for  the  US,  although  this  is 
debatable  and could be discussed in this conference, but  this  is more likely to  be true for the  euro 
area. Moreover, there might be a danger that asset prices diverge from the CPI, as this was observed 
over  the  last  few  years.  There  might  be  an  internal  conflict  here  if  the  objective  of  price  stability  is 
defined by aggregating the changes in the CPI and the changes in asset prices, and this is a crucial 
issue since the nature of both types of prices is fairly different. 
So, do asset prices have a key role to play in the conduct of monetary policy? To answer this question, 
I will briefly describe the way we deal with asset prices in the conduct of the European single monetary 
policy. As you already know, the ECB(cid:146)s monetary policy strategy is based on a two-pillar approach. 
This  concept  of  monetary  policy  was  designed  to  promote  the  conduct  of  a  sound  monetary  policy 
whilst coping with the complexity of the set of major determinants of inflation (cid:150) fully recognized by the 
Governing Council of the ECB. That is the reason why we rely upon a binocular vision of the factors of 
inflation,  i.e.  as  a  monetary  phenomenon  according  to  pillar  1  and  as  the  result  of  short-term  to 
medium-term  developments  of  inflation  according  to  pillar  2.  This  framework  is  also  well  suited  to 
addressing the asset price bubble issue. 
In this context, the first pillar is very helpful for analysing how ample liquidity is within the euro area, 
that is to say how much the broad monetary aggregate (M3) deviates from its reference value, and 
how economic agents make use of this liquidity: credit and loan developments are carefully monitored, 
in line with economical and financial developments. Portfolio shifts are also an important part of the 
monetary analysis. Too rapid a credit expansion to the private sectors associated with large portfolios 
shifts  towards  equities  and  a  strong  rise  in  stock  or  asset  prices  would,  under  normal  economic 
conditions, signal the risk of a bubble formation. 
The second pillar consists of a wide range of economic and financial indicators: stock and bond prices, 
housing prices, exchange rates are also analysed in depth. Obviously, their assessment is made in the 
context of maintaining price stability over the medium term, and the ECB does not react to their signals 
unless price stability is endangered. To recap, if monetary policy does not react directly to asset price 
developments  or  to  an  asset  price  bubble,  it  has  clearly  to  take  under  consideration  all  the 
consequences  of  these  developments  on  aggregate  demand  and  aggregate  supply,  on  economic 
agents(cid:146) confidence and expectations, since they may at some point affect price developments. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  my  second  point,  that  is  the  implications  of  asset  prices  bubbles  for  financial 
stability.  
Implications for financial stability 
2. 
Over the last decade, we have experienced several financial crises and contagion episodes: just to 
name a few episodes, the Mexican crisis in 1994-1995, the Russian-LTCM in 1998, the (cid:147)Tech-Bubble(cid:148) 
that  ended  in  2000,  or  more  recently  the  financial  crises  in  Argentina  and  Turkey.  However,  recent 
                                                      
2 
J. M GUTTENTAG and R. J HERRING (1986), (cid:147)Disaster myopia in International Banking(cid:148), Essays in International Finance, 
164, Princeton University. 
BIS Review 28/2002 
  
3
 research3 has shown that, if the frequency of financial crisis is not significantly different from what was 
observed in previous periods over the long run (1883-1998), recent episodes were certainly shorter, 
but perhaps more severe. 
Although  financial  globalisation  has  brought  about  improved  macro-economic  efficiency,  via  a  more 
efficient allocation of resources and capital, liberalised capital flows, increased competition on financial 
markets,  increased  transparency  (apart  from  the  recent  ENRON  episode!),  changes  in  asset  prices 
have  also  become  more  pronounced  and  have  experienced  clear  misalignments  or  deviations  from 
their  (cid:147)equilibrium(cid:148)  levels.  Moreover,  credit  seems  to  have  played  a  greater  role  in  asset  prices 
fluctuations.  Initially  observed  during  the  (cid:147)speculative  bubbles(cid:148)  of  the  1980s  and  early  1990s,  this 
trend has persisted, if not amplified. 
Several  factors  may  explain  these  recent  and  abnormal  patterns  in  asset  prices.  I  shall  give  a  few 
examples. 
    First,  "short-termism":  some  market  participants  may  have  become  more  inclined  to  be 
mostly preoccupied with their short-term results. This trend might result, in particular, from 
growing  pressure  to  yield  good  results  immediately.  However,  these  results  are  not 
necessarily sustainable. Marking-to-market financial products may also have contributed to 
this  widespread  focus  on  immediate  financial  performances.  This  emphasis  on  short-term 
performance may result in increased volatility in the price formation process: the shorter the 
investment horizon of markets participants, the bigger the impact of any new information on 
prices. 
Second, herding or mimetic behaviour: mimetic behaviour is of course by no means a new 
phenomenon  on  financial  markets.  Technological  developments  on  markets  may  however 
have  gradually  reinforced  this  type  of  behaviour,  as  participants  are  under  increasing 
pressure to follow their peers through matching the performance of a benchmark. There is 
no doubt that the spread of benchmarking allows fund managers and clients to better assess 
their performance against that of other funds. But, in a context of growing competition within 
the  sector,  it  may  well  have  increased  mimetic  behaviour.  Some  market  participants 
operators (whose own compensation is closely  linked to the relative, rather than absolute, 
profit and losses they generate) may indeed have come to the conclusion that it would be 
better  to  be  wrong  along  with  everybody  else,  rather  than  running  the  risk  of  being  right 
alone.  A  striking  example  of  rational  mimetic  behaviour  is  the  influence  that  hedge  funds 
enjoyed as "opinion leaders" and trend makers. By its nature, trend-following amplifies the 
imbalance  that  may  at  some  point  affect  a  market,  potentially  leading  to  vicious  circles  of 
price  adjustments  and  liquidation  of  positions.  Moreover,  more  and  more  participants  are 
able to access directly to financial markets, while the expertise to deal with a larger set of 
technical information is not evenly distributed. This may also reinforce the role of (cid:147)gurus(cid:148). 
Third, index management: as a fund management technique, it has proven very popular on 
equity  markets  and  may  have  contributed  to  exacerbating  movements  in  financial  asset 
prices.  Because  their  goal  is  to mimic  the  performance  of  indices,  (cid:147)passive  managers(cid:148)  try 
constantly to match the composition of their benchmark. They thus help to amplify market 
trends, buying more as the market rises and liquidating more as the market drops. It can be 
argued  that  index  funds  distort  the  price  of  the  targeted  indices  and  that,  as  a  result,  the 
indices end up creating rather than measuring performance.  
Last  but  not  least,  the  impact  of  risk  management  techniques  on  market  dynamics  is 
particularly enlightening with regard to the question of asset price overshooting. Value-at-risk 
calculations  have  become  a  crucial  element  of  the  standard  approach  used  by  market 
participants  to  evaluate  the  risk  inherent  in  their  market  activities  and  to  set  up  exposure 
limits. Of course, central banks and financial institutions should continue to encourage the 
use of these instruments. But, in times of financial turmoil, the growing use of sophisticated 
risk  management  techniques  by  financial  intermediaries  might  have  had  the  paradoxical 
effect  of  amplifying  the  initial  shock,  exhausting  liquidity  and  contributing  to  contagion 
                                                      
3  M.  BORDO,  B.  EICHENGREEN,  D.  KLINGEBIEL  and  M.  S.  MARTINEZ-PERIA:  (cid:147)Is  the  Crisis  Problem  Growing  More 
Severe?(cid:148), CEPR, September 2000. 
4 
  
BIS Review 28/2001
 phenomena.  Regardless  of  the  intrinsic  qualities  of  these  risk  management  tools,  we  see 
that  their  growing  use  in  the  same  fashion  by  all  market  participants  may  have  produced 
pernicious  effects. When  market  players  rely  on  converging  risk  evaluations,  they  tend  to 
take  the  same  decisions  at  the  same  time,  thus  amplifying  the  initial  shock  to  prices  and 
trading volumes. 
All  those  factors  have  one  consequence  in  common:  they  encourage  homogenous  behaviour  and 
reactions to the detriment of the diversity that is indispensable to the smooth functioning of financial 
markets.  
So, what are the possible policy implications of these recent patterns or trends on financial markets? 
My  opinion  is  that  financial  authorities  might  reflect  on  some  ways  to  foster  behavioral  diversity  in 
financial markets. As we have just seen before, some specific factors, such as short-termism, mimetic 
behaviour  etc(cid:133)  have  tended  to  make  (cid:147)contrarians(cid:148)  less  pro-active  on  financial  markets.  As  a 
consequence, in order to safeguard the smooth functioning of the markets, the diversity of participants(cid:146) 
behaviours  must  be  protected  or  even  reinforced.  This  necessary  diversity  should  logically  reflect 
natural differences in time horizons, strategies and reaction functions of market players. On this point, 
I  would  like  to  explore  amongst  many  others  three  possible  avenues  for  future  action  for  both 
monetary or financial authorities and the financial industry. 
First avenue: Strengthening the continuing efforts aiming at market transparency 
Experience  shows  that  uncertainty  and  incomplete  information  are  determining  factors  in  mimetic 
behaviour. These shortfalls in market transparency make mimetic behaviour seem rational to agents, 
who prefer to follow bigger participants, who are thought to be better informed, rather than develop 
their  own  analysis.  Therefore,  strengthening  transparency  continues  to  be  the  priority.  In  the  same 
vein,  attention  should  be  paid  to  expand  the  skills  and  competencies  required  by  the  analysis  of  a 
more detailed and complex information. Transparency is useless if only a limited number of experts 
are able to deal with it. 
One of the objectives of transparency is to enable better differentiation of borrower creditworthiness. A 
key feature of mimetic behaviour is that all borrowers are "tarred with the same brush". So when one 
emerging economy encounters difficulties, all neighbouring countries are treated in the same way (cid:150) 
regardless of their actual economic and financial situation. The same applies to businesses operating 
in  the  same  economic  sector.  Transparency  may  have  improved  since  the  Asian  crisis,  which  may 
explain why contagion effects are nowadays rather subdued (sees Argentina(cid:133)). Let us continue and 
reinforce these efforts. 
Second possible avenue: Taking into accounts the medium and long-term perspective of some 
market participants 
Some  investors,  such  as  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies,  have  to  invest  funds  in  order  to 
enable their customers to build up wealth over the medium and long-term, notably in preparation for 
retirement.  Consequently,  these  types  of  investors  are  supposed  to  behave  differently  from  traders 
and short-term investors, who are working on a very different time horizon. But at times it seems that 
they are all pushed to behave in much the same way, on the basis of a very short-term horizon. 
To  preserve,  and  even  restore,  their  specific  investment  approach,  these  investors  might  be  more 
shielded from excessive short-term pressures. This objective raises considerable difficulties, because 
it touches on the way in which the performances of medium and long-term funds and life insurance 
companies  are  assessed.  In  other  words,  this  objective  concerns  the  accounting  standards  and 
practices they use. It might imply that some rules and standards would be adapted to the medium and 
long-term horizon used by these entities. 
Third possible avenue: Diversify the risk management tools of financial institutions 
As I mentioned earlier, even the best techniques can have adverse effects when used on a standard 
basis  and  by  all  participants.  To  some  degree,  this  is  perhaps  what  has  happened  to  value-at-risk 
based  techniques,  which  have  been,  for  very  good  reasons,  massively  adopted  by  the  financial 
industry. Because they use more or less similar parameters and suffer from the same weaknesses (cid:150) 
for example, they did not take market liquidity into account adequately at the time of the 1998 crisis (cid:150), 
BIS Review 28/2002 
  
5
 such  tools  might  tend  to  give  converging  signals  to  those  that  use  them.  They  thus  encourage  the 
mimetic behaviour that I discussed previously. 
Of  course,  the  fact  that  some  market  participants  are  more  sophisticated  than  the  average  is  a 
guarantee  that  standardisation  will  remain  limited,  since  they  will  develop  techniques  that  are  little 
used by others. 
However, supervisors might help, and obviously are already helping to spread the idea that financial 
institutions should round out their current range of risk management tools to include extensive use of 
stress testing. This technique offers a better reflection of the varying situations of institutions and of the 
diverse  perceptions  that  institutions  have  of  exceptional  events.  The  application  of  stress  testing 
techniques  and  their  results  are  thus  inherently  more  diversified  than  those  resulting  from methods 
based on the value-at-risk approach. 
Conclusion 
3. 
Asset price developments are a serious cause of concern for central banks since they may impinge 
upon  both  price  and  financial  stability.  And  I  would  like  to  stress  what  I  feel  is  the  highly 
complementary nature of price stability and financial stability objectives: price stability is the bedrock 
on which financial stability is built. 
However, in my opinion, it is clearly not opportune to introduce asset prices into a monetary policy rule 
the  central  bank  should  commit  to  or  in  the  central  bank(cid:146)s  reaction  function.  Besides  the  reasons  I 
already mentioned, another issue is: which asset price should we take into account? Should we limit to 
stock prices, or extend the rule to housing prices, exchange rate, the cost of capital and so on? I would 
also not support the idea of introducing asset prices into the measurement of inflation or the definition 
of price stability. My first reason is that the nature of goods and services on the one hand, and assets 
on the other hand, is quite different, and so is the information contained in their prices. Another reason 
is that asset prices are highly volatile, much more volatile than other prices, especially in the current 
context of low inflation. Consequently, it might be difficult to implement a sound monetary policy by 
focusing  on  highly  volatile  indicators.  Finally,  it  is  highly  questionable  that  one  could  determine 
scientifically what an asset price equilibrium value is. Some participants will probably address some of 
these issues during the conference, which are of great interest for central bankers. 
I also provided  you with some examples of possible options monetary and financial authorities may 
take to help improve the functioning of the financial cycles. There is a lot of merit in embarking upon 
an overall review of regulatory, accounting and tax rules and regulations, as well as of codes of good 
conduct  and  good  practices,  and  finally  of  structural  developments  of  markets  themselves.  I  am 
convinced that this review, triggered not only by macro-financial considerations but also by dramatic 
micro observations, like ENRON, is likely to help identifying possible amendments and improvements 
that could, protect and enhance not only the integrity but also the behavioural and conceptual diversity 
which should make an essential characteristic of modern financial markets. 
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
  
BIS Review 28/2001
