 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: The Bank of England’s tasks through the 
Monetary Policy Committee 
Speech  by  The  Rt  Hon  Sir  Edward  George,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Engineering 
Employers Federation (EEF) Biennial Dinner, London, 12 February 2002.  
 Let me open my defence by trying to explain to  you what  we at the Bank - through the MPC - are 
tasked to do, and why. 
The task sounds straightforward. It is to set short-term interest rates with the consistent aim of hitting 
the  Government's  symmetrical  2½%  inflation  target  (on  a  precisely  defined  measure  of  retail  price 
inflation - RPIX). Now the reason we've been set that task is not - as some people imagine - because 
either we or the Government think that consistently low inflation is the be all and end all of economic 
life.  It  is  because  we've  learned  from  long  experience  that  consistently  low  inflation  is  a  necessary 
(though not in itself sufficient) condition for the sustained growth of output of the economy as a whole, 
for high levels of employment, and for rising living standards, which are more fundamentally the things 
that we are all seeking to achieve. 
Carrying out our task is not as straightforward as it sounds because there is not, of course, a simple, 
direct link between interest rates and the rate of inflation.  
Interest rates essentially affect the demand side of the economy. They do not directly influence the 
supply side, which depends upon a whole host of structural characteristics of the economy which are 
largely  beyond  the  direct  reach  of  monetary  policy.  What  we  have  to  do  in  managing  short-term 
interest  rates  is  to  keep  overall  demand  growing  broadly  in  line  with  the  underlying  -  sustainable  - 
supply-side capacity of the economy as a whole to meet that demand. In other words we are trying to 
maintain overall, macro-economic, stability in a much broader sense, in the medium- and longer- and 
not  just  the  short-term;  and  the  Government's  inflation  target  is  the  criterion  against  which  our 
success, or otherwise, in achieving that broader macro-economic stability is to be measured. 
Our problem is that we don't know with any great precision or confidence exactly what is happening on 
the supply-side - that's to say precisely what rate of growth we can hope to sustain. We don't know 
precisely either what is currently happening, or what is likely to happen looking forward over the next 
couple of years or so to overall, aggregate, demand. And we don't know precisely what the full impact 
of a change in interest rates will be on aggregate demand, or how long it will take before the full impact 
is felt. 
Ours is not a precise science. In fact it's more of an art than a science. And, although we bring as 
much economic and statistical science to bear as we can, we know that our forecasts, and indeed our 
policy judgements, are subject to a range  of error. They cannot be  accurate to every  last digit. We 
can't expect to hit the target all the time, but by consistently aiming to do so (and we do consistently 
aim  to  do  so  looking  2  years  or  so  ahead  -  whatever  you  may  have  read  in  some  recent  media 
commentaries) we can hope to get reasonably close to the target on average over time.  
Given the uncertainties, which are well illustrated by the sudden - and no doubt to some extent erratic 
- jump in the RPIX inflation rate in the year to January of 2.6% announced this morning, the overall 
results over the past decade since the recession of the early 1990's have been encouraging. Whether 
that's a result of good luck or good judgement I leave to others to decide - I'm more interested in the 
outcome. 
Since the Summer of 1992, inflation, on the target measure has averaged just 2.6% - and has been 
more stable than at any time in our history. And it has been consistently remarkably close to target 
over the past 5 years. 
But the even better news is that stable, low,  inflation has been accompanied by steadily increasing 
overall  output  and  employment,  and  by  a  progressive  fall,  until  very  recently  at  least,  in  the  rate  of 
unemployment. 
Over the same period, to the fourth quarter of last year, GDP growth averaged just under 3% a year - 
which  is  well  above  most  estimates  of  our  trend  rate  of  2¼%-2½%.  GDP  has  in  fact  grown  for 
38 successive  quarters  which  is  the  longest  period  of  sustained  quarter-by-quarter  growth  we  have 
enjoyed since quarterly records began in the UK in 1955. 
BIS Review 10/2002 
 1
 the  economy  - 
Employment has increased steadily from a low point of 25 ½ mn people in the Spring of 1993 to its 
current  level  of  28  mn.  And  the  rate  of  unemployment  fell  from  a  peak  of  over  10½%  on  the  LFS 
measure to around 5% last summer; while on the claimant count measure it fell from some 10% to just 
over 3%, which meant that the number of people claiming unemployment benefit, at under 950,000, 
was the lowest for 26 years. 
Now some of you - given what's happening to your own businesses - are probably thinking that I must 
come from a different planet. And yes, we do have a problem. Once you look beneath this apparently 
benign  surface  of  the  economy  as  a  whole,  you  find  very  substantial  differences  between  many 
internationally-exposed  sectors  of 
including  particularly  many  manufacturing 
businesses  -  which  have  recently  been  having  a  really  tough  time,  and  other  businesses  largely 
serving our domestic market which have been doing pretty well.  
There  are  two  main  reasons  for  the  pressures  affecting  the  internationally-exposed  sectors:  the 
synchronised economic slowdown over the past year or so in all major industrial countries, on the one 
hand, and the puzzling persistent weakness of the euro in foreign exchange markets not just against 
sterling but even more against the dollar, on the other. 
What that has meant for the UK manufacturing sector is that output in the year to November (the latest 
month  for  which  we  have  internationally  comparable  data)  fell  by  5.7%  and  employment  fell  by 
153,000 people, or by nearly 4%. For what it's worth, we were not alone. Comparable figures show 
that manufacturing output  fell by  over 13%  in Japan, by 6.7%  in the US  and by  4.3% in Germany, 
while  manufacturing  employment  fell  by  5%  in  Japan,  over  6½%  in  the  US  and  around  ¾%  in 
Germany.  
The frustrating thing is that, with the best will in the world, there was not much that either we at the 
Bank or the UK Government could have done to ward off the pressures on UK manufacturing, which 
had their origins abroad. 
That's fairly obvious where we are talking about the global slowdown - with negative growth last year 
of  about  1¾%  in  Japan  (fourth  quarter  on  a  year  earlier)  and  roughly  zero  growth  in  the  US  and 
Germany.  We  can  go  to  international  meetings  and  encourage  the  respective  authorities  there  to 
stimulate their economies, but there is nothing that we can do about it directly ourselves. 
It's perhaps less obvious that we cannot control the exchange rate. Many people think that we could 
weaken sterling against the euro quite simply by cutting our interest rate relative to the interest rate in 
the eurozone. But it's not as simple as that. The US has reduced its interest rate far more aggressively 
than the ECB over the past year or so, but the dollar is actually stronger against the euro than it was to 
begin with; and the same is true, to a lesser degree, of ourselves, here in the UK, with sterling also 
stronger against the euro (though weaker against the dollar) than it was a year ago. 
So there was nothing much - as I say - that we could have done directly to affect the weakness of the 
global economy and the resulting weakness of external demand on the UK. 
But  what  we  were  able  to  do  -  given  that  inflation  was  marginally  below  target  -  was  to  try  to 
compensate for that external  weakness by stimulating domestic demand here in the UK. The  Bank 
sought to do this by cutting interest rates to buoy up consumer spending. And the Government has 
stepped up its own spending, which is helpful in the present international environment. Although we 
couldn't avoid an overall slowdown altogether we have managed to keep the UK economy as a whole 
moving forward despite the recession in the internationally-exposed sectors of manufacturing. 
In fact overall GDP growth in the year to the fourth quarter of 2001, at 1.9%, was by some margin, the 
highest  among  the  G7  countries,  and  the  rate  of  UK  unemployment  is  currently  the  lowest,  on  a 
comparable  basis,  in  the  G7.  And  interest  rates  are  the  lowest  they've  been  in  this  country  in  a 
generation. 
Of  course  we'd  all  have  been  much  happier  with  better  balanced  growth.  Stimulating  domestic 
demand to offset the external weakness - the only option available to us - was very much a second 
best option, and not without its own risks, but it was better than doing nothing at all. That would have 
meant  a much  sharper  slowdown,  and  probably  recession,  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  And,  given 
what  was happening on the inflation front, it  would have meant a quite unnecessary  loss of overall 
output - and income and employment. In effect we took the view that unbalanced growth was better 
than no growth. 
The question now, of course, is where do we go from here. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2002
 There have recently been encouraging, but tentative, signs that the worst of the global slowdown may 
now be behind us, and that the US and Eurozone economies are now beginning to bottom out and are 
likely to pick up as we go through this year, perhaps to around trend. And the euro, which has, as I 
say, been puzzlingly weak since soon after its introduction 3 years ago, still seems likely to strengthen 
eventually.  As  it  becomes  clearer  that  the  international  environment  really  is  improving,  and  that 
external  demand  really  is  picking  up,  then  we  can  look  forward  to  better  balanced  and  generally 
stronger growth in our own economy. 
That  will  in  due  course  mean  that  domestic  demand  growth  -  and  consumer  demand  growth  in 
particular - will need to moderate if we are to avoid a build up of inflationary pressure. But let me be 
quite  clear  -  that's  not  a  warning,  still  less  is  it  a  threat,  as  some  more  excitable  commentators 
suggested earlier this year. It is - as I explained elsewhere recently - essentially a matter of arithmetic! 
It's  quite  possible,  even  quite  likely,  that  the  necessary  moderation  of  consumer  demand  -  and  I 
emphasise  the  word  moderation  -  will  come  about  of  its  own  accord,  given  the  gradual  increase  in 
unemployment we are currently seeing, and the build up of household debt. And provided it does not 
happen too abruptly, that would be the best possible outcome. But if consumer spending were not to 
moderate of its own accord, we would, in the context of strengthening external demand, clearly need 
at some point to consider raising interest rates to bring that moderation about. I don't suggest that the 
timing of any such move is imminent - that would obviously depend upon the timing and the strength of 
the recovery abroad. 
But for the time being, and whatever the precise numbers, the overall prospect for the British economy 
over the next couple of years is for output growth picking up to around trend and inflation to around 
target. And it was against that background that we left interest rates unchanged at our MPC meeting 
last week. 
I gather that the EEF was "deeply disappointed" at that decision, having been hoping for a cut. And I 
really do understand why, seeing things from the perspective of the manufacturing sector in particular, 
you might take a somewhat more pessimistic view of the prospects than did the MPC. We are - as I 
have explained - well aware of the degree of uncertainty inherent in any forecast, and do not pretend 
we have a crystal ball. But I can assure you that if, as we move forward, it seems likely that the overall 
economy will be weaker than we currently expect, and inflation lower, then we are prepared to reduce 
interest rates further, just as we stand ready to raise them if the overall economy, and inflation, appear 
likely to be stronger than we currently anticipate.  
Mr President, the past year or so has been a difficult time for the world economy which has made life 
increasingly difficult for the internationally-exposed sectors of our own economy - including large parts 
of manufacturing. And things could remain difficult for a time. But it won't last for ever. I am "cautiously 
optimistic" that the overseas environment will improve as we move through the year, and that by this 
time next year we here in the UK will have seen a return to somewhat stronger and better balanced 
growth, with unemployment not far above its recent lows, and with continuing low inflation. If that is 
indeed how things turn out, we will have weathered the international storm as well as anyone could 
reasonably have expected. 
So  it  is  in  the  hope  -  and  indeed  the  expectation  -  of  improving  prospects  for  the  internationally  - 
exposed sectors of British manufacturing that I ask you all now to rise and to join me in a toast to the 
Engineering Employers Federation, and it's President, Mr Paul Lester.  
BIS Review 10/2002 
 3
