 David Carse: Documentation risk, operational risk and the New Capital Accord 
Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Asia 
Pacific Loan Market Association Documentation Launch, Hong Kong, 24 May 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  able  to  speak  at  this  special  luncheon  to  launch  the  APLMA  Standard 
Documentation. I am told that there has been an unprecedented demand to attend this event. I would 
like to think that this reflects my own attractions as a speaker. But I am realistic enough to recognise 
that the real star of the show is the documentation itself; and your attendance here today reflects the 
level of interest in the outcome of the Association’s hard work in bringing the first phase of this project 
to fruition. 
My  purpose  today  is  to  stress  the  importance  of  good  documentation  and  to  place  it  in  the  more 
general  context  of  the  increased  regulatory  focus  on  operational  risk  that  is  a  feature  of  the  Basel 
Committee’s proposed New Capital Accord. I will also briefly describe the latest developments in the 
New Accord and bring you up to date on the revised timetable. 
The work of the Association 
It is over three years since I spoke at the inaugural luncheon of the Association in Hong Kong. I said 
on that occasion that the Association promised to become a vital part of the market infrastructure in 
Hong Kong. I noted particularly that the Association could play a role in three main areas: by acting as 
an  industry  representative  and  interlocutor  with  regulators;  by  establishing  common  standards  and 
documentation; and by promoting market transparency and efficiency. 
I am glad to say that the Association has delivered on its promises in each of these areas. Its website 
is, for example, now up and running, and is an important source of information for both members and 
non-members.  If  I  could  put  in  a  plea,  however,  it  would  be  for  more  market  statistics  to  be  made 
available on the parts of the website that are open to non-members - or honorary members such as 
the HKMA. 
In  its  representational  role,  the  Association  offered  very  helpful  comments  last  year  on  the  draft 
guideline that the HKMA prepared on the management of the risks associated with syndicated lending. 
Our initial draft generated a certain amount of heat. This was I think largely due to a feeling on the part 
of the industry that we had overplayed the inherent risks of syndicated lending. We therefore made it 
clear  in  the  final  version  of  our  guideline  -  which  we  issued  in  non-statutory  form  -  that  syndicated 
loans are not necessarily riskier than other types of lending. Indeed, the distribution of lending among 
participants is designed to reduce risk by sharing it. However, the very fact of sharing and the multiple 
parties involved can give rise to risks of their own - particularly of a legal nature - which means that the 
documentation in syndicated loans needs to be as watertight as possible. 
The benefits of standardised documentation 
This is why the Association’s initiative in producing a suite of standard loan documents is so important, 
and is probably the Association’s major achievement to date. Good documentation is not glamorous 
and is generally not fascinating reading, but it plays a vital role in underpinning the growth and liquidity 
of markets in financial products. 
This is not a theoretical proposition. The explosive growth in the derivatives market is to a large extent 
due to the role played by the International Swaps & Derivatives Association (ISDA) in the development 
and maintenance of its derivatives documentation. The most recent testimony to this is the emergence 
within the space of the last few years of a US$ 1 trillion credit derivatives market, built on the platform 
provided by the Standardised ISDA Default Swap Documentation. 
Why is standardised documentation such a  powerful driver of market growth?  The answer is that  it 
creates more predictability and certainty about the characteristics of the financial contract in question. 
BIS Review 33/2002 
 1
 People are better able to understand what their rights and obligations are under the contract, and this 
gives them more confidence to enter the market and transact. 
I would therefore encourage as many market participants as possible to begin to use the Association’s 
new documentation. This should help to boost the liquidity of the primary market in syndicated loans, 
but  it  should  also  serve  to  increase  turnover  in  the  secondary  market  which  is  still  relatively 
underdeveloped  in  Hong  Kong.  It  is  easier  to  trade  a  product  whose  terms  and  conditions  are 
homogeneous. 
The  Association’s  intention  to  move  on  in  the  second  phase  of  its  project  to  develop  standardised 
documentation for secondary loan trading will give further impetus to this market. This is something 
that the HKMA would particularly welcome since it would give banks greater flexibility to manage their 
loan portfolios and adjust their liquidity. 
Apart from its impact on the market as a whole, standardised documentation has clear benefits at the 
level of the individual firm. Lending banks are better protected against the risk that contracts will turn 
out to be unenforceable, and that they will be left with a credit exposure that they did not anticipate. 
Moreover, the whole process of negotiating loans becomes more streamlined. There should not be a 
need to haggle over the standard “boilerplate” of the loan agreement, so that resources can be freed 
up to concentrate on the issues that are unique to the particular transaction. 
The reduction in the number of idiosyncratic terms and conditions also means that the loan should be 
easier  and  safer  to  administer  after  the  loan  agreement  is  signed.  Operational  risk  is  therefore 
reduced. 
Nor are the benefits one-sided. Borrowers will benefit from documentation that is easier to understand 
because  it  is  written  in  (relatively)  plain  English  and  strikes  an  appropriate  balance  between  the 
interests  of  lender  and  borrower.  I  understand  that  the  Association’s  documentation  embodies  both 
these concepts. It is important that the borrower community should buy into the new documentation. In 
this connection, it is reassuring to know that the new documents are based substantially on those of 
the  Loan  Markets  Association  (LMA)  in  London.  These  have  already  been  widely  adopted  in  the 
European  loan  market  and  were  developed  in  association  with  the  UK  Association  of  Corporate 
Treasurers. I believe that it is also intended to seek input from the borrower community in Hong Kong 
to help further develop the documentation. 
Standardised documentation can therefore be described almost unreservedly as a good thing. This is 
subject to only two provisos. The first is that the basic documents will still need to be tailored to suit 
individual transactions - and the documents leave gaps for this to be done. This means that  banks 
should  not  be  lulled  into  a  false  sense  of  security.  Legal  advice  will  still  be  required  for  individual 
transactions, which should be good news for at least some of the people in this room. Second, the 
standard terms will need to evolve and be revised to take account of changing market circumstances 
and particular issues that arise. They may on occasions need to be tested in the courts. The recent 
experience  of  the  credit  derivatives  market  shows  that  ambiguities  can  arise  even  in  standardised 
documentation, and the sponsors and users of the documentation need to be alert to this and make 
changes where necessary. 
The link with operational risk 
But  the  bottom  line  is  that  standardisation  will  reduce  the  risk  that  something  goes  wrong  with  the 
documentation.  This  feeds  in  turn  into  reduced  legal  risk,  which  is  included  within  the  definition  of 
operational  risk  adopted  by  the  Basel  Committee.  This  defines  operational  risk  as  “the  risk  of  loss 
resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people or systems or from external events”. 
This  definition  focuses  on  the  causes  of  operational  risk  -  internal  processes,  people,  systems  or 
external  events.  Operational  risk  losses  can  be  further  classified  into  various  “event  types”  and 
assigned to each of a bank’s major business lines. By classifying losses in this way, banks are better 
placed  to  identify  appropriate  risk  controls  and  to  assess  the  impact  of  these.  In  its  draft  paper  on 
Sound Practices for the Management and Supervision of Operational Risk, the Basel Committee has 
identified seven main loss event types for operational risk. These include losses related to “execution, 
delivery and process management” within which resides documentation risk. 
Why has the Basel Committee decided to focus on operational risk? The answer lies in the growing 
diversity  and  complexity  of  banking  operations  arising  from  well-known  phenomena  such  as 
globalisation, the growing sophistication of financial technology and outsourcing. This has shown up in 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2002
 concrete form in the severe operational losses suffered by a number of international institutions. The 
Committee has therefore decided to take the lead in promoting greater understanding of operational 
risk and more consistency in the way in which it is measured, managed and controlled. 
This would by itself be relatively unobjectionable. However, the Committee has decided to put some 
teeth into its recommendations by proposing an explicit capital charge for operational risk in the New 
Capital  Accord.  This  is  controversial  for  two  reasons.  First,  there  is  no  firm  consensus  on  how  to 
measure the capital required to support operational risk - the Committee is currently proposing three 
approaches to this, which range from the very basic to the quite sophisticated. Second, the amount of 
capital  charge  that  the  Committee  originally  had  in  mind  was  considered  to  be  much  too  high.  In 
response  to  this,  the  Committee  is  proposing  a  reduction  in  the  proposed  target  of  operational  risk 
capital from 20% to 12% of minimum capital. A further reduction would potentially be available to those 
banks which use the more advanced measurement approaches. 
This is an example of how capital requirements can be used as an incentive to banks to improve their 
risk management practices. This, in our view, is where the real value of the New Accord lies. Among 
other things, the increased focus in the New Accord on internal ratings and risk-adjusted pricing might 
encourage a more sensible approach to the setting of margins on syndicated loans. I know that many 
banks in Hong Kong think that margins are now too low to fully compensate for expected loss, the cost 
of capital and operational costs. However, more rational pricing policies are currently hindered by the 
lack of consistency among banks on how they price risk and allocate capital. The New Accord should 
go some way to correct this. Under the internal ratings based (IRB) approach, banks will be required to 
use internal ratings as a factor in the pricing of credit risk. 
Progress on the New Accord 
As part of the process of creating incentives for better risk management, the Basel Committee is now 
engaged in a more general effort to recalibrate the New Accord to adjust the amount of capital charge 
under each of the main approaches. The aim of the revised set of proposals is that, on average, the 
total amount of capital required under the standardised approach to cover both credit and operational 
risk should be the same as that required under the current Accord to cover credit risk only. Modest 
capital relief would be available to those banks that move to the foundation IRB approach, with still 
more relief for those which opt for the advanced IRB approach. 
These, and other revised proposals of the Basel Committee, seem to have got the New Accord back 
on  track.  As  you  know,  the  project  has  suffered  significant  delays,  and  only  a  few  months  ago  the 
chances  of  it  going  ahead  seemed  to  be  only  50-50.  However,  a  number  of  the  logjams  have  now 
been cleared and a revised timetable has been announced. The intention is now to release a revised 
set of consultation papers in May of next year. This would take account of a further quantitative impact 
study which will be held later this year to test the calibration of the revised proposals. If all goes well, 
the final Accord would be released before the end of 2003 with implementation targeted for 2006. 
I know that there have been a number of false alarms on the New Accord, and that some of the banks 
here  today  may  be  inclined  to  take  a  wait-and-see  attitude.  To  such  banks,  I  would  say  that  the 
pendulum has swung in favour of implementation. It would therefore be sensible to plan on the basis 
that  the  New  Accord  will  now  go  ahead  on  the  revised  schedule,  and  that  it  will  include  an  explicit 
capital charge for operational risk. 
This  does  not  leave  all  that  much  time  for  those  banks  which  might  want  to  use  the  advanced 
approaches in the New Accord to measure credit or operational risk to get themselves ready. I would 
advise such banks to start their preparations now if they have not already done so. 
I would particularly recommend that banks begin to collect default data for credit risk and loss data for 
operational risk. A framework for doing the latter is set out in the Basel Committee’s Sound Practices 
paper in the form of the two-dimensional matrix I described earlier, which assigns losses arising from 
the various loss event types to the major business lines of the bank. 
Conclusions 
Operational risk has many facets, and the events which give rise to it cover a huge range from high-
frequency low-impact at one end to low-frequency high-impact at the other. There is a correspondingly 
wide range of controls and techniques that can be used to prevent or at least mitigate losses. Sound 
BIS Review 33/2002 
 3
 documentation lies at the more bread and butter end of the spectrum of such controls and techniques. 
But  it is no  less vital for all that. The Association  is therefore to be congratulated for its initiative in 
putting in place an essential building block in the form of the standardised documentation that is being 
launched  today.  This  will  help  to  promote  the  development  of  the  syndicated  loan  market  in  Hong 
Kong and in the region more generally, and will also serve the objective of enabling banks to better 
manage their operational risk. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2002
