 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The Malaysian banking industry - gearing up for excellence 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Malaysian 
Banking  &  Financial  Services  Summit  2002  -  “Gearing  up  for  excellence”,  held  in  Kuala  Lumpur, 
20 May 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The drive for excellence in the banking industry is a matter of priority, given that the well being of the 
banking  sector  is  integral  to  the  health  and  prosperity  of  the  Malaysian  economy.  The  advanced 
progress achieved in the restructuring and consolidation of our banking system in the recent year, has 
provided us with the strong foundation on which to develop and strengthen further the banking sector 
so that, it is better positioned to respond to the new and changing requirements of the economy and 
better  abled  to  become  more  efficient  and  competitive.  The  focus  of  our  strategies  has  therefore 
shifted  from  financial  restructuring  to  that  of  capacity  building  and  to  ensuring  the  soundness  and 
stability of the system. In essence, our drive for excellence in this phase of our development of the 
financial sector is to achieve an enhanced level of effectiveness and competitiveness in the banking 
sector. The issue before the banking industry is therefore the strategies and actions needed to gear up 
for this excellence. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be here again at this  year’s Malaysian Banking and Financial Services Summit 
organised by ASLI. This Summit indeed provides an opportunity for bankers and the private sector to 
discuss  the  issues  facing  the  banking  industry.  It  is  now  just  over  a  year  since  the  release  of  the 
Financial Sector Masterplan. It is therefore also a good time to undertake stock taking. Today, I would 
like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  progress  that  has  been  achieved  over  the  recent  year.  I 
would also like to discuss some of the critical issues in the strategies that are being adopted by the 
banking  institutions  in  charting  their  strategic  course  to  enhance  capacity  and  capability  to  achieve 
improved effectiveness and competitiveness. 
During the period of slower economic growth in 2001, following the global downturn in the technology 
sector,  the  banking  sector  clearly  demonstrated  its  resilience  and  underlying  strength.  During  this 
period, domestic sources of growth was important in sustaining the economy. Access to financing in 
this environment was therefore particularly important. The strengthened position of the banking sector 
in terms of quality of portfolio, capitalisation and profitability enabled them to continue to perform their 
intermediation  function  without  disruption.  The  banking  sector  generally  remained  profitable  and 
financially sound during this period. At the end of this first quarter, the risk weighted capital ratio was 
sustained at 12.5%. Profitability of the banking industry had also continued for the third consecutive 
year since the Asian crisis. While profits for the calendar year 2001 was affected by the higher level of 
provisioning during the year, the banking system has recorded a higher profitability of RM 2.4 billion in 
the first quarter of 2002. This represented a 72.3% increase over the preceding quarter. It reflected the 
lower loan loss provisions and the lower overhead expenses during the period. 
Of importance is that financing activities during this period was sustained. Financing by the banking 
system increased by 5.2% in 2001. Consumer credit extended by the banking system rose by 11.9% 
supporting  further  the  strong  consumer  spending.  Similarly,  loans  for  the  purchase  of  transport 
vehicles  recorded  a  strong  growth  of  27.4%  while  loans  for  the  purchase  of  residential  property 
expanded by 9.3%. There was also strong demand for loans by the retail sector reflecting the positive 
response to the low interest rate environment and the fiscal stimulus measures to spur the domestic 
economy. Loans disbursed to the manufacturing was also high accounting for 27.7% of the total loans 
disbursed. 
Important  aspects  of  enhanced  effectiveness  and  competitiveness  of  the  banking  institutions  is 
whether there is enhanced access, convenience, timeliness, and customised service, and whether the 
treatment by the banker and the quality and price of the service has improved. The changing nature of 
the industry has forced banking institutions to augment traditional product offerings with new products 
and services designed to be more solution oriented. However, in most cases, there are barriers, or 
reluctance, to phasing out the older products. The result is a widening of the total product array and 
confusion  for  customers  and  amongst  employees.  Competition  is  forcing  many  banks  to  take  a 
BIS Review 33/2002 
 1
 defensive  posture.  In  many  instances,  the  banking  institutions  do  not  have  the  financial  information 
systems capable of measuring the true profitability of individual products and services. There needs to 
be  an  ability  to  monitor  and  identify  the  products  and  customer  relationships  that  may  make  a 
questionable, or even negative, and those that contribute to earnings. 
As customers become increasingly aware of alternative solutions, institutions will understandably feel 
compelled to fill gaps in their offerings to maintain relationships. The critical success factor will be to 
ensure that this is done at a profitable pricing point - and that the addition of new products does not 
decrease the profit contribution of existing products and services. For these reasons, it will become 
increasingly important to have a comprehensive product or service profitability measurement system. 
A significant progress achieved in the recent year, is the enhanced network of delivery channels over 
and above the network of branches throughout the country. Eight domestic banking groups are now 
offering  the  full  range  of  banking  services  through  the  internet.  In  addition,  four  foreign  banks  are 
offering transactional internet banking services. 
Malaysia has had significant foreign presence in our banking system since the 1880s. Unlike several 
of the East Asian economies that have liberalised only recently, Malaysia has always had a significant 
foreign presence that has represented an important benchmark against which the domestic banks can 
be measured. While the domestic banking institutions have moved in a deliberate manner to build up 
their capabilities to expand and provide new services, foreign banks have for the most part been able 
to move much faster. The more innovative foreign banks have in fact continued to grow their business 
despite  the  branching  restriction.  They  are  able  to  leverage  on  the  research  and  development 
initiative, expertise and off-the-shelf products or inherit new delivery systems already tested by their 
parent banks. As such, the foreign banks have generally been better abled at identifying and reacting 
to changes in the market much faster than most domestic banking institutions. They are able to open 
new distribution channels that operate beyond the traditional delivery methods for financial services. 
Using new delivery systems and largely relying on new technologies, foreign banks have generated a 
more competitive environment for the domestic banks. Progress has nevertheless been achieved as 
the gap between domestic banks and foreign banks in terms of return on assets has narrowed. On an 
annualised basis, the ROA of the domestic banks has improved to 1.2% for the first quarter this year 
compared with 1.5% for the foreign banks. The gap was 1.1 percentage points in June last year. More 
importantly, the ROA of the top quartile of the domestic banks is even higher at 3%. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  these  competitive  and  challenging  times,  excellence  in  marketing  capabilities,  innovative  and 
efficient  distribution  network,  product  development  capabilities  and  customer  relationship  and  care 
require  the  ability  to  harness  these  different  competencies,  formulate  a  coherent  enterprise-wide 
strategy,  that  is  then  executed  effectively.  For  that  to  happen,  banks  have  to  look  within  their 
organisations  for  the  answers.  Before  resources  are  allocated,  before  a  marketing  direction  and 
strategy  is  established,  before  the  organisation  is  restructured,  the  bank  needs  to  decide  what  its 
strategic  business  will  be  within  the  context  of  its  markets  -  exactly  what  type  of  financial  service 
provider it will be. 
As part of the efforts to enhance efficiency and thus alleviate the level of competitiveness, significant 
strategies were initiated during the year. This included the consolidation, the rationalisation of common 
functions  and  operations  across  institutions  in  the  group,  outsourcing  of  non-core  activity  and 
leveraging on cross- selling of the products and services within the group. Following the consolidation 
of the 54 domestic banking institutions into ten banking groups, there was significant rationalisation of 
the  wide  range  of  common  functions  and  operations  across  institutions  in  the  group.  Six  banking 
groups have also now leveraged on cross-selling of their products and services across institutions in 
the group. 
A further impetus towards achieving this would be the merging of the commercial banking and finance 
company businesses in the banking group into one single entity. In this phase of development of the 
financial system, the commercial bank in the  banking group  would hold two  licences, a commercial 
banking  licence  and  a  finance  company  licence.  Under  this  arrangement,  the  domestic  commercial 
banking institutions would in addition to its banking business, be able to undertake finance company 
business. Commercial banks would therefore be able to leverage on the opportunities presented by 
the two licences to take advantage of economies of scale, diversify and strengthen their earning base 
and create an enhanced market presence. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2002
 Other  areas  of  improvement  in  respect  of  operational  efficiency  was  in  terms  of  the  average  core 
system  downtime  which  showed  that  for  the  first  quarter  this  year,  seven  domestic  banks  did  not 
experience any computer downtime or disruptions in their payments system matching the performance 
of  the  foreign  banks.  Of  significance  is  that  in  the  operations  of  the  ATM  networks  where  seven 
domestic banks reported downtime of not exceeding 2 hours compared to four foreign banks. In terms 
of turnaround time for retail loan applications, an indicator of customer service standards, during the 
final quarter of 2001, the top quartile domestic banks took 2 days on average to approve a housing 
loan application compared to 2.5 days taken by the top quartile foreign banks. Meanwhile, lost credit 
cards were replaced within a day for both the domestic and foreign banks in the top quartile. 
While the gaps in operational efficiency and productivity have improved, there remains great scope for 
further improvement particularly in areas where the domestic banks are evidently behind the foreign 
banks. For instance, productivity standards of the counter personnel as measured by the number of 
counter  transactions  per  counter  employee  for  the  domestic  banks  averaged  approximately  5,000 
compared with 11,000 for the foreign banks. Meanwhile, the number of domestic banks that did not 
experience any disruption in their retail deposit and loan initiation systems is significantly lower than 
that  of  the  foreign  banks.  In  terms  of  the  time  taken  to  approve  new  credit  card  applications  it 
averaged 8 days for the domestic banks compared with 6 days for the foreign banks. 
As can be seen from the scorecard, the consolidation programme for the domestic banking sector was 
a necessary pre-requisite to enhance the sector’s capacity to compete. Size alone however, is not a 
sufficient condition that  will result  in  producing efficient and competitive banks and  it  does  not  offer 
guarantee of success. Being a large bank is however, an important enabler to achieving enough scale 
to be able to invest in cutting-edge technology and management systems and to attracting the talent 
required to compete with the best players in the market. Domestic institutions need to be able to meet 
the range of products offered by foreign competitors. But the larger scale and wider range of activities 
will demand stronger management teams. With the completion of the merger programme in December 
2000, the banking groups are at various stages in building up their management team and enhancing 
corporate  governance.  A  number  of  measures  have  been  implemented  to  ensure  that  banking 
institutions’  Boards  and  key  committees  have  sufficient  representation  of  independent  directors  and 
that the Boards are encouraged to appoint qualified professionals to run the banks. Towards this end, 
Bank  Negara  has  liberalised  the  remuneration  package  of  the  chief  executive  officers  of  banking 
institutions and left it to the Boards to formulate appropriate packages to attract the necessary talent 
and determine their remuneration package. 
In the final analysis, a more competitive banking system should produce benefits to their customers 
and the business in terms of easy access, quality choices and competitive prices. An indicator of the 
improved level of competitiveness has been the narrowing of margins. During the  year 2001, gross 
interest margins of banking institutions have narrowed to 3.86% for the commercial banks from 4.3%. 
This  reflected  the  larger  reduction  in  the  average  lending  rate  vis  a  vis  the  average  cost  of  funds. 
Competitive  interest  rates  were  particularly  evident  for  mortgage  and  hire  purchase  loans  reflecting 
strong demand for credit for these sectors. The competitiveness of the domestic banks in terms of the 
gross interest margin has also improved. The gap between the domestic banks and foreign banks has 
narrowed from 0.92 percentage points as at the beginning of year 2000 to 0.69 percentage points as 
at the end of 2001. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Banks which do not make investments to take advantage of the new technology may find themselves 
losing customers to the better-quality or lower-cost products of banks that do. Investing in IT however, 
entails  high  cost  and  an  uncertain  payoff.  The  changes  brought  about  by  IT  -  new  products,  more 
sophisticated  customers,  changing  cost  structures,  and  enhanced  competitive  pressures  -  have  all 
combined  to  transform  the  structure  of  the  banking  industry.  And  with  further  development  of  new 
technology,  the  industry  will  likely  continue  to  evolve.  Advances  in  IT  have  also  resulted  in  new 
database technology  and  data-mining techniques that can expand  the range of services that  banks 
may offer their customers. The winners will be those who are able to harness on the capability of ICT 
in  making  strategic  decisions  -  in  terms  of  enabling  better  alignment  of  businesses,  enhancing 
organisational  capacity  and  capability  such  as  in  risk  management,  and  building  better  customer 
relationships. Today, decisions on ICT investments demand a more thorough assessment, extending 
beyond the cost implications, to include better human resource redeployment, more efficient work flow 
process and system interface, expandability of the technology platform and the level of complexity to 
users and customers. 
BIS Review 33/2002 
 3
 As banking institutions continue to adopt greater sophistication in the application of ICT, efforts must 
also  be  intensified  to  develop  ICT-savvy  employees  and  to  increase  customers’  understanding  and 
acceptance of the new approaches. While the efficiency of electronic means of doing banking, such as 
electronic kiosks and internet banking is valued, the  need for personal attention cannot be  ignored. 
While being engrossed in the technology race this is a factor that should not be neglected. Banking 
business after all is about cultivating relationships, which will become more challenging as customers 
become more well informed and knowledgeable as they move up the income curve. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In this period of rapid change, where change is the only constant, the successful organisations will be 
those that are able to recognise and identify the forces of change and how it affects them and make 
the required internal adjustments in response. This is by no means an easy task. Change mandates a 
need to create a new organisational mindset, capable of identifying opportunities and responding to 
them.  Such  organisations  will  be  those  comprising  individuals  with  a  clear  sense  of  mission  and 
empowerment  and  in  which  every  level  of  the  institution  is  motivated  and  focussed  on  achieving  a 
consistent set of corporate objectives. In a service organisation, it will always be the type of talent that 
is hired and retained that will make the difference. This is perhaps the greatest challenge facing banks. 
The  level  of  knowledge  and  expertise  is  vital  to  achieving  excellence  in  providing  the  required 
services. Currently, the skills and expertise are insufficient compared to the global providers. 
In  assessing  how  well  a  customer  is  served,  quality  is  a  key  factor  especially  when  dealing  with 
service operations. The role of quality, and its inter-relationships with operational aspects of a service 
organisation has been expressed in what has been described as the “service-profit chain” as follows: 
(i)  profit  and  growth  are  stimulated  primarily  by  customer  loyalty;  (ii)  loyalty  is  a  direct  result  of 
customer  satisfaction;  (iii)  satisfaction  is  largely  influenced  by  the  value  of  services  provided  to 
customers; (iv) value is created by satisfied, loyal and productive employees; (v) employee satisfaction 
results  primarily  from  high-quality  support  services  and  policies  that  enable  employees  to  deliver 
results to customers. 
Superior insights on customer needs will be an important advantage. This will involve recognising the 
diverse needs of the different customer segments. There is now already a discernable change in the 
pattern of customer behaviour. There is now an increasing shift towards a customer base that has less 
need for the standard distribution systems for most banking services. “If you build it, they will come” 
used to be the by-word for domestic banking institutions. A new branch  would  naturally attract new 
customers. Now, while customer relationship is of vital importance, these needs to be addressed in the 
context of the needs of the younger customers for retail services who do not want the “inconvenience” 
of a branch. The preference is for services as much as possible over the telephone, ATM or Internet. 
Writing  cheques  has  become  an  inconvenience.  This  new  generation  of  customers  have  their  own 
ideas of what a bank should be and successful banks need to respond to this change. 
A  further  segment  that  will  gain  in  importance  is  that  of  the  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs) given its growing significance in the economy. The main concern with respect to banking for 
the  SMEs  is  access  to  credit.  Among  the  issues  that  have  been  raised  is  the  quality  of  service 
delivered in terms of accessibility, the lack of responsiveness, lack of understanding of their business, 
poor  branch  level  service,  and  poor  turn  around  time.  Other  complaints  have  centered  on  the  high 
collateral  demands  and  the  general  perception  of  a  lack  of  willingness  to  extend  financing  by  the 
banking  institutions.  While  the  recent  year  showed  an  encouraging  trend  with  loans  to  SMEs 
increasing by 3.1%, the issue of the overall services provided to SMEs need to be enhanced. Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  has  undertaken  a  survey  through  the  banking  institutions  on  the  SME  profile  and 
requirements.  This  will  represent  an  important  database  for  the  development  of  a  comprehensive 
framework for the development of SMEs initiated  by  Bank Negara. The survey  findings will also be 
useful for the banking industry in formulating its own strategic plans with respect to this segment. With 
the advances in technology, banking institutions should be in a position to enhance access and quality 
of service for the SMEs. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  performance  of  the  banking  institutions  is  also  being  gauged  from  the  perspective  of  the 
shareholders. There are several significant issues affecting shareholders in the current environment. 
The global trend is being driven partly by an increased focus by banks on the financial performance 
and on the creation of shareholder value. In essence, the potential for growth lies in the value of their 
investments. This would be the right thing to do in the interest of long-term survival. There are enough 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2002
 examples of companies  around the  world  that had  lost track of the true reason for venturing  into a 
particular business and as a result, they find themselves no longer in the business. Despite narrowing 
of interest margins and high costs, the banking industry has been able to increase their returns with 
the average return to shareholders in 2001 being 14.5%. 
Banks, like other companies in a free market economy, have a responsibility to generate returns for 
their shareholders. It is in  the interests of the community as a  whole that they do so, otherwise  we 
could end up with a weak banking sector. But any company maximises shareholder value subject to 
constraints. These may be imposed by laws and regulations, or by the expectations of society. This 
means that if banks wish to preserve their reputation and the confidence of their customers, on which 
ultimately the strength of their franchise depends, they should act in a way that is seen to be fair and 
reasonable.  To  do  otherwise,  may  in  the  long-term,  be  inconsistent  with  the  objective  of  creating 
shareholder value. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me take a moment to say a few words on Islamic banking. Today, Islamic banking in Malaysia has 
firmed its position as a viable and vibrant component of the banking system. Bank Negara Malaysia 
has been in the forefront in providing the necessary and required infrastructure for the sector to grow 
further. From a market share of virtually nil a decade ago, Islamic banking has captured more than 8% 
of the assets of the banking system and is poised to reach 20% by 2010. We capitalized on the dual 
banking  system  which  we  believed  is  the  right  approach,  and  we  will  continue  to  embark  in  this 
direction.  There  are  currently  two  Islamic  banks  and  33  conventional  banks  with  Islamic  windows 
offering  the  full  range  of  Islamic  financial  services,  and  the  industry  has  recorded  commendable 
growth at an annual rate of 48% in terms of assets. At the end of March 2002, the assets mobilised by 
the  Islamic  banking  sector  amounted  to  RM  59  billion.  Deposits  and  financing  mobilized  during  the 
same period amounted to RM 48 billion and RM 30.1 billion respectively. 
Islamic  banking  in  Malaysia  is  now  at  the  threshold  of  entering  its  next  stage  of  development,  to 
expand  on  a  global  basis,  to  gain  greater  acceptance  as  an  effective  and  efficient  means  of 
intermediation  and  to  contribute  to  the  overall  wealth  creation.  Policies  and  measures  will  be 
formulated to not only increase the capacity and the capability of the Islamic banking players but also 
to  set  the  stage  for  Malaysia  to  be  an  active  player  in  global  developments  in  Islamic  banking  and 
finance. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
New players, new technologies, the push to globalisation and continuing deregulation are still driving 
change in the financial services industry. Productivity, service quality, customer satisfaction and cost 
are key factors that drive the performance in a financial services organisation. In this uncertain world, 
the  drive  towards  excellence  can  only  be  realised  if  strategic  steps  are  taken  today  to  enhance 
capability and capacity, thereby securing the well being of the banking industry and thereby the ability 
of the industry to contribute to the overall economic prosperity of our nation. 
On this note, Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish you a successful Summit. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 33/2002 
 5
