 Lee Hsien Loong: Best practices in insurance regulation 
Keynote address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  International  Insurance  Society’s  38th  Annual  Seminar, 
Singapore, 15 July 2002. 
 Introduction 
Mr Douglas Leatherdale, Chairman of the International Insurance Society, distinguished guests, ladies 
and gentlemen, 
I am pleased to address this seminar organised by the International Insurance Society. It is an honour 
for Singapore to be hosting this prestigious event again. 
These are trying times for the insurance world. Insurers are coping with extraordinary losses arising 
from the Sep 11 tragedy. High profile corporate scandals involving household names such as Enron 
and  Worldcom  are  depressing  market  sentiment.  Sustained  declines  in  asset  values  mean  that 
insurers can no longer rely on investment returns to offset poor underwriting results.  
New risks facing insurers 
Over  the  past  decade,  insurers  have  forayed  deeper  into  financial  markets  in  pursuit  of  higher 
profitability - both as investors and as intermediaries.  
As investors, they are exposed to the vagaries of volatile capital markets. As intermediaries, they are 
taking  on  new  financial  risks.  Insurers  investing  in  credit  derivatives  effectively  take  on  bank  credit 
risks.  Insurers  who  underwrite  professional  indemnity  policies  for  bank  directors  and  officers, 
effectively assume banks' operational risks. 
Insurance company managers must keep abreast of these developments. They must understand how 
their companies' risk profiles have changed, and how new activities can have opposing effects on both 
sides  of  the  balance  sheet.  All  insurance  industry  professionals  need  to  become  more  astute  at 
assessing risks, and competency needs to be upgraded at all levels in the company. 
Regulators must  also keep  pace.  In  supervising  individual  insurers,  regulators  need  to  look  beyond 
insurance  risks  and  protecting  policy-holders.  From  a  broader  systemic  perspective,  greater 
engagement  of  insurers  in  financial  markets  raises  important  questions  concerning  their  impact  on 
financial stability. How well are insurers managing this new portfolio of risks? What are the spillover 
effects of an insurance company failure in this environment of inter-linkages? 
Traditionally, regulators associate systemic risk with the failure of large banks. The events of Sep 11 
have  turned  the  spotlight  onto  the  importance  of  the  insurance  industry  as  a  whole,  and  even  of 
individual  insurance  players.  A  number  of  recent  failures  and  near  failures  of  insurance  companies 
have  revealed  just  how  wide  an  economic  impact  insurers  have.  The  high-profile  collapse  of  a  few 
major insurers such as HIH and Independent, left businesses without essential insurance cover, and 
critical  services  without  professional  indemnity  coverage.  Economic  activity  in  these  sectors  might 
have  ground  to  a  halt,  had  the  government  not  stepped  in.  But  by  stepping  in,  the  governments 
created a new source of moral hazard. 
These  issues  have  been  extensively  debated.  The  IMF  has  concluded  that  the  insurance  industry, 
while  not  systemically  critical,  has  taken  up  a  definite  systemic  relevance.  We  need  to  understand 
better  the  nature  of  insurance  companies'  financial  activities  and  their  possible  impact  on  global 
financial stability. 
In Singapore, the supervisors of banks, insurance companies and securities houses are housed under 
one roof in MAS. This has given us a head-start in dealing with current industry trends, with financial 
product boundaries blurring and insurance companies crossing over into banking and capital market 
territory. The pressure is on to bring integrated supervision to an even deeper level. 
BIS Review 44/2002 
 1
 Singapore’s response 
In today's new risk landscape, MAS aims to develop sound and efficient markets where risk can be 
effectively spread and mitigated. We need to make sure that best practices prevail in the management 
as well as regulation of insurance companies. Strong players will make for a resilient industry. 
Two  years ago, Singapore opened up completely  the direct life and general  insurance market. The 
earlier  closed-door  policy  had  insulated  both  local  and  foreign  incumbents  from  competition  and 
engendered complacency. Creating an open and competitive environment was the first step to raising 
standards and strengthening resilience. 
Since we opened up the industry, insurers in Singapore have taken various measures to enhance their 
competitiveness.  They  have  sharpened  their  business  focus,  moved  into  higher-value  added  and 
higher-growth areas and improved professional standards. This will stand our insurers in good stead to 
meet new challenges and opportunities. 
Meeting new challenges and opportunities 
Entering new growth areas 
Globalisation  of  markets,  advances  in  technology,  changing  demographics  and  socio-economic 
patterns  are  some  trends  that  will  result  in  new  or  changing  needs  for  insurance  protection  and 
financial  planning.  Insurers  should  hone  their  skills  in  these  new  areas  and  take  advantage  of 
emerging opportunities. 
One  important  opportunity  is  in  health  insurance,  especially  financing  the  health  care  needs  of  the 
aged. This is a challenge that is facing governments around the world. It is no different in Singapore 
where the population is aging rapidly. Health insurance can play a greater role in financing old age 
medical  care  than  it  now  does.  MAS  plans  to  introduce  in  2003,  a  regulatory  framework  for  this 
specialized area of insurance. We will be seeking feedback from local industry on this. 
The government recently  announced the  launch of  Eldershield, a  national long-term care insurance 
scheme  to  be  underwritten  by  private  insurance  companies.  Eldershield  provides  a  basic  level  of 
benefits, which many Singaporeans will wish to supplement. This will create opportunities for insurers 
to structure and market appropriate Long-Term Care policies. 
Credit insurance and political risk insurance are two other promising areas. Globalisation and lower 
barriers  to  cross-border  trade  will  spur  continued  internationalization  of  trade  and  support  strong 
demand for credit and political risk insurance. 
Being located in Asia, a region that has traditionally witnessed strong trade flows, Singapore is well-
placed to develop further as a hub for such activity. Several new specialist insurers and brokers have 
in  recent  months  set  up  a  presence  in  Singapore,  including  financial  guarantee  insurers  and  trade 
credit insurers and brokers. 
Another growing area of business is bancassurance activity. Life insurance products sold through the 
bancassurance  channel  now  account  for  25%  of  new  life  insurance  business.  Two  new  specialist 
bancassurance players have established operations in Singapore, and contributed significantly to this 
trend. 
Increasing resilience 
Amidst  these  new  opportunities,  more  than  ever,  we  now  need  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the 
insurance  industry.  The  MAS  has  for  some  time,  been  working  with  the  insurance  and  reinsurance 
industry to raise standards of corporate governance,  internal controls and  professionalism. Many  of 
our  companies  are  already  at  international  best  practice  standards.  However,  as  in  all  countries, 
practices vary, and  we aim to have  all our insurers to attain best practice standards by  2005 if not 
earlier. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2002
 Risk-based supervision 
In 1998, MAS embarked on a strategic change in our regulatory philosophy. We moved from a bottom-
up, audit-based inspection approach to a top-down, risk-based supervisory approach. This approach, 
being prospective in nature, is well suited to today's world of new and increased risks. 
Risk-based supervision evaluates the major risks faced by an institution and assesses how well these 
risks are being mitigated. This will help both regulators and companies to identify and, importantly, to 
pre-empt problems. Well-managed institutions will be given greater flexibility, while less well-managed 
ones will be subject to closer scrutiny. 
Singapore's risk-based supervisory framework for insurers 
The basic framework for risk-based supervision of insurers in Singapore has been set up. 
MAS is now developing risk profiles for each Singapore-based insurer. We have devised a five-step 
"supervisory ladder of intervention", and will use it to classify insurers according to their risk rating. The 
five steps range from "Normal" to "Viability at Risk" and terminally, "Winding Up or Closure". 
Insurers assessed to be on the more critical steps will receive more stringent and intrusive supervisory 
actions. MAS draws the analogy between the risk classification of an insurance firm and the medical 
assessment of a patient's health. If an insurer is classified as being on the "Viability at Risk" step, it will 
probably be admitted to MAS' Intensive Care Unit. 
However,  MAS  is  not  regulating  for  a  no-failure  regime.  We  encourage  industry  consolidation.  In 
today's  competitive  environment,  size  brings  financial  strength  and  facilitates  diversification  on  both 
sides of the balance sheet. But it is not possible, and also not desirable, to operate on the basis that 
we will never, under any circumstances, allow a financial institution to fail. That way lies moral hazard. 
leadership  and  set  consistent  corporate  values.  Management 
Improving corporate governance and internal controls 
A  risk-based  supervisory  approach  relies  heavily  on  the  strength  of  company  leadership  and 
management. Corporate governance is thus critical. MAS expects the Board of Directors to provide 
clear  strategic 
teams  must 
operationalise these strategies while upholding the spirit of the corporate values. 
Given the nature of the insurance business, corporate values need to be guided by risk management 
concerns. What is the company's risk appetite? What should be its risk tolerance limits? What is the 
level of risk management skills in the company? How profitable is the underwriting of various classes 
of risks? Apart from answering to shareholder interests, the board of directors and management also 
have a fiduciary duty to their policy-holders. Sound internal risk management and controls are needed 
to protect policy-holders' interests. 
Currently,  our  regulations  oblige  the  Appointed  Actuary  to  take  responsibility  for  monitoring  the 
financial soundness of life insurance companies. But the Board and management cannot just sit back 
and rely on the actuaries. Board and management themselves must acquire a better awareness and 
understanding of actuarial assessment. 
We need to set clear expectations of the role that the Board and management play, in ensuring the 
financial soundness of their companies. MAS will work with industry and professional associations to 
set out guidelines for this important area. 
In  Singapore,  we  established  the  Corporate  Governance  Code  for  listed  companies  last  year.  MAS 
has tightened corporate governance standards for local banks. We recently required auditor rotation 
for local banks, a policy which we had been considering for some time, even before the latest wave of 
accounting scandals. 
For insurance companies, we are currently working on a draft corporate governance framework. MAS 
is consulting the industry and will issue guidelines for internal governance for local boards of directors, 
as well as guidelines for the roles and responsibilities of Principal Officers of insurance companies.  
The guidelines for internal governance will deal with the main responsibilities for the Board, stress the 
importance of transparent and performance-linked compensation; emphasise the need for the integrity 
of financial information; encourage fair dealings with the members of the public who are policy-holders 
and urge insurers to engage in regular communications with policy-holders. 
BIS Review 44/2002 
 3
 Life insurance companies are entrusted with the management of long term funds. We are considering 
more  rigorous  corporate  governance  requirements  for  life  insurers. We  intend  to  formally  introduce 
and enforce the corporate governance framework for the insurance industry later this year. 
Imposing risk-based capital requirements 
In a world of new and increased risks, appropriate levels of capitalization are necessary. Insurers face 
mounting complexities, given the increased volatility of asset risks and the diversity of liability risks. 
In  Singapore,  as  in  many  other  countries,  the  existing  statutory  framework  of  solvency  and  capital 
adequacy for insurers is essentially a "one-size-fits-all" approach. This is clearly no longer appropriate, 
since  different  insurers  have  acquired  different  levels  of  exposures  to  financial  risks  and  developed 
different underwriting specialties. 
In banking, a risk-based capital approach is well-established. There are clear guidelines from the Bank 
for International Settlements, and a new standard is undergoing extensive worldwide consultation.  
For the insurance industry, the same level of regulatory consensus does not as yet exist. MAS has 
formed two work groups comprising industry practitioners, representatives of professional associations 
and regulators to develop risk-based capital models for life and non-life insurance. 
Besides refining the treatment of liability risk, we will also look at capital charges for asset risks. This 
will help to level the playing field between banks and insurance companies, and minimise opportunities 
for capital arbitrage. The new capital requirements should also provide an early indicator of financial 
weaknesses,  and  thus  facilitate  progressive  intervention  by  regulators.  These  risk-based  capital 
requirements will be introduced by end-2003. 
their 
insurance  professionals  should  constantly  upgrade  both 
Raising professional standards in insurance 
To improve corporate governance and internal governance, it is critical to raise insurance professional 
standards.  All 
technical  and 
management skills. 
In  2000,  MAS  appointed  a  private  sector  committee,  the  Committee  for  Efficient  Distribution  of  Life 
Insurance  Products  (CEDLI)  to  recommend  minimum  standards  of  transparency,  competition  and 
efficiency  in  the  distribution  of  life  insurance  products.  MAS  accepted  CEDLI's  recommendations  to 
enhance the sales advisory process and professional training. 
To  date,  industry  practitioners  have  adopted  these  minimum  standards  enthusiastically.  Many  have 
gone  further,  and  set  their  own  requirements  that  exceed  the  prescribed  standards,  because  they 
realised  that  this  makes  them  more  competitive  in  the  market.  This  has  improved  the  level  of 
professionalism  among  life  insurance  agents  and  greatly  enhanced  the  reputation  of  the  industry, 
which in turn, is helping the industry to attract higher-calibre talent. 
Training and competency requirements should apply across-the-board to all insurance professionals, 
and not just to life insurance intermediaries. MAS is currently reviewing the manpower capabilities of 
the insurance industry and will identify the main competency gaps and areas of weakness. Apart from 
upgrading professional competency, consideration will also be given to the technical competency of 
company  directors and other staff involved  in the  insurance business. We will  work with  industry to 
formulate  an  insurance  manpower  development  strategy.  We  envisage  industry  players,  training 
providers  and 
that  will  enhance 
professionalism in the insurance industry.  
to  develop  programmes 
institutions  co-operating 
tertiary 
Conclusion 
MAS will continue to work together with the insurance industry to achieve international best practices 
and standards. Over the past two years, MAS has worked hard to build a closer partnership with the 
financial sector. We will continue to promote an open environment and consult actively with the private 
sector for its views. The relationship between the regulator and the regulated should be arms length 
but  not  adversarial.  The  regulator  has  to  be  firm,  but  also  friendly.  Market  practitioners  can  help 
regulators generate ideas, keep abreast of market developments, anticipate global trends and review 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2002
 our financial sector strategies. Candid, thoughtful feedback, including dissenting views, go a long way 
to ensure that policies are pragmatic and remain relevant. 
We hope that such a regulatory environment will help to develop well-managed insurers in Singapore, 
who  will  take  up  new  challenges,  and  play  a  more  active  and  productive  role  in  upgrading  our 
insurance industry, and thus our financial sector as a whole. 
I wish you fruitful deliberations. 
BIS Review 44/2002 
 5
