 Tony Latter: Who or what determines monetary policy in Hong Kong? 
Speech by Mr Tony Latter, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, to the Hong 
Kong  seminar  on  Financial  Services  in  Asia,  organised  by  Lovells  and  the  Pacific  Rim  Advisory 
Council, 13 May 2002. 
 You  may  think  this  a  rather  naive  question,  to  which  the  answer  is  obvious,  but  my  experience  is 
otherwise. 
Who is responsible? 
Let's start with the "who" question. I have encountered people who variously believe the answer to be 
the  Beijing  government;  the  People's  Bank  of  China;  the  US  Federal  Reserve  Board;  some 
combination of HSBC, Standard Chartered Bank and the Bank of China (which are the note-issuing 
banks in Hong Kong); the Hong Kong Legislative Council; the Hong Kong Government; or the Hong 
Kong Monetary Authority. 
Article 110 of the Basic Law – often referred to as Hong Kong's constitution – includes the statement 
that "The Government of Hong Kong shall, on its own, formulate monetary and fiscal policies". This 
makes it clear that neither the Mainland government nor the PBoC has any powers in relation to our 
monetary policy, and that the policy responsibility lies firmly with Hong Kong's own government. Since 
China  resumed  sovereignty  over  Hong  Kong  some  five  years  ago,  there  has  been  absolutely  no 
erosion of this principle.1 
As regards the Federal Reserve, although it is true to say that under the present regime chosen for our 
monetary  policy  –  namely  a  currency  board  with  the  US  dollar  as  anchor  currency  –  the  Fed's 
monetary  policy  has  a  major  and  direct  influence  on  monetary  conditions  in  Hong  Kong,  it  was 
certainly  not  the  Fed  which  determined  that  Hong  Kong  should  operate  a  monetary  policy  of  this 
nature. It was Hong Kong's choice, and we do not require any permission from Washington or New 
York to continue or discontinue it. 
With  regard  to  the  Legislative  Council,  while  members  of  LegCo  take  a  keen  interest  in  monetary 
policy and related issues, and although the HKMA maintains a dialogue with LegCo, more particularly 
with its Financial Affairs Panel, over matters of common interest, LegCo has no locus under existing 
laws to determine monetary policy. 
With regard to the three note-issuing banks, that particular status confers no ability to affect monetary 
policy. The banks issue notes in response to the public's wishes to exchange deposits into currency, 
and are required to pay over backing to the Exchange Fund in such manner as the Financial Secretary 
specifies - which has since 1983 been the equivalent value in US dollars calculated at the fixed rate of 
7.80. Within this framework the volume of note issuance itself is neutral in terms of monetary policy. 
There was a time back in history when it could have been claimed with some justification that HSBC, 
as it is now known, which then served as clearing bank to the banking system, wielded considerable 
influence  over  monetary  conditions,  but  that  capability  was  dismantled  progressively,  by  the 
requirement introduced in 1988 for HSBC to hold a countervailing balance with the Exchange Fund, by 
the creation of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority in 1993, and by HKMA's subsequent assumption, in 
1996, via the Exchange Fund, of the role of settlement institution for the local payments system. 
Government and Monetary Authority 
So, having dismissed the possible involvement of a number of other players, we are left with the clear 
conclusion that it is in essence the Hong Kong government which determines monetary policy. More 
specifically, the authority rests in the first instance with the Financial Secretary, since the Exchange 
Fund Ordinance places him in control of the Exchange Fund, which in effect provides the resources for 
                                                      
1   For  a  discussion,  in  lighter  vein,  of  the  relationship  between  HKMA  and  other  central  banks,  including  PBoC,  see  the 
Viewpoint article "Central Bank Cooperation", 8 November 2001, at www.info.gov.hk/hkma/eng/viewpt. 
BIS Review 31/2002 
 1
 the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  He  is,  however,  obliged  to  consult  the  Exchange  Fund  Advisory 
Committee in the exercise of his control of the Exchange Fund. 
The Exchange Fund Ordinance also provides for the Financial Secretary to appoint a person as the 
Monetary Authority, to assist him in the performance of these and certain other functions. Moreover, 
the  Financial  Secretary  delegates  various  of  his  duties  under  the  Exchange  Fund  Ordinance  to  the 
Monetary Authority. 
In fact, the Monetary Authority is a public officer and therefore formally just a single person, but the 
Ordinance provides for other persons to be engaged to assist him in the discharge of his duties. This 
gives rise to the institution which is known as the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. 
The upshot of all this is that it is the Financial Secretary who ultimately determines monetary policy, 
albeit having taken advice from the Advisory Committee. And it is the Monetary Authority who carries 
out monetary policy on a day-to-day basis and in accordance with any delegations to him. This does 
not mean, however, that the Monetary Authority is divorced from the formulation of policy – rather the 
opposite in practice, since the Monetary Authority has a major influence on the determination of policy 
through close liaison with the Financial Secretary and membership of the Advisory Committee. 
Although  the  Hong  Kong  arrangement,  and  in  particular  the  status  of  our  Monetary  Authority,  is 
unusual internationally  and may possibly  be unique  when compared to the more typical set-up of a 
central  bank  established  as  a  distinct  corporate  entity,  the  process  of  monetary  policy  may  not  in 
practice be greatly different from that in other jurisdictions – with the broad framework being set by the 
government and with the central bank executing the policy in a transparent and accountable fashion. 
However,  we  do not have  such a  precisely  defined framework of autonomy for  the central bank as 
exists in some other jurisdictions, which is sometimes regarded as a necessary formal safeguard to 
monetary stability. The distinction may be less important under our firmly rule-based currency board 
system than it might be in other circumstances. 
Legal parameters 
Let's turn now to the "what" question. 
Although,  as  noted  already,  the  Basic  Law  clearly  states  that  the  Hong  Kong  government  shall 
determine  its  own  monetary  policy,  it  also  sets  some  very  important  parameters  within  which  that 
freedom can be exercised. Thus:- 
"The  Hong  Kong  dollar,  as  the  legal  tender  in  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region,  shall 
continue to circulate." (Article 111) 
"No  foreign  exchange  control  policies  shall  be  applied  in  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative 
Region.  The  Hong  Kong  dollar  shall  be  freely  convertible.  …….The  Government  of  the  Hong  Kong 
Special  Administrative  Region  shall  safeguard  the  free  flow  of  capital  within,  into  and  out  of  the 
Region." (Article 112) 
"The  Exchange  Fund  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region  shall  be  managed  and 
controlled by the government of the Region, primarily for regulating the value of the Hong Kong dollar." 
(Article 113) 
"The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall follow the principle of keeping the expenditure 
within  the  limits  of revenues  in  drawing  up  its  budget,  and  strive  to  achieve  a  fiscal  balance,  avoid 
deficits  and  keep  the  budget  commensurate  with  the  growth  rate  of  its  gross  domestic  product." 
(Article 107) 
These stipulations confirm the continuance of the Hong Kong dollar as an independent currency; they 
confirm that the Exchange Fund is available to regulate the exchange rate; they rule out the use of 
exchange controls; and they provide some comfort that deficit fiscal financing should not attain a scale 
that would pose a serious threat to monetary stability. 
Choice of regime 
But within these parameters the exact monetary arrangements are not prescribed. We have chosen to 
operate a currency board with a fixed rate against the US dollar. I have recently written and spoken at 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2002
 some length on the rationale behind this choice and do not intend to repeat all of that today.2 But let 
me  just  reiterate  one  of  my  principal  contentions  –  namely  that  monetary  policy,  which  includes 
exchange  rate  policy,  cannot  determine  an  economy's  competitiveness  outside  the  relatively  short 
term.  Competitiveness  is  determined  by  the  intrinsic  efficiency  of  the  economy,  which  is  in  turn  the 
result of investment, productivity, structural evolution, and so on; these may in turn be amenable to 
influence by government policy in various fields, but the role of monetary policy is to provide a stable 
monetary environment within which those longer-term forces can operate most propitiously, and not 
itself to attempt short-term fine-tuning. 
There is one further aspect of this debate which I should like to address, since it seems to be the focus 
of increasing attention. It is the issue of what should or should not be done with the Hong Kong dollar, 
were  the  renminbi  to  move  more  flexibly  against  the  US  dollar,  and,  more  particularly,  whether  we 
should consider pegging the Hong Kong dollar to the renminbi. 
Adjustment of competitiveness 
Prices in Hong Kong are observed to be flexible in both directions in response to market forces. One 
of  these  forces  is  the  influence  of  competing  prices  from  the  Mainland;  our  research  indicates  that 
there is a gradual process of convergence at work (which includes rises in prices across the border as 
well as falls  in  Hong Kong), although this may be  weaker than some observers claim and certainly 
does not mean that prices will or should eventually equalise completely.3 Moreover, prices of tradables 
in Hong Kong are found to be particularly adept at adjusting to movements in the effective exchange 
rate.  In  other  words,  if  our  prices  become  misaligned  against  foreign  prices  because  of  some 
movement in exchange rates (such as by the US dollar moving against other  major currencies and 
pulling  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  with  it),  Hong  Kong  prices  are  quick  to  adjust  in  order  to  restore 
competitive equilibrium. At the same time, it appears that prices in the Mainland are, by international 
standards, also quite flexible. 
Two conclusions can be drawn from these observations. One is that prices between Hong Kong and 
the Mainland are well able to adjust relative to one another without any assistance from the exchange 
rate.  The  other  is  that,  if  the  exchange  rate  were  to  move  around  and  create  disequilibria  between 
prices, domestic prices would adjust to offset that disequilibrating tendency. In other words, it seems 
unlikely  that  shifts  in  relative  price  competitiveness  would  be  greatly  different  under  conditions  of 
exchange  rate  variability  than  without  it  –  there  would  simply  be  a  different  mix  between  shifts  in 
relative domestic prices and the exchange rate effect. 
It is evident anyway that the Hong Kong economy complements the Mainland's more than it competes 
with it. Hong Kong benefits from a buoyant Mainland economy. If this buoyancy is judged to be best 
sustained by some increased flexibility in the renminbi exchange rate – and I make no judgement here 
as to whether that would or would not be the case – then Hong Kong would be likely to benefit. 
What I have suggested so far is that the exchange rate between the two currencies is probably not 
something which we need worry greatly about in terms of economic impact via competitiveness and 
trade. Thus Hong Kong ought not to need to take any particular defensive or offsetting action if the 
renminbi were to move more widely against the US dollar. 
There is, however, an important qualification to that conclusion. If financial markets believe differently, 
and  react  to  those  beliefs,  we  may  see  disturbances  in  markets  as  a  result  of  actual  or  rumoured 
developments in the Mainland's exchange rate policy. We have indeed already witnessed some such 
behaviour from time to time when reports have circulated about imminent adjustments to the renminbi. 
Yet, as on those occasions, so on future ones I would expect our markets to cope satisfactorily with 
such  disturbances  –  essentially  through  the  currency  board's  adjustment  mechanism  whether  to 
upward  or  downward  pressures  on  the  HK  dollar  exchange  rate  –  and  economic  fundamentals 
ultimately to prevail. 
                                                      
2   See  "Why  blame  the  peg?",  available  on  the  HKMA  website  (www.info.gov.hk/hkma/eng/speeches)  and  forthcoming  in 
HKMA Quarterly Bulletin, May 2002. 
"Price convergence between Hong Kong and the Mainland", by Jiming Ha; to be available shortly in the HKMA research 
memorandum series. 
3 
BIS Review 31/2002 
 3
 Fixing to the renminbi? 
However, the conclusion that we should not be too agitated about the HK dollar-renminbi exchange 
rate  begs  a  further  question.  If,  indeed,  the  bilateral  exchange  rate  arrangement  does  not  of  itself 
matter  much  in  the  long-term  determination  of  price  competitiveness,  why  not  anyway  tie  your 
currency  in  some  way  to  that  of  your  closest  neighbour  or  major  trading  partner,  as  a  matter  of 
convenience,  in the expectation of savings  in transaction costs and  of other synergies  which  would 
benefit both sides, independently of any arguments about price competitiveness? 
There  are  some  fairly  compelling  arguments  in  favour  of  such  an  arrangement.  The  elimination  of 
currency exposure and transaction costs would doubtless be welcomed. Prima facie one would expect 
resultant gains in the generation of mutually beneficial trade. One may recall that this was one of the 
principal  factors  justifying  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  For  Hong  Kong,  however,  both  the  United 
States and Mainland China are major trading partners, so there would, in this context, be offsetting 
effects from merely switching the peg from one currency to the other. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  some  significant  examples  of  economies  which  retain  a  currency 
independent  of  that  of  their  main  trading  partner  without  obvious  disadvantage.  Take  Canada  and 
Mexico  for  example.  The  United  States  is  a  considerably  more  important  trading  partner  to  both 
Canada and Mexico than is China to Hong Kong, and the financial linkages are probably stronger too, 
but the Canadian dollar and Mexican peso remain separate from the US dollar, and the Canadian and 
Mexican economies do not appear to be disadvantaged. Other pertinent examples might be the United 
Kingdom's dependence on the euro area, Ireland's dependence on the United Kingdom, Switzerland's 
links  with  Germany,  and  so  on.4  Moreover,  many  of  these  other  currency  pairs  have  exhibited 
considerable fluctuations when compared with the stability of the cross rate between the renminbi and 
the Hong Kong dollar in recent years, indicating that exchange rate variability may not be an obstacle 
to the continuing expansion of mutually beneficial economic ties. On this evidence there would be no 
obvious advantage in a closer link between the Hong Kong dollar and renminbi. 
In our particular case, there is a further crucial consideration: the renminbi is not convertible. There 
would be little logic in trying formally to fix a fully convertible currency against a non-convertible one. 
One might argue that the constancy of the HK dollar against the renminbi for the past several years 
amounts to de facto fixing, but it does at least allow for variation at such time as might be justified – for 
example, in the light of major or sudden structural shifts such as WTO entry or eventual convertibility. 
It would not anyway be possible to operate Hong Kong's currency board system by reference to a non-
convertible currency, since the essence of the system, namely continuous convertibility between the 
HK dollar and the anchor currency, would be denied. 
I conclude that an exchange cross rate between Hong Kong and the Mainland which varies, or has the 
potential to vary, is not a problem for us, and this seems set to remain the case for the foreseeable 
future. The corollary to this is that there would be no advantage in attempting to hitch the HK dollar to 
the renminbi in some formal or permanent fashion. 
Other options? 
There are of course other alternatives which might be explored. For example, in a perfect world, if we 
were to set ourselves the narrow objective of sustaining our price competitiveness index at a particular 
level  and  we  possessed  a  nicely  calibrated  model  of  the  economy,  and  if  we  then  applied  suitable 
methodology, we could derive some formula for the optimal exchange rate, which would doubtless be 
different from that determined by the present regime, and we could then devise an operational strategy 
to deliver that exchange rate path. But this sort of desktop solution could be a nightmare in reality. 
Even  if  the  empirical  basis  of  the  formula  was  entirely  reliable  (a  wholly  unrealistic  assumption), 
imagine the possible consequences for interest rates or foreign reserves, and the practical problems in 
terms of operability, comprehensibility, transparency,  credibility, financial market confidence, and so 
on.  Such  problems  could  be  particularly  acute,  and  the  risks  of  such  a  strategy  therefore 
correspondingly high, in such an open economy and open financial market-place as Hong Kong. 
I  have  deliberately  exaggerated  in  order  to  make  the  point.  A  monetary  policy  framework  must  be 
viewed  in  its  entirety,  and  needs  to  be  clear  and  enduring.  Its  success  should  be  judged  over  the 
                                                      
4   Based on average values of trade in goods over the past five years, Hong Kong had a dependence on Mainland China of 
some 40% (including re-exports on a value-added basis only); Canada on the USA of 76%; Mexico on the USA of 81%; the 
UK on the 12 countries of the euro area of 64%; Ireland on the UK of 27%; and Switzerland on Germany of 28%. 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2002
 longer term, while we must accept that what delivers long-term stability may not continuously deliver 
results to everyone's liking in the short term. In the HKMA we do pay attention to the whole spectrum 
of  possible  alternatives.  The  fact  that  we  support  the  retention  of  our  current  framework  of  the  US 
dollar  peg  represents  a  conscious  decision;  it  does  not  mean  that  we  are  deaf  to  the  counter-
arguments or reluctant to debate them. 
Conclusion 
In  summary,  monetary  policy  in  Hong  Kong  is  set  by  the  Hong  Kong  government  within  a  broad 
framework  provided  by  the  Basic  Law,  and  with  the  fundamental  objective  of  providing  long-term 
monetary stability. In our judgement it is unlikely that this aim would be assisted by altering the current 
arrangements, whether by pinning our currency to that of our neighbour or by any other devices. 
BIS Review 31/2002 
 5
