 David Clementi: A bank for all regions: promoting monetary and financial 
stability in the United Kingdom 
Speech  by  Mr  David  Clementi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  Ulster  Society  of 
Chartered Accountants, Belfast, 14 March 2002. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much indeed for your kind invitation to be here with you tonight. 
Despite its name, the Bank of England is the central bank of the United Kingdom, and as such it is 
essential for us to get out and about in the country at large, explaining our actions, and listening hard 
to the views of businesses and the wider public about the way we are doing our job. In the past year, 
members of the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee have made some 50 visits across the UK. On this 
trip,  apart  from  attending  this  dinner,  I  have  held  a  meeting  with  the  regional  council  of  the  CBI, 
discussed  trading  conditions  with  local  business  people,  and  explained  our  mission  to  some  of  the 
Northern Irish press. 
I want to cover three main themes in my comments tonight. First, I want briefly to explain the Bank's 
general approach to monetary policy. Second, I want to give you my current assessment of the outlook 
for the economy. And, third, I want to explain the Bank's other key role - that of maintaining stability in 
our financial system. 
The accountancy profession is very much under the microscope at the moment, as part of the rash of 
Enronitis which fills the pages of the press. I want to touch on Enron at the end of my talk here tonight, 
since it raises a number of issues of relevance to us at the Bank in our broader financial stability role. 
Maintaining monetary stability 
I  turn  first  though  to  the  Bank's  role  of  maintaining  monetary  stability.  The  current  institutional 
arrangements were put in place in May 1997, when the Chancellor established the Monetary Policy 
Committee. The MPC's target is extremely clear, and - I hope - well known. We aim for 2½% inflation 
in retail prices (excluding mortgage payments) at all times. That target is set by the Government. And 
it is symmetric: that is to say, we worry as much about being below the target as we do about being 
above  it.  That  makes  sense  because  the  problems  of  severe  deflation  are  just  as  great  as  the 
problems of severe inflation. 
Since the inception of the MPC, RPIX inflation has been extremely stable by historical standards, and 
close to target. Some commentators have suggested we have had more than our fair share of luck in 
achieving this outcome. There may well be some truth in that. But I'm not sure that we should be too 
surprised. Market and survey evidence shows that people are now clear that the MPC will do what it 
takes to keep inflation on track. And that expectation is factored into their own behaviour, whether it is 
negotiating wages, setting prices, or deciding how much to borrow and consume. All of that goes a 
long way towards ensuring that inflation is well anchored to the target. 
Of course, from month to month, inflation will still vary somewhat around 2½%. In recent months, RPIX 
has been a little below target, and there has even been some interest in whether it might reach 1.5%, 
the point at which the Governor would have to write a formal letter to the Chancellor explaining what 
was going on. The pick up of inflation to 2.6% in January has silenced this discussion, at least for the 
time being. We pore over the reasons for such developments in enormous detail at the Bank. But in 
the bigger scheme of things these month-to-month movements are quite small, and are I hope likely to 
play very little - if any - role in the key decisions of your businesses, or those you represent. 
People often ask if our relative success at targeting inflation has come at a cost in terms of lost output 
or employment. It is increasingly accepted, I think, that there is no such trade-off in the long run. And, 
looking at recent data, it is hard to see a trade-off even in the short run. Unemployment remains close 
to its lowest level for a quarter of a century - a trend seen in Northern Ireland just as much as in the 
UK as a whole. And UK GDP has now risen for 38 consecutive quarters (albeit in the case of 2001 Q4, 
only just!), the longest continuous expansion since post-war records began. Achieving low and stable 
inflation  is  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  the  wider  economic  goals  of 
sustainable growth and employment. Having an inflation target certainly does not mean that we ignore 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 1
 real activity. We have discretion over how rapidly we try to bring inflation back to target when and if it 
diverges from 2½%. And we regularly publish our best estimate about the likely future path of growth 
up to a two year horizon. But the aim of policy is clear - we do what is necessary to keep inflation on 
target. 
As you know, there are nine of us on the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee, and we meet once a 
month to make our interest rate decision. This is a rigorous process, and rightly so. But, of course, 
agreement on process need not, and does not, imply universal agreement on the appropriate stance 
of policy, as our minutes show. Indeed, an industry has grown up geared to guessing MPC members' 
personal  habits,  psychoanalysing  our  personalities  and  classifying  us  into  different  species  of  the 
aviary. But it is important to recognise, I think, that disagreements are evidence of the strength of the 
system, not its weakness. Economic analysis involves a great deal of peering into the future, so it is 
not  surprising  that  there  should  be  differences  of  view.  And  the  opportunity  to  explore  and  explain 
these differences in a rational and open way is an important part of getting to a better answer. 
The outlook for the economy 
I now want to turn briefly to the current policy debate. 
The key focus of the MPC's recent discussions has been the implications of the slowdown in world 
growth, which became apparent in the US during the first half of last year, but was exacerbated by the 
tragic events of 11 September. World trade rose by only around 1½% in 2001, less than a quarter of 
the average growth in the previous three years. That of course has had very serious implications for 
businesses exposed to international trade, of which I know there are many in Northern Ireland.  
Monetary policy has not been idle in the face of this challenge. Interest rates have been cut by 4¾% in 
the US since the start of last year, by 2% in the UK and by 1½% in the euro area. How far monetary 
policy by itself would be able to insulate the world economy if the slowdown were to persist is I think 
hard to say at this stage. Very significant uncertainties remain. But recent news from the US has been 
encouraging.  GDP  growth  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  has  been  revised  upwards,  consumer 
confidence  has  rebounded  somewhat  and  the  main  forward  looking  surveys  of  activity  in  the 
manufacturing and services sector have been looking substantially more positive since the turn of the 
year.  Consistent  with  this  tentative  recovery  in  optimism,  the  Consensus  survey  of  professional 
economists' forecasts for near-term growth in the US has been revised upwards for the first time in 
quite a period. 
So far, the UK has escaped the worst of the squalls raging across the Atlantic. Though GDP growth 
slowed over the course of last year, output in 2001 was still 2.4% higher than a year earlier, close to 
trend  growth.  Underlying  this  relatively  benign  aggregate  picture,  there  are  of  course  some  quite 
marked  differences:  on  the  expenditure  side,  between  growth  in  consumption,  which  has  surged 
ahead,  and  growth  in  investment,  which  has  been  strikingly  depressed;  and,  on  the  output  side, 
between the fortunes of firms in manufacturing, which have borne the brunt of the global slowdown, 
and those of firms in the more sheltered services sector. 
These  differences  are  sometimes  referred  to  as  'imbalances',  and  it  is  certainly  true  that  we  can 
neither expect (nor wish) for them to persist over the long run. The shake-out in manufacturing has 
been particularly severe, as you know here only too well. Manufacturing output in Northern Ireland fell 
by some 4.6% in the year to last autumn, compared with a fall of 3.5% in the UK as a whole. But not 
all  of  the  sectoral  differences  that  have  emerged  are  necessarily  unwelcome.  Indeed,  for  those 
seeking to ensure stability in the economy as a whole, it is really just as well that consumption growth 
has remained robust at a time when the net trade position of the economy has worsened so markedly. 
And,  as  recent  MPC  minutes  show,  that  has  been  our  intention.  So  long  as  the  world  economy 
recovers quickly enough to pick up the slack as consumption slows, it may be that we in the UK will 
avoid the sharp recessions of previous cycles. 
Of course, this is a big 'if', and I do not want to imply that I am excessively confident that this will occur. 
Rapid consumption growth brings with it considerable risks, not least when it is financed by a large 
build  up  in  consumer  debt.  But  it  is  the  MPC's  central  expectation  that  we  will  escape  a  serious 
slowdown at current interest rates. In the last few weeks, we have seen some tentative signs of an 
unwinding of some of the more severe sectoral gaps in the economy, with the slowdown in retail sales 
growth  since  the  start  of  the  year,  and  an  encouraging  pickup  in  a  number  of  surveys  of  business 
confidence and investment intentions. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2002
 Overall, it seems to me that the risks around the outlook for UK inflation are fairly evenly balanced. On 
the  downside,  the  speed  of  the  recovery  in  the  world  economy  may  be  held  back  by  a  number  of 
factors, including the large outstanding debt position of corporate and household sectors; investment 
in the UK might remain subdued; or the weakness in pricing pressures we have seen over the past 
year or so may persist. But on the upside, the US might bounce back more rapidly than anticipated; 
consumption  growth  might  remain  robust;  or  the  sterling  exchange  rate  might  begin  to  adjust 
downwards.  
Against this background of risks, it is quite possible we may see rates at current levels for some time 
until the way ahead is clearer. But, as you know, economic events have a habit of developing quite 
rapidly, so even short term predictions are never easy. For our part, we will continue to assess the 
case for interest rate changes on a month-by-month basis. 
In carrying out our task, the MPC relies heavily on having the very best information at our disposal, 
and in that we are enormously assisted by our network of regional Agencies. Each month, our Agents 
drive thousands of miles, eat hundreds of rushed sandwich lunches and, on occasion, no doubt push 
your goodwill to the limit as they seek out the latest news on developments in your businesses. Nigel 
Falls, our local Agent, is here with me tonight, and for those of you who have not already met him I 
really do encourage you to do so after the dinner. Agents attend the monthly briefing in Threadneedle 
Street ahead of each policy meeting, so information from their contacts is fed directly into the heart of 
the policy process. I know I speak for all of my colleagues on the MPC when I say that we really do 
find this a crucial barometer of current events, so I hope you will feel that a short while with our Agents 
once or twice a year is time well spent! 
Financial stability and Enron 
I  now  turn  to  my  final  subject  tonight  -  that  of  the  Bank's  role  in  ensuring  financial  stability. 
Responsibility  for  the  day-to-day  supervision  of  banks  passed  from  the  Bank  of  England  to  the 
Financial Services Authority in 1997. But as the central bank we still have a key role in overseeing the 
stability of the system as a whole. In this guise we meet on a monthly basis with HM Treasury and the 
FSA in the so-called tripartite Standing Committee, to review the risks facing the UK financial system 
and take stock of any actions which may be required to address them. Keeping close to the FSA is 
particularly  important. To this end, I sit  on the FSA  Board, and Howard Davies is a member of the 
Bank's Court. 
Of course, as I have no need to remind you here, with the border of the euro area just a few miles 
down  the  road,  we  cannot  look  at  the  UK  system  in  isolation  from  the  wider  international  financial 
markets.  The  world  economic  slowdown,  with  the  attendant  rise  in  credit  risks,  the  deepening 
problems  in  Argentina  spreading  to  its  banking  system,  and  the  events  of  11  September,  creating 
temporary liquidity strains in New York and elsewhere, have all posed serious risks to the stability of 
the international financial system. So far, the response has been encouraging. The capital position of 
many of the  larger financial players is stronger than in previous cycles. There  seems to be a more 
sophisticated  approach  to  differentiating  between  sovereign  risks  in  the  emerging  markets.  And  the 
hugely impressive efforts of staff, together with the largely successful operation of contingency plans, 
and  the flexibility of the US monetary  authorities, saw us through the  worst of the  aftermath to  last 
autumn's attacks without a serious crisis emerging. 
The latest topic of discussion in financial circles is, of course, the implications of the collapse of Enron. 
The  case  raises  a  host  of  issues  for  firms  and  policy  makers.  Some  of  these  relate  to  accounting 
standards; some relate to the way in which the auditing profession organises itself; and some relate to 
corporate  governance  issues  more  generally.  There  are  also  some  issues  about  the  scope  and 
operation of the financial regulation net. 
There have also been questions raised about the implications of the collapse for health of the financial 
system as a whole, which is very much of interest to the Bank, given our responsibility for systemic 
risk. From the current perspective, these implications appear limited, however. Enron had extensive 
links with banks and other financial firms, mediated in part through the use of relatively new credit risk 
transfer  instruments.  Tracing  these  exposures  through  to  their  ultimate  owners  is  not  a  particularly 
straightforward  business  -  an  issue  that  we  at  the  Bank  have  been  raising  in  a  macro-prudential 
context for some time now, most recently in our December Financial Stability Review. But on current 
information, the residual exposures do not appear unmanageable. Indeed, the apparent dispersion of 
exposures may even turn out to demonstrate the effectiveness of these markets in spreading risk. 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 3
 The Bank does not have any direct locus on the accounting and corporate governance issues raised 
by the case. But the way in which firms' financial performance is overseen and presented does have 
an  important  bearing  on  the  disciplines  applied  by  financial  markets,  which  are  an  essential 
component  of  maintaining  financial  stability  in  the  wider  sense.  Public  confidence  in  financial 
statements  and  the  role  of  auditors  is  critical.  One  set  of  issues  relates  to  the  appropriateness  of 
accounting rules governing the treatment of special purpose  vehicles  and those relating to revenue 
recognition.  This  is  a  technical  area,  and  one  in  which  the  rules  applied  in  the  US  and  the  UK  are 
relevantly different. No doubt the appropriate professional bodies will be looking at these questions. 
Another  set  of  issues  relates  to  rules  and  practice  governing  the  appointment  of  auditors,  and  the 
extent and nature of non-audit work carried out by firms' auditors. Best practice in listed companies 
has  for  some  time  recognised  the  importance  of  rotating  individual  auditors.  But  the  relationship 
between a major listed company and its auditor goes well beyond the role of the senior day-to-day 
audit partner. Before coming to the Bank of England, I had been involved with companies where the 
audit  partner  had  rotated;  but  the  senior  partner  of  the  firm,  who  took  a  close  interest  in  the 
relationship,  of  course  had  not.  If  the  profession  believes  that  rotation  is  important  to  maintain 
independence, should that rotation not relate to the firm, with whom the relationship is, rather than any 
individual?  There  are  of  course  good  arguments  on  the  other  side,  and  it  will  be  interesting  to  see 
where the review of these and related matters, recently announced by Patricia Hewitt, comes out. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  has  been  a  pleasure  for  me  to  come  to  Northern  Ireland,  to  meet  with  a 
number of business people during the course of this visit, and to join you this evening. Can I take this 
opportunity to wish you, and the business communities you serve, all success for the future. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2002
