 R Basant Roi: A central banker’s piece of advice to bankers 
Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the official inauguration of the New 
Co-operative Bank Ltd, 9 August 2002. 
 The Rt Hon Prime Minister 
Hon Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance 
Hon Ministers 
Chairman and Members of the Board of Directors of New Co-operative Bank Ltd. 
Ladies and Gentleman 
Good Afternoon 
I am privileged to address this audience of bankers and representatives of co-operative societies on 
the occasion of the official inauguration of the New Co-operative Bank Ltd. 
Nearly  a  hundred  and  forty  years  ago,  in  December  1863,  the  Comptroller  of  Currency  and  later 
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States addressed a letter to all national banks that had just 
come into operation. Retrospectively, I strongly believe that this is rightly an occasion for me to quote 
7 very short paragraphs from the nearly 140-year old letter, more so as I recognise a good number of 
bankers and representatives of co-operative societies in this audience. Each of the seven paragraphs 
that I am about to share with you remains invaluable pieces of advice to bankers - even after nearly 
140 years. 
First advice 
 “Let no loans be made that are not secured beyond a reasonable contingency. Do nothing to foster 
and encourage speculation. Give facilities to legitimate and prudent transactions. Make your discounts 
on as short as the business of your customers will permit and insist upon the payment of all paper at 
maturity, no matter whether you need the money or not.” 
Second advice 
“Distribute your loans rather than concentrate them in a few hands. Large loans to a single individual 
or firm, although sometimes proper  and necessary, are generally  injudicious and frequently unsafe. 
Large  borrowers  are  apt  to  control  the  bank;  and  when  this  is  the  relation  between  a  bank  and  its 
customers, it is not difficult to decide which in the end will suffer.” 
Third advice 
“Treat your customer liberally, bearing in mind the fact that a bank prospers as its customers prosper, 
but never permit them to dictate your policy.” 
Fourth advice 
“If you doubt the propriety of discounting an offering, give the bank the benefit of the doubt and decline 
it;  never  make  a  discount  if  you  doubt  the  propriety  of  doing  it.  If  you  have  reasons  to  distrust  the 
integrity of a customer, close his account. Never deal with a rascal under the impression that you can 
prevent him from cheating you. The risk in such cases is greater than the profits.” 
Fifth advice 
“Pay  your  officers  such  salaries  as  will  enable  them  to  live  comfortably  and  respectably  without 
stealing; and require of them their entire services. If an officer lives beyond his income, dismiss him; 
even if his excess of expenditures can be explained consistently with his integrity, still dismiss him. 
BIS Review 47/2002 
 1
 Extravagance, if not a crime, very naturally leads to crime. A man cannot be a safe officer of a bank 
who spends more than he earns.” 
Sixth advice 
“The capital of a bank should be a reality, not a fiction; and it should be owned by those who have 
money to lend, and not by borrowers. The Comptroller will endeavour to prevent, by all means within 
his control, the creation of a nominal capital by national banks, by the use of their circulation, or any 
other artificial means; and in his effort to do this, he confidently expects the co-operation of all well 
managed banks.” 
Seventh advice 
“Pursue a straightforward, upright, legitimate banking business. Never be tempted by the prospect of 
large returns to do anything but what may be properly done under the National Currency Act. ‘Splendid 
financiering’  is  not  legitimate  banking,  and  ‘splendid  financiers’  in  banking  are  generally  either 
humbugs or rascals.” 
These are the seven chief mantras of good banks and good bankers. They  are atemporal - indeed 
timeless. They were valid more than century ago; they are valid today and they will continue to remain 
valid. 
The New Co-operative Bank Ltd is starting operation. A note of caution is appropriate on this occasion. 
Never attempt to grow big too fast. Make sure that all loans are adequately and legally backed by valid 
securities - whether the loans are made to co-operative societies or to individuals. When a bank lends 
few  thousands  of  rupees  it  is  the  borrowers’  headache  to  repay  the  loan;  when  it  lends  millions  of 
rupees it is not the borrowers’ headache but the bankers’ headache to recover the money lent out. A 
small bank with a healthy and sound balance sheet is stronger than any big bank with a weak balance 
sheet. 
I seize this opportunity to reflect on one particular aspect of the way policy decisions in some banking 
enterprises are made in Mauritius. Of all the five revocations of banking licences in Mauritius, three 
were clearly motivated by problems the roots of which were found at the level of Boards of Directors. 
Members of the Boards of Directors obscenely took advantage of their positions to influence imprudent 
credit decisions making. The Bank of Mauritius issued 9 Guidelines to the banking industry so far. Two 
more  Guidelines  have  been  issued  to  the  industry  for  consultations.  The  Guidelines  on  Corporate 
Governance, effective June 2001, and on Related Party Transactions, effective January 2002, put the 
roles and responsibilities of Boards of Directors of banks in the right perspective. The Guidelines, as I 
said in my address to the private sector in November last, are not obituaries but principles that should 
be adhered to by the Boards of Directors of all banks, including the Board of Directors of the Bank of 
Mauritius. The quiet and sybaritic lives of Board members are over. 
The Banking Supervision Department of the Bank of Mauritius is already assisting the staff of the New 
Co-operative Bank Ltd to come to grips with all the Guidelines. I urge all the Co-operative entities to 
familiarise  themselves  with  the  Guidelines  in  order  to  understand  and  fully  appreciate  the  new 
regulatory environment in which the New Co-operative Bank Ltd is expected to operate. 
May I wish the New Co-operative Bank Ltd the very best of success. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2002
