 Guy Quaden: New views on firms’ investment and finance decisions 
Opening address by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, for the National Bank 
of Belgium Conference, Brussels, 27-28 May 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am really pleased to welcome you here at the National Bank of Belgium 2002 Conference. My wish, 
one of my wishes, since I have become Governor, and it is shared by the members of our Board, is to 
stimulate  the  scientific  co-operation  between  the  Bank  and  the  academic  community  and  more  in 
particular the Belgian academic community in a modus operandi of mutual respect and independence. 
Two years ago, the National Bank of Belgium organised a conference on “How to promote economic 
growth in the euro area” to celebrate its 150th anniversary. On that occasion, I announced that the 
Bank  would  call  an  international  conference  every  two  years  to  encourage  the  debate  between 
academics  and  professional  economists  working  in  central  banks  and  in  other  policy  making 
institutions.  At  that  time,  the  Bank  also  decided  that  a  joint  research  project  between  its  own 
economists and Belgian academic researchers would precede the conference. The project started in 
March 2001 and ends with the current conference where the results of the research are presented. 
The Bank requested the Belgian academic community to express its interest in participating in the joint 
research  project  by  submitting  a  proposal  concerning  the  content  of  an  analysis  on  one  or  several 
sub-items of the general project, preferably with an empirical content making use of available panel 
data from firms’ balance sheets and other sources. All in all we received nineteen proposals from the 
academic community. Since at this conference also foreign speakers are invited, we were forced to 
select a limited number among the proposals we received. This selection was based on a number of 
criteria but, especially, on their compliance and coherence with the overall research project. 
Allow me to explain the reasons that have led to the particular choice of the topic of the conference. 
Everybody will acknowledge that investment is a key variable in economics. Capital accumulation not 
only  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  determining  the  process  of  long-run  economic  growth,  as  was  clearly 
evidenced by our previous international conference two years ago, but it is also an important driving 
force of business cycles. Although investment represents a relatively minor fraction of GDP, a major 
part of output fluctuations is driven by firms’ investment behaviour. For the conduct of monetary policy, 
it is, therefore, crucial to understand the mechanisms that drive an essential component of the interest 
sensitive  expenditures, and more in particular, how  monetary  policy  affects investment spending by 
firms.  Given  that  investment  is  an  important  element  in  the  complex  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy, and given the continuous change of economic behaviour and institutional structures, 
a continuous interest of the central bank in this kind of research can easily be motivated. Despite the 
best  efforts  of  economists  working  in  various  research  institutes  and  in  central  banks,  it  remains, 
however, imperfectly understood. This is, of course, to a large extent due to the volatility of investment 
itself,  which  is  many  times  higher  than  that  of  GDP.  By  choosing  it  as  the  theme  for  its  second 
international conference the Bank wants to encourage further research in this field of economics. 
In that respect, after the pioneering work of Dale Jorgenson, analysing the investment decision in a 
neo-classical  framework,  and  who  will  speak  about  taxation  issues  today,  two  major  strands  in  the 
literature have been developed, which examine the implications of capital market imperfections and 
uncertainty 
invited  speakers,  Lenos  Trigeorgis, 
Jean-Bernard  Chatelain,  Charles  Himmelberg  and  Julian Franks,  will  give  an  overview  of  these 
subjects in their contributions. 
The first strand shows that in the presence of information asymmetries firms with weak balance sheets 
may  become  financially  constrained  in  the  sense  that  their  cost  of  external  funds  substantially 
increases or that they are  unable to attract external funds. In these circumstances, the effects of a 
change in the monetary policy-controlled interest rate will not only be transmitted through an increase 
in the user cost of capital but also through their impact on the financial structure of the firm. Indeed, an 
increase in policy rates will result in larger interest payments, hence a worsening of the firm’s cash 
flow  and  its  ability  to  self  finance,  and  in  a  decrease  in  the  value  of  assets  that  could  be  used  as 
collateral for new loans. As a consequence, firms that are likely to be more exposed to problems of 
asymmetric information, will react more to a monetary tightening. Variations in the availability of credit 
as  a  result  of  changes  in  monetary  policy  may  act  as  an  important  channel  of  transmission,  since 
investment  behaviour.  Our  distinguished 
for 
BIS Review 33/2002 
 1
 these financial frictions amplify the effect of changes in the policy-controlled interest rates. In order to 
assess the monetary policy stance it is important for the policy maker to know whether these frictions 
are present or not. 
A second recent strand in the theory of business investment addresses the impact of uncertainty on 
investment. The main insight from this literature is that a firm, being uncertain  about the future and 
knowing that investment is a sunk cost, may choose to postpone investment in order to obtain further 
information about future market conditions. One can show that, in this case, the required rate of return 
to undertake the investment project increases. It is clear that, hereby, uncertainty introduces additional 
frictions in the investment decision process, which are likely to temper the effect of a change in the 
policy-controlled  interest  rates.  Therefore,  also  in  this  respect,  the  monetary  authorities  need  to 
evaluate the precise timing and magnitude of these frictions, which are caused by uncertainty. 
As  to  the  requirement  to  use  micro  data,  it  is  known  that  aggregation  can  blur  identification  of 
important parts of the behaviour of economic agents. So, studies at the aggregate level often fail to 
find an economically significant relation between investment and the user cost of capital, a relation of 
the utmost importance for the transmission of monetary policy. This failure is attributed in literature to 
the so-called simultaneity bias. Using micro data allows alleviating these problems. Moreover, micro 
data allow analysing  important economic questions that cannot be addressed  using  aggregate data 
sets. This is precisely the case if one wants to identify the existence of financial frictions, because here 
the individual balance sheet position of the particular firm matters. 
Next, I want to review the importance of the launch of the euro and of the ECB’s price stability policy 
for investment behaviour. 
The  introduction  of  the  single  currency  three  years  ago  provoked  fundamental  changes  in  the 
environment in which the public and the private sector operate. First, the most apparent change has 
been  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risks.  Together  with  the  lower  transaction  costs  and  more 
transparent markets, this has created new opportunities for companies within the euro area. Second, 
the  euro  has  given  impetus  to  the  process  of  financial  integration  by  enhancing  the  widening  and 
deepening  of  the  euro  area  financial  markets. This  evolution  may  appear  to  be  beneficial  for  firms, 
which  were  or  still  are  financially  constrained  and  unable  to  execute  all  their  investment  plans. 
Especially  young  and  risky  firms  often  suffer  from  insufficient  tangible  assets,  that  might  serve  as 
collateral for external funds, and/or develop activities that are highly risky in terms of future returns. 
Since these are typically the enterprises which tend to bring new technologies to the market, financial 
market deepening, as triggered by the euro, may contribute to boost investment and economic growth. 
Although with the launch of the euro, the exchange rates of the currencies of the euro area countries 
became irrevocably fixed and the national currencies were only expressions of the same currency, for 
most residents of the euro area the euro only arrived with the introduction of the new euro banknotes 
and coins at the beginning of this year. Since the first of January, more than 300 million citizens in 
Europe share the same tangible currency. This event will further foster transparency and efficiency. 
Not only the mere launch of the euro, but especially the rigorous and credible pursuit of the ECB of its 
objective  of  price  stability  as  assigned  by  the  Treaty  of  Maastricht,  can  stimulate  investment  and 
contribute to sustained long-run economic growth. First, price stability allows changes in relative prices 
to be more easily observed, since they are not obscured by fluctuations in the overall price level. This 
enhanced transparency allows economic agents to make better-informed decisions, which result in a 
more  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  Second,  monetary  stability  also  eliminates  some  of  the 
uncertainties  about  the  future  which  private  decision-makers  face  in  managing  their  businesses.  If 
providers  of  funds  are  convinced  that  price  stability  will  be  maintained  in  the  future,  they  will  not 
require a “risk premium” to cover themselves against future inflation. By reducing such risk premia the 
real interest rate may fall, and monetary policy can give an incentive to invest. Finally, a credible policy 
of  price  stability  also  makes  it  less  likely  that  firms  will  divert  resources  from  productive  uses  to 
stockbuilding in order to hedge against inflation. In a high inflation environment there is, indeed, an 
incentive to accumulate real goods since they are expected to become more expensive in the near 
future. 
To sum up, the ECB’s monetary policy of maintaining price stability can affect expectations of market 
participants  about  future  price  developments  when  it  succeeds  in  achieving  a  necessary  degree  of 
credibility. The continuous  low inflation expectations reflect that the ECB has been successful in its 
task, and has created the basis for low long-term interest rates. These have had significant positive 
effects  on  the  government  budget  in  many  countries  and  have  stimulated  investment.  Stabilising 
expectations has also shown to be beneficial for the ECB itself, since it enhances the predictability of 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2002
 the conditional relationships between major macroeconomic variables and diminishes the uncertainties 
involved in the conduct of monetary policy. 
Before  leaving  the  floor  to  our  first  speaker,  Professor  Dale  Jorgenson  I  would  like  to  thank  all  the 
invited speakers and discussants for accepting the invitation and for actively taking part in this event. I 
am also very grateful to the Belgian teams for their research effort in exploring the factors that drive 
business investment in Belgium. Finally, I want to thank all the participants whose large attendance 
today will certainly contribute to the success of the conference too. I hope that this conference will help 
us  all  to  better  understand  the  mechanisms  underlying  investment  behaviour  and  to  discover  the 
policies needed to foster it. I wish you all a very productive conference. 
BIS Review 33/2002 
 3
