 Bruno Gehrig: Review of the Swiss economy 
Introductory  remarks  by  Prof  Bruno  Gehrig,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 13 December 2002.  
 The past year was an eventful one for the international financial markets. The global deterioration in 
economic prospects and eroded  investor confidence  deepened the stock market slump as from the 
middle of the  year. Parallel to this development, the interest rate level continued to fall. The central 
banks contributed to the interest rate reduction. However, with risk premiums increasing at the same 
time, financing conditions failed to improve for many companies but actually often deteriorated. 
Foreign exchange 
Following the steep slide of the US dollar, exchange rates stabilised again from mid-year onward once 
it had become clear that the growth slump was affecting all major economic regions equally. 
The  Swiss  franc  fluctuated  within  a  relatively  narrow  margin  to  the  euro  this  year.  The  geopolitical 
uncertainty premium applied to the Swiss franc after the shock of 11 September 2001 is still being paid 
(see graph). 
 
In the current year, we again recorded phases of heightened upward pressure on the Swiss currency. 
We tried to counteract the negative consequences of the strong  Swiss franc and the risk of further 
upward  movements  by  lowering  the  interest  rate  several  times.  Since  the  beginning  of  September 
2001, the key interest rate differential between the euro and the Swiss franc has widened from one to 
two percentage points. The yield on long-term bonds in Swiss francs is also around two percentage 
points below that on corresponding euro paper. This has lowered the attractiveness of the Swiss franc 
somewhat compared with the euro. 
The  stabilisation  of  the  euro/Swiss  franc  relationship  –  albeit  at  a  relatively  high  rate  for  the  Swiss 
franc – is a positive development. Experience has shown that the exchange rate development has a 
significant  influence  on  business  activity  in  Switzerland.  We  are  still  determined  to  counteract  any 
additional upward trend of the Swiss franc that might jeopardise the economic recovery. 
BIS Review 73/2002 
 1
 Bonds 
In the capital markets around the world, nominal yields dropped considerably (see graph). However, 
borrowers with medium and low credit ratings did not benefit much from this development as credit risk 
premiums rose during the year. This also limits the macroeconomic stimulus effect of the yield decline. 
In addition, real interest rates did not decrease to the same extent because simultaneously inflation 
expectations again subsided markedly. Particularly in the euro's core countries – first and foremost in 
Germany – real interest rates are high. They depress the economic outlook and increase the growth 
differences between the member countries. 
Shares 
Stock  markets  were  characterised  by  extraordinarily  sharp  fluctuations  and  hefty  price  losses.  This 
was due to risk aversion increasing in the course of the year and the effectively higher risk level, which 
both depressed share prices. The sharp price swings mirror the difficulty of assessing the risks and 
opportunities in this environment. The stock market slump has persisted for almost three years now. In 
the past few weeks, though, all major stock markets have at least witnessed some upward corrections. 
 2 
 BIS Review 73/2002
  The  long-term  expectation  that  higher  yields  can  be  achieved  only  by  taking  higher  risks  has  not 
proven  true  over  a  relatively  long  period  of  time.  Unlike  shares,  low-risk  bonds  have  generated 
attractive  yields  during  this  phase.  This  experience  together  with  the  fact  that  numerous,  notably 
institutional investors have lost part of their risk capability might,  in many  instances, result in equity 
weightings  remaining  low  in  the  foreseeable  future.  This  change  of  behaviour  will  limit  the  stock 
markets' growth potential for the time being. 
At present, the price/earnings ratios of the major stock markets are close to the average of the past 
15 years. This indicator suggests that, despite the price losses suffered, shares are not yet particularly 
low-priced. However, compared with the very low yield level of bonds, which are the most important 
investment alternative, shares do seem quite inexpensive. 
Does  the  stock  market  slump  have  any  adverse  effects  on  economic  development?  This  seems 
certain for several reasons. For the corporate sector, it has become more expensive to raise capital, 
which  undermines  investment  activity.  Although  direct  shareholding  is  less  common  in  Switzerland 
than, for example, in the United States, the asset losses incurred discourage private consumption. In 
many  cases,  the  deteriorated  financial  position  of  pension  funds  necessitates  an  increase  in 
contributions and/or a decrease in existing premium reductions. Such perspectives and occasionally 
voiced  doubts  about  the  reliability  of  pension  promises  adversely  affect  consumption  and  investors' 
willingness to take risks. Last but not least, the bearish stock markets directly affect the value added 
by our financial sector, which contributes over 10 percent to GDP. 
Risk management 
In Switzerland and abroad, banks have adopted a more cautious attitude. International institutions, in 
particular, manage their credit risks much more actively than they used to. They sell some of these 
risks to other financial intermediaries, including insurance companies and institutional asset managers. 
The available data do not allow any reliable conclusions to be drawn as to the risk distribution after the 
credit  risk  transfers.  It  can  be  concluded,  though,  that  credit  risks  are  borne  by  a  larger  number  of 
market  players  than  previously  and  that  diversification  possibilities  are  probably  better  utilised 
nowadays. 
In interbank business, too, more attention is being paid worldwide to default risks. A growing share of 
interbank business is hedged; this is also the case in Switzerland, where repo business has developed 
steadily.  Unhedged  transactions  still  clearly  account  for  the  bulk  of  interbank  business,  but  with  an 
average volume of approximately Sfr 20 billion, interbank repos, which were neglected for a long time, 
BIS Review 73/2002 
 3
 have grown to a respectable size. With respect to system stability, this development is favourable and 
should be further promoted. 
Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) 
As regards credit risks in foreign exchange business, the launch of the CLS system this autumn is a 
milestone achievement. CLS Bank, which has its headquarters in New York, serves as a platform to 
eliminate  the  so-called  Herstatt  risk,  i.e.  the  settlement  risk  inherent  in  foreign  exchange  deals. 
Previously, the two legs of a foreign exchange transaction were settled at different times. If US dollars 
were bought against Swiss francs, the franc amount was to be paid during European trading time. The 
corresponding amount in US dollars, however, was credited only a few hours later – during US trading 
time. In the few intervening hours, a credit risk existed. If a bank had been closed down during this 
time period, its counterparties might possibly have lost huge amounts of US dollar receivables. CLS 
Bank now makes it possible to settle foreign exchange transactions in the major currencies based on 
the  «payment  versus  payment»  principle,  thereby  eliminating  the  settlement  risk  for  these 
transactions. 
Currently, 42 financial institutions are directly linked to the system (Settlement Members) and settle 
their  foreign  exchange  payments  via  CLS  in  seven  different  currencies.  One  of  these  settlement 
currencies is the Swiss franc. Three Swiss banks – UBS, CS and Zürcher Kantonalbank – participate 
in  CLS.  Apart  from  these  three  Swiss  banks,  two  other  financial  institutions  –  HSBC  and  Bank  of 
America  –  effect  foreign  exchange  transactions  in  Swiss  francs  via  CLS.  Every  day,  these  five 
institutions  together  enter  around  1,400  payments  in  the  amount  of  almost  Sfr  20  billion  into  CLS. 
Settlement takes place via a direct link between the Swiss Interbank Clearing System (SIC) and CLS 
Bank.  To  meet  their  delivery  obligations  in  Swiss  francs,  the  five  banks  draw  on  intraday  liquidity, 
which  the  SNB  offers  through  interest-free  repo  transactions.  Since  November,  direct  system 
participants have been able not only to use CLS services for their own purposes but also to offer these 
services  to  other  banks.  With  this  so-called  third  party  business  expanding  and  further  direct 
participants  and  currencies  joining  the  system  next  year,  more  and  more  payments  will  be  settled 
through CLS. 
Currently,  about  35,000  transactions  in  the  amount  of  approximately  USD  400  billion  are  settled  in 
CLS  every  day.  All  parties  involved  are  very  satisfied  with  the  system's  mode  of  operation.  By 
eliminating  the  settlement  risk,  CLS  has  made  a  significant  contribution  to  the  stability  of  the 
international financial infrastructure.  
4 
 BIS Review 73/2002
