 Niklaus Blattner: The euro - implications for Switzerland and for the monetary 
policy of the Swiss National Bank 
Speech by Professor Niklaus Blattner, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Banking Studies Center Colloquium, Lugano, 22 October 2002. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Where do we stand more than three and a half years after the launch of the European Economic and 
Monetary Union (EMU) and almost ten months after the introduction of euro notes and coins? On the 
whole, from the perspective of the Swiss National Bank (SNB), the experience with the euro has been 
primarily  positive  so  far,  even  though  the  Swiss  franc  has  somewhat  appreciated  against  the  euro 
since 1999. 
First of all, Switzerland is now surrounded by a large currency area that pursues similar goals in terms 
of monetary policy, and, in particular, with respect to price stability. Competitive currency devaluations 
are no longer an option for members of the euro area, and the exchange rate volatility of the Swiss 
franc vis-à-vis the currencies of the European trading partners has declined considerably. 
For  Swiss  enterprises,  foreign  currency  management  has  become  easier.  Apart  from  decreasing 
transaction  costs,  Swiss  firms  also  benefit  from  enhanced  price  transparency  and  competition  in 
Euroland. At the same time and despite some initial fears to the contrary, Switzerland has been able to 
retain  its  advantage  of  lower  interest  rate  levels.  There  has  also  been  some  concern  that  the  euro 
would make the Swiss franc obsolete as a means of payment, but this is very unlikely. 
These  are,  in  a  nutshell,  some  of  the  main  conclusions  from  a  Swiss  perspective,  on  which  my 
remarks today will focus. Moreover, I will address the consequences for the SNB’s monetary policy. In 
the  light  of  current  experience,  the  SNB  will  undoubtedly  continue  to  conduct  an  independent 
monetary  policy.  But  before  turning  to  the  implications  for  Switzerland  in  more  detail,  let  me  briefly 
recall the principal pros and cons of creating a monetary union. 
Benefits and costs of a monetary union 
2. 
The launch of a common currency promises benefits and causes costs. Since the benefits are mainly 
the result of structural improvements and the costs are due largely to the greater difficulty in steering 
inflation and economic activity, it is difficult to offset the advantages of a monetary union against its 
disadvantages. Whether a monetary union on balance creates benefits or causes costs depends on a 
whole range of factors, not least among them the characteristic features of the common currency area. 
What is theoretically uncontested is the following: in order to form a so-called optimal currency area, 
the member countries must be structured along similar lines or exhibit a high degree of flexibility. 
The benefits of a monetary union consist in a reduction of transaction costs for changing money, the 
elimination  of  internal  exchange  rate  uncertainty,  tighter  competition  thanks  to  easier  price 
comparisons, the expansion of trade within a region, the prevention of competitive depreciation and 
speculative  attacks  on  a  currency,  and  growth  in  the  liquidity  of  the  financial  markets.  Those 
advantages, in particular, that are associated with an increase in competition and an expansion in the 
trade of goods and services need time to develop. 
The  costs  of  adopting  a  common  currency  include,  first,  one-off  expenditure  in  connection  with  the 
introduction of notes and coins. In the European Monetary Union, these were estimated to be around 
0.5%  of  gross  domestic  product.  Naturally,  these  costs  are  evident  from  the  start  and  of  a  merely 
temporary nature. Potentially the most significant costs of a currency union, however, arise from the 
loss of the individual countries' independent monetary policies. Particularly at the early stage, these 
costs  are  a  considerable  factor.  Depending  on  the  further  economic  development  of  the  Monetary 
Union, they might eventually decline over the years. 
So where is the problem? The loss of autonomy in monetary policy is felt all the more with the growing 
number  of  asymmetric  shocks.  Such  shocks  are  disruptions  that  affect  the  economic  structure, 
business activity and inflation of member countries in different ways. Thus, they cannot be combated 
with  a  uniform  economic  policy.  The  recession  of  1990-92  vividly  illustrates  the  potential 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 1
 consequences of a single currency in regionally diverging economic situations. At that time, Britain and 
Italy  withdrew  from  the  European  exchange  rate  mechanism  and  devalued  their  currencies.  This 
measure permitted them to recover relatively quickly from the recession but they had to put up with 
higher  inflation  instead.  Conversely,  and  at  the  same  time,  Germany  had  to  contend  with  the 
inflationary effects of reunification. Therefore, the German Bundesbank had to raise interest rates to 
support price stability. 
What would have happened if the Monetary Union had already existed at the time and if Italy, Britain 
and Germany had been members of the Monetary Union? Italy and Britain would not have been able 
to  devalue  their  currencies.  The  sole  instrument  would  have  been  monetary  policy.  The  European 
Central Bank (ECB), had it already existed then, might possibly not have increased interest rates out 
of consideration for Britain and Italy, or at least might not have permitted rates to rise to the extent that 
the  Bundesbank  considered  necessary.  This  would  not  have  served  either  Germany  or  Italy  and 
Britain well. In the case of asymmetric shocks a uniform monetary policy is second best. 
Apart  from  this  historical  case  in  point,  the  general  rule  is  that  the  costs  of  the  loss  of  monetary 
independence  will  be  progressively  lower  as  the  pace  of  economic  adjustments  increases.  In 
particular, the speed with which the economy recovers depends largely on the flexibility of the labour 
market and on job mobility. When salaries develop in line with the regional economy and a potential 
for direct investment exists, regionally diverse shocks may be more easily absorbed despite a uniform 
monetary policy. The mobility of the workforce is also a helpful factor. If a workforce is mobile, there 
will be some who will leave a country suffering from a crisis and settle where job prospects are better. 
An  illustration  of  how  useful  such  flexibility  can  be  was  provided  by  the  1990-91  recession  in  the 
United States. Following substantial cuts in military expenditure, the economic downturn in particular 
affected regions with a high proportion of military bases and arms manufacturers. Notably in California, 
the unemployment rate rose much more markedly than in the rest of the country. Thereupon, between 
1993 and 1994 more than 250,000 employees (in net terms) emigrated from California, while in the 
previous  boom  year  200,000  persons  had  been  attracted  to  this  region.  Even  if  the  adjustment 
process was painful for many people, the flexibility of the US labour market dampened the costs of this 
asymmetric shock.  
Coming back to the European currency union, it might be objected that monetary policy is not the sole 
economic policy instrument. Fiscal policy measures such as a tax reduction or an increase in public 
expenditure  are  also  a  means  of  boosting  overall  demand.  Yet  the  stability  and  growth  pact,  which 
helps to ensure budget discipline in Euroland, imposes restrictions on the fiscal policy of the individual 
members. By contrast, interventions in the field of fiscal policy on a European level would hardly be in 
contradiction to the stability and growth pact. For a long time to come, however, the Union's budget is 
still  likely  to  be  too  modest  to  bring  about  the  desired  effects  within  the  Union  by  means  of  a 
stabbility-oriented fiscal policy. For the time being, fiscal policy is therefore not a realistic option. 
Finally, one should take into account that by its very nature a monetary union promotes the division of 
labour between the participating countries. Instead of being evened out, differences between countries 
may thus become more acute. In fact, regional specialisation in the United States is more pronounced 
than  it  currently  is  in  Europe.  Major  industries  have  joined  together  in  national  clusters  -  car 
manufacturers  in  Detroit,  software  producers  in  Silicon  Valley,  the  film  industry  in  Hollywood.  One 
might  argue,  in  this  context,  that  the  Fed  in  Washington  faces  the  same  problems  as  the  ECB  in 
conducting  a  common  monetary  policy  that  fits  economically  diverging  regions.  However,  there  are 
two  remarkable  differences  between  the  United  States  and  Euroland.  First,  the  US  labour  market 
exhibits a higher degree of flexibility, and second, the United States are a federal state with a large 
budget and fiscal policy power of its own. 
The European Union (EU) is still far removed from all this. Nevertheless, despite all the reservations, it 
should not be overlooked that a monetary union creates facts. The elimination of transaction costs and 
of  exchange  rate  volatility  helps  to  lower  interest  rates,  stimulates  trade  and  facilitates  direct 
investment within the Monetary Union. The project of the European single market, which, among other 
things, also serves to encourage mobility among the workforce, is thus provided with further valuable 
stimuli. Moreover, the stability and growth pact contributes to the harmonisation of economic policy. 
Asymmetric shocks may thus become less important in the course of time. It is precisely this type of 
shock that has the most adverse effect on the functioning of a monetary union. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2002
 3. 
Implications of the euro's launch for Switzerland 
Implications for the Swiss economy and the Swiss franc as a means of payment 
3.1. 
Like many enterprises in the euro area, Swiss companies benefit from the greater price transparency 
created by the euro for goods purchased from Euroland.  Besides, this leads to enhanced  domestic 
competitiveness with beneficial effects on national prosperity. 
A  further  positive  effect  for  Switzerland  results  from  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  European 
currencies. Hence, foreign currency management becomes easier. The danger of extreme exchange 
rate  fluctuations  such  as  the  70%  real  depreciation  of  the  Italian  lira  between  1992  and  1995  has 
diminished drastically with the disappearance of the most volatile European currencies. Nevertheless, 
in a system of flexible exchange rates fluctuations can never be ruled out entirely. 
A hedging strategy for Swiss entrepreneurs would consist in using the euros that they earn for settling 
suppliers' bills or, in theory, even for paying wages and salaries in Switzerland. In reality wage earners 
are likely to offer resistance to being made to bear the exchange rate risk. So-called natural hedging is 
a more obvious option. In this case, Swiss exporters use the euro amounts for paying for intermediate 
services, i.e. their suppliers from Euroland. 
Naturally, the Swiss financial centre, too, will not remain immune to the euro. The integration of the 
European financial markets propelled by the single currency will trigger waves of innovation and, in 
particular,  of  consolidation.  As  virt-x  in  London  shows,  financial  markets  are  not  tied  to  a  specific 
location.  A  strengthening  of  locational  competition  on  a  global  level  represents  a  considerable  but 
desirable challenge for the Swiss financial centre. 
Euro cash is also a welcome innovation that makes things easier. The introduction of the euro in its 
physical  form  has  primarily  affected  the  hotel  and  catering  industry,  retail  trade  and  banks.  In  this 
connection, some observers have raised concerns that the euro might displace the Swiss franc as a 
means of payment. Obviously, the euro is now circulating in Switzerland. This will not lead to a new 
world, however. Numerous businesses and hotels, notably in border areas and in holiday resorts, have 
long-standing  practical  experience  in  accepting  foreign  currencies.  But  even  though  they  provide  a 
foreign-exchange service to their customers, this is definitely not where their comparative advantage 
lies.  Hence,  the  offered  exchange  rate  is  generally  unattractive,  and  visitors  will  almost  always  be 
better off converting their money at a bank or using their credit cards. 
Historically,  parallel  currencies  have  only  prevailed  in  those  countries  that  no  longer  had  a  sound 
currency of their own. As long as the SNB continues to pursue a policy that aims at maintaining price 
stability, the Swiss franc will remain a widely accepted and trustworthy currency. There is no reason to 
expect it to disappear. 
By contrast, the declining significance of the Swiss franc as a denomination of foreign bonds in recent 
years  is  not  primarily  due  to  the  creation  of  the  single  currency.  This  trend  had  already  been 
observable long before 1999. It can be seen as a return to a situation in which the importance of the 
Swiss franc is more in check with Switzerland's economic size, as compared with its former extremely 
over-proportional weighting as an investment currency.  
Certainly, the launch of the euro has not enhanced the attractiveness of Swiss franc bonds, mainly 
because the market liquidity of euro bonds has grown significantly since 1999. On the other hand, the 
Swiss franc has gained in stature simply because it is a member of the dwindling family of international 
currencies. For this reason, we expect it to maintain a role as an instrument of portfolio diversification. 
Implications for the exchange rate 
3.2. 
In  principle,  the  following  applies:  the  more  the  single  currency  proves  to  be  a  stable  and  strong 
currency,  the  greater  will  be  its  advantages  for  Switzerland,  too.  With  the  launch  of  the  euro,  the 
standard deviation of the trade-weighted exchange rate of the Swiss franc vis-à-vis the currencies of 
the European trading partners has narrowed considerably. The decrease in exchange rate volatility is 
due to the fact that the euro - as already mentioned - has to some extent replaced weak and extremely 
volatile  currencies.  This  is  a  welcome  advantage  for  the  Swiss  economy,  which  is  closely 
interconnected with the EU. 
The volatility of the exchange rate is one thing; the level of the exchange rate is another. Since the 
beginning  of  1999,  the  Swiss  franc  has  appreciated  by  more  than  9%  against  the  euro.  In  the 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 3
 beginning, the development of the Swiss franc exchange rate against the euro was relatively stable. 
However, in the aftermath of 11 September, investors became increasingly risk-averse. This led to a 
further strengthening of the Swiss franc, which had already appreciated during the year 2000. 
The strength of the Swiss currency is a considerable challenge for our export-oriented economy. One 
has  to  put  things  in  perspective,  though.  First,  rather  than  on  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  the 
competitiveness  of  the  Swiss  economy  depends  on  the  real  exchange  rate,  which  is  corrected  for 
inflation. If, for example, the Swiss franc appreciates  by  2%  and domestic inflation  is 1%, prices of 
Swiss products are raised by 3% abroad. Yet as soon as foreign inflation exceeds the level of 3%, the 
competitive disadvantage for the Swiss export sector resulting from the nominal appreciation is more 
than  compensated  for.  In  fact,  inflation  has  been  slightly  higher  in  Euroland.  In  real  terms,  the 
appreciation of the Swiss franc against the euro is therefore about 5%. It should be noted that a real 
appreciation of 5% over a period of more than three years is not extraordinary by historical standards. 
To  be  sure,  the  euro  has  also  lost  some  ground  against  the  US  dollar  and  the  yen.  There  are, 
however, some factors that point to a future rise in international demand for euros. These include the 
growth  of  the  euro  financial  market  and  of  its  liquidity,  the  growing  significance  of  the  euro  as  a 
benchmark currency, and the euro area's largest trading share worldwide. Moreover, the gap between 
the US growth rate and that of Euroland has narrowed recently, albeit ultimately for cyclical rather than 
for structural reasons. 
The most decisive positive factors for the future exchange rate development of the single currency are, 
for  one  thing,  the  convincing  removal  of  the  structural  and  institutional  weaknesses  in  numerous 
member countries and EU institutions. The willingness to continue and implement reforms will in large 
measure  influence  the  growth  path  of  Europe.  For  another  thing,  the  euro  rate  is  determined  by 
confidence in the ECB's monetary policy. The institution's determination to achieve price stability may 
not be seriously doubted despite some minor initial inconsistencies in communication. 
Finally, a danger potential for Switzerland derives from the traditional notion that the Swiss franc is a 
safe haven currency. The events after 11 September have shown that this notion still plays a certain 
role. Nonetheless, a mere glance at the map of Europe, on the one hand, and at the integration of the 
Swiss economy in the euro area, on the other hand, should convince any investor that the Swiss franc 
could hardly remain immune to a major crisis in the euro zone. 
Implications for the interest rate level in Switzerland 
3.3. 
Both nominal interest rates and real interest rates, which are more important for growth, have been 
relatively  low  in  Switzerland  since  the  First  World  War.  Averaged  over  the  past  twenty  years,  the 
interest  rate  spread  on  money  market  rates  compared  with  Germany  amounted  to  between  1  and 
1.5 percentage  points,  while  the  differential  between  capital  market  rates  came  to  approximately 
2.5 percentage  points.  This  interest  differential  represents  an  inestimable  advantage  for  the  Swiss 
economy. 
The reasons for this so-called "interest rate island" are manifold. First, a lower real interest rate may 
simply be seen as a reflection of the Swiss franc which appreciates over time. If this were the only 
correct interpretation, more favourable interest rates would not represent a genuine advantage for the 
Swiss economy, because the real interest rate advantage would be fully offset by a corresponding real 
appreciation of the Swiss franc. This has not been the case during the past decades. On the contrary, 
the  real  interest  rate  lead  in  our  country  has  on  average  exceeded  the  trend  in  real  appreciation. 
Therefore, the upward trend of the Swiss franc is only one of the reasons for the "interest rate island". 
More  convincing  explanations  include  the  high  savings  rate  in  Switzerland,  political  stability,  the 
efficiency of the financial sector, and a by and large investor-friendly legal framework. 
To the fore, however, are likely to be monetary arguments. In an international comparison, Switzerland 
has exhibited very low inflation rates and correspondingly low price fluctuations over a very long period 
of time. Beyond this, its higher-than-average gold and foreign exchange reserves create confidence. 
The  relatively  low  Swiss  franc  interest  rates  may  therefore  be  considered  as  a  type  of  insurance 
premium paid by investors to hedge their portfolios against crisis situations. 
The  more  than  three  years  of  relatively  calm  co-existence  with  the  euro  have  not  significantly 
diminished  the  interest  differential  in  favour  of  the  Swiss  franc.  Currently,  the  difference  between 
German and Swiss long term rates on government bonds still amounts to more than 1.5 percentage 
points. As long as the SNB can conduct an autonomous monetary policy, the Swiss franc will remain a 
crisis-resistant investment currency, and the interest rate bonus will be maintained. 
4 
 BIS Review 60/2002
 4. 
The euro's implications for the SNB's monetary policy 
The monetary policy concept 
4.1. 
With the euro now existing in its physical form, some cash transactions will tend to be effected in euros 
rather than in Swiss francs. This development will, in turn, have a negative impact on the demand for 
Swiss  francs.  But  as  I  have  set  out  before,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  large  majority  of  domestic 
payments will continue to be transacted in Swiss francs. On the whole, the decline in seigniorage, i.e. 
the profit that central banks achieve with the circulation of money, is likely to be very limited. However, 
the main point I want to make here is that even if the creation of the European Monetary Union did 
have a significant impact on the demand for Swiss francs, this would not call the viability of the SNB's 
monetary policy concept into question. 
A possible change in the demand for money hampers monetary policy decisions especially if a central 
bank pursues money supply targets. The steering of the money supply as a monetary policy concept 
has  by  now  been  abandoned  by  many  countries.  A  prominent  exception  is  the  ECB,  which  uses  a 
reference  value  for  the  growth  of  the  money  stock  M3  as  a  second  pillar  besides  a  broad-based 
assessment of the inflation outlook to achieve its objective of price stability. 
The SNB abandoned money supply targeting two years ago. Its new concept is based on an inflation 
forecast and an operational target range for the three-month Swiss franc Libor rate. The main goal has 
been, and will remain, price stability. Price stability is considered to have been achieved if inflation, 
measured by the national consumer price index, is below 2% in the medium term. In achieving this 
goal, the SNB always takes account of the economic development. This is also stipulated in the draft 
of the revised National Bank Law. 
Due  to  the  strategy  change  from  money  supply  targeting  to  inflation  forecast-oriented  interest  rate 
steering,  shifts  in  the  demand  for  money  have  become  less  problematic,  as  they  are  being  offset 
automatically.  But  although  the  money  supply  no  longer  serves  as  an  intermediate  target,  its 
development is an important element duly considered – along with other indicators – in producing the 
inflation forecast. The centuries-old observation that sustained changes in the price level are linked to 
changes in the supply of money remains valid. 
The significance of the exchange rate 
4.2. 
Another  important  variable  in  producing  a  medium-term  inflation  forecast  is  the  exchange  rate.  The 
significance  of  the  Swiss  franc  exchange  rate  against  the  major  currencies  is  due  to  the  Swiss 
economy  being  so  small  and  open.  The  export  share  of  the  Swiss  gross  national  product  (GNP) 
amounts to approximately 42%, while the corresponding share is 29% in Germany and only 12% in 
the  United  States.  Switzerland's  major  trading  partners  are  the  EU  countries,  which  absorb  59%  of 
Swiss  exports. With  regard  to  imports,  the  interdependence  is  even  greater:  75%  of  Swiss  imports 
come  from  the  EU.  Via  foreign  trade,  the  exchange  rate  exerts  an  influence  on  aggregate  demand 
and,  therefore,  also on the price  level in  Switzerland. In addition,  the exchange rate  directly  affects 
import prices. 
Therefore, exchange rate movements have been, and will be, closely monitored by the SNB. The rapid 
succession  of  interest  rate  cuts  by  the  National  Bank  since  11  September  2001  was  also  an 
expression of concern about an exchange rate-triggered threat to the economy. Since price stability 
was not jeopardised, it was possible to considerably relax monetary policy. 
Steering the exchange rate? 
4.3. 
Although  the  SNB  takes  account  of  the  exchange  rates  when  determining  its  monetary  policy,  it  is 
sometimes called upon to do more than that. It is even requested to concentrate – at least temporarily 
– exclusively  on the exchange rate. The underlying  notion is that the National  Bank could  aim at a 
lower Swiss franc exchange rate and that exports would consequently pick up to the desired degree. 
Theoretically, it is possible to weaken the franc in nominal terms by conducting a highly expansionary 
monetary  policy.  However,  while  the  hope  that  a  depreciation  of  the  franc  will  boost  export 
opportunities is understandable, it is deceptive all the same. On the one hand, the exchange rate is 
only one of the factors determining export success. Exports do not only depend on price elasticity, but 
also  on  their  income  elasticity,  i.e.  the  cyclical  development  abroad.  On  the  other  hand,  as  I  have 
pointed  out  before,  it  is  the  real  rather  than  the  nominal  exchange  rate  that  matters  for  production 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 5
 decisions and trade flows. It is well known that monetary policy cannot manipulate the real exchange 
rate for any length of time. 
Expanding the  domestic money supply until the Swiss franc was depreciated to the desired degree 
would  inevitably  lead  to  a  massive  rise  in  inflationary  risks.  As  a  consequence,  the  SNB  would  no 
longer be able to fulfil its mandate of ensuring price stability. In the long run, such a policy would result 
in the well-known costs of rising inflation without any compensating real benefits. 
Moreover, if the SNB tied the Swiss franc to the euro, as some calls from the industry and the unions 
have demanded, a first consequence would be the erosion of the "interest rate island". One can only 
begin to imagine what this would mean for the Swiss financial centre, the building and construction 
industry, or Swiss asset prices. The sinking of the "interest rate island" would trigger substantial waves 
of  redistribution  from  debtors  to  creditors,  the  financial  system  would  come  under  pressure,  and 
cyclical setbacks would be inevitable. 
The  view  that  a  weaker  franc  might  even  compensate  for  structural  shortcomings  of  the  Swiss 
economy must also be rejected. Looking at the economy as a whole, we notice that the Swiss export 
sector in general is highly competitive. It is exactly the export-oriented companies that are the main 
driving force behind productivity gains in Switzerland. If, however, the domestic sector, which is less 
exposed  to  direct  international  competition,  does  not  follow  suit,  growth  prospects  are  limited.  The 
continued improvement of economic policy conditions, in particular the strengthening of competition in 
the domestic industry, is the key to a sustained high level of prosperity in Switzerland. It is, therefore, 
justified in taking priority in terms of economic policy. 
Without doubt, we are today confronted with an unstable economic situation worldwide. However, the 
economy  cannot  be  improved  by  targeting  a  specific  exchange  rate.  Given  the  limited  prospects  of 
success, the described inflationary risks and the risk of giving away the interest rate bonus, exchange 
rate targeting as a monetary policy strategy clearly must be rejected. 
Conclusions 
5. 
For more than three and a half years now, Europe - and in its midst Switzerland - have been living with 
the euro as deposit money. It has led to fixed exchange rates and a uniform interest rate level in the 
euro zone surrounding Switzerland. The conditions for an optimal currency area have probably not yet 
been met. But the currency union will develop further. 
For large parts of the Swiss economy, the euro facilitates business. The Swiss export sector benefits 
from  lower  transaction  costs.  Currency  devaluations,  which  were  previously  implemented  by  some 
European countries so as to improve their competitiveness, are now a thing of the past. In addition, 
Swiss  monetary  policy  profits  from  the  existence  of  a  large  economic  bloc  in  Europe  that  pursues 
similar goals as Switzerland in terms of monetary policy. The exchange rate of the Swiss franc is likely 
to remain more stable against the euro than it used to be against the former currencies of the EMU 
members.  However,  exchange  rate  fluctuations  must  still  be  reckoned  with,  as  the  events  after  the 
terrorist attacks in the US demonstrated. 
As a result of the introduction of euro notes and coins, the euro will be used increasingly as a means 
of  payment  in  the  tourism  sector  as  well  as  in  foreign  trade.  However,  the  euro  will  not  become  a 
parallel currency. In Switzerland, employment and loan contracts will continue to be concluded mainly 
in Swiss francs. The same applies to domestic payments. 
The SNB's monetary policy concept will remain unchanged: in other words, the SNB will continue to 
conduct  an  independent  monetary  policy  oriented  to  price  stability  and  the  needs  of  the  Swiss 
economy. As a consequence, Switzerland is likely to retain its lower interest rate level. Exchange rate 
targets are incompatible with the SNB's mandate. Nevertheless, since the exchange rate can affect 
the health of the economy the SNB will also continue to take the exchange rate closely into account 
when determining its monetary policy. 
6 
 BIS Review 60/2002
