 Otmar Issing: Relationship lending in the euro area 
Dinner speech by Prof Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Second ECB Central Banking Conference "The transformation of the European Financial System", 
24-25 October 2002, Frankfurt am Main, 24 October 2002.  
 The conference is on "The transformation of the European financial system". This topic raises a wide 
range of fascinating issues. 
The, first, and most immediate question is: have we chosen the right title for the conference? To what 
extent  can  we  already  speak  of  a  single  European  financial  system?  To  what  extent  are  we  still 
dealing with European financial systems, in the plural? I shall leave the answer to this question for the 
conference – and, most appropriately, for the future – to decide. 
A  second  question  could  be:  why  should  a  central  bank  organise  a  conference  on  banking  and 
financial issues? Here the answer is obvious. Central banks and the financial system are inextricably 
linked. Central banks rely on the financial system for the transmission of monetary policy. The financial 
system relies on the central bank as the ultimate source of liquidity, the monopoly supplier of central 
bank money to the economy and as the institution responsible for maintaining price stability and thus 
supplying a stable unit of account for all economic and financial transactions. A stable currency and a 
sound financial system are the foundation of a strong economy ... and if I may add: a stability-oriented 
monetary  policy  is  a  central  bank's  best  contribution  to  a  sound  financial  system,  which  in  turn 
facilitates the conduct of monetary policy.  
A further perennial theme running through the conference is the long-standing debate on the relative 
merits and drawbacks of bank versus market financing of economic activity. This – finally – brings me 
closer to the subject of tonight's speech. Here, again, I have no answer to offer, except to say that I 
trust in the forces of competition, evolution and adaptation in the economy. What matters in the end is 
that the financial system is robust, resilient and flexible in the face of shocks and new developments. 
In this context I would not rule out that a financial system based on two pillars of bank and market 
finance may well stand the test of time. While – as you may suspect – I personally have perhaps a 
natural  inclination  to  associate  two  pillars  with  robustness,  again,  I  would  leave  it  to  you  (at  the 
conference) and the course of history to come up with a verdict. 
In  any  event,  the  papers  presented  today  and  tomorrow  bring  further  evidence  that  the  relative 
importance  of  banks  and  markets  is  a  widely  used  summary  indicator  of  the  evolution  of  financial 
systems.  
The changing nature of banking relationships in European finance today is the issue on which I would 
like to share a few thoughts with you this evening.  
Banks deserve special attention as they are, in continental Europe, the main suppliers of credit and 
financial services to individuals and firms. My argument will develop around two simple questions:  
• 
• 
How important is relationship lending in the euro area?  
Given  the  current  trends  in  bank  structure  and  competition,  is  relationship  lending  on  a 
declining trend, and if so, what could be the consequences?  
Relationship lending in Europe  
1. 
By relationship lending, I mean that banks and their customers build up agreements on terms of credit, 
implying  for  instance  secured  access  to  credit  lines  at  pre-set  prices.  The  bank  acquires  expertise 
about the credit-worthiness of its customer by keeping close contact with the management of the firm. 
For instance, the bankers who sit on the board of many European firms can gain insider information on 
these firms. The implication of this close link may be that the bank provides the firm with easier access 
to liquidity.  
Relationship  lending  is  particularly  widespread  in  the  euro  area,  in  particular  regarding  small  and 
medium enterprises (SME). Given that SME account for about 60% of private sector employment in 
the euro area, it is immediately apparent that a reduction in the availability of relationship lending could 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 1
 have an effect on the euro area's economy and on the working of monetary policy. This is particularly 
relevant to determine the importance of the often mentioned "credit channel of monetary policy".  
At  the  micro-economic  level,  relationship  lending  implies  that  as  a  tendency  the  bank  insulates  its 
customers from liquidity or interest rate shocks. In case of a drop to its cash flow e.g., a firm can draw 
on a credit line that has been previously negotiated. Likewise, bank lending rates will not necessarily 
be  adjusted  in  line  with  market  interest  rates.  While  firms  that  have  access  to  these  risk-sharing 
schemes can be expected to pay some form of an insurance premium to the bank, their decisions on 
investment, employment and production should be less sensitive to financial shocks. 
Hence, at the macro-economic level, the more widespread relationship lending is, the smoother the 
business  cycle  should  be.  This  may  contribute  to  explain  why  business  cycle  fluctuations  have 
traditionally been larger in the US and the UK, where relationship lending is limited, than in continental 
Europe, where relationship lending is thought to be prevalent. It may also imply that the role of banks 
in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  differs  in  continental  Europe  and  in  the  US  or  the  UK.  In 
continental Europe, banks would insulate the firms from the effects of changes in the market interest 
rates to a larger extent than US or UK banks would, because of the larger proportion of loans granted 
through relationship lending.  
But, as I will argue, current trends in bank structure and competition seem to be putting pressure on 
banks to limit the scale of their relationship lending activities.  
What then are the main characteristics and trends of the European banking sector?  
2. 
Let me briefly touch upon some aspects that have been addressed in the papers by Dermine and by 
Rajan and Zingales. These papers stress that competition, both among banks and from other financial 
intermediaries, has led to the consolidation of the European banking sector and to a diversification of 
the financial services proposed by banks.  
First,  there  has  been  significant  consolidation  of  the  banking  sector,  including  a  sharp  fall  in  the 
number of banks. Overall, the number of banks in the euro area decreased by about a third in the last 
fifteen years.  
Second, financing through issuance of market instruments, which has historically played a minor role 
for euro area corporations, has become more important since the start of Stage Three of Economic 
and  Monetary  Union.  Due  to  the  monetary  union,  large  issuers  can  more  easily  go  abroad  if  their 
domestic financial markets are not sufficiently developed. And European Banks have been confronted 
with competition from non-European investment banks in the issuance-underwriting business.  
Third,  traditional  deposit-taking  activities  have  been  challenged  by  the  emergence  of  assets 
management companies and mutual and pension funds. These bank competitors have boomed in the 
last decades, accentuating the competitive pressure on the traditional banking business. 
Fourth, retail lending, and  especially lending to SMEs, remained untouched from the competition of 
either  other  financial  intermediaries  or  foreign  banks.  However,  given  the  over-capacity  of  most 
domestic banking sectors of euro area, retail lending is likely to undergo intensified competition among 
domestic banks.  
Like  any  business  that  is  confronted  with  new  competitors,  banks  reassess  their  activities.  For 
instance, we observe in most countries that banks have been able to generate income by entering into 
the  business  of  their  competitors.  Banks  actually  have  offered  mutual  funds  and  other  portfolio 
management services to the customer network acquired via their traditional deposit taking and lending 
activities. Now, many economists have asked whether relationship lending can remain profitable in a 
more competitive environment.  
3. 
Increased competition in banking seems to be reducing the availability of relationship 
lending in the euro area  
Before further describing the effects of increased competition on the availability of relationship lending, 
let me stress that the phenomena we are talking about are not directly observable, and hence making 
it hard to evaluate the availability of relationship lending with certainty.  
2 
 BIS Review 60/2002
 On  the  one  hand,  increased  competition  may  deter  banks  from  costly  acquisition  of  information  on 
borrowers if they fear that the latter can more easily switch to other banks in good times. On the other 
hand, the competition from non-banks in so many of banks' activities may push more banks towards 
relationship lending with SME, a segment on which they can not be challenged by non-banks.  
Recent  evidence  seems  to  suggest  that  the  availability  of  relationship  lending  is  decreasing.  We 
observe for instance that in Belgium and Germany, the growth rate of real loans to the private sector is 
lower  than  output  growth,  which  is  quite  different  from  what  was  observed  in  previous  episodes  of 
economic slowdown. This decline coincides with large commercial banks reducing the scale of their 
retail banking because competition from local savings banks has intensified. 
There is also evidence that the banks which have been involved in mergers tend to limit the scale of 
their lending relationship activities. 
Finally, some observers expect that the introduction of the Basel II accord would increase the capital 
charges on loans supplied to Small and Medium Enterprises. This new regulation is likely to make the 
price of credit to Small and Medium Enterprises more responsive to market interest rates.  
This would directly affect the role of banks in the monetary policy transmission; as the recent research 
in  the  Eurosystem  has  shown  this  role  depends  on  the  particular  environment  in  which  European 
banks have operated up to the recent past. 
In conclusion, recent trends in the European financial markets seem to have put pressure on banks, 
leading  some  of  them  to  reduce  the  scale  of  their  relationship  lending  activities.  If  it  continues,  the 
recent reduction in the availability of relationship lending in Europe could affect the euro area business 
cycle  and the transmission of monetary policy as  the liquidity  insurance  provided by banks to SME 
decreases.  
All in all increased competition will trigger substantial changes and cause difficulties. But in the end 
after a period of transition the financial industry of the euro area will have gained competitiveness and 
strengthened robustness.  
Such developments are clearly of primary importance for central bankers and this is precisely why this 
conference is so useful.  
BIS Review 60/2002 
 3
