 Michael C Bonello: Regional economic integration - the options for Malta 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Annual Dinner of the 
Institute of Financial Services, St. Julian’s, 7 November 2002. 
 In previous years I used this occasion to focus on issues related to the country’s perennial challenge, 
which is to converge to the economic standards of its more developed trading partners. Among the 
appropriate responses to this challenge I emphasised the importance of price and financial stability, 
fiscal  restraint,  market-based  reforms  and  a  viable  exchange  rate  strategy.  These  are  indeed 
necessary elements of a strong macroeconomic policy framework conducive to export-led growth. The 
issue I shall address today is the need to complement these policies with a more secure access to 
international  markets.  The  reason  is  simple. Without  such  access,  a  small  open  economy  like  ours 
cannot hope to achieve sustained, quality growth in today’s globalized world.  
A structured, regional approach to building competitiveness 
In a world economy driven by cross-border flows of foreign direct investment (FDI) seeking the most 
profitable  locations,  the  challenge  of  sustaining  economic  growth  must  be  faced  head  on  by 
endeavouring  to maintain  cost competitiveness and  gaining access to larger markets. Studies have 
shown that countries which are more open to trade tend to achieve higher growth rates compared to 
less open economies at comparable stages of development.1 Of course, openness also brings with it 
greater exposure to external shocks, particularly for small economies that cannot aspire to any degree 
of self-sufficiency. 
Experience, however, suggests that such exposure does not necessarily translate into vulnerability for 
small economies if they are closely integrated with larger ones. For example, the greater resilience of 
countries in Central and Eastern Europe over that of a number of other transition economies has been 
attributed to the relatively stronger trade links which the former have with rich, neighbouring countries.2 
In addition, the latest IMF World Economic Outlook shows that over the past 25 years less integrated 
economies exhibited a higher degree of susceptibility to financial crises than economies with strong 
trade linkages, and that financially integrated economies in turn experienced a lower degree of output 
volatility than those with closed financial markets.3 This suggests that trade and financial integration 
with major trading partners remains a preferred option.  
This conclusion is borne out by the experiences of small states such as Luxembourg and Singapore. 
The fundamental characteristics of these countries resemble Malta’s in that they too are small open 
economies  which  lack  natural  resources.  Both,  however,  have  achieved  far  higher  levels  of 
prosperity.4 Luxembourg, for example, with a population only slightly larger than that of Malta has a 
per  capita  income  three  times  higher.  This  success  is  attributed  to  Luxembourg’s  ability  to  reap 
economies  of  scale  by  integrating  with  larger,  prosperous  territories  in  a  way  that  has  permitted 
high-value,  export-oriented  firms  to  flourish  alongside  domestically-oriented  ones.  In  addition,  by 
pooling  resources  with  those  available  in  neighbouring  countries,  Luxembourg  has  managed  to 
address resource limitations and other problems that it could not deal with in an effective way on its 
                                                      
1  Excluding OECD member states and a number of countries that are well known for their pro-trade orientation, Dollar and 
Kray (2001) find that developing countries who had the largest trade to GDP ratios also experienced the highest per capita 
growth rates since the 1960s. They note, for example, that these countries - which they term the “post-1980 globalizers” - 
have seen their average annual growth rates jump from 2.9% in the 1970s and 3.5% in the 1980s to 5.0% in the 1990s. By 
contrast, the non-globalizers have seen their growth rates fall from 3.3% in the 1970s to 1.4% during the 1990s. Dollar., E. & 
A.  Kray.  (2001)  Trade,  Growth  and  Poverty.  World  Bank,  Policy  Research  Department, Working  Paper  No.  2615.  USA, 
Washington. 
"The  Challenge  to  Small,  Landlocked  Transition  Economies  -  Trends  and  Policies  in  the  World  Economy”,  in  World 
Economic and Social Survey 2001, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations. 
"Consequences of Trade and Financial Integration for Macroeconomic Volatility”, in IMF, World Economic Outlook 2002. 
3  
4   While Malta ranks 50th in terms of income per capita, these countries are among the 20 richest economies of the world. 
2 
World Development Indicators 2002. World Bank. 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 1
 own. Similarly, Singapore has developed into a regional hub by supplying manufacturers and service 
providers in booming Southeast Asian economies. And not only does it participate in the Association 
of South East Asian Nations, but it also has a far reaching trade agreement with New Zealand, which 
is expected to develop into a closer economic partnership that will in time also include Hong Kong and 
Japan.5 
These countries are not unique in this regard. Recognising that success in world markets requires a 
critical  mass  in  order  to  foster  competition  and  competitiveness  and  to  acquire  a  measure  of 
bargaining power, countries the world over are turning to regional arrangements as a stepping stone 
to gaining a foothold in the global economy.6 They know that belonging to a regional grouping also 
makes it easier to attract FDI and to absorb the necessary technology and management expertise that 
can be applied elsewhere in the economy. Such arrangements also provide members with a first-hand 
experience  of  the  negotiation  process.  The  World  Trade  Organisation  estimates  that  243  regional 
trade agreements are in force today,7 covering at least 129 countries.8 Regional groupings moreover 
are not only increasing in number, but they are also becoming deeper in scope, encompassing areas 
of policy other than trade and investment.9 
This brings me to the first point I wish to make today. The experience of other countries shows that the 
capacity necessary to deal with the competitive forces of globalisation can be optimally built in stages 
through participation in regional arrangements. The implication is that in order to reap the full benefits 
of the policy reforms currently under way, Malta does not only need to integrate further internationally, 
but  has  to  do  so  through  a  structured  approach  that  seeks  to  exploit  potential  synergies  with  other 
economies. The question then arises, “What kind of regional arrangement and with whom?”. 
Malta’s potential partners for regional integration 
Traditionally,  partners  to  regional  integration  arrangements  exhibit  strong  trade  ties  based  on 
complementarity in terms of resource endowments and geographical proximity, as well as a common 
historical and cultural background. These criteria limit the scope for integration between Malta and a 
number of outlying European countries such as the transition economies of Eastern Europe and the 
EFTA  countries.  In  fact,  Malta’s  commercial  links  with  these  countries  are  weak,  with  only  a  few 
economic sectors that could be of potential interest to both parties. In 2001 Malta’s exports to EFTA 
countries represented less than 0.5% of its exports to the European Union (EU). It follows that the EU 
and  the  countries  of  North  Africa,  many  of  which  are  participating  in  the  Euro-Mediterranean 
Partnership known as the Barcelona process, are more likely to be potentially viable regional partners 
for Malta.  
As  far  as  the  latter  countries  are  concerned,  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  have  made  considerable 
progress in recent years. Most of them, however, require more time to be able to take full advantage of 
their  potential.  A  strategy  based  solely  on  closer  ties  with  these  countries,  therefore,  would  tend  to 
condition  Malta’s  development  to  proceed  at  a  slower  pace  than  its  own  potential  would  justify. 
Furthermore, although efforts are being made to create a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area (FTA) by 
2010, this date appears rather optimistic. This was confirmed by the Spanish Presidency last March, 
which noted that a critical mass of implemented FTAs between the partners themselves has yet to be 
                                                      
5   Singapore has recently also initialled a bilateral agreement with Japan. 
6 
Indeed, these are the precise reasons put forward by the Minister of Industry and Trade of the Republic of Tanzania during 
the 47th session of UNCTAD’s Trade and Development Board where he noted that: 
“We do not believe that we can enter into the international arena under today’s rules if we do not go through these steps at 
regional level”. 
 7  Of these arrangements only 141 have been notified to the WTO. “Regional Trade Integration Under Transformation”, WTO 
Secretariat, 2002, preliminary draft prepared for the Seminar on Regionalism and the WTO on 26 April 2002 
8   These include members of AFTA, the Andean Community, CARICOM, COMESA, ECOWAS, the EU, MERCOSUR, NAFTA, 
SADC,  CACM,  LAIA,  ECO,  GCC  and  the  Bangkok  Agreement.  This  does  not  include  countries  which  have  stand-alone 
FTAs/Association Agreements with another country or regional grouping. 
9   The  ANDEAN  Pact,  for  example,  also  deals  with  biodiversity,  electronic  commerce  and  the  protection  of  indigenous 
knowledge. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2002
 reached.10 Finally, it is also to be noted that an essential aspect of an eventual Euro-Mediterranean 
FTA is expected to be an obligation to achieve equivalence in standards. 
At  this  stage,  therefore,  a  growth  strategy  that  relies  on  closer  links  with  these  countries  appears 
neither  plausible  nor  likely  to  provide  adequate  opportunities  in  terms  of  market  access.  The  only 
viable  alternative  thus  seems  to  be  to  forge  stronger  ties  with  the  EU,  with  whom  Malta  is  already 
closely integrated through trade and investment. The EU accounts for more than half of Malta’s trade 
in goods and for around 80% of incoming tourists.11 The EU is equally important as a source of FDI, 
accounting  for  some  43%  of  the  total  in  2000.12  This  suggests  that  strengthening  the  existing 
relationship  with  the EU is more likely  to  produce early results than attempting  to develop  ties  with 
other regions starting from a very small base. 
Malta’s relationship with the EU - alternative scenarios 
Malta  could,  for  example,  retain,  or  attempt  to  upgrade,  the  existing  Association  Agreement.  As  it 
stands, this agreement is very narrow in scope, focusing on industrial goods to the exclusion of most 
agricultural products. In addition, it is severely limited by a set of rules of origin whereby local exports 
only benefit from preferential access to the EU market if the percentage of the value of the product that 
originates in Malta exceeds a minimum threshold. If this agreement is to be upgraded, however, Malta 
would have to make commitments over and above those it has today. Indeed, many of the countries 
with whom the EU has a comparable agreement have managed to obtain a better deal than Malta not 
only because they are much larger in terms of market size, but also because they have entered into 
additional  commitments.  EEA  countries,  for  example,  do  indeed  participate  in  EU  programmes,  but 
they  have  also  offered  substantial  rebates  on  loan-related  interest  payments  and  committed  nearly 
ECU  500  million  in  direct  grants  for  projects  in  specific  EU  regions.  In  other  words,  EEA  countries 
contributed to the EU’s financial resources, and specifically to the EU’s regional policy, without being 
members of the EU. In addition, it is well known that membership of the EEA implies taking on a large 
part of the EU acquis, whether past, present or future, without having any say in the decision-making 
process.  
Nor  is  the  obligation  to  come  into  line  with  the  acquis  unique  to  the  EEA.  As  is  the  case  with 
Switzerland,  which  is  an  EFTA  but  not  an  EEA  country,  the  EU’s  trading  partners  are  increasingly 
being required to approximate their national laws with those of the EU as a precondition for access to 
its market13.  
The second conclusion to emerge from this analysis, therefore, is that if Malta seeks to negotiate a 
more advantageous form of association agreement, our exporters will only be able to secure improved 
access to the EU and its partners if the Maltese Government makes commitments in areas other than 
those covered by the present agreement, including a commitment to achieve legal equivalence with 
the EU Acquis. 
Pressures to liberalise, the costs of restructuring and the obligation of legal equivalence will 
arise irrespective of EU membership 
It could be argued that as a non-member the pace with which this legal equivalence would have to be 
achieved would be slower than that implied by the current enlargement calendar. In practice, however, 
the difference in timing is subtle. It must not be forgotten that nine other countries are also about to 
                                                      
10 
In  addition,  a  recent  study  by  the  World  Trade  Organisation  shows  that  this  is  one  of  the  regions  with  the  lowest 
concentration of regional trade arrangements, a situation which is not expected to change much in the medium-term. See 
footnote 7 for source. 
11  NSO, News Release 103/2002. 
12   NSO, unpublished estimates 
13   During the Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference on Trade held in March 2002, participating Ministers noted that the 
dismantling of tariffs will not be enough:  
“Businesses have to benefit from an economic environment where trade is facilitated by an adaptation and a harmonisation 
of regulatory provisions concerning the free movement of goods, standards, right of establishment, property rights.” 
 BIS Review 69/2002 
 3
 join, which means that they will shortly have complete access not only to an enlarged EU market, but 
also to the reciprocal trade agreements which the EU has with third countries. If local businesses are 
not to lose out to competition from this new source, therefore, the administrative burdens and financial 
outlays  associated  with  the  achievement  of  legal  equivalence  and  the  adoption  of  EU  technical 
standards will have to be borne within the same time frame available to the other candidate countries, 
irrespective of whether Malta joins the EU or not.  
Yet even if such compliance is achieved on schedule, under any arrangement other than membership 
Malta  would  only  be  able  to  tap  the  markets  covered  by  EU  reciprocal  agreements  by  negotiating 
individual bilateral agreements with most of the countries in question. Given Malta’s limited negotiating 
capacity, combined with the slow pace with which the conclusion of such agreements tends to proceed 
and also the high degree of protection in many developing countries, this seems to be an unrealistic 
objective.  
This at a time when Malta has already started to graduate from the General System of Preferences 
(GSP) through which some developed countries grant non-reciprocal preferential trade access to less 
developing countries. For example, Malta graduated from the GSP scheme of the USA at the end of 
last  year.  In  addition,  pressures  are  mounting  on  developed  countries  in  the  WTO  to  extend  any 
preferential  treatment  accorded  to  a  subset  of WTO  members  to  all  other  members,  such  that  any 
preferential  treatment  given  to  Malta  by  any  country  over  and  above  that  accorded  to  other  WTO 
members will be lost in any case. 
In a non-membership scenario, moreover, the EU-Malta income gap would tend to widen because the 
other new members will continue with reforms that are conducive to attracting FDI. Indeed a recent 
study shows that the EU decision to open negotiations with the first-wave of accession countries had 
by itself reinforced FDI flows into these countries. This has implications for the catching-up process, 
because countries that absorb the highest amounts of FDI normally continue to attract the bulk of new 
investment in later years.14 So that if the scale of FDI flows into Malta fails to keep up with that going to 
the other candidate countries, Malta could easily fall behind these countries in terms of GDP growth 
and living standards. This at a time when the CEECs already absorb around 33% of all FDI flows from 
the EU to emerging markets, and when this region is increasingly becoming the dominant sphere of 
EU  investors.15  It  is,  therefore,  of  paramount  importance  that  the  pace  of  reform  be  accelerated, 
irrespectively of whether Malta joins the EU or not.16 
Against this background, it appears that securing access to the EU market will become increasingly 
difficult  as  a  non-member.  Membership,  on  the  other  hand,  promises  immediate  benefits  for  local 
exporters, because any product made in Malta would not only have complete access to the EU, but 
would also benefit from any preferential treatment which the EU receives under the various reciprocal 
trade  agreements  it  has  with  third  countries,  without  the  need  for  Malta  to  negotiate  separate 
agreements and without being subject to country of origin limitations. The extent of this benefit could 
be substantial because the EU does not merely have reciprocal trade agreements with Northern and 
Eastern European countries and with its Southern Mediterranean partners, but has also finalised, or is 
close  to  finalising,  similar  agreements  with  more  distant  countries  and  regional  blocs,  including 
Mexico, South Africa, Chile, Mercosur17 and the Gulf Co-operation Council18. For many local firms EU 
membership  would  also  translate  into  an  opportunity  to  outsource  inputs  more  cheaply,  and  for 
consumers a wider choice and cheaper products.  
                                                      
14   This follows from the fact that transnational corporations often react to the prospect of a larger market arising from regional 
arrangements by establishing integrated production and distribution networks within the region in question. 
15   Eurostat,  European  Union  Foreign  Direct  Investment  Yearbook  2000.  Moreover,  according  to  UNCTAD’s  latest  World 
Investment Report, Poland, the Czech Republic, the Russian Federation, Hungary and Slovakia absorbed around seventy-
five per cent of world FDI flows to Eastern Europe in 2001. 
16   Staying out of the EU is also likely to have negative implications for Malta’s credit rating. In a recent report, for example, 
FITCH credit rating agency notes that: 
“staying  out  would  damage  Malta’s  creditworthiness  unless  a  new  government  were  clearly  determined  to  retain  and 
develop the parts of the EU Acquis that are starting to enhance the efficiency and competitiveness of the Maltese economy.” 
 17   Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay. 
18   Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2002
 EU membership would also pose some challenges. For example, because membership implies more 
than  a  free  trade  agreement,  Malta  would  have  to  apply  the  EU’s  common  external  tariff  (CET)  to 
imports from third countries. Upon closer examination, however, it seems that this is unlikely to be a 
major problem. For a start, Malta’s customs duties on non-EU imports are already roughly in line with 
the CET, so that not much change would be necessary. Furthermore, the CET is foregone in the case 
of all those non-EU countries which benefit from preferential access of the EU market, especially in the 
case of raw materials. This means that imports can be purchased from alternative sources, possibly 
from the enlarged EU market, or from non-EU countries which enjoy access to the EU market. Finally, 
the CET is also suspended when the imported raw material is re-exported outside the EU as a finished 
product19. So while the costs of production for some sectors of the economy may increase, and this in 
turn could have implications for inflation, at least in the short-run, this impact is likely to be minimal in 
practice. 
As a member Malta would also assume the EU’s commitments under the non-reciprocal agreements 
with developing countries. Whereas this could have negative implications for specific sectors, for the 
economy  as  a  whole  these  effects  are  unlikely  to  be  significant  or  enduring.  This  is  because  the 
proportion  of  imports  from  these  countries  in  Malta’s  import  bill  is  marginal.  Second,  the  Cotonou 
Agreement, which is the EU’s most relevant agreement in this regard, will expire in 2008, by which 
time it is expected to be superseded by Economic Partnership Agreements based on reciprocity.20 If 
anything, therefore, the EU network of reciprocal trade agreements will increase. Within a few years 
importers and consumers should thus have more and not less access to duty-free imports, and any 
short-run increases in inflation should be more than neutralised. Third, the opportunity cost of staying 
out of the EU will increase for export-oriented firms.21 And finally, since the ACP (African, Caribbean 
and  Pacific)  countries  that  are  parties  to  the  Cotonou  Agreement  are  an  important  source  of  raw 
materials  for  the  EU  itself,  the  duty-free  access  of  their  raw  materials  should  actually  benefit  Malta 
which imports all its raw material needs. 
In the process local firms would, of course, also become subject to competition from countries covered 
by reciprocal trade agreements with the EU, and inefficient and high-cost producers in Malta could well 
be driven out of the market. To a great extent, however, this adjustment is already taking place, not 
least  because  the  removal  of  import  levies  is  well  underway.  Thus,  while  there  could  be  some 
increased costs, the effects on unemployment should be limited. In any case, both the Government 
and  the  EU  have  mechanisms  designed  to  assist  uncompetitive  firms.  It  could  also  be  argued  that 
some job losses are inevitable if we really want to give consumers a better deal while promoting the 
competitiveness of domestic firms. 
A short-term increase in unemployment, moreover, could well be reversed. This is not an unrealistic 
expectation. Investors from non-EU countries will find that they would be in a better position to tap the 
enlarged  EU  market  by  consolidating  their  activities  in  the  new  members  than  by  accessing  these 
markets separately. The opportunities  which enlargement would provide for investors should not be 
underestimated  given  that  Europe  is  the  region  having  the  greatest  concentration  of  regional  trade 
agreements with third countries, and that it is also the region with the highest proportion of imports that 
is  outsourced  from  partners  covered  by  such  agreements.  The  resultant  increase  in  employment 
opportunities should compensate for any jobs lost through restructuring. 
The prospect of access to a large market will not, of course, alone guarantee larger inflows of FDI. 
Investment decisions are not based solely on considerations of market size. Unfortunately, Malta is at 
a disadvantage in terms of other relevant criteria such as resource endowments and transport costs. 
Such  deficiencies,  therefore,  have  to  be  made  up  for  through  other  factors,  including  a  sound 
                                                      
19 
It could also be argued that the additional tax revenue from the application of the CET to imports from non-EU countries 
would make up at least partly for any losses arising from the removal of duties on intra-EU trade and trade with EU partners 
covered by reciprocal agreements. 
20   The  Cotonou  Agreement  additionally  foresees that the  number  of developing  countries  that  will continue  to  receive  non-
reciprocal access to EU markets under other agreements of this type is expected to decline, although there could remain a 
certain degree of asymmetry in timing to take into account the specific needs of developing countries. 
It is also relevant to mention that although Malta does not benefit directly from the pre-accession funds which are available 
to the other accession countries of Eastern Europe, Maltese companies may already bid for contracts awarded to projects 
financed under one of the funds in question. (Instrument for Structural Policy for Pre-accession) The benefit would probably 
be lost under a looser form of agreement with the EU. 
21 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 5
 macroeconomic  framework,  political  stability,  high  productivity  levels,  a  transparent  and  simplified 
regulatory framework, and an assurance that business and productive activities are conducted in line 
with internationally accepted standards. This would, of course, hold true whether Malta joins the EU or 
not.  
Costs of participation in international fora obviated by EU membership 
While  EU  membership  also  entails  the  administrative  burdens  associated  with  participation  in  EU 
institutions,  it  should  at  the  same  time  help  to  strengthen  Malta’s  presence  in  international  fora.  As 
Malta does not have the capacity to be present in every forum, it would be in a stronger position as a 
member  of  a  large  block.  One  could,  of  course,  argue  that  this  would  also  be  achieved  in  other 
scenarios. Experience suggests otherwise however. For example, despite the efforts made to create a 
coalition  of  small  states  in  the  decision-making  bodies  of  organisations  such  as  the  World  Trade 
Organisation,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  World  Bank,  and  despite  the  fact  that  the 
specific problems of small states are universally recognised, these efforts have proved largely futile. 
The  situation  is  not  expected  to  change  in  the  near  future  in  view  of  the  differences  among  small 
states  themselves.22  As  an  EU  member,  moreover,  since  Malta’s  representation  in  EU  decision-
making  bodies  would  be  more  than  proportionate  to  its  population,  its  voice  would  stand  a  better 
chance  of  being  heard,  not  least  because  most  of  the  other  acceding  countries  are  also  small  and 
could be potential allies on issues of common concern.  
Indeed as Malta’s recent experience with the OECD and developments relating to the proposed EU 
savings tax directive have shown, Malta is likely to obtain a better deal as an EU member. Four years 
ago the OECD was planning to take action against non-co-operative countries on its list of “harmful tax 
havens”.  Malta  was  not  on  the  list  because  the  Maltese  Government  undertook  to  eliminate  any 
offending practices and to exchange information with foreign tax authorities once a level playing field 
was achieved. But the relevant aspect of this episode is that small jurisdictions are being compelled to 
revisit their strategies and diversify their economies in a manner which does not harm the interests of 
stronger, high-tax economies, and that standards and codes of good practice will increasingly serve as 
another dimension of competition.  
In these circumstances it cannot but be perceived as an advantage by prospective members that the 
EU  not  only  has  the  capacity  to  resist  threats  to  the  competitiveness  of  its  members,  but  also  has 
enough  bargaining  power  to  persuade  its  competitors  to  reach  a  compromise  acceptable  to  its 
members. 
The EU, for example,  is putting pressure on Switzerland  and the United  States to adopt equivalent 
measures to those contained in the proposed EU directive on savings taxation. It has gone as far as to 
suggest  that  it  could  impose  sanctions  and  even  hold  up  negotiations  in  other  areas  if  Switzerland 
remains opposed to a deal on the exchange of information on the savings of EU citizens with Swiss 
banks.  This  stance  is  quite  credible  given  that  Austria,  Belgium  and  Luxembourg  have  a  vested 
interest in this matter and have declared that they will only support the new package if Switzerland, the 
United  States  and  other  third  countries23  agree  to  apply  equivalent  measures.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
since this package is a tax-related measure it can only be adopted on the basis of unanimity, which 
means that it cannot be approved without the support of countries such as Luxembourg. 
From  the  perspective  of  the  current  debate  in  Malta,  the  ongoing  negotiations  between  the  EU 
Commission  and  Switzerland  do  more  than  raise  questions  about  the  durability  of  bank  secrecy 
regimes.  More  relevantly  they  cast  doubt  on  the  assumption  that  third  countries  are  able  to  protect 
their  immunity from EU decisions simply by  virtue of their status as non-members. The savings tax 
example also shows that even a small country like Luxembourg can, through its membership in the 
                                                      
22   Guinea-Bissau, for  example,  has a  GNP  per  capita  of  only  $160, whereas  countries  such  as  Brunei,  Cyprus,  Malta  and 
Qatar have a GNP per capita of more than $9,000. 
23   These  include  Andorra,  Liechtenstein,  Monaco  and  San  Marino.  The  US  is  trying  to  resist  the  move.  In  July  2002  the 
Treasury Department in fact withdrew a draft law which would have made it compulsory for American financial bodies to 
provide extensive information on savings income invested in the United States by non-residents and replaced it with a less 
onerous law that limits the extent of information and the number of countries to which it would apply. 
6 
 BIS Review 69/2002
 EU,  succeed  in  getting  a  larger  country  to  give  up  some  of  the  competitive  edge  it  enjoys  in  a 
particular sector.  
It is to be expected that similar manoeuvres will become more frequent in an enlarged EU. Having a 
voice in setting the rules would then assume paramount importance, especially since the other new 
members,  who  are  Malta’s  competitors  in  several  areas,  would  themselves  be  seeking  to  advance 
their own interests. This, in turn, also casts doubt on whether Malta would be able to obtain transitional 
arrangements and derogations comparable to those it has obtained thus far if it had to negotiate with 
the EU when Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey have become members. 
This  leads  to  my  third  conclusion.  If,  irrespective  of  whether  and  when  Malta  joins  the  EU,  local 
producers and service providers will continue to be influenced by decisions taken by the EU, and given 
that the other channels through which Malta could possibly gain a better representation in international 
fora  are  not  well-developed,  Malta  would  probably  be  in  a  stronger  bargaining  position  as  an  EU 
member.  
The macroeconomic discipline aspect of EU membership 
As  in  any  other  club,  EU  membership  and  access  to  the  privileges  associated  with  it  entails  an 
obligation to contribute to the common budget. Now the debate on whether to join the EU has so far 
focused almost exclusively on whether Malta would be a net contributor or recipient of EU funding.24 A 
decision having such momentous implications cannot, however, be based only on issues relating to 
post-accession funding, which is a time-bound mechanism designed to help lagging EU regions catch 
up  with  the  more  affluent  ones.  For  apart  from  broader  geo-political  and  social  considerations,  EU 
membership  represents  a  concrete,  long-term  response  to  the  challenge  of  developing  a  modern 
economy  with  the  capacity  to  generate  wealth  in  a  sustainable  manner.  In  the  case  of  Ireland, 
Portugal,  Spain  and  Greece,  the  EU  has  indeed  proved  to  be  a  most  effective  mechanism  for  this 
purpose.  
This is so because the EU is unique among other regional arrangements in that it goes beyond market 
liberalisation  and  the  harmonisation  of  standards,  and  encompasses  more  fundamental  aspects  of 
integration. For this audience of bankers and financiers, it would be appropriate to illustrate this point 
by reference to the institutional framework governing macroeconomic policy in the euro area.  
Although new members cannot join the euro area immediately upon accession, they are expected to 
participate  in  EMU  eventually  and,  therefore,  to  show  a  commitment  to  a  stable  macroeconomic 
framework even before accession. Whatever the outcome of the current debate about the Stability and 
Growth Pact, fiscal discipline will continue to be an important policy ingredient of such a framework as 
it is a necessary condition for the success of any monetary union. In addition, the obligation to fulfil the 
Maastricht criteria provides members of the euro area with the impetus to safeguard the sustainability 
of their economies, not least because deficiencies in the real sector of the economy would ultimately 
weaken the ability of a Member State to fulfil the Maastricht criteria on an ongoing basis. 
The  euro  adds  an  important  dimension  to  these  disciplines.  First,  through  its  effects  on  price 
transparency  it  will  increasingly  compel  dominant  players  in  the  market  place  to  reconsider  their 
behaviour.  This  also  applies  to  the  financial  sector,  because  a  growing  number  of  savers  and 
borrowers will be offered a larger selection of euro-denominated financial instruments that will in time 
be tradable without limitation across the EU. This will have the added advantage of causing interest 
rates to converge to low levels. 
In  addition,  although  the  EU  has  not  yet  reached  all  the  objectives  of  the  1999  Financial  Services 
Action  Plan,  there  is  evidence  that  they  will  be  met  on  schedule,  not  least  because  the  euro  will 
provide the market with the necessary impetus to identify the remaining obstacles to the completion of 
the single market. A clear example of this is provided by the regulation on cross-border payments in 
euro which seeks to eliminate unjustifiable differences between charges on cross-border transfers and 
                                                      
24   On  the  same  reasoning  Malta  should  withdraw  from  international  financial  institutions  such  as  the  World  Bank  and  the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development since it is no longer entitled to financing from these institutions. This, 
however,  has  not  occurred  because  it  is  recognised  that  membership  in  these  institutions  yields  more  than  monetary 
benefits. 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 7
 those on transfers within Member States. Another consists of the initiatives underway to extend the 
single  passport  beyond  the  banking  sector  to  investment  services,  insurance  intermediaries  and 
securities markets. This will have at least two implications. 
First, a financial product licensed in one Member State would automatically be recognised in all others 
without  the  need  for  the  service  provider  to  go  through  licensing  and  listing  procedures  afresh.  For 
financial service providers this is an opportunity to by-pass the regulatory and other barriers that would 
otherwise render them uncompetitive. For the individual Member State, this is an opportunity to attract 
financial  service  providers  from  third  countries  who  want  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to 
establish themselves and market their products anywhere in the EU. Second, the single passport will 
also reduce the cost of doing business. It is in fact estimated that the Action Plan would reduce the 
cost of capital for 18 million businesses in the  EU and drive down the cost of financial services for 
consumers.  
Conclusion 
Against this background it is not surprising that studies on the effects of enlargement show that growth 
rates would be higher under EU membership than under any other scenario. A European Commission 
study  shows,  for  example,  that  during  the  first  five  years  following  accession,  growth  rates  in  the 
acceding countries would be between 1.7% and 3.2% above those that  would be achieved if these 
countries  were  to  proceed  with  current  reforms  without  joining  the  EU.25  A  comparable  finding  also 
emerges for Malta: the annual growth rate would be between 1.7% and 1.9% higher in the short-run 
than  it  would  be  under  the  non-membership  scenario.  The  difference  would  be  even  larger  in 
subsequent  years  –  Malta’s  growth  rates  could  then  be  between  4.4%  and  6.1%  higher  under  EU 
membership. 
Such  findings  and  related  considerations  have  led  governments,  political  parties,  trade  unions  and 
academics from twelve European countries, large and small, islands and continental ones, to conclude 
that  membership  of  the  EU  is  on  balance  the  best  available  response  to  the  challenges  posed  by 
globalization.  Those  who  perceive  EU  membership  as  a  unique  opportunity  are  equally  aware  that 
catching up with some of the most economically and socially advanced countries on earth is a major 
task  for  countries  whose  average  income  is  still  only  some  40  per  cent  of  the  EU  average.  This 
challenge  can  only  be  overcome  if  the  candidate  countries  seriously  question  the  way  they  have 
organized  and  managed  their  economies  in  the  past,  and  resolve  to  raise  their  performance.  The 
magnitude of the task is not to be underestimated because the necessary changes are pervasive – 
affecting  both  institutions  and  mindsets,  policies  and  work  practices  –  and  they  also  entail  costs, 
financial and otherwise. 
There is clearly, however, also a widespread conviction in the other candidate countries that this would 
be change with a purpose. Apart from the highly desirable prospect of convergence with EU income 
levels  and  living standards, a process itself facilitated by  EU financial and technical assistance, the 
pay-off  would  include  anchoring  the  future  prospects  of  each  new  member  country  to  those  of  an 
economic  superpower,  unfettered  access  to  a  large  and  rich  market  with  a  single  currency,  the 
adoption across the board of international best practices and standards and, not least, a place at the 
table where decisions are taken which would affect these countries even as non-members.  
The dynamics of regional economic integration are such that the choices available to our policymakers 
will  be  inevitably  conditioned  in  future  by  the  policies  of  an  enlarged  and  stronger  EU.  It  should, 
therefore, be clear that if it is to prosper, Malta will have to seek an accommodation with the EU. The 
prevailing view among countries on the periphery of the existing EU-15 is that the prospective long-
term benefits of membership outweigh the costs. That is why they are anxious to become members. 
                                                      
25   European  Commission,  Directorate  General  for  Economic  and  Financial  Affairs.  (2001)  “The  Economic  Impact  of 
Enlargement.” Enlargement Papers No 4. June. http://europa.eu.int/economy_finance. The report notes that between 2005 
and 2009 the average growth rate in 8 of the accession countries (the first wave of exceeding countries excluding Malta and 
Cyprus)  will  be  2.9%,  4.6%  and  6.1%,  respectively  under  the  baseline  scenario,  a  central  scenario  and  an  optimistic 
scenario. In a similar vein, a recent report by the National Bank of Hungary concludes that the adoption of the euro could 
boost economic growth in Hungary by between 0.6 to 0.9 percentage points annually for 20 years. Most of the growth will 
come  from  increased  international  trade.  See  National  Bank  of  Hungary,  Occasional  Paper  24,  “Adopting  the  Euro  in 
Hungary: expected costs, benefits and timing”, by Attila Csajbok and Agnes Csermely. 
8 
 BIS Review 69/2002
 Until such time as an equally well-documented argument is made which seriously questions this view, 
the case for membership remains a compelling one. 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 9
