 Lee Hsien Loong: Singapore’s economic restructuring against the background 
of Asia’s changing economic landscape 
Keynote address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Morgan  Stanley  Asia-Pacific  summit  2002,  Singapore, 
22 October 2002. 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introduction 
For  two  decades  during  the  East  Asian  miracle,  Southeast  Asia  grew  rapidly.   Large  volumes  of 
foreign  investments  helped  to  transform  the  economies,  creating  jobs  and  expanding  exports.   This 
ended abruptly in 1997, when the Asian Crisis swept through the region. The crisis has passed. But 
since  then,  Northeast  Asia’s  economic  performance  has  outshone  Southeast  Asia’s.  In  Southeast 
Asia, growth has been weaker and more disparate, both direct and portfolio investments have fallen, 
and ebullience has been replaced by pessimism. There are three main reasons.  
First, China. A large part of Northeast Asia’s strong performance reflects the continuing growth and 
transformation of the Chinese economy, which largely escaped the Asian Crisis. The past few years 
have witnessed rapid market liberalisation in China, as it prepared itself to join the WTO and bring 1.3 
billion  people  into  the  global  trading  system.  As  the  Chinese  economy  grew  and  showed  tangible 
progress,  MNCs  have  become  euphoric  over  China’s  potential,  both  as  a  production  base  and  an 
enormous market.  Accordingly, foreign direct investments have poured into China. China still faces 
daunting  problems,  for  example,  in  its  banking  system,  state-owned  enterprises,  and  intellectual 
property rights regime.  But the  dramatic and  ongoing changes give investors  hope and confidence 
that these problems will in time be overcome, making them feel that they cannot afford not to be in 
China.   
A  second  reason  for  Southeast  Asia’s  under-performance  is  the  regional  political  and  security 
situation. The Asian Crisis precipitated major social and political changes in many countries, deterring 
MNCs from committing to new investments in an uncertain climate. These overriding political concerns 
also  distracted  the  governments  from  tackling  urgent  economic  problems  and  implementing  painful 
structural  reforms  to  remedy  weaknesses  uncovered  by  the  crisis.  In  contrast,  South  Korea’s 
aggressive post-crisis restructuring of its corporate sector has spurred a more rapid recovery.  
Most  crucially,  the  Asian  Crisis  brought  down  the  Suharto  Government  in  Indonesia,  and  launched 
Indonesia on a new and uncharted path. For thirty years, a stable Indonesia, with a strong government 
focused  on  economic  development,  had  provided  a  critical  basis  for  confidence  and  peaceful 
cooperation in the whole of Southeast Asia. Suharto’s fall changed this. The subsequent Indonesian 
government  abandoned  Suharto’s  longstanding  policy  of  restraining  political  Islam,  thus  opening 
Pandora’s  box.   Islamic  groups,  including  the  militant  ones,  now  wield  considerable  influence  in 
Indonesia’s  body  politic.  Indonesia’s  political  and  social  landscape  has  altered  drastically  and 
permanently, affecting the whole region.  
More  recently,  Southeast  Asia  has  faced  security  problems  from  extremist  Islamic  terrorist  groups 
linked to Al Qaeda.  After September 11, such groups were discovered in Malaysia, the Philippines, 
Singapore  and  Indonesia.  They  are  linked  to  one  another  in  a  network  which  seeks  to  create  an 
Islamic  state  in  Southeast  Asia  through  violence  and  terror.  The  recent  bomb  attack  in  Bali  was  a 
tragic reminder that Southeast Asia is at the frontline of the worldwide war against terrorism.  
A  third,  more  cyclical,  factor  underlying  Southeast  Asia’s  under-performance,  has  been  weakening 
external  demand.  Although  Southeast  Asia’s  economies  have  been  diversifying  their  sources  of 
demand,  they  are  still  heavily  dependent  on  external  demand,  unlike  China.   But  Southeast  Asia’s 
main export markets – US, Japan, and the EU – are all languishing. The timing and strength of a pick-
up  in  the  US  economy  is  uncertain,  especially  given  the  possibility  of  a  war  in  Iraq,  and  the 
concomitant impact on oil prices and the international security climate. The Japanese economy is still 
mired  in  difficulties,  with  no  imminent  prospect  of  decisive  fundamental  change.  With  fiscal  and 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 1
 monetary policies constrained by the Maastricht Stability Pact and a stringent inflation target, the EU 
economy too remains weak. 
Southeast Asia’s response 
These three factors – China’s rise, regional political and security problems, and weak external demand 
– explain Southeast Asia’s under-performance, but they do not condemn Southeast Asia to perpetual 
stagnation. How can Southeast Asia overcome these problems? 
China 
First, Southeast Asia should not see China only as a challenge, but also as an opportunity. A rising 
China is a formidable competitor for investments and in global markets, but Southeast Asia is better off 
with a prosperous and modern China, than with a poor and backward China.  
International trade is not a mercantilist zero sum game. As China’s exports have grown, so have its 
imports.  Southeast  Asian  exports  to  China  have  been  expanding  rapidly.  Between  1999  and  2001, 
Singapore’s own exports to greater China (i.e. PRC, Hong Kong and Taiwan) grew by an average of 
14% p.a., and now exceed our exports to the US. These exports range from integrated circuits, disk 
drives, scientific measuring instruments, oil and chemical products to food and beverages. 
In services too, China’s rising affluence offers great opportunities to Southeast Asia. China is one of 
the  fastest-growing  sources  of  tourists  to  Thailand,  Malaysia  and  Singapore.  A  growing  Chinese 
middle-class will want high-quality healthcare and education services. And wealthy Chinese – whose 
numbers are already not insignificant – will need more sophisticated financial services.  
In manufacturing, China is rapidly expanding into activities previously carried out in Southeast Asia. 
But that does not mean that Southeast Asia will revert to agriculture and primary production. Attractive 
as China is to investors, it will not soak up all manufacturing investments, nor will it out-compete all 
other  countries  in  every  industry  and  every  product.  More  likely,  Southeast  Asia  and  China  will 
complement  each  other  in  an  international  division  of  labour,  for  example,  with  Southeast  Asia 
providing  the  components  and  intermediate  processing,  and  factories  in  China  doing  the  final 
assembly for the Chinese market. The desire of MNCs to diversify their investments beyond one or 
two countries will also promote such an outcome. 
For our part, Singapore is actively positioning itself to benefit from China’s growth. When Chinese Vice 
President  Hu  Jintao  visited  Singapore  recently,  he  proposed  four  areas  for  increased  bilateral 
cooperation:  high-tech  industrial  sectors,  the  economic  development  of  China's  western  provinces, 
helping  Chinese  enterprises  to  exploit  international  opportunities,  and  the  training  of  personnel  and 
exchange  of  talent.   Officials  from  both  countries  are  pursuing  these  ideas.  To  help  Chinese 
companies go international, Singapore has mooted the idea of setting up a base in Singapore to help 
Chinese  companies  market  their  products  to  the  region  and  beyond.  We  are  actively  facilitating 
Singapore  business  ventures  interested  in  China,  providing  market  information,  office  space  and 
consultancy services, and maintaining business networks.  We have also launched an Asian Business 
Fellowship Programme, to develop a talent pool with operational experience, and network and market 
knowledge in China. 
Politics & Security 
Second,  Southeast  Asian  governments must  tackle  the  security  problems  resolutely  and  decisively. 
Terrorism is not unique to Southeast Asia.  It is a global problem, originating in the Middle East, and 
spreading to every continent.  Southeast Asia cannot be immunised against the terrorism virus.  The 
large Muslim populations in the region are a natural host which extremist Islamic groups will exploit for 
concealment  and  political  cover.  Fortunately,  the  vast  majority  of  Southeast  Asian  Muslims  are 
peaceful  and  moderate  in  their  beliefs.  The  problem  therefore  lies  in  dealing  with  the  extremist 
elements in a way which does not alienate the majority of peaceful Muslims. This calls for deft political 
handling. 
Southeast  Asian  governments  are  already  taking  action.  In  Malaysia,  with  a  Muslim  majority,  the 
government  has  acted  with  despatch,  arresting  members  of  extremist  groups  and  rooting  out  their 
organisations.  The Malaysian government also controls the outflow of Malaysian students studying in 
madrasahs in Pakistan, where they may pick up extremist ideas.   
2 
 BIS Review 61/2002
 In Singapore, with a sizeable Muslim minority, the government has arrested extremists belonging to 
the Jemaah Islamiyah group, and severely disrupted their operations. We have gone beyond security 
actions and taken pains to explain the problem to the population, so that Muslim Singaporeans do not 
feel that they are all under a cloud of suspicion, and the non-Muslims do not treat their Muslim fellow 
citizens  any  differently  than  before.  Muslim  community  leaders  have  come  together  to  publicly 
condemn the extremists as doing great harm to the Muslim community. Their clear and unequivocal 
collective  stand  has  been  enormously  helpful  in  maintaining  confidence  and  avoiding  a  rupture  in 
racial and religious harmony.  
In Indonesia, where 90% of the population is Muslim, the government has been extremely circumspect 
in acknowledging and dealing with the problem. The extremist groups have skilfully used religious and 
nationalist sentiments to garner political support and protect themselves against arrest. However, the 
Bali  bombing  has  changed  the  situation.  President  Megawati  has  promulgated  tough  anti-terrorist 
decrees,  including  powers  to  detain  suspected  terrorists.  The  Indonesian  government  has  arrested 
Abu Bakar Ba’asyir, who is the emir, or leader, of the Jemaah Islamiyah group, who had till now defied 
the Indonesian authorities to act against him. Government action in the aftermath of the Bali bombings 
has  won  the  strong  backing  of  key  local  institutions  and  the  Indonesian  population.  Parliamentary 
leaders concurred with the passing of the anti-terrorism decrees, and the leaders of the two largest 
Muslim groups in Indonesia, the Nahdlatul Ulama and Muhammadiyah, have also voiced their support. 
The  people  of  Indonesia  know  that  if  the  militants  succeed,  not  only  will  international  confidence 
plummet and economic progress grind to a halt, but their country will be torn asunder. 
Southeast Asian governments will act because they know that the objectives of the terrorists are totally 
beyond the pale.  These are not innocent political dissidents exercising their democratic rights. They 
are ruthless fanatics, quite willing to destroy innocent lives in order to create civil strife and animosity 
between  communities  and  countries,  shake  confidence  in  Southeast  Asian  economies  and  their 
legitimate  governments,  and  weaken  the  basis  of  the  states.   They  cannot  succeed,  but  they  can 
cause great harm in trying. Provided the governments respond vigorously to the extremist threat, they 
can contain the problem and gradually restore confidence to the region.  
Access to Markets 
Third, Southeast  Asian economies need to boost  external  demand by strengthening their access to 
the major developed markets. In the short term, there is little we can do about the cyclical downturn. 
But for the longer term, favourable and assured access to key trading partners will allow Southeast 
Asian countries to maximise benefits from free trade  and globalisation,  and make themselves more 
attractive to investors.  
One basic approach  is to  promote multilateral trade, and contribute to a successful outcome of the 
Doha Development Agenda of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). But we need to complement the 
multilateral approach with bilateral Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with our key trading partners. This 
is why Singapore is actively pursuing an FTA strategy. We have concluded FTAs with New Zealand, 
Japan,  and the  European  Free Trade Area (EFTA),  and hope  to conclude  agreements with the US 
and Australia very soon.  
Singapore’s aim is not just to boost our own trade links with our FTA partners, but also to catalyse 
broader economic engagement between ASEAN and its trading partners.  This is indeed happening. 
After New Zealand concluded its FTA with Singapore, Australia and New Zealand proposed starting a 
Closer Economic Partnership Agreement with ASEAN.  Last year, ASEAN and China agreed to set up 
an  ASEAN-China  FTA  within  10  years.   Weeks  later,  Prime  Minister  Koizumi  of  Japan  proposed  a 
Japan-ASEAN  Comprehensive  Economic  Partnership,  to  be  modelled  on  the  Japan-Singapore 
bilateral agreement.  Similarly,  we hope that the US-Singapore FTA will  become a model for a US-
ASEAN FTA in the longer term.  These link-ups show that ASEAN is not turning inwards and away 
from the global economy, and will give ASEAN a valuable edge as an investment destination. 
Singapore’s economic restructuring: philosophy & initiatives 
Given this bracing environment, Singapore is at  a turning  point  in our economic development.  The 
whole landscape has changed.  We need to change our strategies to continue to thrive. This is why we 
convened  the  Economic  Review  Committee  (ERC),  to  carry  out  a  comprehensive  review  of  our 
economic policies, and to identify ways to develop a vibrant and competitive private sector. We have 
concluded that the key tenets of our economic strategy are as follows: 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 3
 First, we must enhance the competitiveness of our economy. This means keeping direct taxes as 
low as possible. There is a worldwide trend towards lowering taxes to attract and anchor companies.  
We also need to cut personal tax rates to spur entrepreneurship, risk-taking and wealth creation, and 
to  attract  and  retain  talent.   Hence  we  undertook  a  major  restructuring  of  our  tax  system,  reducing 
corporate and personal tax rates from around 25% to 20% over three years. We will tax individuals 
who  are  not  ordinarily  resident  in  Singapore,  based  on  the  number  of  days  they  actually  spend 
working in Singapore.  To make up part of the revenue shortfall, we are raising our consumption tax 
from 3% to 5%.  
Tax  incentives  have  also  been  enhanced.   Qualifying  high-growth  and  high  value-added  financial 
activities  will  enjoy  a  concessionary  tax  rate  of  5%,  while  a  10%  rate  will  apply  to  tax-sensitive  but 
mature activities.  We have also enhanced incentives for specific activities, such as fund management, 
trustee and custodian services, insurance and capital market and treasury activities.   
We also undertook a fundamental review of the Central Provident Fund (CPF) Scheme, which is our 
social security and pension fund scheme.  We refocused the CPF on its core objective of providing for 
the basic needs of the majority of Singaporeans, in terms of retirement needs, healthcare expenses 
and home ownership.  We are tightening the use of CPF for buying properties, so as to leave more for 
retirement needs.  We are reducing the coverage for high-income Singaporeans, who should be able 
to plan and provide for their own retirement.  We are lowering contribution rates for older workers, who 
are most vulnerable to losing their jobs.  These measures will make our labour market more flexible, 
and contribute to our economy’s overall resilience and competitiveness. 
Second, we want to encourage entrepreneurship in order to develop more local and foreign start-ups 
and emerging enterprises to complement our strong base of MNCs and established local companies. 
In this rapidly changing, unpredictable environment, the best way to spot and exploit new opportunities 
is not by centralised direction, but through the drive and entrepreneurship of our people. According to 
the 2001 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor Report, Singapore ranked 27th out of 29 countries in terms 
of entrepreneurial activity.  We need to do better.   
We  need  to  imbue  our  young  with  entrepreneurial  instincts  and  attitudes,  through  their  school 
education and life experiences.  At the same time, the government should cut red tape, create more 
economic space for private enterprise, nurture high-potential local enterprises and develop a culture 
tolerant of risk-taking, experimentation and honest failure.   
A self-renewing, self-sustaining entrepreneurial culture will not emerge overnight, but we are making 
some headway.  Ten Singapore companies made it to this year’s list of Forbes’ Global 200 companies 
with  revenues  under  US$1  billion.   This  ranks  among  the  largest  number  of  companies  for  any 
country.  
A third area of focus is the development of our human capital, both local and foreign.  Singaporeans 
rank  highly  in  technical  skills,  and  our  students  often  top  international  mathematics  and  science 
competitions.   But  we  need  to  improve  our  soft  skills,  such  as  people  skills,  management  skills, 
communications skills, as well as cultural and artistic skills.  We will also continue to welcome foreign 
talent to work, live and play here, to add to our talent pool.  
Fourth,  we  need  to  identify,  nurture  and  promote  new  areas  of  growth  in  both  manufacturing  and 
services, the two complementary engines of our economy.  The continuing emergence of lower-cost 
locations  spurs  us  to  constantly  review  and  refresh  our  manufacturing  value  proposition,  be  it  in 
refining our division of labour, exploiting economies of scale through shared facilities, or undertaking 
more innovation and R&D work.  For instance, about 70 companies are located on our petrochemical 
complex in Jurong Island, where they plug into customised infrastructure facilities, specialised services 
and the supply of feedstock.  We cooperate with the Indonesian islands of Batam and Bintan, each 
specialising in different parts of the manufacturing value-chain that it is strong in.   
In the services sector, we expect regional demand for health, education, tourism and financial services 
to  grow  rapidly  as  the  middle-income  group  burgeons.   Already,  Singapore  plays  host  to  50,000 
foreign  students  in  tertiary  and  commercial  institutions,  and  150,000  foreign  patients  per  year  from 
across the region.  They are attracted to local universities and hospitals, as well as to the international 
arms of top schools and medical research institutes based in Singapore, like INSEAD, University of 
Chicago and Johns Hopkins. 
Fifth, Singapore is improving our corporate governance practices and standards.  A globally oriented 
economy needs a robust framework for corporate governance. Singapore’s standards are high but we 
must  continue  to  improve  them,  not  only  in  the  form  of  the  rules  but  also  in  the  spirit  of  their 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2002
 implementation. Our integrity premium is a precious competitive advantage which we guard zealously, 
and which will not be easy to replicate. 
The Company Legislation and Regulatory Framework Committee, a private sector-led body, has been 
reviewing our company law and regulatory framework. The Committee has made recommendations to 
simplify the process of incorporating a company, facilitate capital raising and reduce compliance costs 
for companies in Singapore.  Let me highlight some key recommendations. 
To  widen  the  options  available  for  businesses  and  investments,  the  Committee  recommended 
introducing Limited Partnerships and Limited Liability Partnerships.  To improve access to finance and 
lower  the  cost  of  raising  capital,  the  Committee  advocated  allowing  additional  exempted  offerings, 
such as private placement and small offering exemptions.  The Committee also suggested removing 
statutory requirements for audit and appointment of professional company secretaries, so as to trim 
compliance costs for companies, especially small private companies and start-ups.  Safeguards will be 
simultaneously  introduced  to  uphold  corporate  governance  standards  and  protect  stakeholders’ 
interests.   
I  am  happy  to  announce  that  the  government  has  accepted  all  the  recommendations  of  this 
Committee.  They will ensure that our company law is market-driven, supportive of entrepreneurship 
and aligned with international best practices. The Ministry of Finance will release further details. 
Finally,  just  as  we  are  encouraging  greater  corporate  disclosure,  the  government  is  also  working 
towards raising levels of transparency through consultation and collaboration with the private sector.  
Consultation lengthens the policy-making process and entails commitment of effort and resources on 
the  part  of  the  industry  and  the  public.  But  it  also  helps  to  pre-empt  implementation  problems, 
minimise  unintended  consequences,  and  foster  better  industry  understanding  and  support.   The 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  has  introduced  guidelines  to  make  public  consultation  a 
standard procedure whenever significant changes in the financial services regulatory framework are 
planned.   Over  time,  these  changes  will  further  improve  the  operating  environment  for  the  financial 
sector. The MAS will release further details. 
Conclusion 
Singapore  has  not  shied  away  from  tough  measures  to  remake  our  economy  and  maximise  our 
chances in a difficult environment. These measures will enhance our competitiveness, strengthen our 
companies and consolidate our social cohesion. They will make our economy more flexible, resilient 
and able to adjust quickly to changing circumstances, and so help it to remain ahead in the race of 
nations.  
Although the media impression is that Southeast Asia has stagnated since the Asian Crisis, the reality 
is  less  gloomy.  ASEAN  economies  have  made  progress  in  picking  up  the  pieces  and  pursuing 
domestic reform and restructuring, albeit some more successfully  than others.  Between  1999-2001, 
ASEAN economies as a whole grew by about 4% per annum.  Last year, an export-led slowdown on 
the back of a global electronics slump broke the recovery trend. But ASEAN economies weathered the 
downturn fairly well, with most still managing positive GDP growth.  Most are running current account 
surpluses, in contrast to the large deficits that prevailed in 1997. From a macroeconomic standpoint, 
the  countries  have  held  up  well  and  even  shown  a  certain  resilience.  Reflecting  this,  ASEAN 
stockmarkets have generally performed better than their counterparts in the rest of the world thus far 
this year.  
Part of Southeast  Asia’s negative image is  attributable to political and security  concerns,  which are 
indeed real. A week or so after the Bali attack, these worries naturally loom large.  Many observers, 
seized by the mood of the moment, are now forecasting the worst for the region. But we should adopt 
a longer-term, more nuanced perspective.  Southeast Asia’s economic fundamentals remain positive – 
a sizeable market with a collective population of 500 million people, high savings, abundant natural 
resources, under-developed consumer appetites and a strong work ethic.  The political problems can 
be overcome, provided governments act swiftly and resolutely to counter terrorism and restore order 
and  confidence.  Those  countries  which  do  so  will  regain  investor  interest,  while  those  investors 
shrewd enough to discern which countries and projects deserve support will be amply rewarded by the 
risk  premiums.  Provided  Southeast  Asian  countries  adapt  themselves  to  their  new  environment, 
remedy  their  economic  weaknesses,  and  grasp  the  new  opportunities,  this  region  can  once  again 
become a vibrant part of Asia. 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 5
