 M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Thailand's emergence from the crisis - new 
paradigm for sustainable growth 
Speech  by  Mr  M  R  Pridiyathorn  Devakula,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  International 
Conference on "Economic Recovery and Reforms", Bangkok, 28 October 2002. 
 Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure to be here with you tonight. I would like to begin by welcoming you all once 
again to Bangkok and to this important international conference on Economic Recovery and Reforms. 
I would also like to express our appreciation to the Faculty of Economics, Thammasat University, the 
main  organizer  of  the  conference,  in  allowing  the  Bank  of  Thailand  to  co-host  the  event.  Our 
appreciation also goes to the distinguished scholars who came from all over the world to share with us 
their perspectives on this important topic. 
To  many  of  us  here,  especially  those  in  the  Asian  region,  the  1997  financial  crisis  has  completely 
changed our lives. It was, in a way, a sharp reversal of fortune when suddenly things that were thought 
to  be  good  before  the  crisis  became  no  longer  good  enough.  And  terms  like  ‘restructuring’  and 
‘reforms’ have then become something of a norm. This long and tiresome journey has now lasted for 
more than five years, and naturally begs a question, “when are we going to get out of this abyss?” This 
question is particularly pertinent to Thailand. After all, the Asian crisis started here. 
To provide a starting point in answering this question, I would like to share with you tonight some of 
our views on the current state of the Thai economy, where we are, where are we heading, and most 
importantly, what we see as the key ingredients for sustaining Thailand’s economic growth.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
At the height of the Thai crisis, Thailand’s nominal per capita GDP in dollar term fell by more than 30% 
according to a World Bank estimate while financial restructuring costs have exceeded 30% of GDP, 
and capital flows reversals surpassed the 60% of GDP mark. Given such a depth and breadth of the 
crisis, the current momentum of recovery does suggest that Thailand has indeed come a long way. 
This  view  is  increasingly  shared  by  the  market,  including  major  credit  rating  agencies,  with  some 
analysts concluding that perhaps Thailand has more or less turned the corner. The extent to which 
Thailand has elevated from the crisis of 1997 is probably best illustrated by the latest macroeconomic 
performance and data. 
Thailand’s  GDP  growth  in  the  first  half  of  this  year  is  a  testament  to  the  strength  in  the  current 
recovery.  The  economy  expanded  by  5.1%  in  the  second  quarter  after  a  robust  3.9%  in  the  first 
quarter. In level terms, real GDP has now exceeded  its pre-crisis level. And according to the  latest 
incoming data, the economy in the third quarter looks to remain quite robust as well. 
Thailand’s  better  performance  this  year,  notwithstanding  a  lackluster  global  economy,  has  been 
supported  by  the  strong  momentum  in  both  domestic  demand  and  exports.  Front-loaded  fiscal 
measure  sparked  up  the  initial  momentum  in  domestic  demand,  while  private  consumption  and 
investment are now adding firmly to the growth process. As the regional economies began to recover 
in the last five months, export growth has also provided an additional impetus to the recovery.  
Along with this recovery, inflation remains subdued, credit growth has turned positive, and business 
profits  are  improving,  encouraging  firms  to  expand  their  capacities  through  new  investment.  These 
broad movements are indicative of a positive dynamic linked to the current recovery.  
The most significant improvement since the crisis, however, has been the strengthening of external 
stability. Continued current account surpluses have allowed external debt to run down in concomitant 
with a build-up of international reserves. The coverage ratio of reserve to short-term debt has risen to 
290% in July 2002, four times the ratio at the end of 1997. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Although I share the view that the worst may now be behind us, I believe Thailand still has some way 
to go. The key question is how can we make it last, especially now that the global economic recovery 
BIS Review 62/2002 
 1
 may be somewhat slower  than  earlier  anticipated? The answer to this question probably  lies in the 
answers to yet another important question: what have we learnt from the recent crisis? 
For Thailand to prosper in the future, we can no longer rely on the old way of doing business or, for 
policymakers, the old way of running the economy. We need a different and more effective paradigm 
that  will  not  only  sustain  the  current  growth  momentum  but  also  helped  the  country  meets  future 
challenges.  
Putting the crisis under microscope reveals critical flaws that beg for new approaches and strategies in 
all of the four major areas: (1) the real sector, (2) the financial sector, (3) the issue of governance, and 
(4) the macroeconomic framework. 
In many respects, these lessons are neither limited to Thailand nor unique to the recent crisis. The 
challenge  is  perhaps  how  to  put  them  into  the  context  of  rapidly  evolving  global  and  regional 
economies. 
Let me start with the real sector. 
For  a  brief  period  in  the  early  1990s,  it  seemed  that  everything  was  going  well.  Everywhere  one 
turned, businesses were booming. Demand seemed to always outpace supply. And on top of all that, 
Thailand  was  just  named  Asia’s  fifth  economic  tiger.  Little  did  everyone  know,  however,  that  the 
spectacular  economic  performance  masked  certain  structural  weaknesses  in  some  part  of  the  real 
sector.  As  it  now  becomes  all  too  clear,  parts  of  Thailand’s  real  sector  prior  to  the  crisis  were 
characterized by low productivity and high leverage.  
With the benefits of hindsight, Thailand’s past rapid growth could be attributed primarily to quantity, 
that is, the mobilization of capital, labor, and natural resources, rather than quality. During decades of 
spectacular growth, total factor productivity or TFP rose only modestly. Overtime, Thailand’s inability to 
further move up the  quality  ladder, after it graduated from a low-labor-cost production- base status, 
gradually led to the erosion of our export competitiveness.  
In relation to the attitude towards risk, Thailand’s use of leverage, being among the highest in Asia, put 
the  country  in  a  vulnerable  position  to  potential  adverse  shocks. When  the  crisis  hit  in  1997,  many 
companies thus found themselves in desperate straits to service their debt, eventually leading up to a 
major collapse of the real economy. 
While these weaknesses have been and are being addressed since the crisis, these measures take 
time to become fully effective. In  the meantime, these shortcomings have been accentuated  by  the 
recent change in global competitive landscape brought about by China’s WTO accession. Thailand, 
like many other countries, will need to reposition itself quickly to meet this new global challenge.  
Stepping beyond the realm of the real sector, another expensive lesson learnt during the crisis is that 
the  world  financial  markets  have  become  extremely  slippery.  As  today’s  financial  world  becomes 
increasingly interconnected, disturbances in one market can quickly spread to others with devastating 
results. These merciless and indiscriminating financial storms therefore need to be guarded against 
around the clock, with an early warning system developed to help protect all those involved. 
Looking  back  over  the  past  ten  years,  the  Thai  financial  sector  has  changed  considerably.  The 
financial liberalization trend prodded along by the Bank of Thailand not only expanded the size and the 
scope of the sector, but also made it become more open.  
The government’s ultimate purpose of the liberalization was to provide domestic investors access to 
foreign funds so that Thailand could transform itself into a true industrialized economy. Unfortunately, 
the opening up of the financial sector left the country in an uncharted territory. 
Confidence  in  the  Thai  economy  back  then  meant  easy  offshore  money  for  everybody  with  foreign 
market  access.  Encouraged  by  the  fixed  exchange  rate,  Thai  financial  institutions,  like  many  other 
Thai corporates, borrowed freely and imprudently from abroad. And in pursuit of quick profit, many of 
these foreign borrowings were converted into baht loans without proper currency hedging. 
Exacerbating the problem was the fact that many of the domestic loans went into real estate deals, 
rather  than  into  productive  investments.  A  property  price  bubble  ensued,  and  the  Thai  financial 
institutions, lacking the necessary credit skills, accepted inflated property values as the basis for new 
loans. These pyramid-like financing schemes placed a serious strain on the system, and their eventual 
collapse resulted in a flood of non-performing loans for the unwary lenders.  
2 
 BIS Review 62/2002
 Admittedly, the Bank of Thailand  also shares the blame of what  went  wrong in the financial sector. 
Although the liberalization policy was probably correct given the circumstances, its potential benefits 
were undermined by the lack of strong institutional underpinnings. The existing regulatory framework 
was simply inadequate to detect and prevent the brewing problems. At one level, inadequate follow-up 
framework made it difficult to track where the funds were going. But the heart of the problem lay in the 
loose  supervision  and  examination  system  in  place.  Regulatory  waivers  were  common.  And  the 
culture evolved to one that encouraged or condoned excessive risk-taking behavior. 
Compounding  the  problem  were  Thailand’s  underdeveloped  capital  markets.  The  absence  of  what 
Alan Greenspan termed a “spare tire” of finance made bank lending the dominant source of corporate 
financing. Consequently, viable businesses were trapped in the breaking down of the banking sector’s 
intermediary role with no way out, and the crisis spiraled into a devastating credit crunch.  
The most significant implication drawn from this lesson is thus a strong financial sector is essential for 
a country to sail through financial storms. It is perhaps not a coincidence that Singapore and Hong 
Kong fared better than many other Asian countries during the 1997 crisis, for their financial systems 
were, and still are, relatively deeper than the rest. A strong financial sector serves as an absorber for 
external shocks while a weak and inefficient financial sector aggravates the depth of the problem and 
prolongs the recovery process. 
Beyond the “hardware” of the physical and financial infrastructure, the “software” of the ethical issues 
governing  the  running  of  the  system  is  also  critical.  Tales  of  businesses  being  endowed  with 
extraordinary treatments from bankers through their cross-holding relationship are probably still fresh 
in  everyone’s  mind.  Like  in  most  other  crisis-affected  Asian  countries,  these  relationships  played  a 
critical role in the evolution of the crisis in Thailand. 
The problem of weak governance is not limited to the private sector, however. Regarding monetary 
policy, a post-crisis survey of stakeholders, consisting of domestic and foreign institutions, government 
agencies, as well as the general public, revealed that the BOT was also perceived to be plagued with 
several weaknesses: lack of good leaders, lack of experiences, and lack of transparency. 
Finally,  in  the  macroeconomic  framework  as  a  whole,  it  is  probably  obvious  from  the  experiences 
leading up to the crisis that high growth cannot be reached and sustained in the absence of consistent 
government economic policies. 
The  most  striking  example  here  is  the  combination  of  the  fixed  exchange  rate  and  the  financial 
liberalization policy, which inherently led to underestimation of exchange rate risks. In the end, market 
stability that the fixed exchange rate regime was intended to foster was undermined by market-driven 
foreign borrowings. 
The lesson for Thailand as well as for other emerging economies is that the authorities must regularly 
review  their  policy  stances  in  the  drive  to  keep  up  with  changing  financial  environments.  A  move 
towards  liberalization,  for  example,  should  be  examined  carefully  in  the  light  of  the  public  sector’s 
capability in stabilization and whether there is sufficient infrastructure in place to support the regime 
shift.  
Finally,  the  crisis  reminds  us  the  importance  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  coordination.  More 
conservative  fiscal  policy  would  have  done  what  monetary  policy  could  not  accomplish;  namely,  to 
cool down the overheated economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
These lessons have been expensive ones. Thailand, as a nation, has spent the last five years dealing 
with the problem with some severe hardship and grave consequences. Although it is probably safe to 
say that the height of the problems is now behind us, we still face an enormous uphill battle. A new set 
of  challenges  seems  to  emerge  everyday,  some  with  very  important  repercussions  on  the  Thai 
economy. Here, what spring to my mind are the delay in the global economic recovery and China’s 
WTO entry already mentioned, as well as the current global equity slump. This is just to name a few. 
To prepare Thailand for these future challenges, we need to get the fundamentals right on all of the 
four areas that I have just discussed. In brief, we need to raise productivity in the real sector, rebuild 
our financial infrastructure, instill the value of good governance in both the private and public sectors, 
and develop a comprehensive macroeconomic strategy. 
Needless to say, comprehensive real sector reform is at the core of the new paradigm for sustainable 
growth.  And  this  requires  a  carefully  planned  national  agenda.  In  essence,  Thailand  needs  to 
BIS Review 62/2002 
 3
 distinguish  itself  quickly  in  the  fast-evolving  global  competitive  landscape.  As  global  competition 
intensifies, Thailand can neither simply keep growing on the back of capital accumulation nor dwell on 
massive  production  of  low  value-added  goods.  Desirable  product  features  such  as  high  quality  and 
consistency are needed to sustain export competitiveness, and to maintain linkage to the global arena 
with clear focus on market awareness and adaptability.  
Recently,  there  have  been  positive  signs  in  some  industries  such  as  jewelry,  garments,  and  food, 
where production technology has been upgraded to increase competitiveness of these industries and 
to move them up the value chain. Unfortunately, while such developments are encouraging, they have 
not been adequately spread out to other industries. By the time these adjustments are completed, it 
may have been too late, probably rendering losses in a number of industries.  
What we need now is a national agenda that comprehensively looks at competitiveness of all parts of 
the real sector. Industries that can no longer compete in the world market will have to be gradually 
phased out. Other industries that depict competitive edge and growth potential in the global arena will 
warrant  further  plans  to  upgrade  technology,  increase  added  values,  and  develop  marketing 
strategies.  These  plans  will  have  to  be  implemented  through  a  concerted  national  effort  so  as  to 
ensure better resource allocation along with greater value creation. 
Reforming the real sector would however need to be complemented by strengthening of the financial 
sector.  A  notable  example  of  such  a  strategy  is  the  establishment  of  the  Thai  Asset  Management 
Corporation  or  TAMC.  The  TAMC  was  set  up  to  reduce  distressed  assets  in  the  banking  system 
through centralization of NPLs management. TAMC’s ultimate goal goes beyond the partial clean up 
banks’ balance sheets. It is hoped that doing so would enable banks to resume their normal lending 
activity and get the entire economy going strongly again. Nevertheless, as great goals alone do not 
automatically translate into successful results, the eventual impact of TAMC on the current recovery 
will depend crucially on the performance of its management. 
Still,  the  effort  to  nurture  our  banking  system  back  to  its  normal  health  has  already  started  to  bear 
some  fruit.  Profitability  of  the  banking  system  is  improving  and  the  recent  credit  upgrade  of  major 
banks confirms that we are proceeding on the right track.  
This of course does not mean that all is well. There are still weak points in the system. But at least, we 
know where they are and we are working hard to tackle them.  
With respect to financial institution stability, the authorities’ strategy was to bring the infrastructures of 
the  Thai  financial  system  up  to  international  standards.  Among  the  measures  taken  are  the 
introduction of strict provision requirements, the steps to the establishment of the Deposit Insurance 
Agency, and the tightening of the Bank of Thailand’s supervision and examination framework. 
To improve oversight, the Bank of Thailand has also adopted a policy in line with the new BIS Capital 
Accord, emphasizing the importance of systemic stability and efficient risk management.  
In  an  effort  to  further  modernize  our  financial  system,  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  in  cooperation  with 
stakeholders and representatives from the SEC and the Department of Insurance, is in the process of 
drafting the country’s first Financial Sector Master Plan. Scheduled to be implemented in 2003-2012, 
the Master Plan is intended to increase competition within the Thai financial systems and at the same 
time to improve the soundness of the system as a whole. 
The preliminary vision for the future of commercial banking and financial services in Thailand given by 
a  high-level  steering  committee  comprises  three  pillars  –  accessibility  and  availability  of  financial 
services  for  all  potential  users  nationwide;  a  competitive  and  efficient  financial  system;  and  finally 
fairness for all customers.  
This  preliminary  vision  of  the  Master  Plan  reflects  our  changing  perception  of  the  country’s  new 
financial architecture. As there are already two Asian financial centers in Hong Kong and Singapore, 
there is no point to try to be the third one. Instead, what Thailand needs is probably a more customer-
oriented financial sector with efficient operation and minimum systemic risk.  
The extent to which Thailand’s financial service landscape is going to change from today will depend 
on the results and recommendations of an ongoing study. What I can tell you now is that whatever the 
final outcome will be, for Thailand, this is a change to rectify past shortcomings for the better. 
As we are drafting our Financial Sector Master Plan, the SET is working tirelessly on its Capital Market 
Master  Plan.  The  SET  plan  tackles  another  important  problem,  namely  the  underdevelopment  of 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2002
 Thailand’s  capital  markets.  If  its  implementation  is  successful,  Thailand  will  have  a  balanced  and 
diversified financial system that is more robust and stable than the one today.  
The third area that needs to be addressed is good governance. We need to move fast to ensure that 
firms  follow  proper  accounting  standard  and  information  disclosure,  to  improve  the  protection  of 
minority  shareholders’  right,  and  especially  to  assure  independence  of  board  of  directors  from 
management.  For  financial  institutions  in  particular,  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  with  the  assistance  and 
cooperation  from  the  World  Bank  and  several  domestic  stakeholders,  has  assembled  a  manual 
entitled  the  Directors’  Handbook,  which  provides  guidelines  of  practice  for  directors  of  financial 
institutions.  Regulations  on  the  required  structure  of  Board  of  Directors  would  follow  within 
“November”.  Most  important  point  was  the  regulation  announced  in  July  2002  which  imposes  strict 
conditions on lending to related companies, which was one of the major cause of NPLs in the past. 
Moreover, the Government has also set up a National Committee on Good Governance, responsible 
for campaigning for good corporate governance on various inspects simultaneously, with the SET as 
the secretariat. 
Instilling the value of good governance in the public sector is as important as in the private sector. On 
this  issue,  the  current  government  has  expressed  an  intention  to  tackle  the  problem  that  has  long 
plagued the Thai public sector. Among steps already taken are the recent overhaul of the civil service 
workforce, fiscal decentralization, and privatization of state-owned enterprises. If executed in a proper 
manner, these efforts will go a long way towards good public sector governance. However, there are 
still some other areas in public governance that need attention from the government. These areas are 
of great interest to the public and are therefore currently under public scrutiny.  
On transparency,  progress has also been made in  terms of public data disclosure. Having  adopted 
already the IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS), Thailand is considering moving up 
one step further to publish the more stringent Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes 
(ROSCs), which disclose in more details the country’s economic and financial management.  
In an attempt to restore the public confidence in the financial system, the Bank of Thailand itself has 
undergone  major  reforms  in  its  organization  structure,  data  management,  and  work  processes. 
Inflation targeting has been adopted as a framework for the conduct of monetary policy. And despite 
the crisis turmoil, we have been able to maintain and better define our independence. 
The final area of the new growth paradigm is the urgent need for a comprehensive macroeconomic 
strategy. Policies must be conducted under good discipline, with the right policy mix and stance. Here, 
the keyword is the coordination of monetary and fiscal policies.  
The Bank of Thailand’s role in promoting sustainable growth is to conduct responsible monetary policy 
to ensure price stability. But sound fiscal policies are also needed to complement the effectiveness of 
our policy. It is critical that public debt does not become a problem and threaten to drag the recovery 
process.  Fiscal  responsibility  and  discipline  are  thus  keys,  and  I  am  extremely  glad  to  see  that  the 
government has taken the first step towards fiscal sustainability by consolidating its budget this fiscal 
year. 
Underlying all these frameworks, however, efforts must also be made to ensure that domestic saving 
mobilization is adequate to finance our economic development in a sustainable fashion. As the Thai 
economy  regains  full  strength,  our  current  account  is  likely  to  be  in  deficit  again  and  we  need  to 
ascertain that the savings-investment gap is kept at an appropriate level.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In closing, allow me to reconfirm that Thailand has certainly come a long way since the crisis. To make 
it last, we do need a bit of luck on the global economic development while ensuring that we get all the 
fundamentals right. 
Some of these reform measures are tough and social support is needed to ensure that we continue to 
move in the right direction.  
If we manage to get all of these real, financial, governance, and macroeconomic frameworks in place, 
I do believe that Thailand would be well on a sustainable road to development. 
With these in mind, allow me to wish this conference every success in its endeavor. As a Thammasat 
Economics alumnus, it  is  an honor  and a  great pleasure to  be  ‘home’ addressing the distinguished 
guests and participants of this prominent conference. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 62/2002 
 5
