 Arnold Schilder: Accounting standards, transparency and supervision 
Speech  by  Professor  Arnold  Schilder,  Executive  Director  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  NV,  Board 
Member of the Pensions and Insurance Supervisory Authority of the Netherlands, and Chairman of the 
Accounting  Task  Force  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  congress  EYe  on 
Banking, sponsored by Ernst & Young, in Utrecht, 6 November 2002. 
 Introduction  
Frequent  downward  restatements  of  earnings,  and  accounting  abuses,  have  deeply  shaken  public 
confidence in the reliability of financial reporting. This has contributed to the  worldwide downfalls in 
share prices. In this context, questions arise such as what should be done with accounting standards 
and whether greater transparency could help to restore public confidence. Also, what role supervisors 
can  play  in  this  respect.  I  will  discuss  these  issues  from  both  an  accounting  and  a  supervisory 
perspective.  
First, let me put the erosion of public confidence in financial reporting into its proper perspective. In 
some  countries,  particularly  the  US  with  Enron,  Global  Crossing  and  Worldcom,  confidence  has 
waned more than elsewhere. But this was not the only cause of the current malaise on international 
financial  markets.  In  this  respect,  the  correction  of  the  asset  price  bubble,  the  weakening  of 
macro-economic prospects and the threat of war in the Middle-East have been substantial factors as 
well.  Also,  incentive  structures  within  firms  and  in  financial  markets  may  have  been  distorted. 
Excessive attention to share prices coupled with disregard for long term fundamentals, and exuberant 
stock option programmes are cases in point. With hindsight, it is fair to say that apart from failures in 
accounting,  there  have  been  shortcomings  in  disciplining  mechanisms,  such  as  in  corporate 
governance, in auditing and in disclosure, as well.  
Accounting standards  
What  can  be  done  to  restore  confidence  in  financial  reporting?  On  a  global  level,  the  International 
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) is working hard to deliver a set of high quality standards as soon 
as  possible.  But  it  is  not  easy.  Why?  The  first  complication  is  the  increasing  difficulty  of  proper 
measurement. Take, for  instance,  the  growing  importance  of  intangible  and  non-marketable  assets, 
such as intellectual property rights or goodwill. Another example is the valuation of long-term flows of 
income or expenditure, such as pension liabilities, which are inherently difficult to predict. In addition, 
complex  instruments  for  risk  transfer  and  new  corporate  structures  test  the  limits  of  existing 
measurement  and  valuation  techniques.  In  essence,  accounting  standards  have  to  be  frequently 
adapted in response to developments in corporate practices and financial markets. These are moving 
targets!  
The  second  issue  is  the  fundamental  dilemma  in  the  formulation  of  accounting  standards,  namely 
having  to  choose  between  rules-based  and  principles-based  standards,  in  other  words  between 
detailed standards or standards in more general terms. Rules-based standards, like the US Generally 
Accepted  Accounting  Principles,  in  principle  may  be  easier  to  enforce.  However,  they  increasingly 
bear the risk of being circumvented,  either through financial innovation and  engineering,  or through 
what  has  been  euphemistically  called  (cid:145)aggressive  accounting(cid:146).  Principles-based  standards,  like  the 
International  Accounting  Standards,  or  in  the  new  jargon  the  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards,  may  allow  for  financial  innovation  more  easily.  At  the  same  time,  they  may  leave  more 
room  for  interpretation  and  thus  may  be  more  difficult  to  enforce.  But  this  issue  is  not  as 
black-and-white  as  it  seems.  On  the  one  hand,  there  are  US  attempts  to  move  closer  to 
principles-based  accounting.  A  study  on 
the  recent 
Sarbanes-Oxley  Act.  Principles-based  standards,  on  the  other  hand,  will  most  likely  retain  rule-like 
components as well, particularly in order to create accounting discipline for complex issues such as 
financial instruments. This explains, for example, the complaints about the new IAS 39 Exposure Draft 
being too prescriptive.  Moreover, principles-based  accounting  will not obviate the pressure to make 
the principles more precise, easier to enforce, and hence, more rule-like. If so, this may give rise to 
this  subject  has  been  mandated  by 
BIS Review 64/2002 
 1
 differences between countries and hence raise questions of international coherence. In other words, 
principles-based accounting creates level playing field issues.  
A third subject is fair value accounting for the recognition and measurement of financial instruments. 
Fair  value  accounting  has  potential  advantages.  Essentially,  the  increased  use  of  market-based 
information  may  enhance  the  transparency  and  comparability  of  financial  statements.  However,  fair 
value accounting may not yet be feasible and reliable (cid:145)across the board(cid:146), and may lead to an artificial 
volatility  of  financial  results.  This  greater  volatility  in  turn,  if  not  properly  explained  and  understood, 
may negatively  affect public confidence. For these reasons, it seems sensible for the time being  to 
focus on expanded fair value information in the Notes to the Financial Statements.  
This brings me to a fourth point of interest, the need for risk accounting. Traditionally, accounting has 
concentrated  on  the  information  contained  in  the  balance  sheet,  income  and  cash  flow  statements. 
Arguably, this is no longer sufficient to determine what risks are being run by firms, particularly firms 
active  in  financial  markets.  Modern  financial  instruments  and  techniques,  such  as  derivatives  or 
securitisation, enable them to change their risk profile, sometimes even at very short notice. So more 
information  should  be  provided  about  a  firm(cid:146)s  risks.  That  is  why  banking  and  insurance  regulators 
encourage  disclosures  by  financial  institutions  on  risk  exposures  as  a  means  of  enhancing  market 
discipline. The IASB is working hard on this as well. 
Another  issue  is  the  context  of  accounting.  International  accounting  standards  mainly  deal  with 
financial measurement and disclosure. They do not extensively consider the setting in which financial 
reporting takes place, such as the firm(cid:146)s corporate governance  or risk management, the role  of the 
audit committees or the internal and external auditors. Auditing standards, however, take a different 
approach. They first define the conditions to be met by the company environment, before describing 
what should be audited, and how this should be done. Interestingly, prudential authorities follow the 
same route. The Basel Committee(cid:146)s guidelines, the Nederlandsche Bank(cid:146)s Regulation on Organisation 
and Control or the Pensions and Insurance Supervisory Authority(cid:146)s Principles on Internal Control start 
from the primary responsibility of the management and the directors for sound governance. They then 
elaborate  the  requirements  to  be  met  by  these  functions.  So  the  question  is  whether  international 
accounting standards should deal more comprehensively with the setting for accounting and reporting 
within the firm and address accounting governance more explicitly. Internal reporting procedures and 
compliance,  an  active  role  of  the  audit  committee,  a  separation  of  responsibility  for  and  financial 
interest in financial reports, for example, are most relevant for sound reporting. Perhaps accounting 
standard setters should no longer take them for granted. Without an appropriate environment of sound 
corporate  governance  and  risk  management,  accounting  standards  resemble  a  safe  car  without  a 
qualified driver! 
In  short,  accounting  standards  need  to  be  adapted  to  changes  in  corporate  practices  and  financial 
markets. Modern  standards should be principles-based, take account of sound corporate governance, 
and be risk-oriented. To get this across, there is a constructive dialogue between accounting standard 
setters,  like  IASB,  and  regulators,  such  as  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  Although 
they have a different scope and different objectives, their interests clearly run parallel in many areas, 
for example in accounting for loans and proper provisioning practices, or in transparency about risk 
management. In these fields, the Basel Committee appreciates the dialogue with accounting standard 
setters and the industry in order to achieve sound and effective reporting. Topical issues are IAS 39/32 
and  IAS  30.  A  recent  Roundtable  in  Basel,  chaired  by  BIS  General  Manager  Andrew  Crockett, 
confirmed  the  need  for  a  coordinated  dialogue  regarding  corporate  governance,  accounting  and 
auditing, and transparency and oversight.  
Transparency and disclosure 
Let  us  now  turn  to  transparency.  Transparency  is  a  prerequisite  for  effective  market  discipline.  In 
theory,  the  rationale  for  greater  transparency  is  that  companies,  particularly  financial  institutions, 
present  information  asymmetries  to  the  markets.  Simply  speaking  any  company  is  better  informed 
about its own operations than outsiders are. If the company publishes more information to facilitate the 
assessment  of  its  assets  and  liabilities,  its  strategies  and  risk  profile,  markets  can  function  more 
effectively,  at  least  in  theory.  Markets  contain  disciplinary  mechanisms,  which  stimulate  sound 
management and adequate financial performance. For companies which are well-run, well-financed, 
and transparent, costs of raising capital will tend to decline. The reverse goes for ill-managed firms. 
More  generally,  well-run  firms,  by  being  transparent,  can  obtain  better  terms  and  conditions  in 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2002
 transactions with informed and rationally-behaving market counterparties. In essence, this is market 
discipline. 
Market discipline, however, works only if market participants have sufficient information, which enables 
them to assess companies(cid:146) activities and their inherent risks. But more disclosure as such does not 
necessarily  result  in  greater  transparency.  On  the  contrary,  rather  than  just  expanding  their 
disclosures,  firms  should  pay  attention  to  the  quality  of  information  as  well.  In  short,  information 
disclosure needs to  be timely, reliable, relevant and  sufficient. Importantly, public disclosure of high 
quality information contributes to corporate governance. That is to say, the information can be used to 
hold  directors  and  managers  accountable 
firm(cid:146)s  performance. 
Transparency, in other words, serves the accountability of companies to their stakeholders.  
One aspect of public disclosure which should not be overlooked is the costs involved. Information is 
not a free good. On the contrary, developing, implementing and maintaining up to standard information 
systems  is  costly  and  takes  time.  For  that  reason,  accounting  standards,  should,  above  all,  require 
relevant information. However, there is a professional risk of an overdose of information, which must 
be heeded by both standards setters and regulators.  
their  decisions  and 
the 
for 
Pillar 3  
Let  me  illustrate  this  by  explaining  the  Basel  Committee(cid:146)s  efforts  to  increase  transparency.  Market 
discipline through enhanced public disclosure is one of the main three elements or (cid:145)pillars(cid:146) of the new 
Capital Accord. That also goes for the new European capital adequacy directives. Pillar 3 recognises 
that market discipline has the potential to reinforce  and support minimum capital standards (Pillar 1) 
and  the  supervisory  review  process  (Pillar  2).  This  way,  it  helps  to  ensure  that  banks  maintain 
appropriate levels of capital as a cushion against potential future losses arising from risk exposures. 
Pillar 3 contains proposals for greater disclosure by banks, pertaining to three broad categories, the 
so-termed scope of application of the Accord, a bank(cid:146)s capital adequacy, and its risk exposures and 
assessments. For essential elements of the new Capital Accord, such as the use of an internal ratings 
based approach (IRB), disclosures will even be required for supervisory recognition. This means that a 
supervisor is not supposed to recognize the use by a bank of these techniques, unless the bank has 
met the disclosure requirements. In this respect, in addition to Pillar 1 with its IRB, Pillar 3 marks the 
transition to a fundamentally new approach in prudential supervision.  
As to the content of the information, Pillar 3 aims to provide for a comprehensive set of consistent and 
comparable disclosures. It should, in other words, establish a common framework for the information 
to be made available by banks, and that would allow a meaningful comparative analysis by recipients 
of that information. Comparability is greatly enhanced by the use of the risk weighting methodologies 
in the context of Pillar 1 as a common yardstick for the purpose of public disclosure. At the same time, 
however, Pillar 3 should not become overly prescriptive. That is why Pillar 3 attaches great importance 
to  qualitative  disclosures.  This  will  allow  a  specific  bank  to  explain  and  elaborate  the  particular 
characteristics of its operations in plain language.  
An interesting dimension to the development of the Pillar 3 disclosures is the relationship vis-(cid:224)-vis the 
accounting  standards,  and  vis-(cid:224)-vis  listing  requirements  promulgated  by  securities  regulators.  As  I 
have said before, the costs of public disclosures by banks should be limited. Therefore, banks may 
rely on disclosures under accounting or listing requirements insofar as these are materially equivalent 
to Pillar 3 requirements. However, such requirements have a broader focus than the third pillar, which 
aims at banks capital adequacy. Pillar 3, in other words, is a more specific interpretation of the general 
rules,  as  a  reflection  of  its  more  precise  objective.  Supervisors  are  therefore  keen  on  the  on-going 
revision  of  the  IASB  disclosure  standard  for  banks,  IAS  30  and  IAS  32.  The  Basel  Committee 
maintains  an  ongoing  relationship  with  the  IAS  30  Advisory  Group  in  order  to  achieve  consistency 
between disclosure frameworks. 
Supervision  
I now turn to the last topic, supervision. We must not ignore that public disclosure has its limitations 
and potential drawbacks in certain circumstances, particularly in the financial sector. Modern banks’  
business is complex and opaque. This means that information asymmetries will be reduced, but not 
completely  removed,  even  if  public  disclosure  is  enhanced.  Therefore,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that 
market forces fail to instil sufficient discipline and that banks take excessive risks. When that happens, 
BIS Review 64/2002 
 3
 the market may react too little, too late. Once the risks start to materialize, and the market is aware 
that the bank(cid:146)s position is weakened, it may react excessively. Banks may then be subjected to high 
interest  rates  or  ultimately  be  excluded  from  the  market,  possibly  even  regardless  of  their 
performance. This could spread to other banks and jeopardize the stability of the banking system.   
Here,  prudential  supervision  complements  the  picture.  Although  prudential  supervision  entails 
efficiency  costs,  it  has  additional  advantages  for  banking  stability,  as  compared  to  disclosure. 
Basically,  supervisors  pay  due  regard  to  systemic  implications  of  banking  problems,  and  act 
accordingly. Supervisors have a public responsibility to maintain systemic stability and to prevent an 
escalation of an imminent crisis. Such conduct can not be expected from banks’ counterparties, who 
pursue their own, private objectives only. Given their public responsibility, prudential supervisors have 
a legal right to know about the banks subject to their supervision. They should consequently have an 
information  advantage  compared  to  banks’  counterparties.  The  upshot  is  that  even  if  banks’ 
transparency is enhanced through greater public disclosure, there will remain a need for a thorough 
and comprehensive prudential supervision. This explains the three pillars in the new Capital Accord.  
Interestingly, Pillar 2, the supervisory review process, is an essential complement of the Accord. The 
application of bank specific risk measurement systems, such as IRB, under Pillar 1 will result in bank 
specific capital requirements. Inevitably, since banks and their risk measurement systems differ, this 
will  reduce  the  level  playing  field.  This  development,  however,  is  counteracted  by  Pillar  3,  which 
requires  that  each  bank  provides  specific  disclosures  about  its  risk  management  and  capital 
measurement.  Yet,  although  there  will  be  greater  transparency  about  banks(cid:146)  capital  requirements, 
there is a risk of too much subjectivity. For that reason, there is an additional supervisory review of the 
matter, which is called Pillar 2, as a necessary complement to Pillars 1 and 3. This, incidentally, raises 
a more general question for accounting standard setters. In the banking sector, figures based on new 
measurement  techiques  (Pillar  1)  and  disclosures  (Pillar  3)  will  be  complemented  by  a  supervisory 
review (Pillar 2). If the application of new accounting standards in the corporate sector were to result in 
similar intrusions into the level playing field, this could be counteracted partially by greater disclosures. 
But who will then be supervisor or overseer? 
Against this background, oversight and enforcement with respect to financial reporting and disclosure 
must be strengthened. The Dutch government has recently announced its intention to do so. Three 
elements  are  worth  noting.  First,  application  of  eminent  and  internationally  harmonised  accounting 
standards,  as  Europe  moves  to  adopt  IAS  by  2005.  Second,  an  adequate  check  of  these  financial 
reports by external auditors. Third, an adequate oversight of compliance with the accounting standards 
and  reporting  requirements.  The  government  has  proposed  that  the  Netherlands  Authority  for  the 
Financial  Markets  (Au-FM)  be  entrusted  with  the  task  of  executing  this  type  of  oversight,  which  is 
essential  for  the  confidence  in  financial  reporting  by  Dutch  listed  companies,  as  well  as  to  the 
well-functioning  of  financial  markets.  The  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  the  Pensions  and  Insurance 
Supervisory  Authority  will  co-operate  with  the  Authority  for  the  Financial  Markets,  and  will  oversee 
prudential areas in financial reporting. Apart from this, there is an issue of oversight on the auditing 
profession. This will be introduced as well. 
Also, a brief comment on the US Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Under the Act, the SEC receives new powers, 
although  its  role  continues  to  be  that  of  enforcement  and  oversight.  The  Act  provides  for  an 
independent Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, and prescribes audit quality and corporate 
governance  measures.  Also,  it  directs  the  SEC  and  other  US  government  agencies  to  undertake 
comprehensive reviews of corporate governance, the segregation of audit and non-audit work, and the 
role  and  functioning  of  credit  rating  agencies.  Moreover,  the  Act  strengthens  the  disclosure 
requirements for public companies, notably in the areas of off-balance sheet transactions and insider 
trading.  An  interesting  question,  of  course,  is:  how  will  the  Act  affect  Europe?  The  debate  on  the 
implications of Sarbanes-Oxley for Europe is ongoing. The extent to which the Act will be effective, will 
also depend on the budget that the Administration intends to  provide to the SEC. But what Europeans 
in any event need to appreciate, is the comprehensiveness of the US approach.  
The EU in its turn has launched a major effort to improve its members’ corporate governance regimes. 
Also, the EU adopted the regulations which require the use of IAS by EU listed companies in 2005. 
This  deadline  will  require  EU  Member  States  to  step  up  their  transition  from  national  to  IAS.  In 
addition,  the  EU  supports  global  convergence  through  the  IAS  process  on  important  accounting 
issues,  such  as  the  treatment  of  financial  instruments,  performance  reporting,  consolidation  and 
share-based payments. Furthermore, expanded rules on auditor independence are being drafted. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2002
 Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. The subject of my address, accounting standards, transparency and supervision, is 
fairly complicated and has many aspects. First, although confidence in financial reporting has waned, 
this is due to many factors, of which accounting deficiencies are only one, albeit important element. 
Moreover, these factors are being redressed where possible. Second, accounting standards need to 
be adapted regularly to new developments in business and finance. This is not easy, given the many 
innovations  being  introduced  all  the  time.  Not  only  do  accounting  standards  need  adjusting,  the 
broader  corporate  governance  context  needs  to  be  addressed  as  well.  Third,  greater  transparency, 
through  public  disclosure  and  improving  market  discipline  is  vital  to  restoring  public  confidence. 
Fourth,  although  prudential  supervisors  encourage  transparency,  this  is  no  panacea.  Transparency 
cannot  do  without  adequate  supervision  and  oversight.  Finally,  I  haven(cid:146)t  said  much  today  about 
auditing. But if ever there was a need for high quality auditors, it is now. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 64/2002 
 5
