 Jean-Claude Trichet: Monetary policy in 2003 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Forum 
Institut für Management, Frankfurt, 2 December 2002. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is for me great pleasure to participate in this “International Forum on interest rates” and to exchange 
views with an audience of prominent players on financial markets. I welcome the initiative of the Forum 
Institut für Management. In promoting discussions on challenging issues between market practitioners 
and economists, this contributes to the attractiveness and spirit of financial markets in the euro area. 
I would like to open these discussions with some remarks on structural issues that one should keep in 
mind when examining the prospects for financial markets in Europe.  
Indeed, by achieving its primary objective of pursuing price stability in a medium-term perspective, the 
monetary policy defined by the Governing Council of the ECB lays the foundations of the success of 
euro. But these foundations are also embedded in a far-reaching structural dynamic involving notably 
three components:  
• 
• 
• 
I  would  like  to make  a few  remarks  on  the  challenges  and  opportunities  arising  from  these  three  –
interrelated– topics.  
financial integration, 
financial stability, 
and the prospects of European Union enlargement. 
1 
1.1 
Financial integration 
As regards financial integration, the European monetary union has in many respects 
modified the way in which financial institutions organise their daily business in the 
euro area. This has influenced the integration pattern on the various segments of the 
financial market.  
European Union has modified the way in which financial institutions organise their daily business in the 
euro area: 
It is true that financial integration in Europe started before January 1999, as banks and non-financial 
companies included, in their strategies, the setting up of the Single European Market, which occurred 
ten  years  ago.  The  expansion  of  their  operations  abroad  has  been  notably  the  driving  force.  To 
illustrate  that  point,  we  can  look  at  the  stock  of  foreign  assets  held  by  companies.  In  the  case  of 
France, this stock has more than tripled between 1992 and 2000, from EUR bios 131 to EUR bios 465. 
As a result, non-financial companies gradually introduced more competition into the banking system, 
as  they  funded  their  expansion  through  non-domestic  bond  or  commercial  paper  issues,  or  by 
centralizing  their  financing.  As  an  example  40%  of  the  external  financial  resources  borrowed  by 
French medium and large companies are being redistributed to their own subsidiaries, and 10 to 15% 
consists of commercial paper and bond issuance (figure as at end 2001)1. 
                                                      
1   Source : Banque de France – Central balance sheet data - 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 1
 1.2  
These changes, and on top of them the introduction of the euro, have influenced the 
integration pattern on the money market, on the bond markets, on the derivatives 
markets and on the equity markets.  
Integration is certainly –and naturally– most developed on the money market. Interest rate differentials 
across regional deposit markets have vanished and the “law of one price” applies to all transactions 
within  a  deep  and  highly  liquid  pan-European  market.  Cross-border  transactions  –for  unsecured 
inter-bank  deposits  and  repos–  now  account  for  over  50%  of  all  money-market  cash  transactions. 
EONIA  and EURIBOR  have  within a  very short time become the undisputed  benchmarks for short-
term interest rates. This is reflected for instance in the impressive development of the euro interest-
rate  swap  market,  where  all  but  a  few  transactions  are  indexed  on  these  benchmarks.  This  deep 
integration of the money market has prompted new organisational patterns in the banking sector, with 
a concentration of euro cash management activities  making it possible to take advantage of higher 
liquidity  levels  on  the  secondary  market.  For  instance,  according  to  a  survey  by  the  International 
Securities Market Association in June 2002, the top ten banks in a panel of 77 accounted for 55% of 
the total reported business on the European repo market. As a result the price discovery mechanism 
on the money market is smoothened because trade decisions are based on information systems that 
capture the relevant parameters at euro-area level. 
The integration of euro-area financial markets has also deepened on the bond market: 
• 
Rapid  internationalisation  has  taken  place.  Between  1998  and  2001,  the  relative  share  of 
corporate  bonds issued by corporate borrowers in  the euro area as a  percentage of GDP 
has more than doubled, while it increased by one third in the United States2. 
Competition  between  all  issuers,  corporate  or  sovereign,  has  intensified.  For  sovereign 
issuers,  the  disappearance  of  currency  risk  and  the  convergence  process  driven  by  the 
Maastricht  Treaty  have  transformed  government  bonds  into  directly  competing  risk  free 
assets.  As  a  consequence,  sovereign  issuers  have  implemented  strategies  aimed  both  at 
differentiating  their  issuance  profiles  –in  order  to  diversify  the  opportunities  offered  to 
investors– and at establishing benchmarks on a selection of maturities. This is reflected by 
the  building  up  of  an  outstanding  amount  of  at  least  5  bios  euros  on  the  internationally 
important 10 years segment, in each euro area country, while issuance strategies on other 
segments  –2,  5,  30  years–  differ,  some  countries  building  up  relatively  larger  outstanding 
amounts on 30 years maturities (Italy), some on 5 years maturities (Netherlands)  3. Only a 
few  large  countries  (Germany,  France  for  instance)  are  able  to  provide  a  high  level  of 
liquidity on all the spectrum of maturities. This competition has provided market participants 
with  a  wider  range  of  products  that  are  also  more  standardised,  which  allowed  for  the 
development of electronic trading and enhanced the liquidity of the euro bond market. 
Internationalisation and competition between private issuers have been accompanied by an 
impressive  surge  in  the  amounts  issued.  Issuance  of  Euro  denominated  non-government 
bonds  has  more  than  tripled  between  1998  and  2002  4.  It  is  quite  difficult  to  isolate  the 
specific impact of European Monetary Union, due to the fact that large issuances during the 
1999-2001 period were also linked to the refinancing needs arising from intense merger and 
acquisition activity. Looking ahead over the medium-term, growth in the bond market is likely 
to be driven by such elements as the development of pension fund assets, while retail savers 
may move away from bank deposits to invest in other savings products. In turn, the design of 
savings  products  will  benefit  from  the  standardisation  and  diversification  of  fixed  income 
issuance5. 
  The integration of interest rate markets in the euro area has been accompanied by a new phase in the 
development  of  derivative  markets.  The  proportion  of  worldwide  open  interest  contracts  traded  on 
                                                      
2   BIS and IMF statistics – quoted in RAJAN and ZINGALES – 2002. 
3  OECD – Debt management and Government securities in the 21st century – 2002. 
4  
5   RAJAN and ZINGALES – 2002 – Second ECB international banking conference. 
from about EUR 100 bios in 1998 to about 300 bios in 2000, 2001 and 2002 – source Bondware. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2002
 European derivative exchanges went from less than 1% to more than 15% in 15 years6. As derivative 
markets enhance the ability to manage and trade risk, they are at the heart of modern finance and the 
backbone of financial innovation. Their development  has enabled market participants to  hedge risk, 
develop  arbitrage,  and,  therefore,  enhance  the  efficiency  of  price  setting  in  financial  markets.  Of 
course, the other side of the coin is that derivatives are sometimes criticised as they may be regarded 
under some circumstances as a potential threat to financial stability. I will come back to this point later 
on. 
The elimination of currency risk within the euro area has also had far-reaching effects on the equity 
markets. This is crystal clear when observing volatility patterns and portfolio allocation methods. 
As regards volatility patterns, recent developments seem consistent with the predictions of economic 
theory,  where  stock  prices  should  reflect  expectations  of  future  dividends,  interest  rates  and  risk 
premia. It follows that the introduction of the euro should be associated with a reduction in differences 
in  volatility  across  markets.  Indeed,  a  recent  empirical  study  7  demonstrates  that  those  countries 
whose stock exchanges had a structural high or medium volatility regime, converged towards those 
with  a  low  volatility  regime.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  European  stock  market  as  a  whole,  this 
shows an improvement in global efficiency. 
As regards investment patterns, sector-diversification strategies have been defined as an alternative to 
country  diversification.  Before  EMU,  it  was  common  practice  for  institutional  investors  to  make 
geographical diversification their first priority, and, secondly, to select securities in accordance with a 
sectoral diversification pattern. There is some evidence that the “home bias” has weakened since the 
introduction  of  the  euro.  For  instance,  assets  held  by  pan-European  investment  funds  represented 
25%  of  total  assets  at  the  end  of  2000,  up  from  12%  in  19988.  The  development  of  a  genuine 
pan-European approach is also illustrated by the introduction of various European stock indexes. The 
turnover  on  options  based  on  these  indexes  –for  instance,  the  volume  of  options  traded  on  the 
Eurostoxx50  contract–  now  matches  the  turnover  of  options  based  on  well-established  domestic 
indexes such as the CAC in France. This provides evidence that large investors are looking for – and 
actually have recourse to– hedging products that are suited to a cross-border oriented strategy. 
However,  this  evidence  of  a  strong  impetus  towards  integration  does  not  necessarily  support  the 
argument  that  a  brand  new  asset  allocation  is  overwhelmingly  dominant.  Let  me  emphasise  two 
aspects.  
First, pan-European sectoral strategies have also embraced non-euro area stocks in order to reach an 
appropriate  level  of  diversification.  This  is  the  case  in  sectors  such  as  pharmaceuticals,  or  telecom 
equipment, with stocks listed in non-euro area countries such as Switzerland, the United Kingdom and 
Sweden.  This  is  in  line  with  some  theoretical  assumptions,  which  are  stating  that  currency  risk  is 
outweighed by the risk-return parameters, as far as investing in equities is concerned.  
This leads me to the second aspect: the sensitivity of stock market to general macroeconomic events 
suggests that domestic macroeconomic variables still influence stock prices. Therefore investors may 
still  prefer  to  avoid  being  heavily  weighted  in  a  country  with  structural  rigidities,  or  high  public  debt 
levels, and will on the contrary overweight their asset allocation in countries with well-designed fiscal 
and  structural  policies.  In  the  same  vein,  this  should  suggest  that  the  level  of  connection  between 
stock exchanges in Europe and the US could be time varying, considering that the underlying factors 
are  also  driven  by  policies  that  are  implemented  independently.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  and  not 
surprinsingly, correlations of yields between European stock indexes appear to be higher than those 
between European and US indexes, and these correlations have increased since 1999. These results 
seem  valid  even  taking  into  account  the  increase  in  correlations  due  to  the  increase  in  absolute 
volatility levels9. 
                                                      
6   RAJAN and ZINGALES – 2002 – Second ECB international banking conference . 
7   MORANA, BELTRATTI – 2002 – The effects of the introduction of the euro on the volatility of European stock markets – 
Journal of Banking and Finance. 
8   Source: FEFSI  –  Fédération Européenne  des  Fonds  et  Sociétés d’Investissement  –  in  THE  EURO  EQUITY  MARKET  – 
ECB 2001. 
9   Banque de France Research department calculations – . Correlations calculated as monthly averages. The impact of market 
shocks is neutralized by taking into account changes in long term interest rates. The correlation between Eurostoxx 50 and 
 BIS Review 71/2002 
 3
 2 
2.1 
Financial stability 
Like every modern and independent central bank, the Eurosystem and its individual 
components, the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area, have to fulfil 
two main functions: firstly, ensuring price stability, and secondly, preserving financial 
stability. Discussions about the role that central banks should play in circumstances 
of illiquidity or financial distress are as old as central banks themselves.  
The involvement of central banks in financial stability issues stems from the superiority of central bank 
money in the final settlement of transactions on financial markets. Central bank money enables market 
participants to have risk-free and low-cost working balances – risk-free because the counterpart risk 
on  a  central  bank  is  assumed  to  be  zero,  low-cost  because,  in  the  TARGET  system,  the  cost  of 
intraday  credit  is  limited  to  the  opportunity  cost  of  depositing  the  appropriate  level  of  collateral. 
Therefore,  central  banks  are  concerned  with  the  robustness  of  payment  systems  and  the  financial 
positions of banks participating in the money market, in order to prevent systemic risk that could stem, 
for instance, from the potential “domino effect” if a participant fails to meet its settlement obligations. 
Central banks are concerned also by financial stability from a monetary policy point of view. I would 
say that price stability can be regarded as the bedrock of financial stability, while financial stability is 
critical to the efficiency of monetary policy. Let me elaborate further on these two points. 
First, why is price stability the backbone of financial stability? Financial stability can be achieved on a 
sustainable  basis  if  financial  resources  are  not  misallocated.  Past  experience,  as  well  as  a  large 
number of economic studies provide evidence that inflation brings about distortions in the allocation of 
resources. For instance, the calculation of returns is biased, due to the fact that the replacement cost 
of fixed assets is structurally underestimated. This may result in sub-optimal investment decisions, and 
over-optimistic credit risk assessment. Conversely, in the case of deflation, the solvency of indebted 
companies may be jeopardized, as the value of cash flows decreases over time, while the face value 
of debt remains stable. 
Second,  why  does  financial  stability  matter  for  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy?  The  efficiency  of 
monetary policy relies on the effectiveness of the transmission channels of monetary policy. Central 
banks have direct control over short-term interest rates only. The impact of monetary policy decisions 
on  prices  goes  through  various  channels  –  acting  directly  on  the  anticipations  of  economic  agents, 
influencing banking credit conditions, the exchange rate and other asset prices. Uncertainty may arise 
when  these  channels  do  not  act  in  a  predictable  way  nor  with  relatively  stable  time  lags.  In  this 
respect,  financial  instability  may  affect  the  transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy.  For  instance, 
large  fluctuations  in  asset  prices  may  modify  the  behaviour  of  agents  by  decreasing  the  level  of 
confidence.  Such  fluctuations  can  also  expose  bank  portfolios  to  a  higher  risk  of  losses,  inducing 
banks to compensate for these risks by restricting credit.  
Let me stress that, although a price stability oriented monetary policy is conducive to financial stability 
over the long term, episodes of financial instability have been known to take place during periods of 
low  inflation.  Price  stability  must  be  therefore  regarded  as  a  necessary  but  not  sufficient  condition. 
Other parameters influence financial stability, among which financial integration is of particular interest 
from the point of view of a central bank in the Euro area. 
2.2 
• 
  The relationship between financial integration and financial stability is twofold:  
First, the liquidity redistribution function has taken on a new dimension as participants in the 
market  are  dealing  with  a  wider  range  of  counterparties,  and  actually  trade  larger  unit 
amounts.  Some  bank  treasurers  in  Paris  mention  that  the  average  face  value  in  euro  of 
single transaction today  is equivalent to the face  value of a transaction in French franc in 
1998, that is, more than six times higher. 
Second,  financial  market  integration  is  related  to  the  trend  towards  the  greater  share  of 
markets in the allocation of assets. At the end of 2000 financial assets in the euro area were 
                                                                                                                                                                      
Dow Jones is 70% over the period January 1999- October 2002 (70% when the measure is based on SP500), and 100% 
between CAC and Eurostoxx50 (97% between DAX and Eurostoxx 50). 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2002
 split almost equally between intermediated and non-intermediated assets10. Although credit 
still  plays  a  prominent  role  in  the  allocation  of  financial  resources,  credit  institutions 
themselves are relying on the financial markets to manage their balance sheets. 
These  two  points  suggest  that  the  benefits  of  enhanced  liquidity  entail  the  management  of  a  new 
range of risks. This should not lead us to conclude that financial integration has necessarily negative 
side effects from the point of view of financial stability. 
Financial integration may help to foster financial instability. I would like to put forward three reasons for 
this: 
• 
First, the setting up of a large currency area eliminates disruptions arising from currency risk 
that  would  otherwise  prevail  between  the  participating  countries.  Domestic  economies  are 
immune to currency misalignment episodes that disturb regional trade. Currency risk premia 
are eliminated from interest rates. 
Secondly,  the  setting  up  of  a  large  currency  area  implies  an  overhaul  of  market 
infrastructure. In this respect both public bodies, such as national central banks and market 
participants, have a unique opportunity to pool best practices. Indeed, this has been the case 
in the euro area  where, for example– the TARGET system, interlinking domestic real-time 
gross  settlement  systems,  has  demonstrated  its  ability  to  absorb  large  volumes  of 
cross-border  flows,  and  to  perform  well  even  in  critical  circumstances  such  as September 
2001. The TARGET system processes today around EUR 1500 billion per day, 50% more 
than the average in 1999 and an estimated three times the amount that all the large-value 
payment systems in the 12 euro area countries processed together in 1990 11. 
Thirdly, a large currency area means deeper and more liquid financial markets. This allows 
market  participants  to  diversify  their  risks  on  a  wider  basis;  moreover,  as  currency  risk  is 
eliminated, they can focus on the analysis of credit risk. A large currency area also provides 
more scope for specialised institutions to develop. All  in all, market efficiency  and  liquidity 
help to cushion external shocks 12. 
  2.3 
Taking into account these benefits, one could question why financial stability issues 
are still important in the euro area.  
In  my  view  financial  stability  issues  need  to  be  re-visited  today  against  the  backdrop  of  the  far-
reaching changes observed on the financial markets in the last decade, and taking into account the 
succession  of  market  instability  episodes.  Just  to  name  a  few,  the  Asian  crisis,  the  Russian/LTCM 
crisis  in  1998,  the  “Tech-bubble”  as  of  2000.  These  episodes  were  characterised  by  situations  of 
liquidity  stress,  market  volatility,  and  the  late  discovery  of  risks  that  had  spread  widely  through 
complex hedging and financial innovation devices.  
In this respect the complex relationship between  volatility, financial innovation  and financial stability 
deserves attention. 
Clearly,  volatility  levels  primarily  reflects  the  degree  of  uncertainty  of  market  participants.  From  a 
general  point  of  view,  volatility  is  a  kind  of  genetic  signature  of  the  price  setting  mechanism  in  a 
competitive  market.  Prices  hover  around  the  equilibrium  through  successive  adjustments.  When 
market  participants  express  widely  different  views  on  this  equilibrium  price,  or  when  the  volume  of 
transaction shrinks, volatility usually increases. In this respect, there is a close correlation between the 
occurrence  of  crises  –such  as  the  revealed  insolvency  of  an  emerging  country,  supply  shocks  on 
commodity prices, bursting of equity bubbles– and excessive volatility. Volatility is not an indicator of 
market  inefficiency.  However,  excessively  high  volatility  has  adverse  effects  on  the  behaviour  of 
market participants and the real economy. From a corporate management point of view, volatility on 
capital  markets  lowers  the  predictability  of  the  cost  of  capital.  When  reviewing  investment 
                                                      
10   Source : Report on financial structures – ECB - 2002 
11   estimation  in  « Central  banks  and  financial  stability  –  exploring  an  intermediate  land »  –  Second  ECB  central  banking 
conference - 2002 
12   BRI – Economic aspects of regional currency areas and the use of foreign currencies – 2002 – document non publié. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 5
 opportunities,  managers  may  want  to  avoid  relying  too  heavily  on  external  finance  because  of  the 
uncertainties  surrounding  the  cost,  or  even  the  sheer  availability,  of  financing.  This  may  lead 
companies to postpone or downsize investment projects. From a financial management point of view, 
large investors may give priority to companies with a low risk profile, in order to bring back their own 
asset portfolios to levels of volatility matching their requirements. Therefore listed companies will have 
an  incentive  to  adjust  their  risk  profile  and  avoid  more  hazardous  –which  may  also  be  more 
innovative– investment projects. Therefore, “entrepeneurship” may be curbed and the growth potential 
may be influenced adversely.  
Another  impact  of  volatility  on  financial  management  is  related  to  recourse  to  hedging,  namely 
derivative  products.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  derivatives  are  a  driving  force  behind  mature  financial 
markets, and their strong development in the last two decades is merely consequence of the benefits 
they have generated.  
More precisely, derivatives and related financial innovations have enabled companies to transfer the 
impact of interest rate and currency fluctuations to financial institutions or investors that were ready to 
manage it, whereby facilitating international trade or project financing.  
Meanwhile,  the  pricing  of  derivatives  is  closely  linked  to  volatility.  As  volatility  is  indeed  difficult  to 
predict, market practitioners have developed models, which are constantly being refined. Over time, 
market participants, –especially banks,– have become more competent in managing risk, while being 
left that residual risks which are more complex and harder to control.  
These consequences would not be a major concern, if the episodes of excessive volatility were only 
accidental.  Peaks  of  volatility  clearly  reflect  macroeconomic  imbalances,  as  soon  as  market 
participants take into account the relevant information. This has been evidenced in studies reviewing 
factors  behind  currency  crises  in  emerging  countries.  Macro  data  –such  as  balance  of  payment  or 
fiscal policy indicators– prove to be discriminant-leading indicators from this point of view13.  
However,  I  cannot  affirm  that  the  resolution  of  market  imbalances  would  result  in  a  reduction  of 
volatility  to  levels  that  prevailed  before  these  imbalances  were  taken  into  account  by  market 
participants.  In  my  view  one  should  not  underestimate  the  part  played  by  technical  factors  in  the 
persistence of volatility peaks. This persistence in volatility is fuelled by technical features that facilitate 
the build up of mimetic behaviours (amplifying effects), or that reinforce the links between the various 
market segments (diffusion effects). 
Mimetic  behaviour  is  of  course  by  no  means  a  new  phenomenon  on  financial  markets.  However 
benchmarking, index management, and risk management techniques may have gradually reinforced 
this  type  of  behaviour,  as  participants  are  under  increasing  pressure  to  follow  their  peers  through 
matching the performance of a benchmark.  
There is no doubt that the spread of benchmarking allows fund managers and clients to better assess 
their  performance  against  that  of  other  funds.  But,  in  a  context  of  growing  competition  within  the 
sector,  it  may  well  have  increased  mimetic  behaviour.  Some  market  participants  (whose  own 
compensation is closely linked to the relative, rather than absolute, profit and losses they generate) 
may  indeed have come to the conclusion that it  would be better to  be  wrong  along  with everybody 
else, rather than to run the risk of being right alone. A striking example of rational mimetic behaviour is 
the  influence  that  hedge  funds  posess  as  “opinion  leaders”  and  trend  setters.  By  its  nature,  trend 
following amplifies the imbalance that may at some point affect a market, potentially leading to vicious 
circles of price adjustment and liquidation of positions. Moreover, increasing numbers of participants 
are able to access financial markets directly, while the expertise to deal with a wide range of technical 
information is not evenly distributed. This may also reinforce the role of “gurus”. 
Index  management,  as  a  fund  management  technique,  has  proven  very  popular  on  equity  markets 
and may have contributed to exacerbating fluctuations in financial asset prices. Because their goal is 
to mimic the performance of indices, “passive managers” constantly strive to match the composition of 
their  benchmark.  They  thus  help  to  amplify  market  trends,  buying  more  as  the  market  rises  and 
increasingly liquidating as the market drops. It can be argued that index funds distort the prices of the 
targeted indices and that, as a result, the indices end up creating rather than measuring performance. 
                                                      
13  Leading indicators of currency crisis in emerging countries – BURKART, COUDERT – Notes d’Etude et de Recherche – 
Banque de France – 2000. 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2002
 The impact of risk management techniques on market dynamics is particularly enlightening with regard 
to the question of asset price overshooting. Value-at-risk calculations have become a crucial element 
of  the  standard  approach  used  by  market  participants  to  evaluate  the  risk  inherent  in  their  market 
activities  and  to  set  up  exposure  limits.  Of  course,  central  banks  and  financial  institutions  should 
continue to encourage the use of these instruments. But, in times of financial turmoil, the growing use 
of sophisticated risk management techniques by financial intermediaries might have the paradoxical 
effect  of  amplifying  the  initial  shock,  exhausting  liquidity  and  contributing  to  contagion  phenomena. 
Regardless of the intrinsic qualities of these risk management tools, we see that their growing use in 
the  same  fashion  by  all  market  participants  may  have  produced  pernicious  effects.  When  market 
players rely on converging risk evaluations, they tend to take the same decisions at the same time, 
thus amplifying initial shock to prices and trading volumes. 
Financial  techniques  can  also  reinforce  the  links  between  the  various  market  segments.  A  striking 
feature  of  recent  developments  on  financial  markets  is  the  quick  spreading  of  disryptions  from  one 
market segment to another, especially between equity and credit markets.  
For  example,  the  short  selling  of  equities  is  sometimes  used  to  hedge  credit  risk.  The  underlying 
reasoning is that if there is a credit default, the value of the equity will decrease symmetrically, and an 
equity gain will compensate the lender for the credit loss. As a result, the fall in the equity value, which 
is triggered by the credit default, is amplified by the short selling operation.  
Credit  risk  derivatives  constitute  another  financial  innovation  which  has  played  an  increasingly 
important role in the last years. It has contributed to avoiding credit institutions to be heavily impacted 
by the large credit defaults that have occured recently. Credit risk derivatives have also enabled banks 
to  fine-tune  the  risk-return  profile  of  their  loan  portfolios.  From  a  macro  point  of  view,  credit  risk 
derivatives  are  helping  diversify  and  spread  risk,  under  the  assumption  that  buyers  of  risk  will 
deliberately  alter  their  own  risk-return  profile.  But  the  ultimate  risk  remain  and  as  a  result,  some 
sectors,  such  as  insurance  companies  or  pensions  funds,  which  hitherto  did  not  feel  the  direct 
pressure of a worsening in credit quality, may now find themselves directly impacted, had they sold 
such derivatives at an earlier stage.  
Against  this  background,  and  beyond  the  primary  objective  of  achieving  price  stability  over  the 
medium-term, which part should central banks play to improve the functioning of financial markets and 
promote financial stability?  
Apart  from  their  operational  tasks  –such  as  the  management  of  money  market  liquidity  and  the 
monitoring of large value payment systems– central banks must endeavour unremittingly to create the 
conditions  for  the  international  economy  to  minimize  misalignments  in  asset  prices,  excessive 
volatility,  purely  speculative  phenomena  and  dangerous  herding  behaviour.  This  is  the  underlying 
message in central banks' repeated calls for prudence and caution. 
I would like now to address my third point, that is, the prospects of the European Union enlargement.  
European Union enlargement 
3 
At  first  glance,  the  link  between  this  topic  and  the  two  issues  I  have  been  dealing  with  up  to  now 
appears quite tenuous. Yet, while the issues arising from market integration and financial stability are 
of  concern  for  many  Central  Banks,  managing  the  EU  enlargement  is  a  distinctive  concern  of  the 
Eurosystem. I would like to share views on how the Eurosystem will act to address this concern, while 
performing their task regarding price and financial stability. 
Ten countries from Central, Eastern and Southern Europe –comprising 75 million inhabitants – are to 
join  the  EU,  thus  completing  European  reunification.  Although  their  combined  GDP  is  rather  small 
(equivalent to that of the Netherlands for instance), in terms of population' size they will propel the EU 
(450  millions  inhabitants)  largely  ahead  of  the  combined  population  of  both  the  US  (population: 
275 millions)  and  Russia  (population:  145  millions).  This  testifies  again,  if  need  be,  to  the 
attractiveness of the European Union framework, which has provided us with economic prosperity and 
political stability for almost half a century.  
Accession  countries  have  accomplished  important  progress  in  stabilizing  and  strengthening  their 
economies and their institutions. Observing the accession countries, recent history shows the major 
improvements those countries have made, in hardly 10 years, on the road towards convergence with 
the  EU.  Let  us  keep  in  mind,  the  sometimes  rather  slow  pace  the  current  Member  States  took, 
regarding for example trade openness, price liberalisation, or macro economic discipline. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 7
     8 
 Nevertheless, there is also general agreement on the fact that the gap, in terms of average GDP per 
capita, between the accession countries and the euro area, although diminishing, remains still quite 
significant. The size of the gap, combined recently with a rather limited growth differential between the 
two groups of countries, suggests that the process of real convergence will be very gradual and will 
have to continue much beyond the tentative dates for EU accession.  
Although differences in income levels are not incompatible with EU and even EMU membership, it is 
extremely important for accession countries to increase real convergence. Indeed, real convergence is 
essential to create economic cohesion within EMU and promote integration between Members States, 
thereby  helping  to  minimize  the  risk  and  the  effects  of  asymmetric  shocks,  in  the  best  interest  of 
accession countries themselves. 
Let  me  stress  seven  points  of  particular  relevance  for  the  Eurosystem,  and  for  accession  countries 
themselves on the road towards achieving catching-up and convergence with the EU. 
• 
Firstly, we should never forget that nominal convergence must be sustainable and therefore 
not only constitutes an objective that must be met at a given point of time but rather a goal 
that must be achieved continuously. Strict compliance with the Maastricht criteria will be key 
for joining the euro area. Indeed, the EU Treaty calls, as a prerequisite for adopting the euro, 
for a high degree of sustainable convergence in the fields of price stability, government fiscal 
position, stability of the exchange rate, and long-term interest-rate levels. The sustainability 
of nominal convergence itself presumes that sufficient preliminary progress has been made 
towards  real  and  structural  convergence  (and  namely  having  set  a  fully-fledged  market 
economy,  catching-up  in  income  and  productivity  levels,  as  well  as  economic  and  social 
infrastructures,  upgrading  of  the  legal  system…).  Conversely,  a  sustainable  catching-up 
process requires macroeconomic stability. Therefore, nominal and real convergence should 
be pursued in parallel, and are not antagonistic.  
Secondly, I noted that several accession countries have already expressed their intention to 
join ERM II rapidly after EU entry. This intention is to be welcomed, although it should be 
clear that ERM II membership needs neither to happen immediately after EU accession in all 
cases, nor to be limited to only two years, which is the minimum before adopting the euro. It 
would be totally misleading to consider ERM II as a mere “waiting room” before the euro. On 
the very contrary, ERM II membership allows countries to retain some limited exchange rate 
flexibility  during  the  catching-up  process  and  offers  a  meaningful,  flexible  and  credible 
framework for increasing nominal and real convergence with the euro area, and for helping 
determine the  appropriate  level for the eventual  irrevocable fixation  of parities,  in the  best 
interest of candidate countries themselves. To enter the Eurozone is a very important, very 
grave and irrevocable act. Neither the accession country concerned nor the Eurozone could 
afford the risks associated with a mistaken decision.  
Thirdly,  accession  countries  must  strengthen  their  fiscal  and  external  positions.  Given  the 
aim  of  attaining  real  convergence  over  time,  accession  countries  will  have  to  devote 
significant public resources to funding investment. However, candidate countries’ weighted 
average  public  deficit  amount  to  3.6%  of  GDP  in  2001.  The  fiscal  consolidation  currently 
planned by some accession countries is welcome and likely to require sizeable expenditure 
cuts  or  tax  increases.  Looking  ahead,  accession  countries  will  have  to  implement  fiscal 
consolidation very credibly with a view to avoiding the risks associated with the existence of 
high “twin deficits”, i.e. fiscal and external. 
Fourthly, a sound and efficient banking and financial system is key. Significant progress has 
been  made  over  the  past  few  years  in  rehabilitating  the  banking  sector  and  encouraging 
foreign ownership. The latter has also contributed to greater integration into the EU financial 
system. Nevertheless, adapting the legal and regulatory framework is a process entirely in 
the hands of the accessing countries. The intermediation role of the banking sector remains 
fundamental  for  the  efficient  use  of  capital  and  sustained  growth.  Progress  in  corporate 
governance,  the  enhancement  of  the  legal  and  supervisory  frameworks  that  support  the 
banking  sector,  and  an  efficient  fight  against  money  laundering,  are  also  crucial.  These 
improvements  are  conducive  to  achieving  the  macroeconomic  objectives  of  the  accession 
countries. 
Fifthly,  central  bank  independence  is  of  the  essence.  It  is  an  integral  part  of  the  acquis 
communautaire,  which  is  laid  down  not  only  in  national  legislation  but  above  all  in  the 
BIS Review 71/2002
  Maastricht Treaty. The effective implementation of the acquis communautaire is not only a 
legal  prerequisite  for  accession  to  the  EU.  It  also  implies  the  effective  transformation  of 
accession  countries’  economic  framework,  which  should  facilitate  their  integration  into  the 
EU  and,  later,  the  euro  area.  In  this  context,  it  should  be  ensured  that  there  is  no 
discrepancy  between 
the 
implementation  of  that  legislation.  It  is  of  utmost  importance  that  all  present  and  future 
Member  States  respect  this  economic  and  institutional  ground  rule  of  the  European 
framework. 
Sixthly, let us not forget the present and future contribution of Central and Eastern European 
countries to the economic prosperity of Europe at large.  
the  central  banks’ 
legislation  and 
formal  status 
the 
in 
It seems that this contribution might be sometimes underestimated, while the relative influence of the 
US  economy,  for  instance,  might  be  sometimes  overestimated.  In  fact,  transition  economies,  as  a 
whole, are as important as the US in terms of external demand addressed to the euro area: they both 
enjoy the same share, i.e. 13% of our exports. And, during the last two years, transition economies 
contributed for two-thirds to the overall growth of our total external demand, while the US contributed 
for less than 0.1%.  
More generally speaking, Central and Eastern Europe countries are already major contributors to the 
overall growth on the European continent. In 2001, despite the international context, they remained at 
quite high a level of growth, around 2.8%. This contribution is bound to further increase given these 
countries’ considerable potential for growth.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 9
