 Jean-Claude Trichet: The international financial architecture 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Bank of France, to the Foreign Policy Association, 
New York, 30 September 2002. 
 I am delighted to be here in this great city, speaking to this prestigious association. Let me start by 
paying tribute to the Foreign Policy Association and to its contribution to the international debate with 
immense experience.  
Let me also say how Banque de France feels very close to the New Yorkers one year after the tragic 
events of September 11. As the French daily “Le Monde” rightly emphasised: “We are all Americans”. 
I am just coming back from the international monetary and financial meetings which take place every 
year  in Washington. I am lucidly  and cautiously confident that  we  will overcome present difficulties. 
And in my view there is no room either for undue pessimism or for any kind of complacency. 
What has happened during the recent period of time? 
Some financial markets have experienced sharp corrections and several large  corporate firms have 
failed  or  been  confronted  with  significant  difficulties;  meanwhile,  a  few  major  emerging  market 
economies have got into deep financial troubles. However, financial systems have been so far resilient 
and the economic recovery is underway, although more slowly than first anticipated. 
Against this background of uncertainty and shocks, and in order to reap all the benefits of the fantastic 
process of economic and financial globalisation, we are still facing two main challenges: 
First,  we  observe  persistent  financial  instability  of  which  the  ICT  and  equity  bubble  is  a  striking 
example. What are the factors behind such developments and which avenues should we explore in 
order to mitigate financial instability? 
Second, we had to cope with repeated financial crises in emerging market economies since the early 
80s. Our challenge is how to prevent such crises and, if they occur, how to ensure that effective and 
predictable methods for crisis resolution are available, and enforced.  
In  my  view,  the  new  international  financial  architecture  (understood  broadly)  should  provide 
appropriate  policy  responses  to  both  types  of  challenges.  Of  course,  they  are  interlinked  in  many 
ways.  
For the sake of clarity, I will address these two types of issues separately.  
• 
First,  I  would  like  to  show  that  some  by-products  of  financial  integration  may  have  had 
adverse effects on the stability and efficiency of the financial systems;  
I will then try to put into perspective recent crises in emerging market economies.  
 Some by-products of financial integration may have had adverse effects on the 
stability of mature financial systems 
 1. 
I would like to briefly sketch two main features of this financial instability: 
1.1. 
First,  while  globalisation  and  financial  integration  have  decisively  contributed  to  improving  overall 
economic efficiency, experience also suggests that financial asset prices have experienced in many 
occasions somewhat erratic movements resulting in overshooting and misalignments.  
This pattern applies to a wide range of markets: exchange rates as well as bond and equity markets in 
both emerging and mature markets. The very fast ballooning of the "new economy" bubble in 1999 
and early 2000 -followed by a series of sharp corrections- illustrates the potential of markets to provide 
funding to the real economy, particularly to the most innovative sectors; but it also demonstrates again 
some  tendency  of  markets  to  over-react,  moving  from  excessive  optimism  to  disproportionate 
pessimism.  
BIS Review 62/2002 
 1
 Thus,  financial  authorities  have  been  confronted  with  boom-bust  episodes  which  must  be  carefully 
monitored  and  assessed  since  they  have  the  potential  to  affect  the  global  monetary  and  financial 
stability. 
The  second  feature  is  a  growing  tendency  towards  volatility  on  financial  markets,  in  the  most 
advanced economies as well as in emerging markets economies. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  mid-nineties,  volatility  has  become  higher  on  both  international  stock 
markets and foreign exchange markets. Volatility per se is not an issue from a financial stability point 
of view. Not only is volatility inherent to financial markets but it is taken into account in many areas of 
the operational frameworks of financial markets. 
However,  the  micro  effects  of  volatility,  particularly  of  unwarranted  or  unexpected  volatility,  may 
actually impair the smooth functioning of financial markets, through different channels. For instance: 
the asset pricing process and the determination of equilibrium prices is being complicated; transaction 
costs  and  collateralisation  costs  increase;  the  fragility  of  financial  intermediaries’  balance  sheets 
increases;  the  unequal  ability  of  market  participants  to  tackle  volatility  movements  can  increase 
polarisation among participants, and develop risks of an uneven playing field. Ultimately, these effects 
may  unduly  raise  the  costs  and  bias  the  allocation  of  capital,  a  source  of  concern  from  a  financial 
stability point of view.  
Such  a  higher  volatility  may  have  a  globally  negative  impact  on  market  efficiency.  Indeed,  higher 
volatility may lead to excessive risk aversion among investors and finally to a misallocation of capital, 
at both the global and sectorial levels. It may also lead to some lack of discrimination between different 
debtors which can be especially detrimental to growth in countries who need capital most.  
1.2. 
Several factors are at play when financial asset prices experience more amplified and 
volatile moves. 
The first set of factors relate to the behaviour of market participants: 
Some market participants have become more inclined to engage in "short-termism", that is, they might 
be  too  much  concerned  with  their  short-term  results,  exhibiting  market  “myopia”.  This  trend  might 
result, in particular, from growing pressure of investors to yield immediate financial results that are not 
necessarily  sustainable,  the  so-called  “tyranny  of  return  on  equity”.  Moreover,  the  mark-to-market 
completed  by  mark  to  model  of  a  wide  range  of  assets  and  liabilities  has  also  contributed  to  this 
widespread  focus  on  immediate  financial  performances.  This  focus  on  short-term  performance  can 
translate  into  additional  volatility  in  the  price  discovery  process:  indeed,  the  shorter  the  investment 
horizon of market participants, the larger the impact on prices of any new information.  
Mimetic behaviour is by no means a new phenomenon on financial markets. However, technological 
developments  on  markets  may  have  gradually  reinforced  this  type  of  behaviour.  The  spread  of 
benchmarking, which allows fund managers and clients to measure performance against that of other 
funds, together with the growing competition within the sector, appears to have favoured such “herd 
behaviour”.  Some  operators  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  better  to  be  wrong  along  with 
everybody else, rather than take the risk of being right alone. A striking example of rational mimetic 
behaviour is the influence that hedge funds enjoyed, a few years ago, as "opinion leaders" and trend 
makers.  
The second set of factors relates to new market techniques or financial engineering devices. Here are 
a few examples of some of these mechanisms:  
• 
The  inclusion  of  contingent  or  trigger  clauses  in  loan  and  bond  contracts.  These  clauses 
provide  creditors  with  a  form  of  insurance  since  the  level  of  interest  rate  paid  by  debtors 
increases  when  specific  trigger  events  occurs  (typically  the  downgrading  of  the  debtor  by 
rating agencies). These clauses were designed to help borrowers access financing at lower 
rates.  However,  these  clauses  create  a  sort  of  vicious  circle.  Indeed,  rating  agencies  are 
expected  to  help  borrowers  to make  informed  decisions  for future  financing  ;  still,  through 
these trigger clauses, rating decisions have an impact on the outstanding debt of borrowers, 
thus aggravating the situation of the debtor. 
The  generalisation  of  credit  risk  hedging  through  short  selling  of  stocks.  Hedging  is  a key 
technique for a smooth functioning of financial markets. However, the use of new financial 
techniques to hedge has had unexpected consequences. Indeed, financial institutions have 
BIS Review 62/2002
 2 
   tended to hedge part of their credit exposure on  borrowers by short selling stocks of their 
debtors. Doing so, they have hedged their risks but at the cost of a further deterioration of 
the overall situation of their debtor associated with the fall of their shares resulting from such 
sales. 
The marketing of saving instruments with capital protection feature. These instruments are 
based  upon  a  built-in  asymmetry  :  they  offer  the  full  participation  in  stock  market  capital 
gains  and  the  protection  against  possible  capital  losses.  Either  the  issuers  of  such 
instruments are not hedged, and enormous risks are concentrated on them. Or, more likely, 
they  are  hedging  their  risks  and  thus  they  contribute  to  amplify  current  trends,  be  it 
downward or upward. 
I have to be clear: all these techniques and instruments contribute to a better functioning of financial 
markets. For each and every market participant, they facilitate the management of credit and market 
risks. As such they are to be welcomed. However, if not fully understood at the micro level and not 
fully taken into consideration at a macro level, they may imply some unexpected adverse implications 
in terms of market dynamics. 
Several avenues are being explored to mitigate financial instability 
1.3. 
Strengthening  the  continuing  efforts  aiming  at  market  transparency  is  one  of  the  main  avenue  for 
future action. Experience shows that uncertainty and incomplete information are determining factors in 
mimetic  behaviour.  One  of  the  objectives  of  transparency  is  to  better  differentiate  borrower 
creditworthiness. A key feature of mimetic behaviour is that  all borrowers are ‘tarred  with the same 
brush’. So when one firm or one business sector face difficulties, neighbouring businesses or sectors 
are treated in the same way regardless of their actual economic and financial situation. The same may 
apply between emerging market economies as we shall see later.  
A  careful  examination  of  financial  supervision  rules  and  regulation,  accounting  standards,  codes  of 
good conducts, market practices and financial engineering seems also necessary to better understand 
their  possible  impact  on  market  dynamics.  There  is  a  major  public  interest  in  trying  to  identify  the 
elements  that  are  pro-cyclical  and  those  which  are  anti-cyclical.  Financial  authorities  and  market 
participants  should  commit  to  mitigate  progressively,  or  possibly  suppress,  those  elements  of 
standards, regulations or financial techniques that are strongly pro-cyclical and, in the meantime, to 
reinforce the elements that could potentially counter the boom-bust tendencies.  
Let me give two examples of what is being done: 
• 
As  regard  prudential  supervision,  I  would  only  mention  the  fantastic  work  which  has  been 
achieved by the Basel Committee under the leadership of Bill McDonough, the President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in the field of banking supervision. I trust that the 
new accord  will permit a better and more appropriate handling  of this extremely important 
domain  as  regards  financial  stability.  I  am  also  happy  that  the  concept  of  “dynamic 
provisioning”, which is anticyclical by nature, has been recognised by the Basel Committee 
as a useful concept. 
As regards accounting standards, it seems to me that we should also inject in the present 
meditations in the US, in Europe and at a global level the concern for financial stability. Let 
us  beware  of  changes  that  would  increase  the  procyclicality  of  accounting  rules.  Let  us 
favour changes that would simultaneously help fair accounting and diminish procyclicality. In 
that regard, it seems important to me to design accounting practices which would try to take 
into account of the time horizon of institutions and market participants. Otherwise, we would 
take the risk of driving all financial institutions and market participants to shorten their time 
horizon down to a day-to-day basis. This could be a recipe to favour inappropriate market 
functioning and foster herd instinct in time of excessive volatility.   
 The need for an enhanced framework for crisis prevention and management 
2. 
I do not need to remind you of the long list of financial crises emerging market economies have gone 
through in the last two decades. Against this background, the international community must, on the 
one hand, enhance crisis prevention and, on the other hand, design and implement better procedures 
for crisis resolution.  
BIS Review 62/2002 
 3
 2.1. 
Authorities must reflect, in conjunction with the financial industry, on building up a 
suitable system of surveillance and crisis prevention.  
The  objective  of  strengthening  crisis  prevention  is  shared  by  the  private  sector  and  by  official 
community given  the  magnitude  of  potential  losses;  indeed,  in  some  cases,  restructuring  costs  for 
banking crises have reached more than 40 % of GDP.  
Building  on  international  standards  and  codes  is  instrumental  in  establishing  an  appropriate 
institutional, supervisory and regulatory framework in the financial sectors of all market economies.   
The value of international standards is now widely recognised, insofar as they contribute to spreading 
international best practices and codes of good conduct, very closely linked to the globalisation process 
and the expansion of international capital flows. Indeed, the conduct of sound national economic and 
financial policies stands for a primary protection against potential financial contagion. 
Much has already been achieved with the design of more than seventy internationally agreed norms. 
However, I observe that the IMF and the World Bank have completed a limited number of reports of 
observance  of  standards  and  codes  (ROSCs)  so  far  on  areas  such  as  corporate  governance, 
accounting  and  auditing  which  are  key  in  order  to  assess  the  financial  vulnerabilities  of  the  private 
sector. Recent corporate failures suggest that a renewed emphasis could be given to these areas.  
Private  initiatives  aiming  at  disseminating  information  on  standards  and  codes  are  also  particularly 
welcomed. The private sector could develop further initiatives to monitor compliance by countries of 
international  standards  and  codes.  This  should  be  carried  out  in  parallel  with  efforts  by  the  official 
sector.  
How can we promote further the awareness and understanding of the key standards among emerging 
economies authorities? Encouraging a greater participation by developing and emerging countries in 
the  development  of 
‘ownership’, 
implementation will not occur, as there is a risk that standards be seen as a new “colonial” system. 
The concept of ownership should not be restricted to the policies and corrective actions recommended 
by  the  IMF  /  WB  in  the  context  of  programs,  but  rather  should  be  understood  as  implying  that  all 
countries should be involved in the decision-making process in international groupings.  
Assessing financial sectors strength has also been a top priority of the IMF and the World Bank.  
Cases  of  financial  turmoil  in  emerging  countries,  which  are  usually  due  primarily  to  inappropriate 
domestic  policies,  show  that  there  is  room  for  improving  the  timely  identification  and  correction  of 
vulnerabilities by International Financial Institutions. In particular, a key point is to improve the analysis 
of  debt  sustainability  in  order  to  have  a  more  forward-looking  assessment  of  possible  cases  of 
insolvency. We can only praise the ongoing work by the IMF on this matter.  Unfortunately, enhancing 
warning signals will probably not be sufficient to protect us against financial crisis.   
fundamental.  Without  genuine 
international  standards 
is 
2.2. 
Designing effective procedures for handling international financial crisis represents 
another challenge 
First, there is a need for clarifying the financing policy of the IMF, as acknowledged by the G 7 and the 
recent IMFC communique. 
Greater discipline in the provision of official finance is key to ensure a more timely involvement of the 
private sector in crisis resolution (PSI), and to provide strong incentives for debtors and creditors to 
start debt negotiations timely and appropriately. 
By  doing  so,  the  international  community  will  benefit  from  the  so-called  « catalytic  approach »,  that 
was at the core of crisis management in the 1980s and proved quite successful, and that was recently 
restated by the international community. 
A  precondition  for  an  orderly  crisis  management  relies  upon  more  predictable  decision-making 
process regarding the use of Fund’s resources. In that regard, the presumption of clear access limits 
to  Fund  financing  is  key.  Therefore,  we  should  define  ex-ante  the  exceptional  circumstances  under 
which the international community is ready to go beyond the normal lending limits. These conditions 
should  include  external  debt  sustainability,  appropriate  adjustment  policy  measures  and  the 
perspective of a quick return to financial markets. I also believe that exceptional procedures should be 
put in place when IMF access limits are to be breached.  
4 
 BIS Review 62/2002
 Second, procedures should be settled in order to limit the costs implied by unavoidable suspensions of 
payments. Indeed, these procedures should support the necessary informal dialogue between debtors 
and creditors prior to payment suspension and avoid the drawbacks of freezing market processes.  
Some  instruments  could  help  to  achieve  a  timely  and  orderly  process.  A  co-operative  standstill 
mechanism would help to achieve a more timely and orderly rescheduling or restructuring process. For 
example, commonly agreed Guidelines or Best practices by debtors and creditors under the aegis of 
the  IMF  could  ensure  that  such  standstills  be  implemented.  In  addition  to  the  appropriate  domestic 
adjustment  policy,  such  Guidelines  could  cover  rules  regarding,  inter  alia,  transparency  towards 
creditors,  reasonable  offers  to  creditors,  comparable  treatment  of  all  creditors,  seniority  for  “new 
money”, and a limited duration of the standstill.  
Obviously, a more extensive inclusion of collective action clauses (CACs) in debt contracts can greatly 
facilitate the negotiation of debt restructuring, by promoting agreement among creditors. Industrialised 
countries  could  contribute  to  this  strategy  by  including  CACs  in  their  foreign  debt  issues,  a  step 
already  made  by  EU  countries.  The  work  undertaken  by  the  G10,  benefiting  from  private  sector 
expertise, is most welcome and important in this regard. 
Finally,  the  IMF’s  proposal  for  a  Statutory  debt  restructuring  mechanism  (SDRM)  is  another 
contribution to the debate, in a medium term perspective, given its legal and technical implications.  
 To  conclude,  let  me  stress  three  words:  cooperation,  leadership  and  stability.  Close  co-operation 
between  the  private  financial  community  and  the  official  sector  in  order  to  manage  financial 
globalisation  is  of  the  essence.  Consolidating  this  partnership  implies  that  private  investors  are 
responsible for sharing part of the financial burden, but also that they can expect a fair treatment by 
the official sector in times of crisis. Here, the reliability of information provided by national governments 
and by the corporate sector is essential, as well as the availability of the outcome of the surveillance 
exercise from international institutions, in particular the IMF.  
Leadership: The ideal of Bretton Woods was the promotion of prosperity through global action. We can 
preserve it in a changing world, provided that some rules are adhered to by all players. For my part, I 
believe in an important leadership role for the international financial institutions to make the transition 
toward  the  new  financial  architecture  a  smooth  one.  The  determined  action  of  the  international 
financial  community  to  achieve  this  objective  is  in  particular  more  important  than  ever  to  avoid  any 
backlash against trade and financial integration in emerging and developing countries.  
And  last  but  not  least,  stability.  In  a  period  of  excessive  volatility  and  of  wide  boost-bust  episodes, 
financial and real stability  appear to be a  very  precious asset. Over the  last twenty  years, we have 
constructed  a  new  world:  technology  has  permitted  instantaneous  communication  and  incredibly 
powerful real-time computation. Globalisation has created new cultural, conceptual, commercial and 
financial  links  between  all  economies  including  previously  centrally-planned  systems;  together 
technology  and  globalisation  are  progressively  driving  us  to  a  unified  planet  of  universal  rules  and 
regulations, codes of conduct and practices, market procedures and market instruments, accounting 
standards, etc. In this new world, phenomena which had traditionally a local or even a national impact 
may  be  amplified  and  become  dangerous  at  the  global  level:  amplification  of  financial  cycles,  herd 
behaviour,  global  contagion.  Analyzing  the  opportunities  and  the  risks,  and  understanding  the 
functioning of our system with a view to making it as stable as possible is a very exciting, ambitious 
and urgent task. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS Review 62/2002 
 5
