 Bank of Japan’s December report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 18 December 2002 
 The Bank’s View2 
Japan’s economy has stabilized as a whole, but there is still substantial uncertainty toward recovery. 
With regard to final demand, while the decline in business fixed investment has almost come to a halt, 
private consumption continues to be weak. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public 
investment is declining. While signs of recovery are still not observed in domestic demand, exports are 
virtually level.  
The completion of the cutbacks in inventory stocks still underpins the increase in industrial production. 
But the production is losing its momentum with exports leveling off. Against this background, corporate 
profits  continue  to  recover,  but  the  pace  is  becoming  moderate.  While  business  sentiment  on  the 
current conditions is improving gradually, firms’ outlook is cautious. As for the employment situation, 
the  overtime  hours  worked  and  new  job  offers  are  rising  gradually.  In  addition,  the  number  of 
employees, which widely covers various non-regular employees such as temporary workers, appears 
to have stopped declining gradually. However, as firms are still maintaining their stance on reducing 
personnel expenses, household income continues to decrease noticeably due to, among other factors, 
an  ongoing  decline  in  wages.  Thus,  the  employment  and  income  situation  of  households  overall 
remains severe. 
Turning to the economic outlook, a widely shared prospect for the overseas economy throughout next 
year is that it will follow a gradual recovery path. However, economic indicators in the United States 
and  in  some  other  regions  are  soft  on  the  whole.  Based  on  this  development,  the  recovery  in  the 
overseas economy is likely to be anemic at least for the time being. Therefore, exports and industrial 
production are expected to be more or less unchanged for the immediate future.  
With respect to domestic demand, public investment is projected to follow a declining trend and private 
consumption  is  likely  to  remain  weak  for  some  time  due  to  the  severe  employment  and  income 
situation.  Business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  be  supported  by  the  improvement  in  corporate 
profits  to  date,  but  a  noticeable  recovery  is  unlikely  for  the  time  being  due  to,  among  other  things, 
substantial uncertainty regarding the overseas economy.  
Overall,  assuming  that  the  overseas  economy  recovers  next  year  even  at  a  moderate  pace,  the 
increase in exports and production will resume sooner or later, which in turn will gradually make the 
foundations  of  Japan’s  economic  recovery  firmer.  However,  the  economy  is  unlikely  to  show  clear 
signs of recovery for some time, since exports and production are expected to be virtually unchanged 
for the time being while restraining forces such as excessive labor input and debt persist. Furthermore, 
the  downside  risk  on  the  outlook  for  the  U.S.  and  other  overseas  economies  continues  to  require 
attention,  given  that  there  are  some  uncertain  factors  including  geopolitical  developments  and  their 
economic implication. On the domestic side, stock prices remain unstable. Hence, the progress in the 
disposal of non-performing loans and its effects on stock prices, corporate finance, and the economy, 
should be carefully monitored.  
On  the  price  front,  import  prices  are  on  the  rise  reflecting  the  earlier  firmness  in  oil  prices  and 
depreciation  of  the  yen.  Domestic  wholesale  prices  turned  up  slightly  due  to  the  increase  in  import 
prices  and  the  improved  supply-demand  balances  in  the  materials  industries,  although  machinery 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
December 16 and 17, 2002. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on December 16 and 17 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 73/2002 
 1
 prices and electricity charges are declining. However, consumer prices remain on a gradual downtrend 
and corporate services prices continue to decline.  
Looking at the conditions influencing price developments, import prices are projected to be firm for the 
time  being  as  the  effects  from  the  rise  in  oil  prices  and  the  depreciation  of  the  yen  still  remains. 
However,  the  overall  supply-demand  condition  is  expected  to  keep  exerting  downward  pressure  on 
prices  for  a  while  amid  persistently  weak  domestic  demand,  although  the  completion  of  inventory 
adjustment  and  the  rise  in  capacity  utilization  rates  will  support  prices  to  some  degree.  Moreover, 
factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining 
of distribution channels will continue to restrain prices. Under these circumstances, domestic corporate 
goods prices, the new price indicator  which  will replace domestic wholesale prices from December, 
are  expected  to  be  virtually  level  for  a  while.  Consumer  prices  are  expected  to  stay  on  a  declining 
trend for the time being at the current gradual pace. While the growth in imports of consumer goods 
has  stalled  and  thus  is  expected  to  alleviate  the  downward  pressure  on  prices  to  some  extent,  the 
faster  pace  of  decline  in  wages  may  possibly  reinforce  the  ongoing  decline  in  prices,  especially  for 
services prices.  
As for the financial environment, the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan 
is recently moving at around 20 trillion yen, as the Bank provides further ample liquidity. Under these 
circumstances,  in  the  short-term  money  markets,  the  overnight  call  rate  continues  to  hover  at  very 
close to zero percent. Moreover, longer-term interest rates such as TB and FB rates continue to be at 
low levels as a whole, although the markets remain nervous reflecting weak bank stock prices. 
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  continue  to  move  at  around  1.0  percent.  Yield  spreads 
between  private  bonds  (bank  bonds  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  remain  virtually 
unchanged. 
Stock prices turned up in late-November, but weakened again in December in line with a decline in 
U.S. and European stock prices. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average is recently moving at around 8,500 
yen. 
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  declined  until  the  beginning  of  December  reflecting  the 
improvement  in  some  U.S.  economic  indicators.  Thereafter,  the  yen  rebounded  as  the  U.S.  dollar 
weakened  again  on  the  whole  due  mainly  to  geopolitical  factors.  The  yen  is  currently  traded  in  the 
range of 120-122 yen to the U.S. dollar.  
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious  in  extending  loans  to 
firms  with  high  credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip 
companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms have become slightly 
more severe. In the corporate bond and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with high credit 
ratings is accommodative, but the environment for firms with low credit ratings is severe. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because firms’ business 
fixed investment remains sluggish while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year basis. The growth rate of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP issued is on a 
declining trend.  
Meanwhile,  according  to  business  surveys,  the  financial  position  of  firms,  particularly  that  of  small 
firms, remains severe. 
The monetary base exhibits a high year-on-year growth rate of around 20 percent. The year-on-year 
growth rate of the money stock remains around 3.0-3.5 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions as a whole continues to be extremely easy. Long-term interest rates are low. The money 
stock and the monetary base maintain high growth rates relative to that of the economic activity as a 
whole. However, stock prices remain unstable. In corporate finance, the fund-raising environment of 
firms  with  low  credit  risks  is  accommodative  on  the  whole,  but  with  regard  to  firms  with  high  credit 
risks, the stance of investors is severe and the lending attitudes of private banks are becoming more 
cautious. Hence, including the effects arising from government measures to accelerate the disposal of 
non-performing loans and to revitalize industries and firms, developments in the financial and capital 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2002
 markets, the behavior of financial institutions, and the situation of corporate finance continue to require 
close monitoring. 
BIS Review 73/2002 
 3
