 Bank of Japan’s December report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 20 December 2001. 
 The Bank’s View2 
Japan’s economy is deteriorating broadly, as private consumption is weakening in addition to a decline 
in exports and business fixed investment. 
With  regard  to  final  demand,  net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real  imports)  continue  to  decline  and 
business  fixed  investment  is  also  decreasing.  Housing  investment  remains  sluggish  and  public 
investment is on a downward trend. Moreover, private consumption is weakening recently. 
Industrial production continues to decline considerably, reflecting these developments in final demand 
and the still strong excessiveness in inventories mainly in materials. Corporate profits are falling and 
business sentiment keeps on worsening. The weakness in household income is becoming noticeable 
amid the decrease in the hours worked and the rise in unemployment, and consumer confidence is 
becoming cautious. 
Turning  to  the  outlook,  as  for  exporting  conditions,  inventory  adjustments  in  IT-related  goods 
worldwide are showing steady progress, and this has strengthened the view that adjustments will be 
mostly completed by around next spring. However, as final demand of IT-related goods still remains 
stagnant, a distinct recovery in exports of the sector is unlikely for the time being. Moreover, the world 
economy  has  decelerated  further  since  the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  and  there  is 
considerable uncertainty about future economic developments especially for the U.S. Therefore, such 
concern still exists that downward pressure may be exerted on Japan’s exports and production once 
again depending on the developments in overseas economies such as the U.S.  
Meanwhile,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  follow  a 
downward trend amid the fall in corporate profits. Private consumption will also continue to be weak 
along  with  deteriorating  employment  and  income  conditions  and  the  more  cautious  consumer 
sentiment.  Government  spending  is  basically  projected  to  follow  a  downward  trend  while  domestic 
private  demand  generally  weakens  on 
the  uncertainty  about  exporting  conditions. 
Consequently, it may take quite a while for economic activity as a whole to stop declining, even though 
the decrease in industrial production may moderate somewhat in line with the progress in inventory 
adjustments such as of IT-related goods.  
Overall, Japan’s economy will inevitably continue to deteriorate for a while. In this situation, continuous 
attention should be paid to the risk of a negative impact on the economy induced by developments in 
foreign and domestic financial markets. 
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  continue  to  decline  reflecting  the  softening  of  international 
commodity prices. Domestic wholesale prices are declining faster from the effects of the fall in crude 
oil  prices  in  addition  to  the  continuous  decreases  in  prices  of  electrical  machinery  and  materials. 
Consumer prices are weakening owing mainly to the decline in prices of imported products and their 
substitutes. Corporate service prices continue to decrease. 
As  for  the  conditions  surrounding  price  developments,  crude  oil  prices  remain  weak.  Also,  as  the 
economy will continue to deteriorate, the balance between supply and demand in the domestic market 
will increasingly exert downward pressure on prices. Furthermore, in addition to the declining trend of 
machinery  prices  caused  by  technological  innovations,  the  decreases  in  the  prices  of  goods  and 
services reflecting deregulation and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain 
price developments. Overall, prices are expected to follow a gradual declining trend for the time being. 
Moreover,  given  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding  future  economic  developments,  the 
top  of 
                                                      
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
December 18 and 19, 2001. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on December 18 and 19 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 102/2001 
 1
 possibility  that  weak  demand  will  further  intensify  downward  pressure  on  prices  warrants  careful 
monitoring. 
In the financial market, the overnight call rate is moving around zero percent as the Bank of Japan 
provided ample liquidity to the money market by aiming at maintaining the current account balances 
held at the Bank at above 6 trillion yen. 
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  basically  continue  to  be  level.  The  Japan  premium  remains 
negligible. 
Yields on long-term government bonds are virtually flat, and are mainly moving around 1.35 percent 
recently. As for the yield spreads between private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and 
government bonds, while spreads between bonds with relatively high credit ratings and government 
bonds remain mostly unchanged, those between bonds with low credit ratings and government bonds 
continue to expand slightly. 
Stock prices are weakening recently. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen is currently being traded in the range of 127 -129 yen to the 
U.S. dollar, moving around the lowest level for this year. 
With regard to corporate finance, private banks appear to be more cautious in extending loans to firms 
with high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. 
The  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  firms  are  becoming  more  cautious.  In 
corporate  bonds  and  CP  markets,  the  fund-raising  conditions  continue  to  be  generally  favorable 
particularly for firms with high credit ratings, although the issuing environment for those with low credit 
ratings is deteriorating. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  is  declining  faster  mainly  because  firms  are  decreasing  their 
business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline at about 2 percent on a year-
on-year basis. As for the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued, the year-on-year growth rate 
has been slowing due to a decrease in the issuance of corporate bonds with low credit ratings. The 
year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of CP issued is declining recently, although the 
amount is still well above the previous year’s level.  
The growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) in November increased slightly from the previous month 
owing to a rise in demand deposits.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole, although market funding 
costs for some firms are rising. 
Overall, the recent financial environment remains extremely easy in terms of money market conditions 
and interest rate levels. However, the fund-raising conditions of firms with high credit risks, especially 
of small firms, are becoming severe as private banks and investors are becoming more cautious in 
taking credit risks against the background of a growing number of corporate bankruptcies. Hence, the 
developments in the behavior of financial institutions and corporate financing need closer monitoring. 
2 
 
BIS Review 102/2001
