 Tony Latter: Preserving monetary stability in the face of budget deficits 
Speech  by  Mr  Tony  Latter,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the 
Insight Investment conference in Hong Kong, 20 November 2002. 
 Introduction 
There has been much talk recently in Hong Kong about the possible threat to exchange rate stability 
from  the  burgeoning  budget  deficit,  which  is  predicted  by  many  to  reach  about  6%  of  GDP  for  the 
current  financial  year  as  a  whole.  Evidence  of  this  concern  is  apparent  when  any  media  report 
suggesting  a  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  position  is  invariably  accompanied  by  a  weakening,  even  if 
shortlived, in the forward exchange rate of the HK dollar. 
This  phenomenon  is  not  confined  to  Hong  Kong.  In  Europe,  news  of  widening  budget  deficits, 
threatening to breach the terms of the stability and growth pact, and allegations of lack of commitment 
among  officials  to  the  degree  of  fiscal  discipline  necessary  to  conform  to  that  pact,  have  tended  to 
weaken the euro's exchange rate, at least temporarily. 
But there is another story which can be told. This is of an economy where the budget deficit rose from 
about  1½%  of  GDP  to  4½%  in  the  space  of  4-5  years.  What  happened  to  its  exchange  rate?  It 
strengthened over the same period by some 70% in trade-weighted terms. The authorities reined in 
the  deficit  somewhat  over  the  next  couple  of  years,  but  then  it  began  to  expand  again.  On  this 
occasion, the deficit doubled within three years, while the exchange rate appreciated once again. 
That country was the United States and the references are to episodes when the deficit grew rapidly in 
the early 1980s and again at the turn of the 1990s. And some observers detect signs today of a similar 
replay  beginning.  To  be  fair,  however,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  dollar  tended  to  remain  as  firm 
during the years of deficit reduction in the late 1990s as it had when the deficit was rising in the early 
1980s, and that, on balance, there may not be a very clear long-term relationship in either direction 
between the US deficit and the dollar exchange rate. But at least the US experience warns us against 
presuming there to be an automatic negative causation flowing from the one to the other. 
The relationship between fiscal and monetary policies 
It  may  be  worthwhile  examining  more  generally  certain  aspects  of  the  relationship  between  fiscal 
policy and monetary policy. 
The economy can be characterised as comprising any number of different sectors. At the highest level 
of aggregation the classification is usually the public sector, the corporate sector, the household sector 
and the overseas sector (the counterpart to the external balance of payments). Each sector may be in 
financial  surplus  or  deficit,  but  the  surpluses  and  deficits  must,  in  accounting  terms,  sum  to  zero 
(although in terms of available statistics they may not, because of errors and omissions); every piece 
of deficit is necessarily matched by a piece of surplus. 
Typically, one might envisage the savings surplus of the household sector being channelled through 
the  banks  and  financial  markets  to  fund  a  deficit  in  the  corporate  sector,  arising  from  its  capital 
investment  and  working  capital  needs.  In  this  context  the  deficit  in  the  corporate  sector  seems 
perfectly acceptable. Why, then, should a deficit in the public sector raise particular anxiety? Isn't the 
situation where the public sector has a funding need analogous to that where private sector corporate 
entities have such needs? 
Not necessarily so. A number of factors may differentiate the two situations. What are these factors 
and what are the special considerations which may apply in the case of the public sector deficit? 
• 
First, when assessing the impact of different deficits one may need to look behind them, to 
associated developments in the real economy. For example, a financial deficit may reflect, at 
one extreme, spending on current consumption, and particularly on imports with no resulting 
benefit  to  domestic  employment;  or  it  may  reflect,  at  the  other  extreme,  investment  which 
generates jobs and greater efficiency within the domestic economy. If there is a suspicion – 
whether or not well founded – that a public sector deficit is inclined to the former category, it 
will be judged less helpful to the long-term health of the economy and thus tend to weaken 
BIS Review 70/2002 
 1
      is 
to 
led 
these 
types  of  consideration  which  have 
financial confidence. A sizeable underlying public sector deficit may anyway be regarded as 
a sign of fundamental weakness in an economy, if it signifies too heavy an involvement of 
government in the running of the economy.  
It 
the  emergence  of  various 
recommendations and rules about fiscal deficits. There is, for example, the "golden rule" of 
the UK finance minister, Gordon Brown, which he first espoused in 1997, stating that, over 
the  cycle,  spending  of  a  current  (as  opposed  to  capital)  nature  should  be  balanced  by 
revenues,  and  borrowing  should  only  be  countenanced  to  cover  capital  expenditure.  In 
Europe there is the supposedly sacrosanct cap on the fiscal deficit of each of the member 
countries of the euro-zone, at 3% of GDP. And in Hong Kong there is the Basic Law (Article 
107), stating that Hong Kong should strive to achieve a fiscal balance and avoid deficits. 
Second, the financing of private sector deficits is subject to market discipline, in that those 
who provide finance do so on the calculated expectation that the investment will generate 
sufficient internal returns to repay them in due course. By contrast, in the case of a public 
sector deficit, the investor's confidence is based not so much on any knowledge about the 
rate of return, if any, from the expenditure to which the funds are destined, as on faith in the 
government's ultimate ability to raise money through taxation, if necessary, at some future 
date  in  order  to  service  its  borrowings.  Such  a  prospect  of  higher  taxation  might,  among 
other things, serve as a dampener on financial confidence.  
Third, there may be a fear that public sector borrowing will crowd out worthy corporate sector 
borrowing from the financial markets, to the detriment of the economy as a whole, although 
to the extent that a public sector deficit has its counterpart in a corporate sector surplus (or 
reduced  deficit),  the  corporate  sector’s  borrowing  requirement  will  anyway  have  been 
reduced.  
Fourth, in some cases a public sector deficit may be financed by a reduction in net foreign 
currency assets. For instance, the government may resort to foreign borrowing because the 
local financial market is not mature enough to supply the funding. Or, exceptionally, as in the 
case  of  Hong  Kong,  the  government  may  raise  the  funds  by  running  down  accumulated 
foreign  currency  investments.  The  respective  build-up  of  foreign  currency  liabilities  or 
reduction  in  foreign  reserves  may  raise  concerns  in  the  context  of  net  national  wealth, 
national economic security, credit ratings, and so on. Moreover, foreign currency borrowing 
exposes  the  government  to  financial  loss  in  local  currency  terms  should  the  currency 
depreciate.  
Fifth,  there  may  be  a  lurking  fear  that  the  government  will  be  tempted  to  acquiesce  to 
inflation  and  currency  depreciation  as  the  means  both  to  repair  its  current  finances  (if  it 
believes that revenue may be affected more quickly and positively than expenditure) and to 
reduce the real value of its outstanding indebtedness.  
Sixth, there may be a consequential fear that, as a means to that end, the government will 
seek to monetise its debt – "printing money" to fund the deficit. This would, however, require 
the cooperation of the central bank, and in most jurisdictions nowadays there is some form of 
prohibition on the central bank abetting such a strategy. More specifically, governments tend 
to be prevented – by force of law or moral pressure – from obtaining finance direct from the 
central  bank  (eg  as  might  occur  if  the  bank  was  forced  to  take  up  issues  of  government 
securities in the primary market), although the central bank is invariably permitted to buy (or 
sell) government paper in the secondary market as part of its discretionary monetary policy 
operations.  
Practical experience 
What of experience in the real world? 
Reference has already been made to the case of the United States. The US government is regarded 
as  just  about  the  best  credit  risk  in  the  world  and  there  is  a  huge  global  appetite  for  US  treasury 
securities.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  an  equally  strong  track  record  in  avoiding  inflation.  For  these 
reasons, markets have seldom, during living memory, considered  a  large fiscal deficit  in  the US as 
presaging monetary laxity or signalling a weaker dollar. Indeed, the contrary often seems to have been 
the  case:  with  the  fiscal  deficit  providing  some  circumstantial  evidence  of  a  deficiency  of  domestic 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2002
 savings,  the  prospect  that  interest  rates  might  need  to  rise  to  bring  savings  and  investment  into 
equilibrium – or the reality of such a rise – may actually have contributed to the strength of the dollar 
on occasions, as noted already. 
A  similar  trait  was  apparent  with  the  deutschemark  in  the  early  1990s  in  the  wake  of  German 
reunification: the prospect – and subsequent emergence – of a substantial budget deficit, and hence 
higher interest rates than otherwise, was accompanied by a strengthening of the exchange rate. By 
contrast,  however,  and  as  discussed  below,  the  more  recent  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  outlook  in 
Germany has not been a positive factor for the euro. 
At the other extreme lie examples of countries where budgetary indiscipline has plainly been a factor 
behind  the  collapse  of  the  currency.  It  would  be  invidious  to  mention  names,  but  the  story  can  be 
caricatured as follows. The government is running a deficit which it is unable or unwilling to correct. 
Domestic savings are in short supply and savers do not have abundant faith in the government from 
the credit-risk perspective. The government finds itself having to pay ever higher interest rates, so that 
the  interest  burden  itself  becomes  a  significant  component  of  the  continuing  deficit.  Meanwhile  the 
government may have been meeting some of its funding needs through foreign currency borrowing – 
initiated at a time when international sentiment was favourable and the interest rate seemed attractive, 
at least on an uncovered basis. 
The situation then begins to unravel acutely. Foreigners take fright and don't wish to roll forward their 
lending, or will only do so at a much higher margin. The country can’t afford higher foreign currency 
interest payments, still less to make net repayments of principal on foreign borrowing. Domestically the 
only  means  left  by  which  to  cover  the  deficit  is  for  the  central  bank  to  fund  it.  This means  that  the 
central bank lends to the government virtually on demand by, effectively, crediting the government’s 
bank account – resort to the printing press in all but name. Whether this lending carries an interest rate 
or not is largely immaterial, since the central bank can continue at the stroke of a pen to create the 
money to pay the interest. This procedure will inevitably be inflationary, but a wayward government 
may welcome this as a means of reducing the real value of its outstanding domestic debt. It may even 
feel that inflation will aid its current financial position, if its revenues inflate faster than its outgoings. 
All of this is a clear recipe for disaster, including, probably, an exchange rate crisis. 
Between these two extremes – the US and the no-hoper – there are of course many cases where the 
situation  is  less  clear-cut  or  less  predictable.  Euroland  provides  an  interesting  example.  Given  the 
careful steps which were taken before the advent of the euro to ensure the insulation of monetary from 
fiscal policy and to outlaw monetary financing of budget deficits, we might wonder why the news of 
impending budget overruns should cause the euro to weaken. It seems that not only do credit spreads 
faced by individual deficit countries widen (presumably for fear, however slim, of sovereign default), 
but also the currency weakens for fear of governments conspiring with the central bank to abandon its 
mandate  against  inflation  or  to  break  the  rules  against  monetary  financing.  A  rather  different 
interpretation  could  be  that  foreign  exchange  markets  are  merely  exhibiting  a  pavlovian  reaction: 
having  been  brainwashed  to  the  effect  that  a  deficit  is  inherently  bad  if  it  surpasses  certain  pre-
announced  limits,  the  reaction  when  such  a  breach  does  occur  is  bound  to  be  negative,  even  if 
analysis of the substance underlying the breach provides little or no justification for such a reaction. 
In  the  context  of  trying  to  identify  a  relationship  between  the  fiscal  position  and  the  exchange  rate, 
these examples demonstrate that there is no simple, pre-ordained relationship. The outcome depends 
on  a  wealth  of  factors,  including  the  nature  of  the  disturbances  affecting  public  finances,  the  policy 
regime and policy responses, and the state of sentiment in financial markets. 
Hong Kong 
How does the present situation in Hong Kong match up against these various considerations? 
Hong Kong is in several respects exceptional, if not unique. It has no specific central bank law of the 
type common in other jurisdictions (although a number of laws, such as the Exchange Fund Ordinance 
and the Banking Ordinance, govern particular aspects of the Monetary Authority’s functions). It has no 
mainstream  government  debt.  It  operates  a  currency  board  rather  than  a  discretionary  monetary 
policy. And it has only quite recently become familiar with the idea of a budget deficit persisting for 
longer than an isolated year or two. 
Although the absence of a law to explicitly prohibit monetary financing of the budget deficit – of the 
sort which has been adopted in many economies, both new and old, in the course of the past couple 
BIS Review 70/2002 
 3
    4 
 of decades – may be thought a weakness, it need not be so in reality. Whether or not it has a formal 
legal basis, the proscription of monetary financing has nowadays become so firmly established as part 
of the policy landscape in the developed financial economies, that any of them which dared breach it 
would be immediately crucified by the markets, the world media, the IMF and so on. One could class 
this as a sort of de facto law of nature, which is likely to be at least as effective and durable as any law 
passed by a legislature, if not more so. Hong Kong can be regarded as being subject to this law of 
nature. 
In any event, Hong Kong’s currency board system rules out the creation of money except in exchange 
for foreign currency, and therefore serves as an operational safeguard against monetary financing of 
the budget. 
In order to fund its deficit, the government has a choice between running down its assets (the fiscal 
reserve) and borrowing, from banks or the markets,. It has chosen for the time being the former route. 
The monetary impact would in either case be neutral. It may be worth explaining the process. If the 
fiscal reserve is drawn from the Exchange Fund and the Fund consequently needs to realise foreign 
currency assets, the foreign exchange is sold in the market. The counterparty surrenders HK dollars. 
These accrue temporarily to the Exchange Fund and are then transferred to the government, which 
will in turn pass them to some other party, as the counterpart of the budget deficit. The net result is a 
change in the ownership of HK dollar money but not in the quantity outstanding. Similarly, borrowing 
HK dollars to fund the deficit would involve a shift in ownership of those dollars around the economy, 
but no net increase in quantity. 
The mechanics of financing the deficit  ought  not therefore raise  any concerns in Hong  Kong in the 
context of monetary stability. 
Nevertheless, in practice the markets do appear to exhibit a degree of negative reaction to the deficit. 
Why? A number of possible explanations come to mind. 
• 
First,  and  rather  obviously,  there  is  Hong  Kong’s  Basic  Law,  which  indicates  that  deficits 
should be avoided. It’s understandable for markets to become nervous if they suspect that 
the law might be infringed.  
Second, many people, whether in Hong Kong or elsewhere, anyway have a gut feeling that 
getting into debt is imprudent. This does not stop them individually from borrowing money, or 
from  being  tolerant  of  their  government  being  in  debt,  but  they  may  nevertheless  be 
uncomfortable  about  it.  The  underlying  rationale  for  holding  this  view  may  not  be  well 
articulated, but it does not need to be – if the view exists, that is enough for it to have an 
impact. And the impact may be reinforced if the government’s record appears to run counter 
to what it has itself been preaching.  
This leads to the third point, which is that Hong Kong has boasted since long ago about its 
budget surpluses and the absence of government debt. This makes it intellectually difficult to 
deny the significance of the deficit. Not that anyone is trying to downplay it – the expressions 
of concern from government officials have been numerous, sincere and unambiguous. But in 
some ways this serves to highlight the difference. The present position is seen to represent a 
sea-change  in  the  financial  circumstances  of  Hong  Kong,  whereas  other  economies more 
familiar with deficits might be able to take a deterioration in public finances more easily into 
their stride.  
Fourth,  there  is  the  more  specific  concern,  that  either  of  the  two  available  means  for 
financing the deficit - by, as now, realising foreign currency investments or by government 
borrowing – would impact adversely on Hong Kong's financial standing in the eyes of rating 
agencies  and  others.  Of  course,  it  is  by  no  means  obvious  that  these  financing  activities 
would necessarily endanger monetary stability or weaken the exchange rate. Indeed, there 
are  plenty  of  examples  of  economies  with  low  foreign  reserves  or  high  government 
borrowing having enjoyed  firm currencies and strong credit standings, and it's  hard to see 
why, for example, the act of the Hong Kong government borrowing modest amounts on the 
capital  markets  in  its  own  currency  should  have  any  substantive  adverse  impact  on 
sentiment. But perceptions are typically coloured as much by unusual or sudden changes in 
circumstances as by continuity of particular circumstances, and analysts and markets tend to 
respond accordingly.  
BIS Review 70/2002
   Fifth, observers may – not unreasonably – regard the deficit not so much as a problem in its 
own right as a symptom of other things, such as sharp cyclical recession or perhaps more 
serious  underlying  problems  in  the  economy  which  affect  future  prospects.  It  would  be 
natural  for  these  considerations  to  unsettle  general  confidence,  independently  of  the 
budgetary arithmetic.  
Sixth  is  fear  of  the  unknown.  The  current  run  of  fiscal  deficits  is  taking  Hong  Kong  into 
uncharted waters. It has been acknowledged that at least part of the deficit may be structural 
rather  than  cyclical  in  nature.  Although  official  projections  suggest  that  the  combination  of 
cyclical recovery and disciplined containment of government spending should restore fiscal 
balance in due course, scepticism is understandable; this is an extraordinarily difficult field 
for forecasters, since the balance is the difference between two very large numbers, each 
comprised  of  many  varied  components.  The  air  of  uncertainty  gives  rise  to  rumours  –  of 
sweeping expenditure cuts, of asset sales, of new taxes, of higher tax rates or whatever – 
and to fears that Hong Kong may not be able to preserve its distinctive edge as a place with 
an uncomplicated tax system and low rates of tax.  
Concerns  which  arise  under  any  of  the  above  headings  may  find  expression  through  the  financial 
markets. 
Conclusions 
What can one conclude from all of this? 
• 
  First, a number of reasons have been enumerated as to why fiscal deficits may be a worry, 
both for economies generally and for Hong Kong in particular. There can be no doubt that 
Hong  Kong's  fiscal  position  is  a  matter  for  concern,  but  monetary  factors  should  not 
necessarily be paramount to that concern.  
Secondly,  and  in  the  same  broad  context,  one  should  beware  of  simplistic  assertions  or 
hypotheses  about  the  monetary  implications  or,  more  specifically,  the  exchange  rate 
implications of fiscal deficits.  
Finally,  the  infrastructure  of  monetary  discipline  which  is  in  place  across  the  financially 
developed world, and the peer pressure that exists to conform to such discipline, provide a 
very  strong  safeguard  against  any  monetary  financing  of  fiscal  deficits  or  any  associated 
compromising  of  sound  monetary  principles.  This  applies  in  Hong  Kong  as  forcefully  as 
anywhere else.  
BIS Review 70/2002 
 5
