 William J McDonough: Promoting financial resilience 
Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Cato Institute’s 20th Annual Monetary Conference on “International Financial 
Crises: What Role for Government?” cosponsored with The Economist, New York, 17 October 2002. 
    Good morning. It  is a pleasure to have the opportunity to join  you on the  occasion of this 
timely conference, and to share with you my thoughts on promoting financial resilience.  
Despite the fact that periodic surges in volatility are a fact of life in financial markets, I think 
there is general acknowledgment that recent years have been extraordinary in this regard. 
This has been a period  of historic change and remarkable  volatility in markets, going  well 
beyond the emerging markets, and carrying with it important implications for political, social, 
and institutional stability in significant segments of the globe.  
The experiences of recent years have reinforced old lessons and brought home new insights 
about maintaining financial stability and sustained growth. In particular, a broad consensus 
continues to develop on ways of strengthening the institutional framework at the national and 
international level to create more robust, and thus more crisis-resistant, economies. There is 
general  agreement  that  in  order  for  countries  to  enjoy  sustained  and  stable  growth,  the 
following are crucial: 
G
G
a sound and stable macroeconomic environment, and 
well-functioning and robust financial systems in both capital-exporting and capital-
importing countries. 
 Moreover, both of these are most effective when supported by a dynamic and adaptive policy regime.  
• 
The simple reality is that countries with robust financial systems, strong fiscal accounts, low 
inflation, credible and coherent monetary and exchange rate policies, moderate external and 
internal  indebtedness,  reasonable  current  accounts,  and  adequate  domestic  savings  rates 
are less likely to be buffeted by financial and economic turbulence. Moreover, when shocks 
do occur, such countries tend to be far more resilient.  
There  is  also  considerable  agreement  on  many  of  the  elements  needed  to  achieve  these 
goals. This agreement has been reflected, in part, in the development and promulgation of 
globally accepted standards and codes for best practices in areas ranging from transparency 
in fiscal, monetary, and financial policies, to public debt management, and core principles for 
bank  supervision.  Guiding  themes  across  these  various  standards  have  included  the 
importance of consistent disclosure practices and of building stability up from the firm and 
sector  level.  The  latter  is  accomplished  by  encouraging  sound  risk  management  and 
stronger  balance  sheets,  and  creating  efficient  systems  of  market,  legal,  and  regulatory 
discipline.  
But the learning process continues. For example, in this country, recent experiences have 
brought  to  light  the  need  to  do  more  to  strengthen  corporate  accounting  and  disclosure 
standards, particularly with regard to guarantees and complex financial arrangements, such 
as those funded offshore or through special-purpose entities.  
Our ongoing efforts to revise the Basel Capital Accord also reflect a learning process. We 
embarked on this voyage in the late 1990s because we realized that the original 1988 Basel 
Accord  had  been  overtaken  by  advances  in  the  financial  sector  –  and  in  the  broader 
economy. While the  1988  Accord represented an important advance,  new  technology, the 
globalization  of  financial  markets,  and  innovative  financial  products  and  services  have 
changed the way that banks monitor and manage credit, market, and operational risks in a 
manner that the 1988 Accord could not anticipate and does not address.  
To  ensure  that  the  New  Accord  remains  flexible,  forward-looking,  and  appropriate  for  the 
risks and capital needs of internationally active banks of the twenty-first century, the Basel 
Committee established several goals for its work, goals that the industry has embraced.  
   BIS Review 61/2002 
 1
       2 
 G
G
G
G
First,  we  intended  to  develop  a  framework  that  encompasses  the  "three  pillars" 
necessary  to  support  an  effective  system  of  regulatory  capital:  the  appropriate 
measurement  and  minimum  requirements,  supervisory  review,  and  market 
discipline.  
Second,  we  wanted  to  align  the  minimum  requirements  more  closely  with  the 
actual underlying economic risks to which banks are exposed, which should help 
allocate capital resources effectively.  
A third goal was to encourage banks to refine their measurement and management 
of risk over time. By creating incentives in the New Accord for banks to re-evaluate 
and enhance their tools constantly, we expect that banks themselves will adopt a 
forward-looking perspective on risk.  
I’m pleased to say that, through the Committee’s efforts and the cooperation and 
support  of  other  supervisors  and  the  industry,  it  appears  that  the  proposed 
framework  will  attain  each  goal. We  can  now  count  them  among  the  milestones 
we've achieved.  
However, though we have covered quite a bit of territory over the past three years, the last 
miles of any marathon are the toughest to finish. I’d like to turn now to the status of the New 
Accord and of the issues we are still resolving.  
Since  the  Second  Consultative  Document’s  release  21  months  ago,  the  members  of  the 
Basel  Committee  have  worked  collaboratively  and  publicly  with  supervisors,  banks,  and 
others to revise the proposals so that they best serve the needs of modern banking. We’ve 
published and discussed thousands of pages of proposals and studies with the industry and 
the  public.  I’d  like  to  share  with  you  the  latest  news  on  how  we  are  resolving  the  key 
challenges and concerns that have surfaced in this process.  
One general issue raised is that the New Accord’s increased sensitivity to risk will reinforce 
procyclical behavior by banks, leading to increased cost of credit during cyclical downturns. 
While we are working to address this concern, I would note that banks already are expected 
to operate above minimum capital requirements, manage  to their economic capital  needs, 
and evaluate how their risk profiles may change over time. Along those lines, the Committee 
recently agreed that banks adopting the "internal ratings based" approach to credit risk will 
be  required  to  conduct  appropriate  credit  risk  stress  testing,  which  should  help  to  contain 
procyclical behavior.  
Another concern raised about Basel II is its complexity. If the New Accord is to be more risk-
sensitive, however, it must involve an irreducible degree of complexity, which parallels the 
changes in bank practices and market instruments. Indeed, some of this complexity stems 
from the various options the New Accord provides to address the wide range of risk profiles, 
strategies, and systems that banks maintain.  
The  treatment  of  operational  risk  has  been  a  more  specific  area  of  concern.  While 
operational risk cannot be quantified with the same degree of precision as credit or market 
risk,  the  Committee  believes  that  introducing  a  separate  charge  for  operational  risk  will 
bolster  efforts  to  find  better  ways  to  address  it.  In  this  vein,  we  have  seen  encouraging 
progress in operational risk measurement, although we recognize that the industry has not 
settled on particular methodologies or principles. Accordingly, the New Accord will permit an 
unprecedented  amount  of  flexibility  to  accommodate  a  spectrum  of  approaches  to 
operational risk. Toward that end, under the "advanced measurement approach," the most 
sophisticated institutions will be free to experiment with a great variety of methodologies.  
The Basel Committee expects that we will achieve our goal of not raising in aggregate the 
capitalization required of the banking industry, though clearly and appropriately those banks 
that engage in higher risk businesses may see their requirements rise, and vice versa.  
G
To help ensure this, the Committee launched its third Quantitative Impact Study on 
October 1, 2002, involving, to date, 265 banks from nearly 50 countries. The banks 
will  assess  how  the  proposals  will  affect  them  and  submit  their  findings  by 
December  20,  2002.  These  results  will  allow  us  to  ascertain  the  need  for 
adjustments prior to the release of an updated proposal for public comment in the 
BIS Review 61/2002
     second  quarter  of  2003,  followed  by  finalization  of  the  New  Accord  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2003, and implementation at year-end 2006.  
While much work clearly remains to be done over the next three years - including evaluating 
banks' readiness, training supervisory staff, and working towards consistent implementation 
across  supervisors  -  in  my  view,  both  the  journey  and  the  ultimate  destination  of  a  New 
Accord will contribute substantially to a more resilient international financial system.  
Unfortunately, while there is a deepening consensus on key elements about how to promote 
resilience  ex  ante,  there  is  no  comparable  degree  of  consensus  on  how  best  to  handle 
international financial crises once they do erupt, or the proper roles of public institutions and 
the  private  sector  in  containing  and  resolving  such  crises.  Notwithstanding  considerable 
efforts at the public and private level to search for a better way, no magic bullet or formula 
has been found, although at times some have been asserted.  
Nor is one likely to be available. Experience and a reading of the historical record suggest 
that  the  seductive  allure  of  grand  solutions  must  be  resisted.  Cases  differ  greatly  with 
respect to what is possible and desirable in terms of their implications for the interests of the 
public and private sectors. Moreover, history tells us that new developments in markets and 
practices  quickly  will  render  obsolete  those  measures  that  might  seem  well  attuned  to 
today’s circumstances.  
Allow me to explain how I think progress can be made by first focusing a bit on the problem 
that confronts us. I  would  like to highlight some of the important changes that  have taken 
place over the past two decades in the patterns and instrumentation of capital flows to the 
emerging world, and in the nature of crises that can arise associated with these flows.  
G
G
G
G
G
G
flows  since  1990, 
the  predominance  of  private-to-private 
First, it is important to keep in mind that the constellation of investors and the range 
of instrumentation have broadened considerably over the past two decades. Equity 
investors (both direct and portfolio) are now the principal source of net inflows for 
emerging market countries, and most medium-term debt is held in tradable form by 
a broad array of diversified, well-capitalized, fixed-income investors.  
Second,  there  have  been  equally  important  changes  in  the  destination  of  flows. 
Reflecting 
today 
sovereign foreign debt often represents only a relatively small part of maturing debt 
in crisis cases. Most maturing debt is owed by private borrowers and/or is locally 
issued.  
Third,  the  context  has  been  fundamentally  altered  by  broad  institutional  change. 
Accounting,  regulatory,  technological,  communications,  and  structural  market 
changes  have 
fostered  an  environment  characterized  by  mark-to-market 
accounting and much more liquid and actively managed balance sheets. Investors 
are focused on financial performance, and on their fiduciary responsibilities to their 
largely  private  clients  and  shareholders,  rather  than  on  long-term  strategic 
relationships  with  sovereigns.  Today  this  is  as  true  for  banks,  which  remain 
important providers of credit, as it is for other providers of capital.  
Last, the new environment entails new and complex linkages - - between domestic 
and  international  markets,  and  within  and  across  countries  -  -  reflecting  the 
internationalization  of  local  banking,  equity,  debt,  and  currency  markets,  and  the 
greater complexity of funding structures.  
This  new  environment  has  important  implications  for  policymakers  and  market 
participants alike. Let me comment on just a few:  
On the negative side, crises are more complex and unfold much more quickly and 
with surprising dimensions. Variable and often highly interdependent cross-market 
developments are often critical in the evolution of a given case and its implications 
for others. Indeed, many of the more recent crises were triggered by problems in 
domestic  banking,  currency,  and  debt  markets  that  then  spread  to  the  capital 
account. Also, in today’s environment, the fear of an event often is the event itself, 
because  of  the  inherent  tendency  of  markets  to  anticipate  developments  and 
overreact.  
BIS Review 61/2002 
 3
   4 
 G
But on the positive side, financial recoveries can proceed more rapidly in today’s 
environment,  particularly  with  the  right  policy  responses  from  borrowers.  In  part, 
this reflects the fact that today’s market participants generally have the capacity - - 
and many have little choice, under mark-to-market accounting - - to digest losses 
and move on. The broader sourcing of capital today also gives more scope to the 
possibility  that,  while  some  investors may  withdraw,  others  may  take  their  place. 
The caveat here is that the well not be poisoned through unnecessarily broad or 
heavy-handed approaches, a point I will return to later.  
What is the right way to deal with this changed and changing environment? In my view, the 
solution is neither a single piece of financial engineering nor a compact between the official 
lenders  and  private  creditors.  Rather,  it  is  a  process  incorporating  a  number  of  elements. 
Essentially, I would suggest that our current case-by-case approach to crisis management 
needs to evolve in ways that are market-based and adaptive, yet strategic, creative, and 
principled.  
Being successful in today’s environment requires adapting to the particularities of the case at 
hand, as well as the global financial and economic context, and requires seeking, as far as 
possible,  to  work  with  the  grain  of  a  given  situation.  The  approach  needs  to  be  market-
based, in part because that is what the game is all about. Today, the relevant considerations 
for  crisis  management  relate  more  to  markets  and  the  problem  of  restoring  market 
confidence, than to individual borrowers and creditors.  
G
G
G
To the extent that systemic concerns pertain, they more often relate to the risks of 
market disruption and over-adjustment than to potential domino effects caused by 
the failure or impairment of key institutions. Also, in today’s environment, a market-
based approach is much more feasible, because financial recoveries can proceed 
more rapidly than in the past.  
To be more specific, in my view, although much has been made of the difficulties in 
achieving debtor workouts, the truly thorny issues associated with emerging market 
financial crises usually relate to the following:  
    containing the fallout to domestic financial systems and to local consumer 
and investor confidence,  
minimizing contagion and spillovers to other cases and markets,  
maintaining  or  restoring  market  access,  particularly  for  private  sector 
borrowers, and,  
most importantly, encouraging policy reform so that a given crisis falls as 
closely  as  possible  to  the  liquidity,  rather  than  the  solvency,  end  of  the 
spectrum.  
Working with the grain means recognizing the realities and limitations inherent in 
the  current  market  structure  and  its  functioning,  and  tailoring  approaches  to  the 
specifics of individual cases. This involves acknowledging that attempts to impose 
solutions from outside are unrealistic and potentially counterproductive. Instead it 
involves identifying ways to induce and encourage desired behaviors. I would also 
suggest  that  it  means  avoiding  departures  from  normal  market  functioning 
whenever  possible.  Interventions  should  seek  not  to  override  or  suspend  market 
functioning, but rather to guide market processes.  
  This is not to say that payment suspensions always can and should be 
avoided,  or  that  ever-larger  bailouts  are  desirable  or  feasible.  I  would 
note  that  we  at  the  New  York  Fed  in  numerous  instances,  spanning 
several  decades,  have  worked  to  help  borrowers  and  creditors  find 
mutually beneficial solutions that involved some degree of concerted or 
coordinated financing.  
But in such instances, when payment interruptions or resort to concerted 
financing  truly  are  unavoidable,  experience  has  shown  that  minimalist 
approaches - - where only certain payments are suspended or delayed, 
and  only  when  absolutely  necessary  -  -  generally  offer  the  best 
BIS Review 61/2002
 G
prospects  for  minimizing  spillover  effects  and  for  restoring  market 
access rapidly.  
The  linchpin  of  a  market-based,  minimalist  approach  has  to  be  a  strong  policy 
response  on  the  part  of  the  country  in  crisis.  Markets  may  not  always  be 
reasonable, but they usually have reasons for reacting adversely. Those reasons 
most often relate to policy or institutional shortcomings. Across all of the episodes 
of market distress in the emerging world over the past two decades, an essential 
element of heading off or minimizing damage from a crisis has been policymakers 
showing that they "get the message" about the need for reform, and are prepared 
to take appropriate measures.  
  In  this  regard,  the  comparative  advantage  of  the  international  public 
sector  is  in  guiding  economic  and  financial  policy,  and  fostering  the 
conditions  that  will  facilitate  the  restoration  or  maintenance  of  voluntary 
credit and investment flows. IMF support should provide an unambiguous 
signal  of  the  international  community’s  confidence  in  the  capacity  of 
crisis-affected  countries  to  take  the  measures  necessary  to  restore 
economic health.  
This  role  is  particularly  important  in  unfolding  crisis  situations,  because 
borrowing  country  authorities  too  often  are  slow  to  recognize  the  full 
dimensions  of  the  policy  challenges  confronting  them,  and  the  private 
sector is ill-equipped to deal with this.  
 A case-by-case approach by definition is supremely tactical, but it also needs to be strategic 
in orientation if it is to be successful in the longer run. I would like to highlight several ways in 
which the case-by-case approach needs to be strategic.  
G
G
First off, strategy needs to be informed by a long-run view about the case at hand. 
The emphasis should not be merely on "working out" the problems at hand, but on 
"working through" them. The latter orientation focuses attention beyond the current 
circumstances to the restoration of growth, access to capital,  and normal market 
functioning, recognizing that workouts are  but one of several  means to that end, 
not an end in themselves.  
 We should not forget that a crisis is not over when capital outflows have 
been halted and prices stop falling. Emerging market economies depend 
on sustained and predictable access to international capital market and 
bank credit, and economic recovery and restoration of growth depend on 
confidence being reestablished, so that the necessary financing, beyond 
emergency lending, can be obtained.  
Secondly,  we  in  the  public  sector  would  be  well  served  to  maximize  the 
complementarity  between  efforts  to  prevent  crises  and  efforts  to  contain  and 
resolve crises when they do arise. 
 The consensus on sound preventative policies includes precepts that public 
sectors should limit the scale of their involvement in the domestic economy, 
and that borrowers, public and private, should be encouraged to follow best 
practices in the management of their liquidity, foreign exchange, and credit 
risk. Indeed, as I discussed earlier, this is the essence of what we are trying 
to  do  under  the  revised  Capital  Accord.  Moreover,  countries  are  being 
encouraged to strengthen their legal and regulatory regimes for insolvency 
resolution to deal more effectively with cases when private sector borrowers 
and lenders get it wrong.  
 Progress  in  these  areas,  even  if  only  incremental,  will  have  important 
implications for what is possible and necessary in the future. For example, 
having  stronger  bank  and  corporate  balance  sheets,  with  lower  leverage, 
expands the scope for using interest rates and asset price adjustments as 
stabilizing devices. Better liquidity management at both the micro and macro 
levels  -  -  longer  maturities,  and  greater  reserve  coverage  and  back-up 
financing  -  -  will  create  margins  to  ride  out  financial  shocks.  And  more 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 5
     6 
 effective  insolvency  regimes  would  make  decentralized  workouts  more 
feasible, particularly in cases where systemic stress is better contained. 
The approach to crisis management and resolution also needs to be creative. In part, this 
can be accomplished by relying as much as possible on the efforts of debtors and private 
creditors  to  work  things  out  on  their  own.  The  perception  in  some  circles  that  private 
creditors  are  not  interested  in  resolving  payment  problems  expeditiously  is  mistaken,  and 
stands at odds with recent experience. If nothing else, investors are interested in restoring 
liquidity to debt instruments in order to move on to new opportunities. There is also scope for 
exploring creative market-based ways to lever in private participation and stretch the impact 
of public sector funds.  
G
The various experiences since the late 80s with buybacks, partial guarantees, and 
debt exchanges provide some hints for how targeted deployment of public moneys 
can  spur  tendencies  in  a  direction  consistent  with  public  policy  goals.  Such 
creativity  is  essential  if  we  are  to  get  beyond  stark  and  unpalatable  choices 
entailing either massive bailouts or sweeping defaults.  
Finally, a successful market-based, case-by-case approach also needs to be principled. I 
would suggest that the essence of an effective case-by-case approach is the development of 
viable  plans  that  link  broad,  generally  acceptable  principles  to  the  particulars  of  a  given 
situation.  
G To  achieve  this,  a  clearer  and  more  transparent  articulation  of  the  public  sector’s 
objectives is necessary. Greater emphasis and clarity are needed as to the purposes 
and  limits  of  public  intervention,  and  the  extent  to  which  those  interests  warrant 
different  degrees,  modes,  and  timing  of  public  and  private  sector  involvement, 
depending on the particular country and circumstances. In this way all parties will be 
better  placed  to  understand  current  developments  and  how  the  international 
community might react to future strains.  
There are, of course, other points of view. In particular, it has been suggested that an early 
recourse  to  broad  suspensions  of  debt  service,  perhaps  amplified  or  reinforced  by  capital 
controls, would increase the manageability of crises and enhance predictability.  
My reading of the record convinces me that trying to preemptively override market processes 
would do the opposite. Let me share a few thoughts with you on this point. 
G
G
G
G
G
The  desire  for  certainty  and  control  which  seems  to  underlie  such  proposals  is 
understandable, as it appears to offer the promise of using less public money, and 
seemingly entails less risk that creditors will be bailed out for poor credit decisions. 
But the control and manageability that might result may be more seeming than real.  
For one, a perceived disposition to preemptively lock the door seems likely to send 
investors heading for the exits all that much sooner. As a result, many avoidable 
crises  soon  may  become  inevitable.  And  the  problem  of  contagion,  whereby 
difficulties in one case spread to many, would seem likely to worsen.  
Moreover, a perceived weakening of the international community’s commitment to 
voluntary,  market-oriented  approaches  and  its  support  for  honoring  contractual 
commitments  would  likely  create  deep  distrust,  making  it  harder  to  encourage 
cooperation between debtors and creditors in ultimately resolving the crisis.  
An overly quick recourse to payment suspensions also risks discouraging precisely 
the types of flows that we should wish to encourage, that is, longer maturities with 
better  risk-sharing  characteristics,  such  as  long-term  bonds  and  equities.  In  a 
crisis, the hottest money leaves first - - by definition. It seems counterproductive to 
seek to penalize those who stay.  
Finally,  I  would  suggest  that  preemptive  attempts  to  "freeze  markets"  also 
undermine market discipline of, and ownership by, the local authorities.  
 Increases  and  decreases  in  financial  flows  -  -  and  the  fluctuations  in 
pricing  that  naturally  accompany  positive  or  negative  trends  in  policies 
and economic and financial performance - - are a reflection of, and act as 
a natural brake on, the development of imbalances. 
BIS Review 61/2002
    But an assertion of control by the international community risks diverting 
attention from the policies of the local authorities. As a result, denial and 
delay, aggravating factors in almost every crisis, may well continue and 
be exacerbated. And then, as a practical matter, once market processes 
have  been  stopped,  how  and  when  do  you  get  things  started  again, 
particularly if needed corrective policies still have not been convincingly 
and transparently implemented?  
G
To  sum  up,  I  believe  the  one-size-fits-all  disposition  inherent  in  a  preemptive 
approach risks making situations much worse than they need to be. The only thing 
that  strikes  me  as  predictable  under  such  an  approach  would  be  that  market 
access would be harmed across the board. Just as bailouts risk encouraging too 
much risk taking, efforts to orchestrate preemptive bail-ins may encourage too little.  
Underlying  the  suggestions  that  I  have  made  is  a  firm  belief  that  the  success  of  our 
approaches  to  crisis  management  needs  to  be  viewed  and  assessed  with  a  wide  focus. 
Certainly, there is the question of efficacy in containing the crisis at hand, and the balance 
between this and the costs, actual and potential, to the public sector. But we also must keep 
in  mind  the  implications  for  the  functioning  of  the  global  financial  system  in  the  near  and 
medium  term.  This  requires  consideration  of  prospects  for  restoring  normal  market 
functioning and access, and the creation of appropriate incentives.  
When  difficulties  arise,  the  challenge  remains,  as  always,  to  encourage  and  work  with 
countries that are ready and able to implement strong corrective actions and to find financial 
solutions  best  suited  to  both  the  specific  case  and  the  broader  functioning  of  the  global 
financial system. A flexible, case-by-case, managed-market approach, represents the best 
bet - - and the only realistic option - - for achieving those goals as  we face a challenging 
future.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 7
