 I J Macfarlane: Australia and the international cycle 
Talk  by  Mr  I  J  Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  Australian  Business 
Economists/Economic  Society  of  Australia  (New  South  Wales  Branch)  Forecasting  Conference 
Dinner, Sydney, 6 December 2001. 
 I last spoke at this Conference Dinner two years ago, and a lot has happened to the Australian and 
world economies since that time. I am pleased to be invited back and given a platform from which to 
share a few thoughts with you tonight. In keeping with the theme of the Conference – which is about 
forecasting  –  I  will  address  the  issue  of  how  well  placed  the  Australian  economy  is  to  handle  the 
challenges of the next year, particularly the international challenge. In a sense, the talk will also be a 
replacement for my regular half-yearly report to the Parliamentary Committee on Economics, Finance 
and Public Administration. Because of last month’s election, there has not been time to re-form the 
Committee and schedule a hearing date in the current half-year. 
I will start tonight by showing a graph which compares Australia’s current economic expansion with its 
predecessors  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Some  people may  think  I  am  tempting  fate  by  showing  this 
graph at this particular juncture, but I have been doing so, from time to time, over the past three years 
without  ill  effect.  What  the  graph  shows  is  that  the  current  expansion  is  a  good  deal  longer  and 
smoother than its predecessors. One of the most important reasons for this is that inflation has been a 
lot lower on average and less variable than in the earlier expansions. Monetary policy, therefore, has 
been able to play a different role than formerly – one that involves earlier movements in interest rates, 
but  with  smaller  amplitudes  of  movement.  The  inflation  targeting  framework  has  been  a  crucial 
element in bringing about this result. 
 Index 
145 
140 
135 
130 
125 
120 
115 
110 
105 
100 
95 
Diagram 1: Expansions in GDP 
Cyclical trough = 100
1990s
1980s
1970s
1 
2 
3
4
5
7
Years since trough
6
8
9
10 
Index 
145 
140 
135 
130 
125 
120 
115 
110 
105 
100 
95 
 Table 1 
Expansions in GDP 
 
Length of expansion in quarters 
Total increase1 
Average growth rate 
Number of quarterly declines 
Standard deviation of quarterly growth rates2 
Average inflation rate 
Standard deviation of quarterly inflation2 
1 Percent.   2  Percentage points. 
1970s 
 
31 
  26.6 
3.1 
 
7 
 
 
1.1 
  11.2 
1.2 
 
1980s 
28 
36.5 
4.5 
2 
0.9 
6.9 
0.7 
 1990s 
 40 so far 
 
45.6 
3.8 
 
2 
 
0.6 
 
 
2.4 
0.3 
 
BIS Review 102/2001 
 1
 For most of the period of the current expansion, the international background has been benign. The 
exception until recently was the period between mid 1997 and the beginning of 1999, when the Asian 
crisis  confronted  us  with  a  pronounced  fall  in  the  demand  for  our  exports  and  some  pretty  skittish 
international capital markets. We survived – indeed, prospered – in that period, much better than any 
of  us  thought  likely  at  the  time.  Now  we  are  confronted  with  another  period  of  weak  international 
demand,  and  this  time  the  United  States  –  the  former  powerhouse  of  the  world  economy  –  is  the 
principal source of the weakness. This time we confront a problem that is global rather than specific to 
our region. 
The current problems did not, of course, start on 11 September, and I think there has been a tendency 
to exaggerate the economic consequences of that event, and under-estimate the underlying weakness 
that preceded it. If I had to give a date when it became clear that the international economy was in for 
a rough ride, I would nominate 3 January, when the Fed surprised everyone with the first reduction in 
interest rates in this phase only a fortnight after their previous meeting at which they had kept rates 
constant. After a flurry of interest rate reductions around the world in the next few months, the situation 
then settled down for a while. In Australia, after our three initial reductions, we paused for four months 
while we evaluated the incoming information. By mid August, we had concluded that the international 
situation was worsening again, and we began a second round of easings in early September, about a 
week before the fateful events in New York. Thus, taking these events together, we have been in a 
situation where we were conscious of a weakening world economy for virtually a full year. During that 
time – or for the three quarters covered by the national accounts – the Australian economy has grown 
at  an  annual  rate  of  4  per  cent,  while  the  US  has  been  flat. We  have  also  done  better  than  other 
comparable  economies.  This  is  a  very  encouraging  result  for  us,  but  success  so  far  does  not 
guarantee success in the future. Indeed, there is a large body of opinion that says we are destined to 
follow where others have led. 
 United States 
Canada 
Euro Area 
United Kingdom 
Australia 
Table 2 
Growth and Inflation in 2001 
per cent, year-to-date annualised. 
GDP Growth 
CPI Inflation 
0.2 
0.5 
0.9 
2.1 
4.0 
2.1 
1.8 
2.5 
1.5 
3.0 
I suppose that is the question that has been on everyone’s lips for quite a few months – if the world 
economy goes into a recession, as the United States and Japan have done and much of the rest of 
the world seems to be doing, does that mean that Australia has to follow? People who would answer 
yes to this question would point out that we have done so in the past, for example, in the mid 1970s, 
the early 1980s and the early 1990s. Why should this time be any different? 
This is a view of the world that I would call historical determinism, and it may or may not be a good 
guide. But before we accept such a prediction, it should be challenged by a close examination of the 
circumstances  then  and  now.  What  such  an  examination  reveals  is  that  present  domestic 
circumstances  are  very  different  to  those  prevailing  in  the  earlier  episodes.  To  put  it  bluntly,  we 
brought a lot of the problems on ourselves in the previous episodes, whereas this time we have not 
done so. On the previous occasions, we could not in all honesty make the claim that it was mainly the 
fault  of  the  rest  of  the  world  –  much  of  the  fault  was  clearly  of  our  own  making.  In  other  words, 
Australia had a lot of serious domestic imbalances that contributed to the downturns. 
Imbalances - then and now 
For a start, each of the earlier downturns was preceded by an episode of high inflation. In the 1970s 
and 1980s, the CPI was rising in double digits; in the 1990s, although this measure peaked at a lower 
rate – about 8 per cent – it was accompanied by unsustainably high asset price inflation. Accordingly, 
monetary policy had to be tightened on all three occasions to combat these imbalances, and short-
2 
 
BIS Review 102/2001
       term  interest  rates  reached  very  high  levels  –  either  a  little  above  or  below  20  per  cent  on  each 
occasion.  Nothing  remotely  like  that  has  happened  this  time  to  either  inflation  or  to  interest  rates. 
Perhaps more importantly, monetary policy this time has been able to be eased much earlier than on 
previous  occasions  –  interest  rates  have  been  successively  lowered  for  nearly  a  year  now,  during 
which the economy has been growing at a good rate. 
While I think the different behaviour of inflation and interest rates is the biggest change between then 
and now, there are a number of other factors that contributed to our difficulties in earlier times that are 
not present now. I have listed these before, but there is no harm in doing so again: 
• 
There were large rises in real wages that squeezed the business sector in the 1970s and 
1980s. This time wages have grown at a reasonably steady 3½ per cent per annum over the 
past year or two. 
There was an investment boom that led to over-capacity in the early 1980s. Investment has 
been quite subdued over the past two years, and, in more normal circumstances, we should 
be due for a pick-up. Even in current circumstances, a straightforward reading of last week’s 
Capex Survey suggests a rise in the current financial year, though it is concentrated mostly 
in one sector (mining). 
In  the  early  1990s,  the  exchange  rate  appreciated  sharply  in  the  period  ahead  of  the 
downturn.  On  this  occasion,  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  exchange  rate  is  exerting  an 
expansionary influence. 
On each earlier occasion, the deficit on current account of the balance of payments widened 
by an amount that alarmed many people. On this occasion, it has fallen to a level not seen in 
more than 20 years. 
I will return to some of these subjects later, but before I do so, I would like to address another form of 
historical determinism. 
Imbalances - United States and Australia 
The macro-economic performances of Australia and the United States in terms of output growth and 
inflation were very similar over the 1990s. It would therefore not be unreasonable to ask the question 
of why they should not also be similar in the first few years of the new century. Again, I think there is a 
reasonably straightforward answer to that question which stresses some very big differences between 
the two economies. 
• 
The  US  economy  exhibited  in  the  late  stages  of  its  expansion  two  or  three  developments 
which arguably warranted the use of the term “bubble”: 
The US stock market, particularly the technology sector as measured by the NASDAQ, rose 
to exceptional heights and has since fallen. The broad indices such as the S&P 500 or the 
Wilshire are down by about 25 per cent from their peak, whereas in Australia the ASX 200 is 
only down about 4 per cent. 
In  the  United  States,  there  was  a  burst  of  physical  investment  towards  the  end  of  the 
expansion, mainly in high technology equipment. We are now seeing the reaction to this and 
the  consequent  excess  capacity,  in  the  form  of  sharp  falls  in  investment.  As  explained 
earlier, this pattern of action and reaction is absent in Australia. 
The  trade-weighted  value  of  the  US  dollar  has  risen  appreciably  over  recent  years  and, 
despite lowering interest rates faster than any other country this year, the currency remains 
at a very high level. 
These three factors were really a manifestation of the excessive euphoria associated with the widely 
held view that the secret of economic success was to pour resources into the “high tech” sector. In the 
event, the countries that were most exposed to that sector are the ones that are showing the largest 
falls in output. 
BIS Review 102/2001 
 3
 The transmission from the world to Australia 
So  far,  I  have  emphasised  the  strong  points  about  the  Australian  economy,  and  the  differences 
between us and other more vulnerable economies. But it would be foolish to deny that a fall, or even a 
pronounced slowdown, in the world economy and world trade would have a significant contractionary 
effect on the Australian economy. Clearly, such an effect will occur, some of which is already showing 
up. The two classical channels are through a fall in the volume of exports and through a lower terms of 
trade,  but  there  may  also  be  other  channels.  The  remainder  of  my  presentation  will  look  at  the 
probable size of these channels. 
Table 3 
Export Contribution to GDP 
Downturns 
Mid 1970s 
Early 1980s 
Early 1990s 
Period 
(year-ended) 
Mar 1974 
Jun 1983 
Dec 1989 
Contribution to GDP 
–1.4 
–0.9 
0.3 
 It is true that during world recessions, the volume of Australian exports usually falls. Table 3 shows 
that  at  the  time  of  previous  world  recessions,  Australia  has  experienced  periods  of  falling  or  weak 
exports roughly coincident with these recessions. But the negative contributions to GDP in any one 
year are not large; the biggest we can identify is the 1.4 percentage points in the year to March 1974. 
Clearly,  if  the  rest  of  the  economy  was  growing  at  a  reasonable  rate,  this  would  not  be  enough  to 
induce a recession. 
Traditionally, the Australian economy has had a reputation for doing better than most other economies 
in the good times and suffering more in the bad times. One reflection of this was that the Australian 
dollar was seen as a “commodity currency” because it was heavily influenced by our terms of trade. 
Again, it is true that during previous world recessions, Australia experienced periods of falling terms of 
trade that coincided roughly with the recessions. The biggest negative contribution of 1.7 percentage 
points of GDI was in the year to March 1975 (following a massive positive contribution the previous 
two  years).  The  magnitude  of  these  effects  is  such  that,  although  they  have  made  a  noticeable 
contribution to slowing the economy, they would not be enough to cause a recession. 
Terms of Trade Contribution to National Income (GDI) 
Table 4 
Downturns 
Period 
Contribution to GDI 
Year to Mar 1975 
Year to Mar 1982 
Year to Jun 1991 
Mid 1970s 
Early 1980s 
Early 1990s 
Even  if  we  add  the  export  volume  effects  and  the  terms  of  trade  effects  together  (noting  that  they 
usually cover different, but roughly adjacent, periods), the combined effect in any one year would not 
be enough to turn a reasonable positive growth rate into a negative one. The other conclusion that can 
be drawn from this table is that the contributions tend to be getting smaller, particularly for the most 
recent recession in the early 1990s. 
–1.7 
–0.6 
–1.2 
4 
 
BIS Review 102/2001
  Index 
130 
120 
110 
100 
90 
Index 
100 
95 
90 
85 
80 
Diagram 2: Trade Prices 
March 1980 = 100
Prices
in SDR terms
Imports
Exports
Terms of Trade
Index
130
120
110
100
90
Index
100
95
90
85
1981
1985
1989
1993
1997
80
2001
 I would like to say a little more about the terms of trade before I leave that subject. As I said earlier, 
there has been a tendency to see Australia as being some sort of “loser” in the international economic 
competition because of our vulnerability to terms of trade movements. There is an assumption that our 
terms of trade are subject to a long-term downward trend, that they are also cyclically sensitive, and 
that both of these characteristics stem from an unfortunate export mix, with its over-representation of 
“commodities”. I think this is a somewhat dated view for the following reasons: 
• 
On the question of long-run trends, it should be noted that the low point in our terms of trade 
was as far back as 1986/87. The two troughs since then have been at successively higher 
levels. 
On the question of cyclical sensitivity, we have had conflicting signals over recent years. Our 
terms of trade fell between mid 1997 and mid 1998 as a result of the Asian crisis, but since 
that time, i.e. over the past three years, they have risen, even though the last of those three 
years has been a very weak one for the world economy. They are now above the peak they 
reached immediately before the Asian crisis. 
The focus on our export prices is misplaced because the really interesting action seems to 
be taking place  on  import prices. They are  not as cyclical  as export prices, but they have 
shown a more pronounced downward trend over the  1990s,  particularly  over the past five 
years. We know that a lot of this is due to the sharp falls in the prices of telecommunications 
and computing equipment, but it is more widespread than this. Of the 29 categories of goods 
for  which  the  ABS  publishes  import  prices,  26  fell  in  SDR  terms  between  1996  and  the 
present. Nearly all of them are categories of manufactured goods. 
  Whether the trend in the price of a particular category of internationally-traded goods is up or down 
depends to a large extent on long-run supply elasticities. It now seems likely that the highest supply 
elasticities  are  to  be  found  in  large-scale  manufacturing  rather  than  resource-based  goods.  Semi-
conductors are an obvious example, as are less sophisticated products such as clothing, textiles and 
footwear,  but  it  also  seems  to  be  true  for  electrical  equipment,  automobiles,  and  for many  types  of 
industrial equipment. In some senses, these are now the “commodities” of international trade. I am not 
suggesting that all manufactured goods have this characteristic, but it seems that most of them do. 
My conclusion from this discussion of movements in exports, imports and the terms of trade is that 
they are not big enough by themselves to transmit a world recession into a domestic recession. A fall 
in domestic spending would be required to bring about that result. Why should domestic spending fall 
if the domestic economy was in reasonably good shape? One possible explanation is multiplier effects 
from the export sector, but most econometric estimates suggest that these would not be large enough 
to tip the balance. Another channel is through confidence effects – perhaps business and consumer 
confidence are influenced, not only by domestic developments, but also by international ones. Given 
BIS Review 102/2001 
 5
 the massive amount of information about the US economy that is routinely transmitted to Australians, it 
would not be surprising if this were the case. 
It  is  clear  that  some  international  events  show  up  in  measures  of  confidence  among  Australian 
consumers and business, September 11 being an obvious example. But, on the other hand, consumer 
confidence  is  still  above  its  long-term  average,  and  like most measures  of  business  confidence,  its 
recent trough was in the March/April period of 2001 – about nine months ago. At that time, we were 
getting bad news on the domestic front, particularly the temporary decline in GDP in the December 
quarter of 2000. The level of confidence recovered from this temporary trough, and on average over 
the past six months, has been a good deal higher than earlier in the year, and has held up reasonably 
well through the recent international turmoil. 
There is one thing about recent business behaviour that has worried me a little, but so far it seems to 
be mainly confined to the United States. I am referring to the practice by companies of announcing 
large lay-offs of employment whenever a downward earnings revision occurs. This practice is no doubt 
designed to please investors and therefore to prop up the company’s share price. If these lay-offs are 
occurring as announced, it suggests a more rapid employment response than in previous downturns. 
While the practice may help one company when viewed in isolation, it is a serious error to think that 
companies in general can protect their earnings in this way. Earnings are meant to decline cyclically in 
circumstances  such  as  the  present  because  it  is  impossible  to  cut  costs  as  fast  as  revenue  is 
declining.  The more  the  cyclical  fall  in  earnings  is  resisted  in  this  way,  the more  it  is  transferred  to 
employment, and the more pronounced the cycle becomes. 
Conclusion 
Calendar year 2001 has been a difficult one for the world economy, and the first half of 2002 looks like 
remaining weak before a recovery gets underway. This would mean 18 months of economic weakness 
for the world economy, and be classified as a recession like those of the mid 1970s, early 1980s and 
early  1990s.  The  Australian  economy  has  got  through  the  first  half  of  it  in  reasonably  good  shape 
considering the circumstances. 
Can we keep up our present performance until we are again in an environment of reasonable world 
growth? Can we span the valley? I have given a number of reasons why I think we can, even though 
we  will  experience  falling  exports,  falling  earnings  and  the  usual  inventory  adjustments.  These  are 
examples of externally-induced contractionary effects that cannot be avoided, but which are not big 
enough by themselves to cause a recession. For that to occur, we would have to see an over-reaction 
by  domestic  consumers  and  businesses.  The  evidence  to  date  from  surveys  of  confidence,  from 
household spending and from business investment intentions is that they are holding up reasonably 
well. Far from over-reacting, they are exerting a generally stabilising influence. If this changes for the 
worse, or if it appears that the outlook for the world economy is weaker than currently assumed, we 
will be prepared to adjust monetary policy accordingly. 
6 
 
BIS Review 102/2001
