 Jean-Claude Trichet: Leadership in Europe - euro, enlargement, economic 
reform 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Bank of France, at the 7th annual conference of 
the German-British Forum, London, 17 October 2002.  
 Mr. Chairman, Ladies and gentlemen, dear German and British friends, it is a great pleasure and an 
honour  to  be  with  you  today,  on  the  occasion  of  the  7th  annual  Conference  of  the  German-British 
Forum. The title of this conference: “Leadership in Europe : Euro, Enlargement, Economic reform” is 
especially  relevant  this  year,  as  2002  will  stay  as  a  decisive  milestone  in  the  process  of  European 
integration. The beginning of this year saw the completion of the changeover to the single European 
currency, the last stage of a now more-than-twenty-year process of monetary integration. And we are 
now  at  the  eve  of  another  historic  stage  for  the  European  Union:  the  forthcoming  enlargement  to 
Central,  Southern  and  Eastern  Europe  countries.  From  a  central  banker’s  perspective,  these  two 
major  events  confirm,  more  than  ever,  the  attractiveness  of  the  European  endeavour,  but  also  the 
necessity of implementing strong, audacious economic reforms in Europe.  
Before addressing in greater detail these two main challenges that the EU and the euro area will have 
to cope with in the next years, economic reforms and EU enlargement, I would like, first, to recall in a 
few words the successful launch of the euro banknotes and coins in January 2002. 
This successful launch, to the benefit of 305 million Europeans, represents the crowning achievement 
of the euro changeover, after the launch of the euro on the financial markets, on 1 January 1999. Both 
operations  were  a  technical  success  because  they  had  been  meticulously  well-prepared  by  the  full 
body  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  all  the  euro  area  national  central  banks, 
including Banque de France in France. However, aside from the technical success in itself, the warmth 
and  enthusiasm  with  which  French  citizens  and  other  Europeans  welcomed  the  euro,  their  new 
currency, was proof that European construction enjoys real popular support that has all too often been 
underestimated. 
Let me now turn to the core of my subject today: first, the process for economic reform, second, the 
perspective of enlargement. 
 Economic reforms 
1. 
Before reviewing the priority topics which require a new impulse, I would like to make a remark on the 
also  often  underestimated  link  between  reform  and  the  changeover  to  the  euro  :  indeed,  the 
introduction  of  banknotes  and  coins  in  euro  is  a  major  structural  reform  in  itself,  as  it  constitutes  a 
powerful  drive  towards  restructuring  the  European  economy,  and  a  strong  lever  to  facilitate  the 
comparison of prices, taxes and incomes between the Member states.  
In my view, three other major prerequisites are needed in order to foster robust, sustainable growth 
and durable job creation, namely : the continuation and strengthening of a policy designed to keep in 
check  unit  production  costs,  the  improvement  of  the  competitiveness  of  the  economy,  through 
ambitious structural reforms and lastly, the completion of a fully integrated European capital market. 
Raising the potential output growth and enhancing the competitiveness of the economy: 
If Europe wants to secure sustainable growth at levels that are as high as possible, the key variable is 
potential output growth.  
The level of potential output growth can firstly be raised thanks to investment: business leaders are 
completely free to invest wherever they want in Europe or elsewhere in the world. It is thus important 
that we create economic, legal and fiscal conditions that are as favourable as possible to investment in 
Europe.  The  investment  appeal  of  Europe  is  crucial  in  this  respect :  the  more  we  invest,  the  fewer 
inflationary pressures we will have, and the stronger potential output growth will be.  
BIS Review 60/2002 
 1
 Another  way  of raising potential output growth is to increase the quantity of available labour and to 
boost gains in labour productivity: the fast transformation of information systems is likely to accentuate 
the structural transformation of the economies. Since last year, the evolution of Stock Exchanges has 
shown that the euphoria associated with the concept of a totally new economic era has vanished, but 
what remains true is that a remarkable potential of economic changes remains for the future. It may 
help to boost labour productivity significantly on a recurring basis, and, in so doing, to boost production 
while preserving the economy’s competitive edge.  
That strategy should be pursued whilst increasing the overall competitiveness of Europe’s economy.  
If I refer to what we observed in the past, the French economic strategy, based on a moderation in the 
increase of unit costs of production, gave us an important advantage: the considerable improvement in 
the  cost  competitiveness  of  the  French  industrial  sector  from  the  mid-1980s  has  contributed 
extensively to the growth of our economy. The French economy grew faster than the other major euro 
area economies in recent years, while repeatedly recording a large current account surplus. This was 
largely  because,  from  early  1987,  production  costs,  measured  by  unit  labour  costs  in  the  industrial 
sector, have risen significantly less in France than in the euro area as a whole. That improvement in 
our overall cost-competitive situation has progressively materialised into growth, into job creations and 
into solid external accounts.  
This ongoing drive to keep prices and costs in check has been accomplished thanks to the economic 
and monetary strategy pursued over a long period. It is of the utmost importance that the entire euro 
area and Europe as a whole maintain and consolidate their cost competitiveness position. Since the 
introduction  of  the  single  currency,  it  is  more  important  than  ever  that  we  closely  monitor  the 
production cost indicator, as it determines to a large extent the competitiveness of goods and services 
produced in our economy and, therefore, the current level of employment. It also acts as a “leading 
indicator”  of  future  employment  because  it  gives  a  measure  of  the  attractiveness  of  an  inward 
investment compared with investment outside the euro area or outside Europe. 
Embarking in bold structural reforms: 
In this context, we also need to pursue and step up bold structural reforms, aimed at increasing the 
flexibility of the economy as a whole and fostering the progress of science and technologies. This is 
crucial if we wish to enhance the potential growth of European economies and to continue to promote 
sustainable growth and enduring job creation. 
The  European  Council  meeting  held  in  Luxembourg  in  1997  explicitly  mentioned  structural  policies 
among the items selected for reinforced co-ordination. The Lisbon and Stockholm European Councils, 
held in 2000 and 2001, further enhanced the medium term strategy necessary for structural reforms in 
the Union. This strategy aims at raising the potential growth and strengthening the competitiveness of 
the EU economies. Since its launch, this strategy has been strengthened on two points: the European 
council of Nice adopted a Social Agenda which clarifies the measures to be taken in order to achieve 
the objective of Lisbon, namely to increase the employment rate. The European Council of Göteborg 
added to this strategy an environmental dimension and confirmed the need for consistency between 
the various long-term policies. These strategies are aiming at making the European Union the «world’s 
most dynamic economy of knowledge in 2010». 
However,  the  responsibility  for  structural  reforms  in  the  European  Union  ultimately  rests  with  the 
individual  Member  States.  Consequently,  a  variety  of 
institutional  solutions  and  regulatory 
arrangements  across  countries  and  sectors  exist.  I  consider  that  such  a  decentralized  approach 
should be seen as an opportunity, even if it has also disadvantages. At least, it fosters competition 
whilst encouraging «cross fertilisation» of best practices through increased co-ordination of Member 
States’ structural policies.  
Work to date in the field of structural reforms remains insufficient even if progress is being made, as 
was  assessed  by  the  European  Council  of  Barcelona  last  March.  Some  advances  have  been 
registered in certain sectors with regard to the implementation of the strategy  defined  in Lisbon : to 
eliminate the hindrances to the free exchange of services, to reduce the overall level of State aid and 
to boost the level of liberalization. 
We  still  have  a  long  way  to  go:  whereas  the  integration  of  good  markets  is  relatively  advanced, 
shortcomings still exist with regard to the full integration of service industries. Most of the barriers to 
trade  in  services  appear  to  be  due  to  national  regulations.  Developments  would  be  necessary  for 
instance with regard to the further opening of the public procurement market.  
2 
 BIS Review 60/2002
 As regards the labour market, the European Council of Lisbon fixed as a central objective the rise of 
the employment rate of our populations from 60 to 70 % in 10 years. As a comparison, the same rate 
stands at 75 % in the USA. Continental Europe is therefore still experiencing levels of unemployment 
that are too high, although it has been declining in most of its economies over the past years.  
According to the IMF and the OECD and the constituency of central bankers, 75% of unemployment in 
the euro zone is of a structural nature, i.e. generated by an environment which handicaps job creation. 
It  is  thus  necessary  to  put  an  end  to  the  neo-Malthusian  behaviour  which  is  still  anchored  in  our 
economies.  
Completing a fully integrated European capital market: 
In  1999,  as  soon  as  the  euro  was  launched,  one  of  the  expected  advantages  was  the  prospect  of 
deeper,  larger  and  more  integrated  capital  markets  contributing  to  reducing  the  cost  of  capital  for 
businesses and giving European savers a greater range of saving options. These expectations have 
become realities in both the money market and longer-term capital markets. 
However, there are still some barriers to further integration of EU capital markets. In this regard, the 
Eurosystem  welcomed  the  ambitious  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  (FSAP)  launched  by  the 
European Council in Lisbon in 2000. This plan is aimed at harmonising and improving the conditions 
under which issuers, investors and intermediaries conduct their activities in the European Union. The 
European  Council  set  a  tight  timetable  so  that  this  plan  can  be  implemented  by  2005,  and  even 
sooner, by 2003, as regards the measures relating to the securities markets.  
At  present,  30  out  the  42  FSAP  objectives  have  already  been  brought  to  a  successful  conclusion, 
allowing  significant  breakthroughs  in  various  crucial  areas.  All  these  objectives  involve  far-reaching 
reforms, such as, for instance, introducing a single passport for issuers, with the planned Prospectus 
Directive,  setting  up  an  adequate  framework  for  the  oversight  of  the  activities  of  financial 
conglomerates  or  harmonising  rules  concerning  the  use  of  collateral  in  financial  transactions, 
especially in a cross-border context. 
The Eurosystem also supports the strategic conclusions of the Committee chaired by A. Lamfalussy 
on  the  integration  of  the  European  securities  markets,  ratified  by  the  European  Council  meeting  in 
Stockholm in 2001 and approved by the European Parliament in early 2002. We are convinced that 
the  implementation  of  these  broad  guidelines  and  the  new  cooperation  structures  at  the  European 
level will help make it possible to take full advantage of the introduction of the euro. I would only like to 
mention, as an example of fruitful co-operation, that the Committee of European Securities Regulators 
(CESR), set up last year as a follow-up to the Lamfalussy report, recently embarked with the European 
System of Central Banks on considering standards to be applied to the European securities settlement 
and clearing systems. 
In  the  field  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  the  Council  of  Economic  and  Finance  ministers 
(ECOFIN) had mandated, last May, the Economic and Financial Committee (EFC) to make proposals 
concerning the structures for financial regulation supervision and stability at the European level. The 
framework  currently  under  consideration  has  the  objective  of  extending  the  arrangements  that  are 
already  in  place  for  securities  regulation  to  the  other  financial  sectors,  based  on  existing  inter-
institutional agreements. Of course, the sectoral specificities are recognized, and especially those of 
the  banking  sector,  through  the  appropriate  participation  of  all  national  central  banks  in  the 
arrangements  concerning  the  banking  supervision.  Indeed,  one  of  the  statutory  tasks  of  the 
Eurosystem is to contribute to the smooth conduct of prudential supervision policies and the stability of 
the financial system. I am therefore convinced that the involvement of central banks in this issue is 
absolutely crucial. 
Economic reform is an ongoing process in Europe, in view of the considerable efforts that still have to 
be  made  in  order  to  promote  sustainable  growth  and  enduring  job  creation.  At  the  same  time,  the 
European Union has to face another important challenge in the near future : the enlargement process. 
The enlargement process 
2. 
The coming EU enlargement to Central, Southern and Eastern Europe countries is a historic stage in 
European  integration.  Twelve  countries  from  central,  eastern  and  southern  Europe  are  currently 
negotiating accession to the EU. According to the calendar endorsed by the European Council, new 
accessions  will  take  place  as  from  1st  of  January  2004.  It  testifies  again,  if  necessary,  to  the 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 3
    4 
 attractiveness  of  the  European  framework,  which  has  contributed  to  both  political  stability  and 
economic progress for almost half a century in Western Europe. 
Accession  countries  in  western  Europe  have  accomplished  remarkable  progress  in  stabilizing  and 
strengthening their economies and institutions. Recent history shows the major improvements those 
countries have made, in hardly 10 years, on the road towards convergence with the EU. Let’s keep in 
mind, with some humility, the sometimes rather slow pace the current Member States took, regarding 
for  example  trade  openness,  price  liberalisation,  structural  reforms  and  even  monetary  stability  and 
fiscal soundness. 
Nevertheless, there is also general agreement on the fact that the gap, in terms of average GDP per 
capita, between the accession countries and the euro area, although diminishing, remains still quite 
significant. The size of the gap, combined recently with a rather limited growth differential between the 
two groups of countries, suggests that the process of real convergence will be gradual and will have to 
continue much beyond the tentative dates for EU accession.  
Although  differences  in  income  levels  are  not  incompatible  with  EU,  it  is  important  for  accession 
countries  to  improve  real  convergence  before  entering  monetary  union.  Indeed,  it  is  essential  to 
preserve a high level of economic cohesion within EMU and appropriate economic integration between 
Members  States,  thereby  helping  to  minimize  the  risk  and  the  effects  of  asymmetric shocks,  in  the 
best interest of accession countries themselves. 
Let  me  stress  five  points  of  particular  relevance  for  the  Eurosystem,  and  for  accession  countries 
themselves on the road towards achieving catching-up and convergence with the EU. 
• 
Firstly, we should never forget that nominal convergence must be sustainable and therefore 
constitutes a medium-term objective, rather than a short-term priority. The strict compliance 
with the Maastricht criteria will be key for joining the euro area. Indeed, the EU Treaty calls, 
as a prerequisite for adopting the euro, for a high degree of sustainable convergence in the 
fields of price stability, government fiscal position, stability of the exchange rate, and long-
term  interest-rate  levels.  The  sustainability  of  nominal  convergence  itself  presumes  that 
sufficient preliminary progress has been made towards real and structural convergence (and 
namely having set a fully-fledged market economy, catching-up in income and productivity 
levels,  as  well  as  economic  and  social  infrastructures,  upgrading  of  the  legal  system…). 
Conversely, a sustainable catching-up process requires macroeconomic stability. Therefore, 
nominal and real convergence should be pursued in parallel, and are not antagonistic.  
Secondly, I noted that many accession countries have already expressed their intention to 
join ERM II as soon as possible after EU entry. This intention is to be welcomed, although it 
should  be  clear  that  ERM  II  membership  needs  neither  to  happen  immediately  after  EU 
accession in all cases, nor to be limited to only two years. It would be misleading to consider 
ERM II as a mere “waiting room” before the euro. On the very contrary, ERM II would allow 
countries  to  retain  some  limited  exchange  rate  flexibility  during  the  catching-up  process. 
ERM  II  membership  offers  a  meaningful,  flexible  but  credible  framework  for  increasing 
convergence with the euro area, for tackling the challenges faced by accession countries on 
the road towards the adoption of the euro, for contributing to macroeconomic and exchange 
rate  stability  and  for  helping  determine  the  appropriate  level  for  the  eventual  irrevocable 
fixation of parities; and this, again, in the best interest of candidate countries themselves.  
Thirdly, a sound and efficient banking and financial system is key. Significant progress has 
been  made  over  the  past  few  years  in  rehabilitating  the  banking  sector  and  encouraging 
foreign ownership. The latter has also contributed to greater integration into the EU financial 
system.  Nevertheless,  the  improvement  of  financial  technicity  and  banking  practices  is  a 
process  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  accession  countries.  The  intermediation  role  of  the 
banking  sector  remains  fundamental  for  the  efficient  use  of  capital  and  sustained  growth. 
Progress  in  corporate  governance,  the  enhancement  of  the  legal  and  supervisory 
frameworks that support the banking sector, and an efficient fight against money laundering, 
are  also  crucial.  They  are  conducive  to  achieving  the  macroeconomic  objectives  of  the 
accession countries. 
Fourthly, central bank independence is of the essence. It is an integral part of the acquis 
communautaire,  which  is  laid  down  not  only  in  national  legislation  but  above  all  in  the 
Maastricht  Treaty.  The  effective  implementation  of  the  acquis  communautaire  is  a 
prerequisite  for  accession  to  the  EU,  as  stressed  in  the  recent  Commission  report  on 
BIS Review 60/2002
  enlargement.  But  effective  implementation  is  also  needed  because  it  implies  the  effective 
transformation  of  accession  countries’  economic  framework,  which  should  facilitate  their 
integration into the EU and, later, the euro area. In this context, it should be ensured that 
there is no discrepancy between the central banks’ formal status in the legislation and the 
implementation  of  that  legislation.  It  is  of  utmost  importance  that  all  present  and  future 
Member  States  respect  this  economic  and  institutional  ground  rule  of  the  European 
framework. 
Fifthly, let us not forget the present and future contribution of Central and Eastern European 
countries to the economic prosperity of Europe at large. It seems that this contribution might 
be sometimes underestimated, while the relative influence of the US economy, for instance, 
might  be  sometimes  overestimated.  In  fact,  transition  economies,  as  a  whole,  are  as 
important  as  the  US  in  terms  of  external  demand  addressed  to  the  euro  area:  they  both 
enjoy  the  same  share,  i.e.  13%,  of  our  exports.  And,  during  the  last  two  years,  transition 
economies contributed for two-thirds to the overall growth of our total external demand, while 
the US contributed for less than 0.1%.  
More generally speaking, Central and Eastern Europe countries are already major contributors to the 
overall growth on the European continent. In 2001, despite the international context, they remained at 
quite high a level of growth, around 2.8%. This contribution is bound to further increase given these 
countries’ considerable potential for growth.  
I  would  like  to  conclude  on  this  topic  with  a  last  remark:  the  EU  enlargement  is  indeed  an  historic 
challenge  for  European  integration.  It  will  represent  the  most  important  enlargement  process  the 
European Union has ever faced. As a result, it has to be prepared with a great deal of care, and much 
remains  to  be  done.  The  process  of  convergence  will  be  very  gradual  and  needs  to  be  enhanced 
through  multilateral  surveillance  and  co-operation  between  the  current  Members  states  and  the 
accession countries. For its part, the Eurosystem is actively contributing to this task, by deepening its 
relationship with the accession countries central banks. 
 To conclude, let me stress three words: rapidity, stability and union. 
Rapidity is a key word. We have not much time to meditate, decide, implement. The structural reforms, 
that we are badly in need of, must be implemented as rapidly as possible if we want Europe to be up 
to its historical challenges. The Chinese say “It is later than you think” has never been so true. In any 
case, history itself does not wait for us. And when I look back, over the last twenty years, it seems to 
me that an unfortunately well-founded criticism could be that we have constantly under-assessed the 
rapidity  of  the  stream  of  history:  the  rapidity  of  the  deterioration  of  the  situation  in  the  USSR,  the 
rapidity of the collapse itself, the rapidity of the enlargement process, the depth, the strength and the 
intensity of the “desire of Europe” which is spreading in the countries in transition. 
Second word: stability. Economic and financial stability, in a period of excessive volatility and of wide 
boom-bust episode, financial and real stability appear to be a very precious asset. Over the last twenty 
years, we have constructed a new world: technology has permitted instantaneous communication and 
incredibly  powerful  real-time  computation.  Globalization  has  created  new  cultural,  conceptual, 
commercial and financial links between all economies including previously centrally planned systems; 
together technology and globalization are progressively driving us to a unified planet of universal rules 
and  regulations,  code  of  conduct  and  practices,  market  procedures  and  market  instruments, 
accounting  standards,  etc.  In  this  new  world,  phenomena  which  had  traditionally  a  local  or  even  a 
national impact may be amplified and become dangerous at the global level: amplification of financial 
cycles, herd behaviour, global contagion. 
Analysing the opportunities and the risks, and understanding the functioning of our system with a view 
to making it as stable as possible is a very exiting, ambitious and urgent task. 
And, last but not least, union. I can not avoid mentioning the question of completing monetary union 
with the entry of the United Kingdom. I would like to stress the following points in this regard: let us 
never forget that the UK is unanimously warmly welcomed in the euro area. It depends only on the 
decision of the British people and of the British authorities to join in. You know that the Germans and 
the French on the continent, as well as all other nations on the continent are very warmly hoping for a 
positive decision by the UK. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 5
