 I J Macfarlane: Overview of the Australian economy 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  I  J  Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  House  of 
Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public  Administration, 
Warrnambool, 6 December 2002. 
 I  would  like  to  endorse  the  remarks  of  the  Chairman  and  say  what  a  pleasure  it  is  to  be  in 
Warrnambool,  for  the  second  hearing  to  be  conducted  outside  the  Sydney-Melbourne-Canberra 
triangle.  The  first  was  in  Wagga  Wagga,  and  I  remember  at  the  time  suggesting  that  the  second 
should  be  a  little  further  away  from  Canberra.  Warrnambool  passes  that  test  and  is  an  important 
agricultural and tourist centre, so it is a fitting venue for this meeting. I would also like to thank the 
Mayor of Warrnambool, Councillor James Nicol, for his hospitality in hosting a civic reception for the 
Committee and the members of the Bank appearing before it. 
I would like to start the substance of this statement by observing that in the six months between this 
Hearing and the previous one in May quite a lot has changed, and this has had an important influence 
on our judgment about what we have needed to do with monetary policy. This change has happened 
relatively steadily, with the result that the financial markets and the public more generally have had no 
trouble in adjusting to the changed outlook. We have assisted, where we thought necessary, by way of 
several speeches and articles on the subject over the past six months; they have probably helped at 
the margin, although I think the public was not having any difficulty in recognising the changing outlook 
as it unfolded. 
That being so, it could be argued that there is nothing further to add on the subject. However, I am 
very aware of the fact that I gave some quite frank indications about the expected future direction of 
monetary policy at the previous Hearing, and that those indications have not been followed through. 
So  I  would  like  to  place  on  the  record  before  this  Committee  another  account  of  the  changing 
circumstances, even at the risk of being accused of going over old ground. 
In May I said to this Committee that since the Australian economy  was behaving normally, and the 
world  economy  was  getting  back  to  normal,  unless  unforeseen  developments  intruded,  we  should 
continue the process of getting real interest rates back to normal, while all the time carefully examining 
incoming data, both from here and abroad, to ensure that developments remained on track. We did 
continue the process of getting interest rates up towards normal in June, but have not done anything 
more in that direction in the following six months. Why not? I think the answer has been obvious to 
nearly  everyone  -  something  did  intrude  and  the  incoming  data  from  abroad  showed  that 
developments were not remaining on track. 
After  a  promising  start  to  the  year,  the  world  economy  began  to  weaken  about  mid-year.  Financial 
markets - particularly equity and bond markets - were the first to show this from about the beginning of 
the second quarter of the year. By mid-year there were also signs from a range of economic indicators 
in the United States and the Euro area that the recovery was likely to be weaker than formerly thought. 
These signs tended  to  become clearer as  events  progressed during the second half of the  year.  A 
good  way  of  summarising  this  large  body  of  data  is  to  look  at  three  indicators  of  perceptions  of 
economic  conditions:  business  confidence,  consumer  confidence,  and  consensus  forecasts  of  GDP 
growth. As can be seen in the graphs for the United States and the Euro area, these indicators show a 
clear improvement in the first half of the year followed by a clear deterioration in the second half. So 
what we have seen for the world economy is a weakening through calendar year 2001, an apparent 
strong recovery in the first half of 2002, followed by a relapse in the second half of 2002. The relapse 
does not mean that the world economy is returning to recession, but it indicates that the recovery is 
going to be weaker than was thought likely in mid-year. 
This gradual change in outlook in the second half of the year obviously had implications for monetary 
policy around the world. In the first half of the year, those countries with strong fundamentals, such as 
Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Sweden, had started the process of getting their interest rates 
back up to normal. This process was occurring when we met in May, and, as I said at the time, it was 
a process that we thought would be continuing. In the event, it did not continue for much longer, and in 
fact none of these countries has raised rates since July, and one (Sweden) has cut them, as has the 
United States. 
BIS Review 72/2002 
 1
 The caution shown by central banks such as ours derived in part from the downward revisions to world 
growth, but also in part from our suspicion that the risks were on the downside. In other words, if an 
outcome  very  different  to  the  consensus  were  to  occur,  it  would  be  more  likely  to  be  weaker  than 
stronger.  Having  said  that,  I  recognise  that  even  though  the  second  half  of  the  year  has  been 
disappointing  compared  with  the  first  half,  equity  and  bond  markets  have  become  a  little  more 
confident over the past month or so. It is too soon, of course, to know whether it represents a change 
in direction or just another blip in the data. 
Turning to the Australian economy, I will approach this by way of my usual practice of reviewing the 
forecasts I gave the Committee last time and presenting some new ones. Last time I said we expected 
GDP  growth  through  2002/03  to  be  between  3½  and  4 per cent  -  we  are  now  forecasting  around 
3 per cent.  Obviously,  the  major  factor  behind  the  reduction  has  been  the  drought,  but  the  weaker 
world economy has also had an effect at the margin. On the other hand, the fact that house-building is 
now forecast to continue to expand for a longer period has pushed the forecast up somewhat. 
For next year, that is calendar 2003, our forecast is for growth through the year of 3¾ per cent. The 
fact that it is higher than the current financial year rests importantly on the assumption that there is a 
recovery  from  the  drought  in  the  second  half  of  the  year,  and  that  the  world  economic  recovery 
gradually  picks  up  momentum  through  the  year.  As  I  said  before,  strength  in  house-building  has 
continued  for  longer  than  earlier  thought:  nevertheless,  we  still  expect  a  downturn  to  occur  in  that 
sector during the course of 2003, which will subtract from growth. 
On the inflation front, I said that we were forecasting the CPI to remain near the top of the target range 
in 2002/03, although we expected it to go down slightly for a time and to then come back up. Implicit in 
this forecast was that the rising phase would continue after mid-2003 and so, other things equal, begin 
to exceed the target range by the second half of 2003. What has happened so far is that headline CPI 
is  slightly  above  3 per cent,  but  our  estimate  of  underlying  inflation  is  that  it  is  running  at  about 
2¾ per cent. We see  no  reason  now  to  expect  underlying  inflation  to  rise  any  further,  and  are  now 
forecasting that it will stay around this rate through calendar 2003. The main reasons for this slight 
downward revision compared with our forecast six months ago are the lower forecasts for world and 
Australian growth. The price effects resulting from the drought will have the effect of holding up CPI 
inflation in the next quarter or two and then reducing it slightly later in the forecast period. 
 
 2 
  BIS Review 72/2002
   
I would now like to return to a subject which the Committee spent a fair bit of time discussing in May, 
namely residential property prices. As you know, we became particularly concerned about this issue 
when we noticed that virtually all of the increase in housing loan approvals in the past year was going 
to investors, not to aspiring owner-occupiers. At the same time, the building approvals data showed 
that  monthly  approvals  to  build  multi-unit  developments,  i.e.  apartments,  had  speeded  up  to  an 
exceptionally  fast  pace,  while  approvals  to  build  houses  were  going  along  steadily.  These 
developments suggested to us that a disproportionate amount of the upward pressure on residential 
property prices was coming from investors. 
One response to this would have been to sit back and do and say nothing, on the grounds that the 
market would sort out the problem. We accept that it no doubt would, but it could take a lot of time, the 
excesses could get worse in the meantime, and the eventual resolution of the issue could cause a lot 
of financial distress. The problem is that the market works, but with long lags during which people are 
encouraged to take decisions based on little more than an optimistic extrapolation of the past. 
Developers  will  continue  to  put  up  new  apartment  blocks  while  ever  there  are  investors  willing  to 
pre-commit  to  buy.  When  investors  purchase  apartments  off  the  plan  (and  it  is  almost  exclusively 
investors to which the marketing is directed), they are making a financial commitment the wisdom of 
which  may  not  become  apparent  for  18 months  or  so.  It  is  only  when  they  take  possession  of  the 
apartment that they discover whether they can find a tenant willing to pay high enough rent to justify 
the  financial  calculation  that  underlay  the  original  purchase.  Of  course,  any  individual  investor  can 
hope to get around the problem by selling to another investor, but they in turn will depend on finding a 
renter. Investors as a group are dependent on finding enough tenants willing to pay sufficiently high 
rents when the time comes, which may be 18 months away or more. 
These  investment  calculations  (or  forecasts)  are  difficult,  and  we  fear  that  many  investors  are  just 
assuming  that  things  will  work  out,  which  is  a  very  dangerous  thing  to  do  if  you  are  making  a 
highly-leveraged investment. Certainly, recent trends would warn against such an assumption. From 
the  best  figures  available,  it  is  clear  that  rents  are  falling  and  that  vacancy  rates  in  apartments  are 
rising.  And,  as  the  pipeline  of  partly-built  buildings  is  completed,  there  will  be  many  more  new 
apartments coming onto the market in the next two years than in other recent years. 
Our purpose in what we have been saying is to try to get the market to work a little better and so avoid 
the overshooting that often characterises parts of the property market. We all remember the excesses 
that  occurred  in  commercial  property  in  the  1980s  and  the  large  falls  in  prices  that  followed  them. 
Investors  should  remember  that  even  when  they  are  buying  a  residential  unit,  they  are  making  a 
BIS Review 72/2002 
 3
 commercial  property  decision,  i.e.  they  are  borrowing  for  an  investment  which  will  be  rented  to  a 
tenant with the purpose of making a profit. 
There  are  now  some  preliminary  indications  that  market  forces  are  starting  to  work  at  last.  I  have 
already  referred  to  falling  rents  and  rising  vacancy  rates,  but  there  is  also  recent  evidence  of  a 
flattening out or, in some cases, falls in apartment prices and marked falls in auction clearance rates in 
Sydney and Melbourne. There have also been reports of some of the more ambitious projects planned 
for Brisbane and Melbourne being  withdrawn,  which makes it all the more surprising that there has 
been such a large increase in October in approvals to build multi-unit buildings. On balance, however, 
these developments, if fully understood by investors, should make them very cautious and so limit the 
extent of over-supply in coming years. 
I suppose the other big event in our area that has occurred since we met last May is that we brought 
down the final report on the Reform of Credit Card Schemes in Australia in August. In this context, we 
welcome  your  endorsement  of  the  reforms,  Chairman,  as  being  ‘an  important  win  for  Australian 
consumers’. Our intention, as stated in our document, is to put these reforms into effect in stages over 
the next year. Although the reforms are being challenged in court by the two main international credit 
card systems, I do not think this court action prevents me from answering questions. 
I do not think I need to say any more at present. We will have plenty of time to discuss any of the 
subjects I have covered plus any others that Committee members may wish to raise. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2002
