 Lee Hsien Loong: Remaking Singapore's financial sector  
Speech by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore, at a MAS Staff Seminar, Singapore, 29 October 2002. 
 Introduction 
I. 
We are gathering in an uncertain environment. On the economic front, Asia’s key export markets – the 
US, EU and Japan – remain weak, blighting South East Asia’s prospects for recovery. In Northeast 
Asia, China’s vitality and transformation continues to dominate investor interest. After September 11, 
security  has  become  the  top  concern  worldwide.  The  bomb  blasts  in  Bali  and  the  recent  hostage 
taking in Moscow are sobering reminders that the war on international terrorism has just begun. All 
these  developments  have  implications  for  Singapore’s  growth  prospects  and  our  aspirations  to 
become a world-class financial centre. 
Certainly, these are challenging times. But if we could suspend the present for a moment, let us cast 
our minds back to 1997, when we embarked on this journey to remake our financial sector.  
Reflecting on the last 5 years 
II. 
Five years ago, the global financial landscape was undergoing dramatic changes. Financial markets 
were becoming more integrated, with freer and faster flows of information and capital. Globalisation 
was  boosting  liquidity  and  facilitating  growth.  But  it  was  also  transmitting  market  disturbances  with 
greater speed and virulence, and complicating the conduct of monetary and exchange rate policies. 
Globalisation,  coupled  with  deregulation,  technological  change,  and  borderless  competition,  was 
revolutionising the way financial institutions competed and did business. There was a wave of mergers 
and acquisitions, as institutions sought to diversify risks, reduce costs, and exploit synergies.  
Financial  centres  faced  similar  pressures.  As  technology  eroded  time-zone  advantages,  institutions 
consolidated  their  activities  within  fewer  financial  centres.  We  believed  that  consolidation  was 
imminent in our time zone. If there were to be only a few financial centres left in Asia, we wanted to 
make sure that Singapore was one of them. So we launched a fundamental rethink of our approach to 
supervising and developing the financial sector.  
Creating a more conducive regulatory environment 
Our  new  approach  could  be  broadly  summarised  in  four  main  thrusts.  First,  we  sought  to  create  a 
more  conducive  regulatory  environment  to  foster  dynamism  and  innovation,  while  maintaining  the 
safety and soundness of our financial sector. MAS shifted its emphasis from regulation to risk-focused 
supervision, so that we could deal with stronger and weaker institutions differently. We wanted to rely 
more on disclosure and market discipline, with investors judging and taking risks for themselves. We 
also  pushed  for  higher  standards  of  corporate  governance  in  the  financial  sector,  to  cultivate  a 
stronger risk management culture, better internal controls, and greater transparency. 
Liberalising the financial sector 
Our  second  thrust  was  to  liberalise  the  financial  sector  to  promote  competition  and  enterprise. We 
deregulated the stockbroking industry, and lowered protective barriers in banking and insurance. This 
would  provide  international  institutions  greater  incentive  to  root  more  activities  in  Singapore,  while 
spurring local institutions to upgrade their capabilities and sharpen their competitive edge. Consumers 
would benefit from a wider offering of products and services at competitive prices.  
Taking a more strategic and proactive approach to development 
Third,  we  adopted  a  more  strategic  and  pro-active  approach  to  developing  the  financial  sector. We 
actively went out to attract new business here. For institutions already in Singapore, we tried to anchor 
them more firmly, and encouraged them to expand and introduce new activities here.  
BIS Review 62/2002 
 1
 Enhancing monetary policy effectiveness 
Finally, we had to enhance the effectiveness of our monetary policy. Free capital flows and complex 
derivative products had made it impossible to completely insulate the Singapore dollar against attack. 
Our  approach  had  been  to  operate  an  inscrutable  monetary  policy  and  impose  comprehensive 
restrictions  on  non-resident borrowing of Singapore dollars. This  was not  only  becoming untenable, 
but  was  also  hampering  the  growth  of  our  financial  markets.  We  needed  a  more  explicit  and 
transparent  monetary  policy  stance,  and  more  precisely  targeted  safeguards  against  the  risks  of 
internationalising the Singapore dollar.  
The changes in the financial and economic landscape 
III. 
We launched these major changes just as the Asian Crisis was breaking. But we did not foresee how 
difficult the next five years would be. Southeast Asian countries became mired in political difficulties 
triggered  by  the  crisis.  Malaysia  dismissed  its  Minister  of  Finance  and  imposed  exchange  controls. 
Indonesia  saw  the  fall  of  the  Suharto  government,  only  to  be  succeeded  by  a  totally  different 
dispensation. More recently,  the region has woken up to the reality  of extremist groups linked to Al 
Qaeda, using terror to undermine countries and bring about an Islamic state in Southeast Asia. 
Meanwhile  China  surged  ahead,  largely  unaffected  by  the  crisis.  South  Korea  launched  vigorous 
reforms, cleaning up its banks and restructuring its chaebols. For a few years, the US economy, with 
its  insatiable  appetite  for  imports,  was  the  world’s  solo  engine  of  growth.  This  helped  the  region  to 
begin recovering from the blow it had suffered. But then the dot-com bubble burst, and far from the 
V-shaped  recovery  confidently  predicted  by  many  experts,  the  US  economy  has  shown  persistent 
weakness, weighed down by high levels of household and corporate debt. 
These upheavals have taken their toll on the global financial industry. After the dot-com bubble and 
the crash in global equity prices, finance is no longer a hot industry on the go. Profits have fallen, and 
bad  assets  have  had  to  be  written  off.  Deals  have  dried  up,  and  investment  banks  are  slashing 
payrolls.  The  excesses  of  the  boom  years  are  now  manifesting  as  corporate  scandals,  putting  the 
industry on the defensive, both with the public and with regulators.  
Singapore’s  financial  sector  has  been  affected  by  all  these  developments.  Despite  all  our  efforts  to 
liberalise  and  grow  the  financial  sector,  it  only  grew  by  an  anaemic  1.1%  per  annum  from  1998  to 
2001. Many jobs have been lost.  
However, these disappointing numbers do not tell the whole story. If we look deeper, we will see the 
significant progress that we have made in spite of the difficult conditions. Indeed had we not embarked 
on these  policy changes, the Singapore financial sector would probably  be facing serious problems 
today. More importantly, we have laid firm foundations to capitalise on opportunities when the financial 
industry picks up again, as eventually it will. 
IV. 
Work done and assessment 
Conducive regulatory environment 
Let  us now  assess the  progress  we have made in  our strategic  thrusts. First, creating  a conducive 
regulatory  environment.  Here  our  efforts  have  centred  on  developing  risk-focused  supervision, 
improving corporate governance, and promoting disclosure and market discipline. 
Risk-focused supervision 
We have institutionalised the risk-focused supervisory approach, to varying degrees. We have created 
risk-based supervisory frameworks and are building risk profiles of individual financial institutions. This 
will  help  us  to  tailor  our  supervisory  plans  for  them.  We  are  conducting  shorter  but  more  frequent 
examinations that are focussed on the more critical risk areas of institutions. We are also allocating 
greater supervisory resources and attention to the systemically more important institutions.  
We  have  made  progress  towards  a  regulatory  framework  that  is  more  flexible,  integrated,  and 
sensitive  to  the  regulatory  burden  imposed  on  supervisee  institutions.  Our  two  new  pieces  of 
legislation – the Securities and Futures Act (SFA) and the Financial Advisors Act (FAA) – embody this 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2002
 new  approach,  with  their  streamlined,  modular  licensing  regime  and  alignment  of  regulatory 
requirements and business conduct standards across similar classes of activities.  
Nonetheless, much work remains.  
First, MAS must build up its expertise in integrated supervision. Boundaries between financial activities 
are  blurring.  Supervision  of  institutions  and  activities  on  a  silo  basis  increasingly  needs  to  be 
complemented  by  integrated  supervision.  We  must  further  harmonise  rules  across  similar  financial 
activities, align supervisory approaches across financial industries, and supervise financial groups on 
an integrated basis. This will help reduce the opportunity for regulatory arbitrage, and also shrink the 
gaps in the coverage of our supervisory radar.  
Second,  we  need  to  facilitate  the  implementation  of  risk-based  capital  frameworks  for  our  financial 
institutions. The New Basel 2 Capital Accord will be a major priority for MAS and the local banks. The 
New Accord will allow banks to better align their capital with underlying risks, but it will require banks 
to put in place elaborate systems, databases, and processes to assess the riskiness of their assets. 
MAS will continue to work closely with the local banks to effect a successful transition into Basel 2.  
Corporate governance 
In corporate governance, we have raised the bar for the financial sector significantly, and especially for 
the  local  banks.  The  local  banks  have  set  up  Nominating  Committees  chaired  by  independent 
directors,  to  ensure  that  competent  individuals  are  appointed  to  the  Board  and  key  management 
positions. The local banks will rotate their auditors every 5 years. The local banking groups are also 
preparing to separate their financial and non-financial activities and unwind cross-shareholdings. This 
will help local bank managements to concentrate on their core business of banking and finance, and 
limit the risk of contagion from non-financial businesses to the banks’ business.  
Market discipline and caveat emptor 
Our efforts to promote market discipline and a caveat emptor regime have focussed on enhancing the 
amount, quality and timeliness of information disclosed by institutions. We have shifted from a merit-
based  supervisory  approach  to  a  disclosure-based  approach  that  emphasises  market  discipline  to 
incentivise  financial  institutions  to  conduct  their  business  in  a  sound,  efficient,  and  professional 
manner. The local banks in particular have significantly improved their disclosure practices.  
We  must  continue  to  update  our  disclosure  standards  in  line  with  industry  developments  and 
international  best  practice.  Furthermore,  the  mindset  change  is  not  yet  complete.  The  public  still 
expects to be protected from downside risks, for example when playing the stock market, but more so 
when depositing their money in banks. Hence one major motivation for introducing deposit insurance 
is  to  change  this  mindset,  and  get  people  to  understand  that  only  a  limited  first  tranche  of  their 
deposits with a bank is protected should the bank run into trouble. 
But disclosure by itself is not enough. It must be accompanied by investor education. Investors have to 
understand  and  use  the  information  provided  to  them.  They  must  learn  to  make  sense  of  this 
information and use it to look after their own interests. We also need a pool of knowledgeable analysts 
and journalists who will shine the spotlight on any obscure fine print that the lay investor fails to notice. 
A more informed and sophisticated investor base will reinforce market discipline and form the basis for 
a more vibrant and mature financial sector. In all these respects, we have a long way to go.  
Market  discipline  also  requires  an  effective  enforcement  regime.  To  preserve  investor  confidence, 
penalties for transgressions must be swift and appropriate. MAS now has the power to investigate and 
bring a court action for market misconduct under the new civil penalty regime. This will complement 
the existing criminal penalty regime administered by CAD.  
Liberalising the financial sector 
We began to open the financial sector to greater competition  while the region  was reeling from the 
Asian  Crisis.  This  went  against  conventional  wisdom.  Opening  up  during  such  a  time  seemed  like 
throwing away the life-jackets as the flood waters rose. 
We thought otherwise. We could see the flood approaching – not just the storm we were then in, but 
the  greater  climatic  challenge  posed  in  the  longer-term  by  the  worldwide  changes  in  the  financial 
BIS Review 62/2002 
 3
 industry.  We  decided  that  we  had  better  learn  to  swim  before  the  deluge  overwhelmed  us. 
Furthermore,  our  actions  to  liberalise  in  the  midst  of  the  crisis  would  send  a  clear  signal  that 
Singapore’s financial centre would always be open for business. 
Banking 
The two major areas of liberalisation have been in banking and the capital markets. Liberalisation has 
brought about major changes in the local banking scene. From six local bank groups (not counting 
POSBank)1 in 1997, we are now down to three through mergers and acquisitions. More importantly, 
the  local  banks  have  rationalised  their  operations,  upgraded  their  risk  management  systems,  and 
introduced new products and services. The recent housing loan price war is an example of consumers 
benefiting from more banking competition. But fiercer competition has also inevitably meant that small 
accounts enjoy fewer cross-subsidies, and have to bear higher charges and tighter usage limits. The 
Basic  Banking  Account scheme will help reassure consumers that necessary reforms will not  leave 
them without banking services. 
Overall,  our  banks  face  tougher  challenges  than  before  –  fiercer  domestic  competition,  greater 
uncertainties  in  the  region,  more  complex  operations,  and  stronger  pressure  to  improve  returns. 
Perhaps the  local banks sometimes look back on the good old days  with  nostalgia.  But  we had no 
choice. The old dispensation was not sustainable. Even the present situation may not last. 
Certainly,  the  local  banks  have  built  up  their  size  and  regional  footprints.  They  are  now  the  three 
largest  banks  in  Southeast  Asia.  But  will  this  be  enough  for  them  to  hold  their  own  against  bigger 
players? Our largest bank, DBS, is only ranked 86th in the world in terms of assets2. Australia has a 
“4-pillars”  policy  that  discourages  consolidation  amongst  its  major  banks.  But  Singapore  has  not 
established its own “3-pillars” policy, and most probably cannot afford one. Of course, whether further 
consolidation actually takes place, and if so when, is for the players and the market to decide.  
But  further  opening  up  of  the  banking  sector  is  inevitable.  We  have  been  negotiating  FTAs  with 
Australia and the US, and are very close to reaching agreement with both. Our FTA partners expect to 
be  given  greater  access  to  our  financial  sector.  The  local  banks  must  brace  themselves  for  further 
liberalisation, by upgrading themselves and keeping pace with international best practices.  
Capital markets 
In the capital markets, the Stock Exchange of Singapore and SIMEX have demutualised and merged 
to form the Singapore Exchange (SGX). SGX is now listed and has expanded its product offerings to 
include single stock and bond futures, and exchange-traded funds. In the stockbroking industry, with 
the liberalisation of fees and opening up of access, commissions have shrunk. The brokerages have 
been consolidating, upgrading their capabilities and widening their service and product offerings. Now, 
your broker will not only buy and sell shares for you, but may also help you to invest in unit trusts or 
cash management accounts, or give you financial advice. But the restructuring is taking place in a very 
difficult bear market, and the process is not yet complete. 
From the point of view of growing the industry, the results of the liberalisation have been disappointing. 
There has been no post-liberalisation “Big Bang” in the local capital markets. This is partly the result of 
poor  market  conditions  globally,  and  partly  the  way  equities  markets  have  developed.  Unlike  the 
trading of bonds and derivatives, the trading of stocks is mostly confined to their home markets. But 
since there  are  only  a  limited  number of large  Singapore companies  who have not  yet  been  listed, 
Singapore  will  have  to  try  harder  to  bring  in  foreign  listings,  particularly  from  India  and  China.  One 
approach may be for SGX to leverage off Singapore agencies with presence in these countries, like 
EDB and IE Singapore.  
                                                      
1   DBS, OCBC, OUB, UOB, Keppel Bank and Tat Lee Bank. We excluded POSBank as it was technically not a bank. 
2   The Banker, Jul 2002. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2002
 Strategic and proactive approach to development 
In  developing  the  financial  sector,  we  sought  to  target  key  activities  that  would  help  to  make  us  a 
world-class financial centre. Our pro-active approach has yielded results, both in expanding specific 
activities, and more generally in sensitising MAS to the needs of the industry. 
Debt market 
While the equity market has found it hard to grow, we have made some progress with our debt market, 
albeit  starting  from  a  very  low  base.  The  relaxation  of  the  S$  non-internationalisation  restrictions 
helped. We have issued more SGS to increase market liquidity and create a benchmark yield curve3. 
The corporate bond market has also seen significant growth4. Issuers include supra-nationals such as 
the  International  Finance  Corporation  and  the  African  Development  Bank,  well-regarded  corporates 
such as GE Capital, and this year Freddie Mac. Singapore has been included in the JP Morgan and 
Lehman Brothers global bond indices.  
Our challenge now  is to sustain the  growth in the local debt market. We need to  work with market 
participants to broaden the debt markets’ investor base and improve swap market liquidity.  But our 
most difficult problem is that our starting premise has yet to materialise. We had envisaged that as the 
region  recovered,  corporates  and  governments  would  again  need  funding,  and  this  time  their  debt 
funding would be in the form of tradable paper rather than bank loans. This has not happened … yet. 
Wealth management 
Wealth management has been our most successful growth area. Since 1998, Singapore’s total assets 
under management have doubled, no mean feat in this climate. Singapore has overtaken Hong Kong 
in terms of discretionary assets under management. More players, ranging from large institutional fund 
managers  to  boutiques,  have  set  up  shop  in  Singapore.  The  local  fund  management  community  is 
now  more  diverse  and  covers  a  wider  universe  of  investment  styles,  geographic  foci  and  asset 
classes.  
Singapore as a financial centre 
In aggregate, we have made promising headway in a few fields, but Singapore still has not set itself 
apart  decisively  from  other  Asian  financial  centres  like  Hong  Kong  and  Sydney.  Southeast  Asia’s 
predicament has a lot to do with this. In the long term, we have to rely on the region recovering its 
stability and vitality. But meanwhile we must do our best to differentiate ourselves. We offer political 
and  economic  stability,  the  rule  of  law,  efficient  infrastructure  and  a  highly-skilled  professional 
workforce.  These  are  exceptional  attributes,  which  lend  themselves  well  to  activities  like  wealth 
management. We need to find new ways to market them and bring in business. 
Enhancing monetary policy effectiveness 
Our decision to progressively relax restrictions on the use of the  Singapore dollar  was a calculated 
risk.  At  a  time  of  heightened  volatility  in  currency  markets,  it  stood  in  stark  contrast  to  our  regional 
neighbours.  However,  the  liberalisation  has  yielded  dividends.  Our  capital  markets  have  grown  and 
deepened without adversely affecting our ability to manage the exchange rate.  
In practical terms, we have now gone as far as we can to relax the restrictions while still maintaining 
the principle of not-internationalising the Singapore dollar. All but two restrictions have been lifted – 
thou shalt not borrow Singapore dollars to speculate in the currency, and if thou shouldst borrow for 
offshore purposes, then thou shalt either swap or convert  the  Singapore  dollars before taking them 
out.  These  remaining  commandments  are  an  important  signal  that  we  have  not  changed  our 
fundamental  stand  against  outright  speculation  on  the  Singapore  dollar,  even  though  we  have 
permitted nearly all activities of legitimate investors. 
                                                      
3   Today outstanding SGS is about S$53 billion, compared to just over S$20 billion in 1997. 
4   From 1998 to 2001, corporate debt issuance in Singapore has increased eightfold to S$72 billion. 
BIS Review 62/2002 
 5
 The  change  in  our  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  also  been  cautious  and  incremental.  We  have 
progressively become more explicit in stating our assessments and intentions. We now publish MAS’ 
assessments  of  the  state  of  health  of  the  economy  in  the  Macroeconomic  Review,  and  the  factors 
considered  in  each  policy  review  through  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement. We  even  publish  a  chart 
showing the movements in the trade-weighted index, although not our policy band or the trade-weights 
themselves. Enterprising analysts have tried to divine the trade-weights of MAS’ basket of currencies 
from the graph, not totally unsuccessfully. 
This  enhanced  disclosure  has  made  our  monetary  policy  more  effective.  Despite  the  more  volatile 
external  environment  and  the  liberalisation  of  the  use  of  the  Singapore  dollar,  there  has  been  less 
need for MAS to intervene in the markets to manage the exchange rate within our policy band. Greater 
market understanding of  MAS’ thinking, underpinned by sound and credible policies that are  in  line 
with economic fundamentals, have contributed to continued confidence in the Singapore dollar. 
The best defence against speculative attacks remains Singapore’s sound economic fundamentals and 
a  credible  exchange  rate  policy.  MAS  works  with  the  other  economic  agencies  to  manage  and 
preserve  these  economic  fundamentals.  Our  role  is  to  provide  in-depth  assessments  of  economic 
developments and short and medium-term economic outlooks. MAS has developed sectoral leading 
indicators and a new macroeconomic model of Singapore, which help us to better anticipate events 
that could impact our economy, and give us time to work out appropriate policy responses. 
Of course, we must not forget the important deterrent role played by our strong reserves. We have to 
manage the reserves under our charge wisely, to deliver good long-term risk-adjusted rates of return 
while  providing  for  unexpected  demands  on  our  liquidity.  Hence,  we  have  also  strengthened  our 
investment and risk management capabilities to diversify into different instruments and markets. 
Priorities moving forward 
V. 
Going forward, I would sum up our key priorities under five thrusts.  
Managing within a riskier environment 
First, we must manage within a riskier environment. 
The  financial  sector  we  now  supervise  is  more  unforgiving.  Volatile  markets  and  poor  economic 
conditions  have  heightened  the  risks  financial  institutions  face.  Competition  has  put  pressure  on 
margins,  inducing  financial  institutions  to  take  on  more  risk  to  maintain  their  earnings  to  satisfy 
increasingly demanding investors. With liberalisation, our financial sector is no longer sheltered from 
these risks.  
Our response is not to avoid these risks but to learn to manage them. We have to continue enhancing 
our  risk-based  supervisory  capabilities.  The  foundations  are  in  place.  We  need  to  collect  better 
information  and  use  it  more  effectively  to  produce  accurate  risk  profiles  of  the  institutions  we 
supervise. These risk profiles, constantly updated,  will help MAS  to detect  problems early and take 
prompt  corrective  action.  Likewise,  instead  of  preventing  institutions  from  taking  risks,  we  must 
encourage them to better identify, monitor, and control the risks they take. Constant vigilance will help 
institutions to monitor their own status, and pre-empt any deterioration before damage is done, either 
to the institution or worse to the financial system as a whole.  
At the same time, MAS must continue to balance its natural inclination to regulate or supervise away 
what  is new and strange  and  therefore risky,  with the need  to  encourage  the financial sector to be 
more dynamic and innovative. Nowadays when presented with new and ingenious schemes dreamt up 
by investment bankers, my first reaction is often to ask whether it may be too clever to be sound. Such 
scepticism on the part of financial supervisors is natural and healthy, but it should not deter innovation 
or become our dominant mindset. 
More  broadly,  because  of  the  emergence  of  global  financial  conglomerates  and  the  trend  towards 
increasing risk transfers across financial industries, regulators need a holistic understanding of what 
and  where  potential  vulnerabilities  are,  and  how  exogenous  shocks  might  impact  and  permeate 
through  the  financial  system.  MAS  must  therefore  enhance  its  capabilities  in  integrated  supervision 
and financial surveillance. This is more critical as Singapore becomes more closely integrated into the 
global economy.  
6 
 BIS Review 62/2002
 We are also conducting our monetary policy in an environment of increased market uncertainty. Our 
exchange  rate  policy  band  should  certainly  be  supported  by  sound  fiscal  and  macroeconomic 
fundamentals. But at the same time our policy should be both proactive and pre-emptive, to sustain 
non-inflationary  growth  despite  volatile  market  conditions. We  therefore  need  good  financial  market 
intelligence  to  keep  abreast  of  market  dynamics,  shifts  in  market  sentiment  as  well  as  large-scale 
capital flows that are potentially destabilising. We have had a fairly easy ride managing our exchange 
rate so far. However, this does not mean that the markets will never try to attack the Singapore dollar, 
or that if they do it will not gravely harm our economy.  
Strengthen partnership with industry 
Second, we must strengthen our partnership with industry. 
The industry plays an important part in all of MAS’ initiatives. MAS needs a good understanding of how 
the market works, whether in supervising the financial sector or in managing the exchange rate. We 
must always be able to see our policies from the private sector’s point of view. What does it mean to 
them? Does it reflect how the market really works? How burdensome will our requirements be? Can 
players get around our policy intent? And how do we prevent that? But however hard we try, we will 
still be at one remove from the market practitioners themselves. The private sector will have the best 
knowledge of industry developments and emerging trends. MAS would continue to tap into this wealth 
of knowledge through systematic and constructive consultation with industry.  
For a start, MAS has introduced guidelines to formalise public consultation as a standard procedure 
whenever significant changes in our regulatory framework are planned. This is a valuable approach 
which should be extended to all facets of MAS’ dealings with industry. Industry feedback will help us 
refine our policy and avoid mistakes and unintended consequences.  
Our contacts with industry need not be confined to Singapore. More often than not, business decisions 
that affect Singapore are made in the head offices. Where possible, we should extend our presence 
and reach by linking up with institutions and organisations worldwide.  
Deepen talent pool 
Third, we need to deepen the talent pool in the financial sector. 
The vibrancy of Singapore’s financial centre is dependent on this. Without the trained talent, it will be 
very hard to persuade financial institutions to site new activities in Singapore. MAS must continue its 
efforts  to  build  up  and  upgrade  this  talent  pool.  While  MAS  is  already  co-funding  financial  skills 
training, we also need to extend our efforts into improving the quality and quantity of financial training 
and  research  conducted  in  Singapore.  One  possibility  is  to  set  up  specialised  financial  service 
institutes  in  Singapore  to  teach  both  the  art  and  science  of  finance,  for  example  in  wealth 
management.  
At the same time, the local talent pool must also be supplemented by infusions of fresh blood from 
abroad.  Singapore  must  continue  with  its  open  door  policy  to  attract  talented  professionals  to  work 
here. 
Another means of deepening the overall talent pool is through greater circulation of talent between the 
public and private sectors. MAS has actively hired from industry in order to build up its expertise. This 
has  enhanced  our  understanding  of  the  commercial  environment  and  invigorated  our  organisation. 
Just as MAS has gained from such insider insight, industry too needs its share of talent. Through the 
mixing  of  talent  between  the  public  and  private  sectors,  industry  will  also  come  to  understand  the 
intent and thinking behind MAS’ policies and actions. Over time, this will lead to a healthier and more 
constructive  relationship  where  MAS  and  industry  together  work  toward  developing  Singapore  as  a 
world-class financial centre.  
Enhance market discipline 
Fourth, we need to continue to enhance market discipline.  
The  easy  part  is  to  establish  and  enforce  the  right  rules  for  disclosure  and  corporate  governance. 
Getting companies to internalise  and abide by  the spirit of tighter rules  will take longer, though  our 
standards of disclosure are already quite good compared to other countries. The most difficult part will 
BIS Review 62/2002 
 7
 be enhancing consumer education and awareness, without which, as I noted earlier, disclosure and 
caveat emptor cannot work.  
We do not need to convert the entire population into Chartered Financial Analysts. But we must help 
the  public  to  understand  basic  finance  and  investment  concepts,  and  to  make  effective  use  of  the 
information  that  is  available.  They  also  need  to  understand  that  investing  is  for  the  long  term  and 
should be based on fundamental analysis.  
This requires a collective  effort on the part of MAS,  industry bodies and consumer groups. It is not 
MAS’ role to front all investor education – this is where industry bodies and consumer groups come in. 
However, MAS will need to act as a catalyst to increase the focus on investor education in the financial 
sector.  MAS  can  set  out  clear  directions  for  industry,  do  more  to  explain  its  own  market  conduct 
regulation to  investors and consumers, work with industry and other  partners to co-ordinate current 
education efforts and, where relevant, co-fund with industry new investor education initiatives.  
Focusing and targeting our development efforts 
Fifth, we need to focus and target our development efforts. 
Despite the adverse environment, there are still opportunities for Singapore. The Financial Services 
Working  Group  (FSWG)  set  up  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  has  identified  three  promising  areas: 
wealth management, universal processing centres and an Asia Risk Exchange.  
In  identifying  wealth  management,  the  Working  Group  has  reaffirmed  a  key  thrust  of  our 
developmental  efforts.  It  has  gone  on  to  single  out  alternative  assets,  such  as  private  equity  and 
hedge funds, as areas for development. Universal processing centres and the Asia Risk Exchange will 
be two new fields for Singapore,  where Singapore’s efficiency, technology and infrastructure will be 
important  strengths.  For  universal  processing  centres  we  need  to  consolidate  global  transactional 
flows into Singapore. The Asia Risk Exchange will combine Singapore’s existing insurance and capital 
market  expertise  into  a  new  physical  vehicle  for  the  transfer  of  large  and  sophisticated  risks.  It  will 
complement Singapore’s risk transfer capabilities and fill a market gap for risk transfer in the Asian 
time zone.  
Singapore needs to move quickly on these initiatives. In wealth management, we must build on our 
existing  base  of  asset  managers  as  well  as  broaden  our  scope  of  activities  to  include  alternative 
assets. I am encouraged that the industry has expressed interest in the Universal Processing Centre 
and the Asia Risk Exchange, and MAS will actively support their efforts. 
Conclusion 
VI. 
Although the Asian Crisis was followed by even more difficult conditions than we had expected, MAS 
has  shown  that  we  can  embrace  change  while  coping  with  an  adverse  environment.  So  has  our 
financial  industry.  In  the  current  mood  of  doom  and  gloom,  we  should  take  a  contrarian  view  and 
maintain our confidence and resolve. The changes that we are now pursuing will help us to cope with 
the current difficulties, and prepare us to pick up again as soon as the outlook improves. It may take 
some time, but we are on the right track to making Singapore as a world-class financial centre. 
8 
 BIS Review 62/2002
