 Tanya Sirivedhin: The New Capital Accord and E-Banking 
Opening  remarks  by  Mrs  Tanya  Sirivedhin,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  FSI 
Workshop for SEANZA's Forum for Banking Supervisors, Chiang Mai, Thailand, 3-7 December 2001.  
 Distinguished Resource Persons and Participants,  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I would like to take this opportunity to personally extend a warm welcome to everyone here today, and 
to  express  our  deepest  appreciation  to  our  distinguished  speakers  and  panelists  who  have  kindly 
agreed to share with us their knowledge and experience concerning the New Capital Accord and E-
Banking.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, for their efforts in co-hosting this workshop on frontier issues.  
As  is  well  known,  the  New  Capital  Accord  is  scheduled  for  implementation  in  2005.  Reflecting 
comments on the second consultative package, the draft third consultative package is scheduled for 
release early next year. Judging from the comments submitted in May, the new draft promises to be 
interesting  and  controversial.  This  is  not  surprising  since  it  will  mark  what  will  be  no  less  than  the 
beginning of a worldwide revolution in the way financial institutions are managed, and especially how 
risks are supervised. The sophistication that comes with enhanced risk-sensitive capital charge should 
be  an  important  incentive  to  drive  financial  institutions  around  the  world  to  upgrade  their  expertise, 
organizational structure, database, IT system, and most of all their risk management process.  
Speaking  from  Thailand's  own  experiences  and  limitations,  we  realize  that  both  planned  and 
unforeseen challenges will mark our path towards eventual compliance. As such, we have taken some 
initial steps to check the readiness of financial institutions to conform to the credit risk guidelines under 
the  New  Capital  Accord.  A  full  impact  analysis  will  be  conducted  next  year.  Going  some  way  to 
prepare for the more sophisticated methodology embodied in the New Capital Accord's treatment of 
credit and operational risk, we are requiring, as a first step in the same spirit, that financial institutions 
calculate market risk capital charge in 2002. Actual  capital requirement  will be made, tentatively,  in 
2003. Although the complexity of credit risk and internal rating approach will add new difficulties even 
after market risk is mastered, we believe this step will serve to focus the attention of top management 
of financial institutions and supervisors, ensuring they will stay alert to other complexities that follow.  
In this connection, we would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Roland Raskopf and Mr. Jason 
George,  who  last  October  were  kind  enough  to  give  Thailand's  banking  community  excellent,  and 
much appreciated, presentations on market risk, after which we received many calls from awakened 
private bankers for advice on how to plan the adoption in their banks.  
I should also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to Mr. George, who spent three 
years at the Bank of Thailand as consultant to help us build up our supervisory capacity. Among other 
things,  he  helped  to  guide  us  and  our  banking  industry  through  several  hundreds  of  pages  of  New 
Accord documents. You should be proud that many of our people continue to refer to your advice and 
work standard which challenge us to tackle our own regulatory framework. Indeed, both of you have 
been an inspiration, and we expect you to do at least that in this coming week.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Our common goal is to devise a comprehensible and methodical road map through a steep learning 
curve, in order to build up risk management expertise. This will place us on a sound footing, necessary 
for  meeting  the  challenges  of  credit  risk  models  in  the  Internal  Ratings  Based,  or  IRB,  approach. 
Therefore expertise and database concerns remain formidable tasks toward IRB compliance.  
Although there is no need for me to say this, given the credentials of this audience, the New Capital 
Accord is quite daunting for regulators. But fortunately, or rather unfortunately, depending on how one 
looks at it, globalization and technological development mean that none of us are alone in this journey. 
This seminar is an important testimonial to the case in point. It is with great hope and expectation that 
through  cooperation,  pitfalls  will  be  avoided,  and  success  only  a  few  policy  measures,  studies, 
committees, and sub-committees away. This reflects the new emphasis on supervisory coordination. 
Once the system is up and running, supervisory coordination in terms of exchange of information, say 
BIS Review 102/2001 
 1
 on risk model validation, will also be crucial. For this reason, seminars such as this also serve to build 
useful networks.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let  me  turn  now  towards  the  second  topic  at  hand,  the  issues  surrounding  new  technological 
development, that is, E-Banking. Indeed the key driver of the financial landscape in the past decade 
has been technology. Innovations, both in finance and IT, have changed the boundaries of financial 
institutions'  businesses,  spurred  vertical  as  well  as  horizontal  integration  in  financial  industry  and 
related industries, increasing the numbers of mergers and acquisitions, and in turn, revolutionized the 
regulatory  boundary  conceptually  and  geographically.  In  short,  the  definition  of  what  is  a  financial 
institution is being challenged.  
Advancements in technology have ramifications for real applications in many Thai businesses, and the 
banking industry is no exception. Changes in consumer lifestyle are amongst major factors pushing 
financial institutions to implement technology-based services that will deliver traditional transactions in 
a more timely and convenient manner. Such a trend is evidenced by the fact that many Thai banks 
have invested a significant amount of resources modifying their technology systems to support new 
on-line services and to enhance efficiency and cost-effectiveness of their operations. A new dimension 
of  competition  has  also  emerged  in  the  form  of  non-bank  providers,  begging  the  question  of  valid 
regulatory framework and forcing us to rethink our definition of financial institution and role of central 
banks  
E-Banking  represents  a  new  challenge  to  the  overall  competitiveness  of  the  banking  industry. 
Notwithstanding the inherent risks of this cyber reality, potential benefits from such services are likely 
to outweigh its costs, and therefore we must resign ourselves to the role of supporting and nurturing 
this  new  tool.  Such  parental  support  will  continue  to  include  our  duties  toward  systemic  security, 
consumer  protection,  risk  management,  and  privacy.  Thus,  E-Banking  fits  the  a  regulator's  age-old 
conundrum of striking the right balance between regulatory oversight and innovation.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I hope that I have presented to you an abbreviated version of the common challenge we all face. It is 
my hope that this seminar will provide us all with the opportunity to dip into the vast pool of knowledge 
possessed  by  our  resource  persons  to  provide  us  with  new-found  understandings,  essential  for 
strengthening our interconnected financial infrastructure, as well as close network.  
Lastly, I hope you will have some time to see the beautiful Chiang Mai, orchid of the North.  
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  declare  the  opening  of  this  "SEANZA Workshop  on  the  New  Capital 
Accord and E-Banking."  
Thank you.  
2 
 
BIS Review 102/2001
