 Seung Park: Economic situation and monetary policy in Korea 
Contribution  by  Mr  Seung  Park,  Governor  of 
24 September 2003. 
the  Bank  of  Korea, 
to 
the  Korea  Times, 
 The Korean economic situation and outlook 
1. 
From  early  this  year,  Korea  has  been  experiencing  the  most  difficult  economic  situation  since 
overcoming  the  1997  currency  crisis.  Last  year(cid:146)s  strong  GDP  growth  of  6.3  percent  was  achieved 
against  the  backdrop  of  the  depressed  world  economy.  This  year,  though,  Korean  GDP  grew  only 
3.7 percent in the first quarter compared to the same period of the previous year before sliding further 
to 1.9 percent in the second quarter. Although economic activity appears not to have worsened from 
its trough in the second quarter, no clearly marked recovery trend has yet become evident. 
This lackluster economic performance came primarily from unfavorable external factors. The recovery 
of  major  economies  worldwide  and  most  significantly  that  of  the  U.S.  proved  to  be  delayed. 
Uncertainty  also  mounted  in  response  to  the  war  in  Iraq,  the  North  Korean  nuclear  issue  and  the 
widespread  outbreak  of  SARS  within  East  and  Southeast  Asia.  Unsurprisingly,  domestic  demand 
contracted greatly, particularly in the form of consumption and facilities investment. 
Lately, external conditions have been showing a gradual improvement. After the early end to the war 
in Iraq, the economies of the U.S. and Japan have shown clear signs of a recovery. Euroland has not 
yet shaken off its recession, but there too indicators of consumer and business confidence are picking 
up. China is again seeing strong economic growth now that SARS has been contained. All in all, the 
general outlook for the global economy is brightening. In addition, hopes are growing that the North 
Korean nuclear issue can be peacefully resolved as, prompted by the holding of multilateral talks, all 
the countries involved have stepped up their efforts to bring this about. 
The effects of the various pump-priming measures taken by the Bank of Korea and the government 
are expected to become progressively more tangible. For its part, the Bank of Korea has lowered its 
policy  rate  twice  this  year.  Meanwhile,  fiscal  expenditure  is  being  expanded  by  the  drawing-up  and 
approval of a 4.5 trillion-won (nearly 38 billion-U.S. dollar) supplementary budget. Measures to reduce 
the tax burden have also been taken including the lowering of the rate of special excise tax and the 
granting of increased tax credits for investment. 
Given the upturn in global conditions and the emerging effects of the economic stimulation package, 
the Korean economy is expected to move onto a moderate recovery track in the near future, though 
there may be some impact from the damage inflicted by the recent typhoon. 
The problems we confront, though, are by no means simple. Above all else, we have the issue of the 
high social costs exemplified by the recent confrontation between labor unions and employers and the 
prevalence  of  actions  placing  the  interests  of  vested  interest  groups  above  those  of  society  as  a 
whole. The timely resolution of this conundrum is crucial to the long-term health and viability  of the 
country(cid:146)s  economy.  We  also  have  to  tackle  the  potential  threats  to  financial  stability  including  the 
mounting number of Koreans on credit blacklists, swelling overdue loans in the household sector and 
the frail management status of certain financial institutions. 
One of the characteristics of Korean society inherited from a history of adversity is that when people 
share the perception that the country faces a crisis, they unite as one in enduring whatever hardship it 
takes  to  overcome  it. This  was  the  wellspring  from which  Korea  drew  the  strength  to  surmount  the 
currency crisis. And helped by these social dynamics, Koreans will, I am confident, deal skillfully with 
the  present  challenges.  There  are  already  signs  that  a  social  consensus  has  been  reached  on  the 
need  to  overcome  the  problems  that  I  have  mentioned  for  the  good  of  the  Korean  economy.  The 
government is now also directing its attention toward curing the evil of spiralling social costs. 
Monetary policy 
2. 
In the light of the shifting economic environment, the Bank of Korea has conducted monetary policy so 
as to support the economic recovery while smoothing out the internal and external disequilibria. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 Early this year, because of the current account moving into the red and the upward price pressures 
brought about by the steep run-up of international oil prices, we had difficulties in making use of the 
interest rate policy lever to deal with the downturn in economic activities. We therefore left our target 
rate, the overnight call rate, on hold. 
But the current account shifted into surplus and price movements settled down once international oil 
prices showed downward stability following the early end of the war in Iraq. For this year as a whole, 
too, our forecasts pointed  to core inflation  being held stable  within its target range at the 3 percent 
level and to the current account maintaining its underlying surplus trend since the 1997 currency crisis. 
Under these circumstances, the Bank of Korea moved to revive business and consumer confidence. In 
May and again in July, it reduced its overnight call rate by 50 basis points in all, bringing it down to its 
present historically low level of 3.75 percent. 
A number of actions have also been taken by the Bank of Korea to stabilize the financial markets. It 
has  ensured  an  adequate  supply  of  liquidity  through  open  market  operations  in  order  to  counter 
temporary  financial  market  unease.  This  emerged  in  March  following  the  revelation  of  accounting 
malpractices  at  a  few  large  companies  and  worries  about  credit  card  companies  going  under.  It 
resurfaced in June when the staff of Chohung Bank went on strike. 
The  Bank  of  Korea  will  continue  to  adopt  a  (cid:147)look  at  everything  approach(cid:148)  in  the  future,  taking  into 
overall  account  the  impact  of  changing  conditions  at  home  and  abroad  on  growth,  prices  and  the 
balance of payments. In the course of conducting monetary policy, particular attention will be paid to 
alleviating potential risk factors including household debt so as to ensure the stability of the financial 
markets. 
From  the  start  of  next  year,  the  revised  Bank  of  Korea  Act  will  come  into  effect,  substantially 
increasing  the  Bank  of  Korea(cid:146)s  powers  and  its  degree  of  independence.  Under  the  revised  central 
banking legislation, the existing practice of setting an inflation target every year will be replaced by a 
medium-term 
increased 
responsibilities  for  the  comprehensive  management  and  oversight  of  the  payments  and  settlements 
system. In keeping with its heightened role, the Bank of Korea will strive even harder to be effective in 
achieving the twin goals of its monetary policy: macroeconomic stability and financial stability. 
targeting  system.  The  central  bank 
is  also  given  greatly 
inflation 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
