 J(cid:252)rgen Stark: EMU - recent developments 
Opening  address  by  Dr  J(cid:252)rgen  Stark,  Vice  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  CEPR/ESI 
Conference  on  (cid:147)The  Euro  Area  as  an  Economic  Entity(cid:148),  hosted  by  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  in 
Eltville, 12 September 2003. 
 I am very pleased to welcome you here at the Bundesbank(cid:146)s Training Centre on the occasion of the 
seventh CEPR/ESI Conference. 
It is important that academics meet with central bank staff. On the one hand, these meetings can help 
to  convey  new  ideas  to  monetary  policymakers.  On  the  other  hand,  these  ideas  should  also  be 
scrutinised by more practice-oriented economists. Such meetings also serve the mutual understanding 
of one another and help to clear up misunderstandings.  
I  consider  these  meetings  especially  valuable  because  academics  should  increasingly  confront 
themselves  with  practical  questions  and  day-to-day  policy  making.  In  turn,  central  bankers  are  too 
closely watched to allow themselves to fall behind the curve of academic thinking.  
Only a few years ago, the title of this conference would have had a question mark at the end. This is 
no longer necessary. The euro area, with the highest possible degree of monetary policy integration, is 
indeed  an  economic  entity,  but  obviously  not  a  political  entity.  The  political  regime  consists  of  a 
centralised monetary policy and decentralised, but coordinated, economic and budgetary policies. This 
institutional setting is challenging. It is a unique but appropriate concept tailored to European needs.  
We  all  know,  the  euro  area  did  not  become  an  economic  entity  overnight.  This  fascinating 
development has its roots in a much broader process initiated in Europe almost half a century ago. 
The convergence which has taken place in the run-up to monetary union and beyond is impressive. 
However, this process of European integration is far from complete and is still evolving. 
Let me now turn to more recent developments. Naturally, the conference will touch upon crucial issues 
arising after the first five years of the third stage of European Monetary Union (EMU).  
In  order  to  stimulate  the  discussion,  allow  me  to  make  a  few  comments  from  the  vantage  point  of 
someone involved in the practical sphere of monetary union: I will comment: 
   firstly on the ways the perception of monetary policy within the euro area has evolved; 
secondly on converging or diverging growth and inflation rates; and  
finally on what we have learned up to now with regard to policy coordination and the Stability 
and Growth Pact. 
Monetary policy 
1. 
In the past some rather critical statements have been made by academics belonging to the Centre for 
Economic  Policy  Research  with  regard  to  monitoring  the  ECB.  At  times  one  actually  had  the 
impression that the ECB came off much worse than other central banks. These criticisms ranged from 
those  on  individual  measures  taken  by  the  ECB  - or  it  refrained  to  take -  to  questions  of 
communication and strategy. Concerns, for example, were voiced about the role of monetary growth in 
the ECB(cid:146)s strategy. There were also many calls for a more precise definition of the term price stability. 
Another favourite pastime seems to have been the hunt to dismantle at last the unpopular Stability and 
Growth Pact.  
Since  reviewing  its  strategy  this  year,  the  ECB  has  been  making  efforts  to  clarify  some 
misunderstandings which have emerged in its communication with the public. It was made clear that 
with regard to price stability, the ECB was striving to maintain a medium-term inflation rate of below 
but  close  to  2%.  Furthermore,  it  was  stressed  that  money  has  to  be  evaluated  with  respect  to  the 
long-term  relationship  between  monetary  growth  and  price  dynamics.  The  (cid:147)monetary  analysis(cid:148)  will 
complement the (cid:147)economic analysis(cid:148), which is more relevant in the short to medium term.  
BIS Review 40/2003 
 1
 I  have  the  impression  that,  in  general,  these  clarifications  were  well  received.  I  hope  that  the 
conference today and tomorrow will help to shed some light on other important issues within the euro 
area as well.  
Business cycles and inflation differentials 
2. 
The  introduction  of  the  euro  was  linked  to  the  expectation  that  the  business  cycles  of  the  member 
states  would  converge  more  closely.  Furthermore,  a  decoupling  from  the  US  business  cycle  was 
expected since the euro area has only a marginally higher degree of openness than the United States. 
The  diversion  of  growth  rates  among  member  states  has  declined  recently.  Unfortunately  this 
represents a convergence towards Germany(cid:146)s stagnating growth figures - and not towards the faster 
expanding euro area countries, as would actually have been desirable.  
Contrary to expectations at the outset of monetary union, the business cycles of the euro area and the 
US  seem  to  be  still  closely  correlated.  Economic  globalisation  has  increased  international  linkages 
through various channels such as trade, foreign direct investment flows, globalised financial markets 
and interlinked business expectations. But the most significant point is that shocks to confidence such 
as the bursting of the high-tech equity bubble and the terrorist attacks have hit capital markets to a 
similar extent all over the world.  
A  lack  of  convergence  is  revealed  by  the  sustained  differentials  in  inflation  among  the  euro  area(cid:146)s 
member states. It is true that these differentials are fairly small in comparison to the first half of the 
1990s.  However,  following  a  substantial  convergence  in  the  run-up  to  EMU,  inflation  differentials 
widened again.  
Divergent  economic  developments  are  apparent  in  other  currency  areas,  too,  such  as  in  the  USA, 
without  monetary  policymakers  being  able  to  address  this  issue.  Monetary  policy  has  to  be  geared 
towards  the  data  for  the  currency  area  as  a  whole.  It  cannot  address  regional  policy  problems. 
Otmar Issing  once  coined  that  quite  succinctly  -  (cid:147)one  size  must  fit  all!(cid:148)  The  member  states  had  to 
accept  that  fact  when  they  joined  the  third  stage  of  European  economic  and  monetary  union.  If 
persistent  diverging  trends  emerge,  either  they  have  to  be  accepted,  or,  if  detrimental  economic 
consequences  result,  measures  need  to  be  taken  at  the  national  level.  However,  interest  rate 
differentials also reflect the adjustment of the real exchange rate. 
But I do not want to elaborate much on inflation differentials. This issue will be covered in depth in 
tomorrow(cid:146)s policy lecture by my colleague, Hermann Remsperger. 
Policy coordination and Stability and Growth Pact 
3. 
The  asymmetry  of  political  responsibilities  in  EMU  makes  a  comprehensive  system  of  coordination 
procedures  indispensable.  I  believe  this  is  undisputed.  The  rationale  arises  from  the  need  to  take 
account of the spill-over effects from national economic policies. Consequently, the EC-Treaty obliges 
member states to consider national economic policies (cid:147)as a matter of common concern(cid:148) and subject 
them to multilateral procedures.  
Of all the coordination mechanisms, name recognition is highest for the Stability and Growth Pact. The 
Pact  may  not  be  popular  in  all  places,  but  at  least  it  is  well  known,  albeit  not  well  understood 
everywhere. I will later on try to illustrate why I remain an ardent advocate of the Pact. 
However,  the  core  coordination  instrument  are  the  broad  economic  policy  guidelines  (BEPG).  They 
contain the principal policy objectives and measures. They build the overarching structure for the more 
specialised coordination and consultation procedures. The guidelines make specific recommendations 
to each member state and to the Community and are endorsed by the Heads of State or Government. 
However, they are politically but not legally binding and there are no really effective instruments for 
enforcing their implementation. Due to the medium and long-term nature of many recommendations, 
measuring  progress  concerning  implementation  has  become  the  main  focus  of  the  Commission(cid:146)s 
work.  
2 
 BIS Review 40/2003
 The specific coordination processes are: 
   The  Luxembourg  process  (1997),  which  aims  to  create  more  employment.  It  consists  of 
employment  guidelines  which  have  to  be  implemented  by  (cid:147)national  action  plans(cid:148)  on 
employment and are monitored by the Commission.  
The Cardiff process (1998), which is intended to enhance structural reforms in the member 
states and their multilateral monitoring to create (cid:147)peer pressure(cid:148) among them.  
The Cologne process (1999), which established a (cid:147)macroeconomic dialogue(cid:148) at Community 
level  with  representatives  of  governments,  ECB  and  trade  unions  involved.  This  dialogue 
aims  not  to  achieve  an  ex-ante  coordination  of  economic  policies,  but  the  exchange  of 
information and views on economic developments.  
These processes were enhanced in 2000 by the (cid:147)Lisbon-strategy(cid:148) with its (cid:147)new strategic goal(cid:148) for the 
next decade, that is (cid:147)to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the 
world, capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion(cid:148). 
A very important conclusion in Lisbon was that no more coordination processes are needed and that 
the  existing  processes  should  be  simplified.  It  is  also  very  reasonable  that  the  BEPGs  now  focus 
increasingly  on  structural  policies.  That  can  be  a  vantage  point  for  the  coordination  processes  to 
accomplish better-then-expected results in future. Up to now, it has been difficult to detect a noticeable 
impact from these various coordination processes on the convergence among member states.  
Within  the  framework  of  the  Luxembourg  process,  governments  did  not  meet  their  commitments  to 
enhance employment. Unemployment is increasing again and is not significantly lower than in 1997. In 
keeping  with  wage  autonomy,  governments  simply  cannot  impose  any  guidelines  that  regulate 
negotiations between management and trade unions. Up to now, the Cardiff process has led to only 
limited  progress,  if  at  all,  on  structural  reforms  in  larger  economies.  The  Cologne  process  seems 
unnecessary  to  me.  In  my  judgement,  all  these  processes  have  been  little  more  than  bureaucratic 
exercises. 
What are the reasons? 
   after convergence efforts in the run up to the third stage of EMU: adjustment fatigue; 
the willingness for further progress on integration has lost steam; 
political behaviour has not adapted to the new environment. 
The integration of Europe is linked to the readiness to curb national sovereignty. The lasting success 
of  the  euro  cannot  be  achieved  solely  through  monetary  policy.  The  success  relies  as  well  on  the 
support of the fiscal, labour and structural policies of member states. However, coordination should not 
be  understood  as  a  substitute  for  the  responsibility  of  policymakers  at  the  national  level.  The 
decentralised  approach  offers  scope  for  healthy  policy  competition.  (cid:147)Best  practice(cid:148)  should  prevail. 
Furthermore,  from  a  political-economy  viewpoint,  coordination  is  an  extremely  helpful  instrument  to 
implement unpopular but necessary policy measures at the national level. 
The Stability and Growth Pact is part of the foundation of economic and monetary union. But some 
governments  act  as  if  they  bore  no  overall  responsibility  for  this  political  project  of  European 
integration. The ongoing debate on so called (cid:147)reform(cid:148) or on relaxing the terms of the pact has already 
damaged the foundation and  will jeopardise the functioning of monetary  union  in the medium term. 
However, it was in fact, a great achievement to adopt self-imposed budgetary rules in order to support 
monetary policy and to prevent a repetition of the problems of the 1970s. Furthermore, the Stability 
and Growth Pact is dealing with the challenges of ageing populations.  
A critical assessment has to be made, I feel, concerning those initiatives - some of which have already 
been  implemented  -  that  aim  to  refine  the  rules  of  the  pact.  As  a  result,  these  rules,  which  were 
originally straightforward and transparent, are becoming increasingly complex and opaque. Even so, 
the debate is continuing down the same road. The proposals contained in the Sapir Report of June 
2003, which would allow an overshooting of the 3% criterion not only in (cid:147)severe recessions(cid:148), but also 
given almost any decline in economic performance, would dilute the Stability and Growth Pact to the 
point where the fiscal policy rules are no longer recognisable. 
I agree with Otmar Issing: the real problem is not any supposed lack of flexibility in the pact, but the 
failure of some large economies in the euro area to make use of growth phases towards sound and 
sustainable  fiscal  positions,  like  others  did.  The  current  difficulties  should  therefore  not  tempt 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 3
 politicians to relax the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact but to apply the rules strictly. The pact is, 
after  all,  not  an  end  in  itself.  It  is  in  the  very  interest  of  member  states  and  their  people.  The 
consolidation of public finances is indispensable, not least in view of the to be expected strains and 
burdens on future generations from demographic changes. 
The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  should  be  seen  as  part  of  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  avoid 
pro-cyclical behaviour, to create sufficient budgetary  safety margins and to attain sustainable public 
finance. I know it will be difficult to achieve, but I would very much welcome your support in convincing 
both the public and politicians that the principles and procedures for budgetary policy in the Treaty and 
in the Stability and Growth Pact are vital for the success of Economic and Monetary Union. 
I believe I am on common ground in stating that from a theoretical perspective, the impact of fiscal 
policy on the economy is rather uncertain. Empirical evidence generally points to a positive but low 
impact  of  an  expansionary  policy  on  output.  Therefore,  the  power  of  fiscal  policy  to  reduce  cyclical 
volatility or to stimulate the economy should not be overestimated.  
Discretionary fiscal measures have proved to be ill-suited for fine-tuning the economy in the past. Due 
to  time-lags  it  has  often  lead  to  a  pro-cyclical  impact  on  the  economy.  Moreover,  asymmetric 
behaviour  in  recessions  and  booms  has  contributed  to  deteriorating  public  finances  in  the  last 
decades.  
Instead, structural reforms directed at improving price and wage flexibility and the mobility of labour 
could strengthen other channels of stabilisation.  
To sum up, by ensuring sound fiscal positions and emphasising the role of automatic fiscal stabilisers 
in dampening cyclical fluctuations, the EC-Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact form an adequate 
framework for fiscal policy in monetary union. The pact is not a curse but a blessing. 
And on a personal note, I would like to add that the very constituting principle of all democracies is the 
rule  of  law.  It  means  that  government  in  all  its  actions  is  bound  by  rules  fixed  and  announced 
beforehand.  The  rule  of  law  lays  down  the  primacy  of  law  over  policy.  Governments  which  do  not 
uphold this principle offend against the fundamentals of modern societies and risk a substantial loss of 
confidence. This holds true for Argentina(cid:146)s arrears to the IMF and for attempts of EU-Countries to not 
comply with the spirit and letter of the EC-Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact.  
The latter is especially disturbing, because the rule of law in modern societies seems to be a French 
invention. It is based on the principle of separation of powers which was formulated as early as 1748 
by the great French political philosopher, Montesquieu. Moreover, it was the French people who first 
realised this concept in continental Europe. A government breaching the law leads down the slippery 
slope from which escape is extremely difficult to find. 
I would also like to draw your attention to a paper Hermann Remsperger and I have written on the 
importance of budgetary rules and on the criticism of the Stability and Growth Pact. Up to now there is 
only a German version but the English translation is already in preparation and will be available in a 
few days on our website.  
My experience tells me that central bankers and academics alike are willing to listen and to learn. The 
ability and willingness to comprehend is decisive for the success of this conference.  
My  most  important  task  today  is  to  award  the  CEPR/ESI  prize  for  the  best  central  bank  research 
paper.  Of  the  numerous  papers  submitted,  Gert  Peersman(cid:146)s  paper  entitled  (cid:147)What  caused  the  early 
millennium slowdown? Evidence based on vector autoregressions(cid:148) was deemed to be the best. The 
paper  attempts  to  answer  this  difficult  question  by  academic  means.  At  the  same  time,  the  paper 
demonstrates to what extent our answers are determined by the respective method of analysis used. 
Mr Peersman, I congratulate you on receiving this award. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2003
