 John Hurley: The monetary policy and operational framework of the 
Eurosystem 
Address by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to ACI Ireland (Financial Market 
Association), Dublin, 12 February 2003. 
 Introduction 
I welcome the opportunity to address you here tonight. The ACI plays an important role in representing 
the  interest  of  financial  markets  and  in  actively  promoting  the  educational  interests  of  its members. 
This  raises  the  level  of  professionalism  of  the  members  and  contributes  to  the  smooth  and  orderly 
operation of financial markets.  
I would like to concentrate this evening on the ECB dimension of the work of the Bank. I will begin by 
talking about the work of the Governing Council, and then go on to focus on monetary policy. Finally, I 
will talk about monetary policy implementation and the role that Ireland has played in the process.  
Since I became a member of the Governing Council, I have been struck by two things in particular. 
The first is the breadth of its activities. Admittedly what are described as its basic tasks go well beyond 
the primary functions of the ECB. Still the range and depth of discussion in such areas as payment 
and settlement systems, foreign reserve management, production and issue of bank notes, statistics 
and so on was quite surprising; and this was following lengthy and detailed preparatory work by the 
Executive Board and by the twelve committees that work to the Governing Council. 
Secondly, there is the democratic way in which the Governing Council goes about its business. In a 
sense one should not be surprised by this; the Statute of the ESCB provides for each member to have 
one  vote  and  specifically  restricts  weighted  voting  to  financial  matters,  and  Treaty  Article  107  is 
designed to ensure that Governors are not influenced by national considerations. But I am impressed 
by  the  manner  in  which  these  principles  are  observed  in  practice.  Certainly  there  is  no  sense  of 
Governors operating in a representative capacity when addressing Euro area policies. Equally, it is the 
force of an argument, rather than who makes it, that commands respect.  
Currently we are preparing for the accession of ten countries to the EU, their participation in ERM II 
and their ultimate adoption of the euro. I should emphasise that this process will not fundamentally 
alter the procedure that I have just described. However, future expansions of the euro area require a 
change in voting modalities, with the introduction of the rotation of voting rights, in order to maintain 
efficiency  in  the  decision-making  process.  The  proposal  is  that  Governors  should  be  allocated 
eventually to three groups, with the voting frequencies in these groups determined in such a way as to 
ensure that, at any time, the euro area economy is adequately represented by those Governors having 
the right to vote. The first group will be composed of the five largest countries; Germany, France, Italy, 
Spain and, in time, if it joins the euro area, the UK, will all be members of this group. Ireland will be in 
the second group, along with countries such as the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Finland, Greece, 
Portugal and some of the larger accession countries. The remaining accession countries will all be in 
the third group. But all Governors, whatever their voting rights, will continue to attend meetings of the 
Governing Council and to participate fully in its discussions. What is more, should voting prove to be 
necessary – and it has not played a significant role in the Governing Council to date – each vote will 
carry exactly the same weight.  
Prospects a year ago 
Interest  rates  are,  of  course,  the  main  focus  of  attention  –  and  rightly  so,  given  the  ECB’s  primary 
objective  of  maintaining  price  stability.  While  a  decision  was  taken  in  late  2001  to  reserve  the  first 
meeting of the month for monetary policy discussions, such issues are never far from the thoughts of 
Governors. Indeed, we are currently engaged in a review of the monetary policy strategy, which has 
been in place since the start of EMU. As you are aware, the strategy is currently based on two pillars, 
namely  money  supply  growth  vis-à-vis  a  reference  value  and  a  broad  range  of  non-monetary 
indicators  geared  to  predict  the  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation.  After  four  years  of  operating  the 
present strategy, it makes sense to take stock of our experience so far and to reflect on its various 
BIS Review 7/2003 
 1
 elements. But the fact that a review is being held does not in itself necessarily imply any significant 
change in the strategy.  
A year ago, the background to monetary policy was – somewhat depressingly – not dissimilar to that 
obtaining at present. The general expectation was that there would be a gradual recovery of euro area 
economic activity over the course of 2002. Taking the year as a whole, while growth was projected to 
be modest – of the order of 1.2 per cent - the euro area economy was expected to attain its trend rate 
of growth by the end of the year. The view was that domestic demand should benefit from a number of 
influences; the absence of fundamental economic imbalances that would require a lengthy corrective 
process,  the  presence  of  favourable  financing  conditions,  and  a  boost  to  real  disposable  incomes 
coming from declining consumer price inflation, which was expected to fall safely below 2 percent. On 
the external side, there were some early signs of stabilisation in the outlook for economic growth, but 
growth in the US was also forecast to be modest – around 1 percent. 
In the light of the prospects for growth, the view in the markets was that short-term interest rates would 
rise somewhat during the course of the year. 
Actual outcome  
As we all know, things turned out rather differently. Euro area growth, at 0.8 per cent, was much less 
than projected, and most of it occurred in the early part of the year, with growth subsequently being 
disappointing.  This  outcome  cannot  be  attributed  directly  to  a  shortfall  in  external  demand.  In  fact, 
looking at the US first, economic growth for the year as a whole turned out to be considerably higher – 
at  over  two  percent  –  than  originally  projected.  But  the  patchy  nature  of  that  growth  –  with  strong 
performances  in  the  first  and  third  quarters  being  succeeded  by  periods  of  economic  weakness  – 
contributed to a rise in uncertainty with regard to the international economic outlook; this undoubtedly 
had  a  dampening  influence  on  the  euro  area.  In  some  respects  the  fundamental  factors  retarding 
economic recovery were discernible at the time. The recession was clearly not long or deep enough to 
allow  the  economic  and  financial  imbalances  which  had  emerged  during  the  preceding  boom  to  be 
corrected. Here I’m talking about the low US savings ratio, excess production capacity and the current 
account  deficit.  Other  factors,  such  as  the  scale  of  the  decline  in  equity  markets  and  geopolitical 
tensions,  were  less  predictable.  Equity  market  weakness  was  particularly  important  in  driving  the 
deterioration in business and consumer confidence in the second half of the year, and served to offset 
the impact of earlier US monetary policy easing. Its effect was felt through the resultant increase in the 
cost of investment and through its negative impact on household wealth. This reduction in household 
wealth,  in  addition  to  rising  unemployment  and  uncertain  growth  prospects,  exerted  a  negative 
influence  on  labour  markets,  offsetting  the  positive  impact  on  consumer  spending  of  the  so  called 
“equity extraction” that was facilitated by the strong housing market. 
The euro area also had its own home-grown problems. While not on the same scale as in the US, 
excess production capacity has also had a dampening influence. The fall in equity markets in the euro 
area was in fact larger than in the US, and, while direct exposure to equity markets in the euro area is 
less than in the US, they have a major signalling effect. All of these factors contributed to a sharp fall 
in  consumer  and  business  confidence  in  most  euro  area  countries.  At  the  same  time  persistent 
inflation, partly associated with oil and food price increases, but also the result of structural rigidities, 
put a damper on consumer expenditure.   
December interest rate reduction 
Against  the  background  of  deteriorating  economic  circumstances  and  evidence  that  inflationary 
pressures, if not easing, were at any rate not worsening, it gradually became clear from around the 
middle of the year that the earlier expectation of a rise in official interest rates would not materialise. 
And by late Autumn, as the economic environment continued to worsen, it was increasingly evident 
that  it  was a question of  when, rather than  whether, the decision to reduce interest rates  would  be 
taken. And that decision, as you are aware, which was to reduce the key ECB interest rates by one-
half of a percent, was taken at our meeting on 5 December.  
A  decision  in  relation  to  interest  rates  –  to  lower  them,  to  increase  them,  or  indeed  to  leave  them 
unchanged  –  is  rarely  easily  made.  It  is  always  a  question  of  weighing  up  opposing  factors  and 
reaching  a  decision  consistent  with  the  medium-term  goal  of  price  stability.  This  decision  was  no 
exception; monetary growth was well in excess of the reference value, though this excess liquidity was 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2003
 largely the result of portfolio reallocation in an uncertain financial market environment and was unlikely 
to pose an inflationary threat. The annual rate of inflation in November was a little above 2 per cent, as 
it had been for most of the previous year, though this was partly as a result of transitory developments, 
such  as  the  carry-over  effects  of  earlier  oil  and  food  price  increases  and  a  limited  impact  from  the 
changeover to the single currency. There was, however, strong evidence of a decline in inflationary 
pressures going forward, with economic growth remaining sluggish and increasing uncertainty exerting 
a predictable effect on confidence. The appreciation of the exchange rate was also expected to play 
its  part  in  reducing  inflation.  Overall  the  assessment  was  that  the  prospect  had  strengthened  for 
inflation  to  fall  below  2  per  cent  in  the  course  of  2003  and  to  remain  in  line  with  price  stability 
thereafter. 
Future prospects 
The reduction in official interest rates came as the Eurosystem staff projections for 2003 pointed to a 
downward  revision  to  both  the  growth  and  inflation  forecasts.  Notwithstanding  these  revisions,  a 
gradual increase in growth over the course of this year was the central forecast, provided the current 
level  of  uncertainty  gradually  unwinds.  Prospects  have  disimproved  since  then.  In  particular,  the 
geopolitical  and  international  economic  uncertainties  surrounding  these  projections  have  increased. 
While  the  last  reduction  in  interest  rates  and  the  expected  moderation  in  inflation  provide  some 
counterweight to the downside risks, it now seems certain that growth in 2003 will be lower than we 
thought, even as recently as the end of last year. To the extent that activity remains weak, inflation 
could  fall  by  more  than  we  projected.  In  such  circumstances,  there  would  be  some  room  for 
manoeuvre  on  interest  rates.  The  Governing  Council  is  always  ready  to  change  rates  whenever  it 
deems  such  a  move  to  be  appropriate  and  it  does  not  necessarily  have  to  wait  until  the  current 
uncertainties dissipate. 
A significant development over the past year has been the sizeable appreciation of the euro from what 
was  a  clearly  undervalued  level.  This  should  help  to  dampen  inflation  and  ultimately  improve 
purchasing power. However, the scale of the appreciation, if it were to continue, would undoubtedly 
slow  activity  somewhat.  In  the  past,  the  relatively  weak  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  has  placed 
exporters to markets outside the euro area in a relatively favourable competitive position. This is no 
longer the case.  
Because of Ireland’s stronger trading links with the US and the UK, the appreciation of the euro has a 
greater impact for us than it has for other euro area countries. In addition, our inflation rate – at over 
twice  the  euro  area  average  –  is  becoming  an  ever  increasing  threat  to  our  competitiveness  and, 
hence, employment situation. I would reiterate, as we have stated for some time now, that this puts the 
onus  back  on  prudent  fiscal  policy  and  appropriate  wage  and  other  cost  developments  to  ensure 
stability.  
The same is true for the euro area as a whole, with the added qualification of the importance of the 
need for structural reform to enhance the productivity of euro area economies. This brings us to the 
salient  question  of  where  growth  is  going  to  come  from  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  not  an  academic 
question:  we  in  the  euro  area  should  be  aiming  to  raise  potential  output  above  its  current  level  of 
around  2¼  per  cent;  this  is  required  if  we  are  to  reduce  the  euro  area  rate  of  unemployment 
significantly below its present unacceptably high level and to help prepare for the forthcoming ageing 
of European populations. And whatever about demand elsewhere in the world, we cannot expect the 
US to continue to be the  engine of growth to the extent that it has been over the past decade; the 
likelihood is, rather, that its balance of payments deficit, which is currently around 5 per cent of GDP, 
will have to be corrected. Which means that Europe will have to generate its own growth to a much 
greater extent than in the past.  
This  should  be  possible  with  such  a  large,  relatively  closed,  economy,  but  it  will  entail  a  significant 
degree  of  structural  reform.  I  know  that  sounds  like  a  rather  jaded  mantra  coming  form  a  central 
banker, but there is no getting away from it. Structural reforms inevitably involves short-term pain in 
pursuit of longer-term benefits. Such reforms are essential if the euro area is to raise its potential to 
generate non-inflationary growth and to reduce its high level of unemployment. 
  Monetary policy implementation 
Turning my attention to the area of monetary policy implementation, I would like, first of all, to refer 
briefly to the TARGET system and the correspondent Central Banking Model – the so-called CCBM. 
TARGET has played a significant role both in monetary policy implementation and in the integration of 
the money markets in the euro area. The system has also helped to significantly reduce systemic risks 
associated  with  large  value  payments.  Daily  transactions  are  over  €1½  trillion  involving  around 
250,000  payments.  The  corresponding  figures  for  Ireland  are  about  €19  billion  and  2,300.  The 
Governing Council recently decided on the strategic direction of TARGET over the medium-term. This 
will involve the development of TARGET2, which will comprise a multiple platform system, including 
one shared platform to be used by central banks on a voluntary basis. 
The CCBM is also an important component of the Eurosystem’s operational framework. The CCBM is 
used for the transfer of cross border collateral in respect of borrowings by ESCB counterparties. At 
end-2002, just over €200 billion was held under the CCBM. At a level of about €15 billion, Ireland’s 
share  was  disproportionately  large,  reflecting  our  importance  as  an  international  financial  services 
centre.  
In terms of how markets have functioned, I would like to start off by reminding you of just how much 
has been achieved. The market in Dublin was fully prepared for EMU in that the Bank had adapted its 
monetary policy instruments and procedures to the ECB model well in advance of EMU. We’re four 
years into EMU now and we have seen many changes in the market. As you well know, the unsecured 
money  market  integrated  very  quickly,  with  the  immediate  introduction  of  the  euro-area-wide 
standards: EONIA and EURIBOR. Other areas took longer, facing, for example, numerous institutional 
and  legal  hurdles.  The  introduction  of  Eurepo  in  March  2002  was  a  significant  development  in  this 
regard. Integration of the short-term securities market is the next target. In this regard, the ECB was 
pleased to act as host for the recent consultation of the market on behalf of the ACI on the issue of 
how the European short-term securities markets could be further integrated. 
I think that it is true to say that the Central Bank has played and continues to play a full part in the 
whole monetary policy implementation process. At the operational level, Central Bank staff carry out 
the  Eurosystem’s  money  market  management  operations  with  Dublin  based  banks.  The  banking 
system  in  Ireland  actually  takes  a  disproportionately  high  share  of  funding  in  ECB  operations.  This 
reflects  the  importance  of  Dublin  as  a  financial  centre,  as  testified  by  the  still  growing  number  of 
financial institutions choosing Ireland as a location for their operations. We have also participated in 
the very limited number of Eurosystem foreign exchange market interventions. Perhaps surprisingly, 
as part of the Eurosystem we carry out regular market transactions with a greater number of domestic 
institutions, and for much larger amounts, than was the case before joining the system. 
At a strategic level, the Bank had a full input into the evolution of the monetary policy framework. This 
applied both when the Eurosystem operational framework was being designed and in its subsequent 
adjustment  to  changing  market  circumstances.  In  fact,  our  pre  EMU  experience  in  the  active 
management of the local markets has proven to be very beneficial in this regard.  
The Eurosystem institutional set-up, involving centralised decision-making on monetary policy issues 
and decentralised implementation of policy presents special challenges in the area of communication. 
There are a number of ways by which the Eurosystem keeps in touch with market developments and 
opinion  and  I  would  like  to  outline  a  few  examples  for  you  here  tonight.  Local  market  views  are 
collected by the Bank and provided to the ECB daily – many of you will recall being contacted as part 
of this process. Together with the views of the rest of the euro-area market, these play a part in the 
ECB’s management of the euro money market. We also conduct annual money market surveys and 
periodic  FX  market  studies,  which  feed  into  wider  euro  area  market  studies,  and  these  in  turn  are 
published by the ECB. Another communication forum is the Dublin Markets Contact Group. This is a 
group  of  banks  representative  of  the  local  market,  which  meets  under  the  auspices  of  the  Bank’s 
Financial  Markets  Department.  The  Bank  uses  this  forum  to  provide  feedback  from  similar  groups 
established at Eurosystem level while local issues that arise at the Dublin Contact Group are fed back 
to the ECB as appropriate.  
The ECB itself is also fully committed to public consultation in advance of making decisions and such 
an  exercise  was  undertaken  recently  on  the  operational  framework  for  monetary  policy.  Market 
participants'  views  were  requested  regarding  three  separate  issues:  a  change  in  the  timing  of  the 
reserve maintenance period; a shortening of the maturity of the Main Refinancing Operations from the 
current  two  weeks  to  one  week;  and  a  possible  suspension  of  the  Longer-Term  Refinancing 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2003
 Operations. The Eurosystem received a strong response to this public consultation. Irish institutions 
were among the most prominent in the number and comprehensiveness of their responses.  
The public consultation was well received by market participants, and from the ECB’s point of view it 
was felt that the consultation process produced valuable additional input with regard to the planned 
changes. It is no secret that there was a lot of opinion in the market against abolishing the Longer-
Term Refinancing Operations, with many counterparties arguing that these operations continue to play 
a meaningful part in managing their liquidity needs. The Governing Council took these concerns into 
account in their deliberations and in the event announced on January 23rd that it would not suspend 
the Longer-Term Refinancing Operations but that it would implement the other two suggestions. Given 
the  preparatory  work  required,  these  measures  are  scheduled  to  come  into  effect  during  the  first 
quarter of 2004.  
I would also like to take this opportunity to remind you that monetary policy formulation at the supra-
national level does not mean that this is at the expense of recognising the differences in local market 
conditions. In fact, the decentralised arrangement has distinct advantages in terms of using NCB’s in-
depth knowledge of their local markets and liquidity conditions. Nor does the current set-up preclude 
flexible and timely responses to market developments. For example, the Eurosystem was also able to 
respond  in  a  cohesive  manner  to  the  conditions  that  prevailed  in  the  aftermath  of  tragic  events  of 
September  11th.  The  ECB  rapidly  announced  its  willingness  to  support  the  normal  functioning  of 
markets and provide additional liquidity if needed. We at the Central Bank played our role alongside 
the rest of the Eurosystem in responding to the situation. Local market participants took part in both 
the  fine  tuning  operations  of  September  12th  and  13th  and  in  the  liquidity  providing  dollar  foreign 
exchange swaps. 
The past four years have not been without difficulties however. One such difficulty was the overbidding 
problem  that  arose  under  the  fixed  tender  MRO  system.  As  you  know,  this  was  particularly 
disadvantageous  to  institutions  like  those  in  Ireland  without  recourse  to  large  amounts  of  collateral. 
The  move  to  the  variable  rate  system  in  mid-2000  virtually  eliminated  the  problem  of  severe 
overbidding which in turn provided Irish counterparties with the scope to increase their share of funds 
considerably –  which, in fact, they  did. Subsequently  the phenomenon of underbidding emerged as 
the  market  anticipated  reductions  in  official  interest  rates.  The  measures  contained  in  the  current 
public  consultation  and  which  have  just  been  approved  by  the  Governing  Council  are  designed  to 
eliminate this problem.  
Concluding remarks 
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  saying  that  the  Eurosystem  has  now  become  such  an  established 
component of the international financial system that one is inclined to forget that it is only four years in 
existence. The considerable technical and operational challenges to implementing a single monetary 
policy across twelve countries have been successfully met. This is due in no small part to the highly 
efficient  manner  in  which  financial  markets  across  the  euro  area  have  functioned.  Monetary  policy 
implementation and the collateral framework are, of course, subject to ongoing review and there will, 
no doubt, be issues to occupy you well into the future. 
As regards the conduct of monetary policy, the Governing Council has a good record in maintaining 
price stability over the last four  years. We are currently  living  in  uncertain times. To the extent that 
activity remains weak, inflation could fall by more than we projected last December. If this looks like 
happening, we will have to reflect further on the monetary policy stance. I thank you for your attention. 
 