 Otmar Issing: Evaluation of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy 
Opening remarks by Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the European Central Bank Watchers Conference, Frankfurt, 11 July 2003. 
 Introduction 
I welcome the opportunity to address this fifth edition of the ECB Watchers conference. This annual 
meeting has become a tradition by now. It is a remarkable tradition: to my knowledge, the ECB is the 
only central bank that regularly intervenes in meetings of this kind. When, four and a half years ago, 
the  ECB  started  conducting  monetary  policy  for  the  euro  area,  we  decided  to  participate  in  this 
initiative launched by the CFS as we felt the need, as a new central bank, to quickly establish active 
channels of debate with the market, academic, and press communities. We now continue to benefit 
from these meetings on a regular basis. I wish to thank Prof. Weber for proposing this formula and for 
maintaining his commitment over the years. 
This meeting is a special one. In the course of the last year the ECB has launched, conducted and 
concluded an evaluation of its monetary policy strategy. A good deal of the remarks today naturally 
focus  on  such  evaluation,  its  conclusions  as  announced  on  8  May,  and  the  changes  -  or  lack  of 
changes - that this review process led to. Accordingly, my short remarks this morning will be centered 
on three points: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Why has the ECB decided to undertake an evaluation of its strategy; 
How was this evaluation conducted; 
What conclusions we reached, and why. 
Why an evaluation of the strategy? 
Many people were surprised by the announcement, last December, that the ECB would undertake an 
evaluation  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy.  Some  took  it  as  an  implicit  indication  that  we  were 
dissatisfied by the strategy and prepared to change it. The opposite is true. 
When our strategy was announced, on October 1998, the ECB had not yet assumed its responsibility 
of conducting monetary policy for the euro area. The strategy we designed was a novel one, suited for 
the special characteristics of the euro area and its central bank, and different in a number of respects 
from other current and past strategies. It incorporated the best judgement and experience of central 
banks and the key lessons of economic research, but it lacked one fundamental element: the test of 
practical experience. Hence it was only natural that, after a period of time, the Council would want to 
go  back  and  reflect  on  the  accumulated  experience  in  a  systematic  way.  This  did  not  mean  that 
changes were necessarily needed - any more than a new car necessarily needs repair when it is taken 
to the garage for its 5,000 miles checkup! It is true, however, that we undertook our evaluation with an 
open mind, ready to introduce changes in case our evaluation had suggested the need to do so. 
There are in my view three areas where a monetary policy strategy plays a crucial role in a central 
bank, and this is where our attention focused: 
The strategy should provide a framework for the internal analysis. 
1. 
As such, the framework must encompass and organize all relevant information in an efficient way. It 
should  use  the  best  available  research,  taking  into  account  all  different  sources  of  uncertainty  the 
central  bank  faces.  Competing  models  must  be  allowed  to  paint  complementary  pictures  of  the 
economic outlook and the risks to price stability. 
BIS Review 33/2003 
 1
 2. 
The strategy should also provide a framework for the debate within the decision 
making body. 
From this viewpoint, the strategy must be efficient in terms of allowing the decision making body to 
examine and weigh all relevant information, encompassing any diversity of views that may exist on the 
transmission mechanism. 
Finally, the strategy should provide a framework for external communication. 
3. 
Here, transparency and effectiveness are linked. Effective communication facilitates the transmission 
of monetary policy decisions to the economy. At the same time, using the same framework for external 
improve  public 
communication  as 
understanding  of  how  monetary  policy 
transparency  and 
effectiveness at the same time. 
internal  analysis  should  guarantee  consistency  and 
thereby  enhancing 
is  conducted, 
for 
How was the evaluation conducted? 
Accordingly, we went through several steps. The first was to revisit all the technical issues. All aspects 
of  the  strategy  were  scrutinized,  going  through  a  lively  internal  debate  and  resulting  in  a  series  of 
technical studies now available on our web site. The key role here was played by the staff of the ECB 
and  of  the  National  Central  Banks,  the  latter  contributing  through  the  Eurosystem  Monetary  Policy 
Committee. Use was made of research accumulated during the recent years, in the ECB and outside, 
on  a  number  of  issues  relevant  for  the  strategy,  such  as  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  the 
determinants of prices, the leading indicator properties of money, credit and other key indicators, and 
the like. 
The  second  step  was  to  reflect  on  how  the  strategy  has  contributed  to  the  debate  within  the  ECB 
decision making bodies, naturally with a particular focus on the Council. In the decade leading up to 
the EMU, a broad consensus on the principles of sound monetary policy making emerged among the 
NCB’s now forming the monetary union. Even so, the ECB Governing Council is a large body, with a 
wealth of diverse experiences and views. The strategy must provide a commonly accepted framework 
within which these experiences and views all contribute to policy decisions. The strategy should also 
ensure that the relevant information is taken into account fully and orderly. From this point of view, the 
ultimate test for the success of the strategy  are the  extent  to  which it effectively  guides the debate 
within the Council and the record of actual policy decisions. I think it is fair to say that most observers 
agree that the ECB’s record has been, on the whole, very successful in these four and a half years. 
Finally, we carefully considered the performance of the strategy in external communication. This is an 
area  where,  according  to  several  observers,  including  some  present  here  today,  the  strategy  has 
worked  less  well.  We  have  examined  the  full  range  of  views,  including  those  coming  from  the 
Watchers’  meetings  and  those  expressed  by  market  participants,  academics,  and  the  press.  Our 
announcements regarding the strategy on 8th May, which I am now going to discuss briefly, are aimed 
primarily at addressing certain misunderstandings that have emerged in our communication with the 
public. 
The result of the evaluation 
I  do  not  need  to  discuss  here  all  aspects  of  our  review;  the  documents  in  our  website  provide  a 
complete account of them. The issues we investigated included the choice of the specific index used 
to define price stability, the preference accorded to headline as opposed to “core” inflation, how to deal 
with inflation differentials within the area, the stability of the euro area money demand function, and 
many others. 
I will limit my remarks to the two most debated aspects: the definition of price stability and the role of 
money, or the “two-pillar structure” of the strategy. 
The definition of price stability 
Regarding  the  definition  of  price  stability,  the  Governing  Council  confirmed  the  explicit  quantitative 
definition  announced  already  in  October  1998,  which  is  based  on  an  objective  and  transparent 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2003
 measure, as provided by the HICP. We remain convinced that this is an important element of clarity, 
that contributes positively to both the effectiveness of policy and to the ECB’s accountability. 
Moreover,  the  Council  noted  that  this  quantitative  definition  had  been  very  successful  in  anchoring 
market  expectations.  The  direct  and  indirect  measures  of  expected  inflation  in  the  euro  area  have 
shown a remarkable stability in the last few years, at a level just below 2%. This is a very important 
result, perhaps the most important, for a central bank whose mandate is to maintain price stability over 
the medium term. Hence, the essence of the existing definition of price stability, namely, a year-on-
year increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area of below 2%, was fully 
confirmed. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Governing  Council  clarified  that  in  the  pursuit  of  price  stability  it  will  aim  to 
maintain inflation rates below, but close to 2% over the medium term. This clarification emphasizes the 
need for a sufficient safety margin against the risk of deflation. 
There are several good reasons for accepting a low rate of inflation. The major concern is the fact that 
monetary  policy  may  become  less  effective,  if  interest  rate  management  by  the  central  bank  is 
constrained  by  a  liquidity  trap  or  a  “zero  bound”  problem.  ECB  analyses  show  that  such  constraint 
should  not  pose  a  significant  threat  if  inflation  remains  sufficiently  above  zero.  The  clarification  we 
provided to the price stability definition offers a safeguard in this sense. 
In  preventing  the  emergence  of  deflationary  and  inflationary  dynamics  alike,  a  forward-looking 
orientation of monetary policy is essential. There is no convincing evidence that relying on rigid rules 
helps  in  this  respect.  Rather,  the  medium  term  orientation  of  the  ECB  strategy,  with  its  explicit 
reference  to  all  relevant  indicators  of  future  price  developments,  provides  flexibility  and  forward- 
looking orientation while maintaining a firm reference to the medium term price stability goal. 
The role of money and the two-pillar framework 
The Governing Council confirmed that the two-pillar framework of the strategy is an effective tool to 
organize  the  information  on  different  risks  to  price  stability.  Different  types  of  analysis  provide 
information  relevant  for  price  developments  at  different  time  horizons.  The  economic  analysis  - 
focusing  on  the  most  proximate  causes  of  inflation  such  as  cost  developments  and  demand-supply 
imbalances  -  primarily  contributes  to  assess  short  to  medium-term  economic  developments  and 
consequently risks to price stability at that horizon. The monetary analysis - focusing instead on the 
ultimate  monetary  determinants  of  inflation  -  primarily  contains  information  for  assessing  price 
developments  at  medium  to  long-term  horizons.  The  economic  literature  suggests  that  there  is  no 
easy way to bring together the monetary analysis with the economic analysis in a unified framework; 
or,  as  we  could  say  more  technically,  to  integrate  money  and  credit  into  today’s  standard 
macroeconomic models. In this respect, the monetary  analysis mainly serves as a means of cross-
checking, from a medium to long-term perspective, the short to medium-term indications coming from 
economic  analysis.  In  particular,  to  underscore  the  longer-term  nature  of  the  reference  value  for 
monetary growth, which is retained as a benchmark for the assessment of monetary developments, 
the Governing Council decided to discontinue the practice of an annual review. 
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy will continue to provide a solid basis to tackle further challenges 
ahead. I am sure that over time the merits of our approach will be fully recognized. It is very open and 
transparent about the presence of the uncertainty surrounding the functioning of the economy and the 
reliability  of  key  economic  relationships,  which  necessitate  a  diversified  approach.  In  particular,  a 
prominent role for money underpins the medium-term orientation of monetary policy and helps eschew 
excessive policy  activism and overly ambitious attempts to “fine-tune” economic developments. The 
two-pillar strategy also provides a suitable framework to take asset price developments appropriately 
into account. 
More than four years of experience provide evidence of the success of the strategy as the basis for 
monetary  policy  decisions  in  the  face  of  significant  uncertainty  and  sizable  adverse  shocks.  The 
evidence  shows  that  the  ECB  is  on  the  right  track.  It  has  earned  credibility,  fulfilled  the  stability 
mandate given to it by the Treaty and will continue to do so. This is in the end what counts. 
BIS Review 33/2003 
 3
 Conclusions 
In concluding let me stress, as I always do when discussing these issues, that our reflection on the 
strategy is an ongoing process. It did not start with the recent evaluation and will not end with it. We 
continuously reexamine the performance of our strategy while we work with it. 
Hence I am sure that your job as Watchers, and occasionally as critics, is not finished. We continue to 
look forward to your feedback and need your constructive critique, not only in the short term - but also 
over the medium to long term. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2003
