David Dodge: Focusing on the long term  
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian  Council  of  Chief 
Executives, Washington, D.C., 7 April 2003.  
 Thank you for the invitation to join you this evening. It was exactly a year ago that I met with you in 
Montréal. It has not been an easy year. All of you have been running companies and making decisions 
under very uncertain conditions. You have had to deal with corporate and accounting issues. Markets 
have been volatile. And geopolitical events have shaken confidence.  
At times like these, it's easy to get caught up in trying to make one's way through current events that 
cloud the outlook. But the present uncertainties make it even more important to maintain a focus on 
strategies that will promote the health of businesses over several years—not just over the next few 
months or quarters.  
The same holds true for economic policy-makers. Failed experiments in previous decades have taught 
us that, in times of uncertainty, it is extremely important to stick to policies that will foster long-term 
economic growth.  
A longer-term focus  
Many of us in this room have reached a stage in life where we have at least two pairs of glasses—one 
for close-up, and one for distance. We're acutely aware that wearing glasses to focus on something 
very close makes us lose perspective on things further away. And if we focus only on the here and 
now, we can lose sight of the future. We need a set of economic bifocals, if you will, to see the impact 
of current events, as well as the best path to future prosperity.  
Tonight,  I'd  like  to  speak  about  that  longer-term  economic  vision.  Through  more  than  a  decade  of 
macroeconomic  reform,  we  Canadians  have  created  a  framework  to  meet  both  immediate  and 
longer-term challenges. Even as short-term events have buffeted our economy, we have followed four 
key  long-term  policy  principles:  trade  liberalization,  structural  reform,  sound  fiscal  policy,  and  low 
inflation.  
Recent Canadian economic performance demonstrates the merit of continuing to set policies with a 
longer-term  view.  Short-term  adjustments  are  sometimes  unavoidable  in  the  face  of  extraordinary 
events—and we've had more than our share of extraordinary events in the past few years! But, on the 
whole, these basic principles have stood Canada in good stead through the recent difficulties in the 
world economy. Let me talk about each one in a bit more detail.  
Trade Liberalization  
The  first  principle  is  trade  liberalization,  and  our  economic  relationship  with  the  United  States  has 
reflected that goal. As you and I discussed last year, the Canadian and U.S. economies made difficult 
adjustments to freer trade in the early 1990s. The Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement and the North 
American Free Trade Agreement exposed many Canadian companies to stiffer competition. But freer 
trade also opened up new markets. And Canadian companies have risen to the challenge. Some of 
the sectors that we used to protect the most—such as furniture, clothing, and wine—have established 
a strong presence in international markets. On the whole, Canadian industry has flourished with the 
competitive pressures generated by these agreements. And so has 
the trading relationship between Canada and the United States.  
As  you  can  see  from  Chart  1,  freer  trade  has  clearly  meant 
increased volumes of exports and imports. And now that we have 
made the adjustment, the more open trading environment is clearly 
helping to raise living standards for Canadians.  
That should strengthen our resolve to see freer trade extended both 
within  and  beyond  North  America.  We  need  to  continue  to  work 
towards reduced trade barriers, both within NAFTA and at the Doha 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 1
round of multilateral talks. It won't be easy, but the long-term economic benefits will make our efforts 
worthwhile.  
Structural Reform  
The second principle focuses on improving the structure of national economies, to facilitate adjustment 
to changing economic conditions and to ensure the longer-term viability of social- and income-security 
arrangements. A number of initiatives have been undertaken in Canada, but I'm going to focus on only 
three.  I  am  sure  that  you're  familiar  with  them,  and  many  of  you  have  participated  in  the  debate 
surrounding these reforms.  
First,  Employment  Insurance  (EI)  benefits  were  restructured  to 
strengthen  the  incentive  to  work.  With  these  changes,  and  with 
improved economic performance, EI payments as a share of GDP 
have declined significantly over the past decade, from more than 
2 1/2 per cent to just over 1 per cent, as shown in Chart 2.  
Second, the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans were revamped, 
to  put  them  on  a  sustainable 
footing.  The  reforms  meant 
some  restructuring  of  benefits 
and  a  sharp 
in 
contributions—moves  that  were  necessary,  if  unpopular.  The 
results  are  shown  in  Chart 3.  The  assets  of  the  CPP  are  now 
managed  by  the  independent  Canada  Pension  Plan  Investment 
Board,  the  mandate  of  which  is  to  invest  the  contributions  in 
markets,  in  order  to  generate  the  best  possible  returns.  These 
changes mean that Canadians no longer have to worry about the 
sustainability of their CPP and QPP pensions.  
increase 
Third, governments have improved the efficiency of their tax and spending programs. I know that you 
are  familiar  with  the  major  federal  and  provincial  efforts  to  make  direct  government  spending  more 
efficient. Although more work always needs to be done, governments in Canada have also undertaken 
significant structural changes to our tax regime. They have reduced distortions in the personal income 
tax system and implemented the goods and services tax to replace the outdated manufacturers sales 
tax.  Structural  reform  has  also  included  changes  to  Canada's  corporate  tax  regime—changes  that, 
when completed, will eliminate the federal capital tax and reduce the average statutory corporate tax 
rate in Canada to a level that is below current U.S. rates.  
Of course, there are other structural improvements left to be made. I'm sure many of you have views 
and suggestions about how to make them. You have been discussing some of them here today. In my 
view, it is critical that Canada's private and public sectors continue to work together to further improve 
the structure of our economy and increase our ability to adjust to changing world economic conditions.  
Sound Fiscal Policy  
Now, the key to good economic performance is sound macroeconomic policy. The Bank of Canada is 
responsible for monetary policy. But monetary policy operates within a larger macroeconomic context. 
So, let me start with fiscal policy.  
For Canada, the commitment to the principle of sound fiscal policy has meant putting our public debt, 
as a  proportion of GDP,  on a sustainable downward track. Many  of  you remember the difficult and 
unpopular decisions that had to be taken by federal and provincial 
governments during the 1990s to achieve this goal.  
Those  efforts  are  paying  off.  Today,  not  only  does  Canada  have 
one  of  the  lowest  debt  burdens  in  the  G-7,  but,  as  shown  by  the 
arrows in Chart 4, that burden is expected to continue to decline. 
The  federal  government  has  paid  down  almost  $50 billion  of  its 
debt—bringing it down from a high of almost 70 per cent of GDP in 
1996 to about 45 per cent in 2002, as illustrated in Chart 5. Thus, 
the  vicious  circle  of  rising  deficits  and  debts  of  the  1970s  and 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2003
1980s has become a virtuous circle of balanced budgets and falling 
debt.  
Program spending for all levels 
of  government  has  dropped 
from  42 per cent  of  GDP  in 
1993  to  34 per cent  last  year, 
as  you  can  see  in  the  table. 
And  debt-servicing  costs  have 
dropped from about 9 per cent 
of GDP to less than 6 per cent.  
Here's how Finance Minister Manley summed up this principle of 
fiscal  discipline  in  his  February  budget  speech:  "Keeping  a 
balanced budget, cutting debt and getting the best value for money are a constant challenge and a 
constant imperative. These are the bedrock of our fiscal and economic strategy."  
Low Inflation  
Complementing  a  sound  fiscal  policy  is  a  monetary  policy  focused  on  keeping  inflation  low  and 
stable—that's  the  fourth  principle,  and  that  is  the  Bank  of  Canada's  responsibility.  Canada's 
inflation-targeting  framework  works  in  a  symmetrical  way  to  keep  consumer  price  inflation  at  the 
2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range. If the trend of inflation moves away from the target, in 
either direction, the Bank will take action to return it to the target within 18 to 24 months.  
Through  most  of  the  past  decade,  we  have  managed  to  keep 
inflation  around  the  2 per cent  target  midpoint,  as  you  can  see  in 
Chart  6.  As  a  result,  Canadians'  expectations  for  inflation  have 
become  firmly  anchored  around 
2 per cent, as shown in Chart 7. 
That  is  extremely  valuable  for 
decision-makers 
in  business, 
government,  and  households. 
This  climate  of  low,  stable,  and 
predictable  inflation  has  helped 
to smooth out the ups and downs 
in the economy and to create the 
best  possible  environment  for  longer-term  economic  growth  in 
Canada.  
Let me now spend a few minutes describing the circumstances in which monetary policy is currently 
operating. Even though growth slowed in the fourth quarter of 2002, reflecting global economic and 
geopolitical uncertainties, our economy continues to operate close to capacity.  
As we said in our January Monetary Policy Report Update, a number of indicators support this view. 
They  include  high  industrial-capacity  utilization;  a  record-high  labour  force  participation  rate;  a 
record-high employment-to-population ratio; corporate profits at their highest level since early  2001; 
and trend inflation that is running above target.  
Canada's inflation numbers continue to reflect the impact of higher-than-expected prices for crude oil 
and natural gas, further increases in auto insurance premiums, and price pressures in certain sectors, 
such as housing, food, and some services. This higher inflation also suggests an underlying firmness 
in the price-setting environment. Relative price increases wouldn't be pushing up trend inflation if there 
was not sufficient demand.  
So,  in  making  our  latest  interest  rate  decision  on  4  March,  we  weighed  not  only  domestic  inflation 
pressures and the expectation that Canadian economic activity will remain near potential in 2003, but 
also  the  stimulative  stance  of  monetary  policy  and  improved  conditions  in  capital  markets.  Taking 
these factors into account, we raised our key policy rate by one-quarter of a percentage point to 3 per 
cent.  
Even with this increase, the stance of monetary policy in Canada remains stimulative. Thus, over time, 
further reductions in monetary stimulus will be required to return inflation to the target in the medium 
term. But, as we have said, the timing and pace of increases in policy interest rates will continue to 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 3
depend  on  a  number  of  considerations.  These  include:  the  strength  of  demand  pressures;  the 
evolution of inflation expectations; the impact on confidence of global economic uncertainties; and the 
way  in  which  the  war  in  Iraq  affects  demand  and  inflation,  both  globally  and  in  Canada.  The  Bank 
continues to monitor all of these factors and will adjust monetary conditions to keep Canadian inflation 
low,  stable,  and  predictable  over  the  medium  term. The  Bank's  next  Monetary  Policy  Report,  to  be 
released on 23 April, will provide a full update of our assessment of the economy and of the outlook for 
inflation.  
Conclusion 
In closing, let me repeat that, in these trying times, it is tough indeed to maintain a clear view of the 
current economic picture.  But,  if we spend all  our energy focusing on the near term, we risk losing 
sight of what's farther out. Your job is to build enterprises that will flourish over the longer term. And 
our job as policy-makers, whether on the monetary or fiscal side, is to create the best possible climate 
for sustained economic growth. In an uncertain world, the best thing we can do is to stick to sound 
economic policy  principles. They have proven to be the most effective tools to  deal  with short-term 
turbulence and, at the same time, promote solid, sustainable economic growth and prosperity over the 
longer term.  
4 
 BIS Review 18/2003
