 Guy Quaden: Models of co-operation in an enlarged EU 
Introductory  speech  by  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the 
IRR-NBB-colloquium in Brussels on 28 January 2003.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am very pleased and proud to welcome you all at the National Bank of Belgium. I would like to bring 
you  back  in  time  for  a  while,  to  the  summer  of  1993.  Most  Belgian  people  surely  remember  the 
decease of King Baudouin on Saturday, 31st of July. However, in my memories the same weekend is 
also connected to some other, also rather dramatic, events that took place in Brussels. At the time, I 
was a member of the Monetary Committee of the European Community and I remember very well that 
the European Monetary System got into severe problems in July 1993. Friday 30th of July has been 
recorded as "black Friday" in the history of the Banque de France because of the huge interventions 
needed  to  support  the  French  franc  on  the  exchange  markets  that  day.  The  situation  made  it 
necessary to call an urgent meeting of the EU finance ministers and the central bank governors and 
their closest collaborators. 
We met on Sunday afternoon the 1st of August here in Brussels in Centre Borchette while thousands 
of  Belgians  queued  before  the  Royal  Palace  to  pay  their  last  respects  to  the  King.  We  all  were 
convinced that we had to find a solution to the crisis before the opening of the exchange markets on 
Monday  morning.  The  negotiations  -under  the  newly  started  Belgian  presidency-  were  very  tough. 
France wanted the German mark to leave the EMS but that was of course unacceptable, not only for 
Germany. 
Only  after  midnight,  a  couple  of  hours  before  the  opening  of  the  Tokyo  market,  we  could  reach  an 
agreement. It was decided to open up the fluctuation margins of the exchange rate mechanism to 15 
percent above and under the central parities. In less than one year, we had lived 6 realignments plus 
the opening up of the margins! 
Today  recalling  these  events  may  seem  like  telling  heroic  stories  from  ancient  times. We  can  only 
imagine  what kind of currency tensions the bursting  of the ICT bubble, the terrorist attacks of IX-XI 
["nine-eleven"] and the current geopolitical and economic stance in general would have brought to the 
Western European countries, if we hadn't got the euro. 
It will be obvious to you now why the National Bank of Belgium is in favour of European Integration. 
We are rather convinced that integration and stability  are highly correlated  and  we believe that this 
applies not only to monetary policy but also to for instance foreign policy. 
Our trust in European integration is one of the reasons why we at the National Bank of Belgium are 
very happy that we got the opportunity to organise the colloquium of today in close co-operation with 
the Royal Institute for International Relations. A second reason is that we feel like naturally related to 
the European construction. Belgium is indeed one of the six founding fathers of the European Union 
and  Brussels  hosts  the  main  headquarters  of  the  European  institutions.  At  several  occasions  the 
National Bank of Belgium provided the  link between  the European central banks and the European 
institutions,  for  instance  on  the  31st  of  December  1998,  when  the  ECOFIN-ministers  met  in  the 
Consilium building in order to fix the irrevocable conversion rates of the euro. It can't be surprising that 
we  are  -  maybe  more  than  our  colleagues  are  -  keen  on  the  institutional  aspects  of  the  European 
integration. 
Today's  colloquium  is  set  against  the  background  of  the  European  Convention  and  the  imminent 
enlargement  of  the  Union.  The  topic  we  would  like  to  discuss  today  is  the  controversial  idea  of 
flexibility. Is it right that we need more flexibility than provided for by the Nice Treaty, if we want the 
larger and more heterogeneous Union to function effectively? In the very near future we will indeed be 
confronted with two challenges when it comes to European integration. 
One is that the EU is going to expand to an important extent. Next year the number of citizens in the 
EU  will increase by  20 %. Second challenge is that  part of the Member States want to deepen the 
integration, but probably only part of them ! I am surely not against the establishment of a larger free 
trade  zone  in  Europe,  in  particular  as  a  Central  bank  governor.  But,  as  a  citizen,  my  ambition  for 
Europe is higher. 
BIS Review 3/2003 
 1
 What instruments do we need to be able to reconcile expansion and deepening ? Can I recall to you 
that the former Belgian Prime-Minister Leo Tindemans argued already in 1975 - more than a quarter of 
a century ago - in his "report on the European Union" in favour of flexibility as a means of deepening 
the integration process, particularly for monetary policy. 
It seems that there is nothing new under the sun. And indeed, models of flexible co-operation have 
already been used in European integration in the past. We can think of the Schengen Accords agreed 
in 1985 but originally kept outside the Treaty because only 5 Member States were ready to implement 
them  at  the  time.  Second  example  is  the  Social  Charter,  that  was  negotiated  together  with  the 
Maastricht Treaty, but that was not acceptable at the time for the British Government. 
A third example of flexibility brings me back to my own business. As you surely know only 12 out of the 
15  current  Member  States  have  until  now  adopted  the  single  currency.  According  to  the  Treaty, 
Member States that have not yet adopted the euro are called "Member States with a derogation". Two 
categories can be distinguished. The UK and Denmark make up one category : these Member States 
got respectively an opt-in  and an opt-out. The second category consists of the  Member States that 
can't adopt the euro because they do not yet comply with the well-known convergence criteria. Only 
Sweden is currently in this position, but very soon a number of new Member States will join Sweden, 
having the vocation - and even the legal obligation - to adopt the euro at the right moment. 
It is very obvious that the Member States of the euro area are more advanced in economic integration 
than the others are. So, this is clearly a case of "closer co-operation", which has taken shape in the 
creation of a forum where the ECOFIN-ministers of the euro area can discuss the economic situation 
in the world, in the European Community and in the euro area, and its consequences for economic 
policy making. This forum is, as you know, called the "Eurogroup" and I'm sure that Minister Reynders 
will tell you everything about it after lunch. So to us, central bankers, closer co-operation or models of 
flexible integration is not some kind of theoretical exercise, we live with it constantly. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
My feeling is that the Royal Institute and the National Bank have chosen for the colloquium of today a 
topic  that  is  very  much  alive  in  the  ongoing  debate  about  the  future  institutional  framework  of 
European integration. The fact that we could find a series of utmost distinguished speakers ready to 
discuss this topic today with you, is a further demonstration of its importance. 
 