 Alan Greenspan: Semiannual monetary policy report to the US Congress 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  on  the  occasion  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  semiannual  monetary  policy  report  to  the 
Congress, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, 15 July 2003. 
 Mr.  Chairman  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am  pleased  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. 
When  in  late  April  I  last  reviewed  the  economic  outlook  before  this  Committee,  full-scale  military 
operations  in  Iraq  had  concluded,  and  there  were  signs  that  some  of  the  impediments  to  brisker 
growth in economic activity in the months leading up to the conflict were beginning to lift. Many, though 
by no means all, of the economic uncertainties stemming from the situation in Iraq had been resolved, 
and that reduction in uncertainty had left an imprint on a broad range of indicators. 
Stock prices had risen, risk spreads on corporate bonds had narrowed, oil prices had dropped sharply, 
and measures of consumer sentiment appeared to be on the mend. But, as I noted in April, hard data 
indicating  that these favorable developments were quickening  the pace of spending  and production 
were not yet in evidence, and it was likely that the extent of the underlying vigor of the economy would 
become apparent only gradually. 
In the months since, some of the residual war-related uncertainties have abated further and financial 
conditions have turned decidedly more accommodative, supported, in part, by the Federal Reserve’s 
commitment to foster sustainable growth and to guard against a substantial further disinflation. Yields 
across maturities and risk classes have posted marked declines, which together with improved profits 
boosted  stock  prices  and  household  wealth.  If  the  past  is  any  guide,  these  domestic  financial 
developments,  apart  from  the  heavy  dose  of  fiscal  stimulus  now  in  train,  should  bolster  economic 
activity over coming quarters. 
To  be  sure,  industrial  production  does  appear  to  have  stabilized  in  recent  weeks  after  months  of 
declines. Consumer spending has held up reasonably well, and activity in housing markets continues 
strong. But incoming data on employment and aggregate output remain mixed. A pervasive sense of 
caution  reflecting,  in  part,  the  aftermath  of  corporate  governance  scandals  appears  to  have  left 
businesses  focused  on  strengthening  their  balance  sheets  and,  to  date,  reluctant  to  ramp  up 
significantly their hiring and spending. Continued global uncertainties and economic weakness abroad, 
particularly among some of our major trading partners, also have extended the ongoing softness in the 
demand for U.S. goods and services. 
When  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  met  last  month,  with  the  economy  not  yet 
showing convincing signs of a sustained pickup in growth, and against the backdrop of our concerns 
about the implications of a possible substantial decline in inflation, we elected to ease policy another 
quarter-point. The FOMC stands prepared to maintain a highly accommodative stance of policy for as 
long  as  needed  to  promote  satisfactory  economic  performance.  In  the  judgment  of  the  Committee, 
policy accommodation aimed at raising the growth of output, boosting the utilization of resources, and 
warding  off  unwelcome  disinflation  can  be  maintained  for  a  considerable  period  without  ultimately 
stoking inflationary pressures. 
 The prospects for a resumption of strong economic growth have been enhanced by steps taken in the 
private  sector  over  the  past  couple  of  years  to  restructure  and  strengthen  balance  sheets.  These 
changes, assisted by improved prices in asset markets, have left households and businesses better 
positioned than they were earlier to boost outlays as their wariness about the economic environment 
abates. 
Nowhere  has  this  process  of  balance  sheet  adjustment  been  more  evident  than  in  the  household 
sector. On the asset side of the balance sheet, the decline in longer-term interest rates and diminished 
perceptions of credit risk in recent months have provided a substantial lift to the market value of nearly 
all major categories of household assets. Most notably, historically low mortgage interest rates have 
helped to propel a solid advance in the value of the owner-occupied housing stock. And the lowered 
BIS Review 33/2003 
 1
 rate  at  which  investors  discount  future  business  earnings  has  contributed  to  the  substantial 
appreciation in broad equity price indexes this year, reversing a portion of their previous declines. 
In  addition,  reflecting  growing  confidence,  households  have  been  shifting  the  composition  of  their 
portfolios  in  favor  of  riskier  assets.  In  recent  months,  equity  mutual  funds  attracted  sizable  inflows 
following the redemptions recorded over much of the last year. Moreover, strong inflows to corporate 
bond  funds,  particularly  those  specializing  in  speculative-grade  securities,  have  provided  further 
evidence of a renewed appetite for risk-taking among retail investors. 
On the liability side of the balance sheet, despite the significant increase in debt encouraged by higher 
asset  values,  lower  interest  rates  have  facilitated  a  restructuring  of  existing  debt.  Households  have 
taken advantage of new lows in mortgage interest rates to refinance debt on more favorable terms, to 
lengthen  debt  maturity,  and,  in  many  cases,  to  extract  equity  from  their  homes  to  pay  down  other 
higher-cost debt. Debt service burdens, accordingly, have declined. 
Overall,  during  the  first  half  of  2003,  the  net  worth  of  households  is  estimated  to  have  risen 
4-1/2 percent - somewhat faster than the rise in nominal disposable personal income. Only 15 percent 
of that increase in wealth represented the accumulated personal saving of households. Additions to 
net  worth  have  largely  reflected  capital  gains  both  from  financial  investments  and  from  home  price 
appreciation. Net additions to home equity, despite very large extractions, remained positive in the first 
half. 
Significant  balance-sheet  restructuring  in  an  environment  of  low  interest  rates  has  gone  far  beyond 
that  experienced  in  the  past.  In  large  measure,  this  reflects  changes  in  technology  and  mortgage 
markets that have dramatically transformed accumulated home equity from a very  illiquid asset into 
one  that  is  now  an  integral  part  of  households’  ongoing  balance-sheet  management  and  spending 
decisions.  This  enhanced  capacity  doubtless  added  significant  support  to  consumer markets  during 
the  past  three  years  as  numerous  shocks  -  a  stock  price  fall,  9/11,  and  the  Iraq  war  -  pummeled 
consumer sentiment. 
Households have been able to extract home equity by drawing on home equity loan lines, by realizing 
capital gains through the sale of existing homes, and by extracting cash as part of the refinancing of 
existing  mortgages,  so-called  cash-outs.  Although  all  three  of  these  vehicles  have  been  employed 
extensively by homeowners in recent years, home turnover has accounted for most equity extraction. 
Since originations to purchase existing homes tend to be roughly twice as large as repayments of the 
remaining balances on outstanding mortgages of home sellers, the very high levels of existing home 
turnover  have  resulted  in  substantial  equity  extraction,  largely  realized  capital  gains.  Indeed,  of  the 
estimated  net  increase  of  $1.1  trillion  in  home  mortgage  debt  during  the  past  year  and  a  half, 
approximately half resulted from existing home turnover. 
The huge wave of refinancings this year and last has been impressive. Owing chiefly to the decline in 
mortgage rates to their lowest levels in more than three decades, estimated mortgage refinancings net 
of cash-outs last year rose to a record high of more than $1.6 trillion. With mortgage rates declining 
further in recent months, the pace of refinancing surged even higher over the first half of this  year. 
Cash-outs also increased, but at a slowed pace. Net of duplicate refinancings, approximately half of 
the dollar value of outstanding regular mortgages has been refinanced during the past year and a half. 
Moreover, applications to refinance existing mortgages jumped to record levels last month. Given that 
refinance applications lead originations by about five weeks and that current mortgage rates remain 
significantly below those on existing mortgages, refinance originations likely will remain at an elevated 
level well into the current quarter. 
We expect both equity extraction and lower debt service to continue to provide support for household 
spending  in  the  period  ahead,  though  the  strength  of  this  support  is  likely  to  diminish  over  time.  In 
recent quarters, low mortgage rates have carried new home sales and construction to elevated levels. 
Sales of new single-family homes through the first five months of this year are well ahead of last year’s 
record  pace.  And  declines  in  financing  rates  on  new  auto  loans  to  the  lowest  levels  in  many  years 
have spurred purchases of new motor vehicles. 
In  addition  to  balance  sheet  improvements,  the  recently  passed  tax  legislation  will  provide  a 
considerable  lift  to  disposable  incomes  of  households  in  the  second  half  of  the  year,  even  after 
accounting for some state and local offsets. At this point, most firms have likely implemented the lower 
withholding  schedules  that  have  been  released  by  the  Treasury,  and  advance  rebates  of  child  tax 
 2 
 BIS Review 33/2003
 credits are being mailed beginning later this month. The Joint Committee on Taxation estimates that 
these and other tax changes should increase households’ cash flow in the third quarter by $35 billion. 
Most  mainstream  economic  models  predict  that  such  tax-induced  increases  in  disposable  income 
should  produce  a  prompt  and  appreciable  pickup  in  consumer  spending.  Moreover,  most  models 
would also project positive follow-on effects on capital spending. The evolution of spending over the 
next  few  months  may  provide  an  important  test  of  the  extent  to  which  this  traditional  view  of 
expansionary fiscal policy holds in the current environment. 
Much  like  households,  businesses  have  taken  advantage  of  low  interest  rates  to  shore  up  their 
balance sheets. Most notably, firms have issued long-term debt and employed the proceeds to pay 
down commercial paper, bank loans, and other short-term debt. Although rates on commercial paper 
and bank loans are well below yields on new long-term bonds, firms have evidently judged that now is 
an opportune time to lock in long-term funding and avoid the liquidity risks that can be associated with 
heavy reliance on short-term funding. At the same time, the average coupon on outstanding corporate 
bonds remains considerably above rates on new debt issues, suggesting that firms are well positioned 
to cut their debt service burdens still further as outstanding bonds mature or are called. The net effect 
of these trends to date has been a decline in the ratio of business interest payments to net cash flow, 
a significant increase in the average maturity of liabilities, and a rise in the ratio of current assets to 
current liabilities. 
With business balance sheets having been strengthened and with investors notably more receptive to 
risk, the overall climate in credit markets has become more hospitable in recent months. Specifically, 
improvements  in  forward-looking  measures  of  default  risk,  a  decline  in  actual  defaults,  and  a 
moderation  in  the  pace  of  debt-rating  downgrades  have  prompted  a  marked  narrowing  of  credit 
spreads  and  credit  default  swap  premiums.  That  change  in  sentiment  has  extended  even  to  the 
speculative-grade bond market, where issuance has revived considerably, even by lower-tier issuers 
that would have been hard-pressed to tap the capital markets over much of the last few years. Banks, 
for their part, remain well-capitalized and willing lenders. 
In  the  past,  such  reductions  in  private  yields  and  in  the  cost  of  capital  faced  by  firms  have  been 
associated with rising capital spending. But as yet there is little evidence that the more accommodative 
financial  environment  has  materially  improved  the  willingness  of  top  executives  to  increase  capital 
investment. Corporate executives and boards of directors are seemingly unclear, in the wake of the 
recent intense focus on corporate behavior, about how an increase in risk-taking on their part would be 
viewed by shareholders and regulators. 
As a result, business leaders have been quite circumspect about embarking on major new investment 
projects. Moreover, still-ample capacity in some sectors and lingering uncertainty about the strength of 
prospective final sales have added to the reluctance to expand capital outlays. But should firms begin 
to perceive that the pickup in demand is durable, they doubtless would be more inclined to increase 
hiring and production, replenish depleted inventories, and bring new capital on line. These actions in 
turn would tend to further boost incomes and output. 
Tentative  signs  suggest  that  this  favorable  dynamic  may  be  beginning  to  take  hold.  Industrial 
production, as I indicated earlier, seems to have stabilized, and various regional and national business 
surveys point to a recent firming in new orders. Indeed, the backlog of unfilled orders for nondefense 
capital goods, excluding aircraft, increased, on net, over the first five months of this year. Investment in 
structures, however, continues to weaken. 
The outlook for business profits is, of course, a key factor that will help determine whether the stirrings 
we  currently  observe  in  new  orders  presage  a  sustained  pickup  in  production  and  new  capital 
spending. Investors’ outlook for near-term earnings has seemed a little brighter of late. 
The  favorable  productivity  trend  of  recent  years,  if  continued,  would  certainly  bode  well  for  future 
profitability.  Output  per  hour  in  the  nonfarm  business  sector  increased  2-1/2  percent  over  the  year 
ending in the first quarter. It has been unusual that firms have been able to achieve consistently strong 
gains in productivity when the overall performance of the economy has been so lackluster. To some 
extent,  companies  under  pressure  to  cut  costs  in  an  environment  of  still-tepid  sales  growth  and  an 
uncertain economic outlook might be expected to search aggressively for ways to employ resources 
more efficiently. That they have succeeded, in general, over a number of quarters suggests that a prior 
accumulation of inefficiencies was available to be eliminated. One potential source is that from 1995 to 
2000 heavy emphasis on new and expanding markets likely diverted corporate management from tight 
cost controls whose payoffs doubtless seemed small relative to big-picture expansion. 
BIS Review 33/2003 
 3
 However,  one  consequence  of  these  improvements  in  efficiency  has  been  an  ability  of  many 
businesses to pare existing workforces and still meet increases in demand. Indeed, with the growth of 
real output below that of labor productivity for much of the period since 2000, aggregate hours and 
employment have fallen, and the unemployment rate rose last month to 6.4 percent of the civilian labor 
force. 
 Although  forward-looking  indicators  are  mostly  positive,  downside  risks  to  the  business  outlook  are 
also  apparent,  including  the  partial  rebound  in  energy  costs  and  some  recent  signs  that  aggregate 
demand  may  be  flagging  among  some  of  our  important  trading  partners.  Oil  prices,  after  dropping 
sharply in March on news that the Iraqi oil fields had been secured, have climbed back above $30 per 
barrel  as  market  expectations  for  a  quick  return  of  Iraqi  production  appear  to  have  been  overly 
optimistic given the current security situation. 
Also worrisome is the rise in natural gas prices. Natural gas accounts for a substantial portion of total 
unit  energy  costs  of  production  among  nonfinancial,  non-energy-producing  firms.  And  as  I  noted  in 
testimony last week, futures markets anticipate that the current shortage in natural gas will persist well 
into the future. Although they project a near-term modest decline from highly elevated levels, contracts 
written for delivery in 2009 in excess of $4.50 per million Btu are still at double the levels that had been 
contemplated when much of our existing gas-using capital stock was put in place. 
The timing and extent of the pickup in economic activity in the United States will also depend on global 
developments. Lethargic growth among many of our important global trading partners is posing some 
downside  risk  to  the  U.S.  economic  outlook.  As  has  been  true  for  some  time,  Japan’s  economy 
remains  in  difficult  straits,  burdened  by  a  weak  banking  sector  and  an  ongoing  deflation,  although 
recent data have seemed somewhat less negative. Economic activity in many European countries - 
especially Germany - has been soft of late and has been accompanied by a decline in inflation to quite 
low  levels.  While  Japan  and  Europe  should  benefit  from  global  economic  recovery,  the  near-term 
weakness remains a concern. 
 Inflation developments have been important in shaping the economic outlook and the stance of policy 
over the first half of the year. With the economy operating below its potential for much of the past two 
years and productivity growth proceeding apace, measures of core consumer prices have decelerated 
noticeably.  Allowing  for  known  measurement  biases,  these  inflation  indexes  have  been  in  a 
neighborhood that corresponds to effective price stability - a long-held goal assigned to the Federal 
Reserve by the Congress. But we can pause at this achievement only for a moment, mindful that we 
face new challenges in maintaining price stability, specifically to prevent inflation from falling too low. 
This  is  one  reason  the  FOMC  has  adopted  a  quite  accommodative  stance  of  policy.  A  very  low 
inflation  rate  increases  the  risk  that  an  adverse  shock  to  the  economy  would  be  more  difficult  to 
counter effectively. Indeed, there is an especially pernicious, albeit remote, scenario in which inflation 
turns negative against a backdrop of weak aggregate demand, engendering a corrosive deflationary 
spiral. 
Until  recently,  this  topic  was  often  regarded  as  an  academic  curiosity.  Indeed,  a  decade  ago,  most 
economists would have dismissed the possibility that a government issuing a fiat currency would ever 
produce too little inflation. However, the recent record in Japan has reopened serious discussion of 
this issue. To be sure, there are credible arguments that the Japanese experience is idiosyncratic. But 
there  are  important  lessons  to  be  learned,  and  it  is  incumbent  on  a  central  bank  to  anticipate  any 
contingency, however remote, if significant economic costs could be associated with that contingency. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  studying  how  to  provide  policy  stimulus  should  our  primary  tool  of 
adjusting the target federal funds rate no longer be available. Indeed, the FOMC devoted considerable 
attention  to  this  subject  at  its  June  meeting,  examining  potentially  feasible  policy  alternatives. 
However,  given  the  now  highly  stimulative  stance  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  and  well-anchored 
inflation expectations, the Committee concluded that economic fundamentals are such that situations 
requiring special policy actions are most unlikely to arise. Furthermore, with the target funds rate at 1 
percent,  substantial  further  conventional  easings  could  be  implemented  if  the  FOMC  judged  such 
policy  actions  warranted.  Doubtless,  some  financial  firms  would  experience  difficulties  in  such  an 
environment, but these  intermediaries have exhibited considerable flexibility  in the past to changing 
circumstances.  More  broadly,  as  I  indicated  earlier,  the  FOMC  stands  ready  to  maintain  a  highly 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2003
 accommodative stance of policy for as long as it takes to achieve a return to satisfactory economic 
performance.  
BIS Review 33/2003 
 5
