 Lars Heikensten: Introduction on monetary policy  
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance, Stockholm, 18 March 2003. 
 Let  me  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  opportunity  to  come  here  to  the  Committee  on  Finance  and 
discuss monetary policy. This is the first time I have come here as Governor of the Riksbank. I have 
looked forward to today's meeting with you, our owners, and I shall do all I can to provide you with the 
information you need.  
These open hearings began originally at the initiative of the Riksbank. They were an expression of our 
endeavour to bring about an open discussion on monetary policy in society, an endeavour that has 
since  taken  on  many  other  aspects,  lengthy  Inflation  Reports,  a  clear  rule-of-thumb  that  can  be 
evaluated, published minutes from monetary policy discussions, and so on. Now these meetings are a 
part of our legislation. 
The fact that the Committee closely follows our activities has become even more important since the 
Riksbank  was  given  an  independent  status.  These  meetings  illustrate  the  link  between  us  and  the 
democratically-elected body in Sweden. They make it clear that we are not working in some sort of 
democratic vacuum, which is sometimes claimed in the debate.  
The  situation  in  the  global  economy  and  the  Swedish  economy  is  currently  marked  by  insecurity 
caused by the Iraq issue. What the central banks of the world can do in this situation is to continue to 
pursue their policy consistently to avoid contributing to greater uncertainty and increasing pessimism. 
If participants in the financial markets of a few years ago could be said to show a strong willingness to 
take risks and perhaps a sometimes exaggerated optimism, there are today tendencies in the opposite 
direction, particularly if one looks at the headlines in the media or listens to market participants. The 
central  banks  can  balance  this  by  maintaining  credibility  in  price  stability  and  by  safeguarding  the 
functioning of the payment system. 
The Riksbank strives to conduct a clear, credible monetary policy that is generally accepted by both 
the Swedish people and participants in the financial markets. We have therefore specified an explicit 
target for the annual inflation rate and explained that we normally try to keep to a simple rule-of-thumb; 
if the forecasts of inflation one to two years ahead exceed the inflation target we raise the interest rate 
and  vice  versa  if  the  forecasts  show  inflation  below  target  level.  This  clear  intellectual  framework 
makes  it  easier  to  influence  expectations  in  society  of  monetary  policy  and  to  evaluate  the  policy 
afterwards. Both we ourselves and external analysts can take a stand on whether the policy appears 
sensible,  whether  the  forecasts  we  make  are  reasonable,  and  whether  we  follow  the  principles  we 
have declared that we follow.  
Today I intend to begin by describing the current monetary policy situation and then looking back at 
developments in recent years. The latter discussion shows, not surprisingly, that it is not always so 
easy  in  practice  to  determine  what  is  appropriate  monetary  policy,  despite  a  clear  target  with 
apparently simple principles behind it. 
Current monetary policy 
Higher energy prices behind rising inflation 
Inflation is at present above the target level. Over the past twelve months UND1X inflation has risen by 
3.3 per cent. Does this mean that monetary policy has been too expansionary, or that the interest rate 
should be raised now? No, it does not. At least we do not believe so. The fact that inflation has risen 
recently  is  due  to  large  price  rises  on  a  few  components  of  UND1X,  primarily  electricity  and  oil. 
Excluding energy prices, UND1X inflation has risen by 1.9 per cent over the past year, i.e. very close 
to the inflation target.  
It  is  well  known  and  accepted  that  monetary  policy  does  not  have  any  great  immediate  effect  on 
inflation, which is one reason why the interest rate is set in relation to changes in the forecast inflation 
rate rather than the actual rate.  Attempts to constantly keep  inflation close  to the target  level could 
BIS Review 15/2003 
 1
 lead to large fluctuations in interest rates, with negative consequences for the economy as a whole. 
This applies in particular  when the economy suffers supply shocks, which at the same time lead to 
higher prices and lower production. Increases in electricity and oil prices are examples of this type of 
supply shock. It is therefore important to separate the effects of the energy price rises from the effects 
of  other  driving  forces  behind  inflation.  This  is  also  completely  in  line  with  the  clarification  of  the 
inflation target published by the Riksbank in 1999. 
The Riksbank's assessment is that energy prices one to two years ahead will fall back to roughly the 
same levels as forecast before the increases. However, these forecasts include a slight trend increase 
in electricity prices. 
Uncertainty in connection with the Iraq conflict 
Assessing more exactly how much is a temporary rise in inflation and how much depends on more 
lasting tendencies is a delicate task. The assessment of economic activity, both here in Sweden and 
abroad,  plays  an  important  role  here.  The  uncertainty  currently  prevailing  in  the  global  economy 
makes  it  more  difficult  than  usual  to  interpret  various  economic  indicators  and  to  predict  future 
developments. When weak figures are received from various sources, it is difficult to know whether 
they  are  the  result  of  a  slowdown  in  the  economic  recovery  due  to  fundamental  reasons,  such  as 
households wanting to increase their saving to compensate for the large stock market falls, or whether 
they are the result of an inability to act while waiting for the solution of the Iraq crisis.  
The  assessments  of  the  economic  situation  and  even  more  the  oil  prices  are  largely  due  to  the 
assumptions made with regard to developments in the geopolitical situation. Let me emphasise, before 
I go into this, what is actually obvious; a war entails much more than just economic consequences of 
the type the Riksbank has reason to observe in its Inflation Report - first and foremost considerable 
human  suffering.  Let  me  also  say  that  in  this  field  -  i.e.  geopolitics  -  we  are  of  course  amateurs, 
although we have tried to use our international contacts when putting together our forecast. 
The Riksbank's main scenario assumes a solution  will be reached  in the Iraq conflict that does not 
give  any  reason  to  significantly  reconsider  the  picture  we  have  of  a  gradual  recovery  in  economic 
activity. The surveys we have made indicate that the macroeconomic consequences of a brief war will 
not be so different from a less dramatic development. In this sense one can say that our main scenario 
is consistent with both a peaceful solution and a brief war. The Inflation Report describes in greater 
detail how we assess the effects of a worse development, which is, of course, a possibility. 
A weaker recovery 
An  increasing  number  of  indicators  over  the  past  few  months  have  given  the  impression  that  the 
international economic recovery will be more protracted than anticipated. The main difference from the 
assessment we made in the December report, is the deterioration in prospects for the euro area. All in 
all, our assessment is that international growth will be slightly lower this year than we believed when 
making  our  forecasts  in  December.  The  fact  that  we  have  revised  down  the  international  growth 
forecast also means that we expect a slightly less strained resource utilisation in the global economy. 
The slightly slower recovery for the global economy will also have repercussions for developments in 
Sweden.  Growth  this  year  is  now  expected  to  be  lower  than  last  year  and  almost  one  half  of  a 
percentage point lower than we had reason to assume in December - 1.7 per cent instead of 2.1 per 
cent.  Consequently,  we  are  also  anticipating  there  will  be  slightly  more  unutilised  resources  in  the 
Swedish  economy  in  the  coming  years  than  we  had  previously  assumed.  Our  forecast  of  resource 
utilisation in Sweden has also been affected by the revisions Statistics Sweden recently made to the 
National Accounts. These indicate that productivity growth in the economy was higher than estimated 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  1990s.  This  in  turn  indicates  that  the  economy's  long-term  potential 
growth rate may be slightly higher. 
To summarise, I can conclude that the pictures of economic activity in Sweden and in the rest of the 
world are similar to the extent that there appear to be some unutilised resources and that growth will 
not exceed its long-term potential over the coming years. Developments are currently being restrained 
by the unease over Iraq. There is also still great uncertainty regarding the size of the adaptations that 
remain after the earlier rises in share prices and other asset prices. Some figures indicate that most of 
the adjustments have now been made, but the picture is not unambiguous. Nevertheless, a recovery is 
under way, after what must be regarded in many areas, and particularly in Sweden, as a fairly mild 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2003
 slowdown.  Our  forecasts  indicate  an  average  GDP  growth  over  the  coming  years  in  line  with  the 
economy's  long-term  sustainable  rate  and  resource  utilisation  is  expected  to  remain  largely 
unchanged over this period. This means that economic activity and the labour market are not expected 
to put any great pressure on prices and wages at present or in the coming years. 
There  is,  of  course,  a  risk  that  developments  will  follow  completely  different  paths  than  those  we 
anticipate in our main scenario. This could in turn entail both upside and downside risks for inflation. 
The  downside  risk  that  concerns  us  most  is  connected  to  international  developments.  There  are 
problems in the euro area in particular that could lead to a weaker development. The upside risks are 
mainly linked to domestic price-setting and wage formation. The rise in energy prices pushes up costs 
in other parts of the economy and can spread. It could also affect expectations and wage demands. 
We are facing collective wage bargaining rounds in the autumn, which will play a decisive role for the 
future of the economy. All in all, we have come to the assessment that the risk spectrum is neutral; we 
see equally large risks for a lower inflation path than in our main scenario as for a higher path. 
Repo rate lowered 0.25 percentage points 
The Riksbank's total assessment is that inflation measured at the rate that has guided policy in recent 
times, UND1X, will be slightly lower than the target level one to two years ahead. However, the picture 
is more complicated than this. Despite the fact that this indicates the repo rate should be lowered, the 
decision has not been a simple one. This is because one important reason for inflation being lower 
than the target level one to two years ahead is that electricity and oil prices are expected to fall back 
from their current high levels and it is not certain this fall in prices will affect policy. When adjusted for 
energy prices, inflation is expected to be in line with the target two years ahead.  
The forecasts of inflation presented in the Inflation Report provide scope for lowering the repo rate by 
0.25  percentage  points.  This  was  also  the  decision  taken  by  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank 
yesterday. An important circumstance that affected the decision is that the unease and uncertainty in 
the global economy risk leading in the short term to a much worse development in economic activity 
than  described  in  the  main  scenario.  It  is  difficult  at  present  to  determine  the  future  direction  for 
monetary policy, which will depend partly on the development of the Iraq crisis and the effects of its 
possible outcome on inflation prospects. 
Before  I  go  on  to  discuss  history,  let  me  emphasise  one  more  thing.  The  repo  rate  decision  we 
consider most appropriate depends on the overall direction expected for economic policy. Recently, 
there have been claims that this is an appropriate time to counteract the weakening of the economy 
with  a more expansionary  fiscal policy.  Some debaters even claim that it  would be desirable  in  the 
present situation to give up the principles that have guided budgetary policy in recent years, with an 
expenditure  ceiling  and  surplus  target.  I  don't  agree  with  that  at  all.  If  there  is  short-term  room  for 
manoeuvre and it is possible to obtain higher growth and employment without threatening the inflation 
target, this should be safeguarded by lowering the repo rate. To relinquish the fiscal policy regulations 
when they may be really put to the test would send a very negative signal to all those who analyse the 
Swedish economy. This could in turn risk having directly counter-productive effects on the interest rate 
and thereby on economic developments.  
Monetary policy 2000-2002 
Let me return to a retrospective look at the development of the inflation rate and the monetary policy 
conducted.  The  Riksbank  has  published  an  appendix  in  the  Inflation  Report  that  is  intended  to 
facilitate the evaluation of monetary policy during the period 2000-2002. 
The focus of my discussion will be on the latter part of this period. This is because developments in 
2000-2001 were illustrated very clearly in last year's assessment. 
Price rise and monetary policy 2001 
The fact that inflation was over the target level during the second half of 2001 and first half of 2002 
was  largely  due  to  supply  shocks  similar  to  those  we  are  experiencing  now.  Food  prices  rose 
considerably as a result of mad cow disease, foot-and-mouth disease and higher prices for fruit and 
vegetables  resulting  from poor  harvests.  There  was  also  a  rise  in  electricity  prices.  The  Riksbank's 
BIS Review 15/2003 
 3
 assessment  was  then,  as  it  is  now,  that  these  price  rises  were  essentially  temporary  and  inflation 
would soon fall again. 
This proved to be the case and in this sense the upturn in inflation 2001 did not comprise a serious 
monetary policy problem. However, the inflation rate rose even after adjustments were made for food 
and  energy  prices;  there  appears  to  have  been  a  rising  trend  in  various  measures  of  underlying 
inflation  from  early  1999  to  early  2002.  It  has  since  been  shown  that  the  Riksbank  and  other 
forecasters overestimated GDP growth and underestimated inflation when we made our forecasts for 
2002  during  2000  and  2001.  Perhaps  we  were  a  little  too  optimistic  with  regard  to  the  economy's 
capacity to grow without inflation accelerating. However, this should be seen in the light of the earlier 
forecasts  having  been  wrong  in  the  other  direction;  when  the  Swedish  and  international  economies 
grew at a very rapid rate, while inflation was low. 
The surprising upturn  in prices during 2001 came to affect policy.  Although the  Riksbank made the 
assessment  -  as  early  as  May  2001  -  that  the  upturn  was  essentially  temporary,  there  remained 
concern that it might to a greater degree than anticipated reflect a high level of resource utilisation. 
When there were signs that inflation expectations were about to rise during 2001, at the same time as 
the krona weakened, we made the assessment that it was necessary to intervene and raised the repo 
rate by a quarter of a percentage point. This took place in early July 2001. A couple of months later, 
after  the  terrorist  attacks  in  the  USA  on  11  September,  the  Riksbank  chose  to  lower  its  steering 
interest  rate  by  0.5  percentage  points  in  the  light  of  the  poorer  economic  prospects.  However,  no 
further  reductions  were  made.  The  reason  was  that  a  tentative  upturn  in  economic  activity  was 
expected in the future and resource utilisation was assessed as relatively high, despite the slowdown. 
Compared with other countries, fiscal policy was tangibly expansionary, while a weak exchange rate 
gave impetus to the Swedish economy.  
Developments in 2002 
During  spring  2002  the  repo  rate  was  raised  by  0.25  percentage  points  on  two  occasions.  The 
background  was that resource utilisation  was still assessed as relatively high and economic activity 
was expected to strengthen significantly in the light of the policy pursued, with ensuing higher inflation. 
In addition, inflation was still high and there was uncertainty over this, partly connected with resource 
utilisation. 
However, the recovery began to slow down, partly in the wake of continued stock market falls. At the 
same time, the earlier assessment that the upturn in inflation during 2001 had been temporary was 
confirmed, as inflation was now in line with the target again, which reduced uncertainty over possible 
contagion  effects.  Given  this  development,  the  repo  rate  was  lowered  twice  during  the  autumn,  by 
0.25 percentage points. 
There are important similarities and important differences between the situation now and then. Inflation 
has risen sharply now, as it did then, as a result of some easily discernible supply shocks, with what 
are  probably  fairly  transitory  effects.  The  geopolitical  unrest  has  had  negative  effects  on  the  global 
economy, ever since 11 September 2001. However, there are also important differences. The krona 
weakened  at  the  beginning  of  2001,  which  together  with  a  tendency  towards  higher  inflation 
expectations brought about an interest rate hike. Over the past year the krona has remained relatively 
stable against the euro and strengthened against the dollar. Expectations of economic activity were 
also different in 2001. That year, up to the early autumn, they were aimed at relatively high growth and 
a  rise  in  resource  utilisation,  although  growth  expectations  were  slightly  lower  than  a  year  earlier. 
Today, expectations are of a largely unchanged level of resource utilisation. Thus, price pressure is 
not as high, either, as long as no secondary effects arise from the energy price rises. 
Forecasts guide policy 
Let me conclude by underlining two important aspects when assessing monetary  policy. Firstly, the 
Riksbank, like many other countries with inflation targeting, has chosen to look ahead when making 
monetary policy decisions. This is clearly seen when the actual policy is compared in the evaluation 
appendix with simple, rule-based decisions on the basis of observed GDP growth or actual inflation. 
The import of this is, of course, that forecasts of inflation and GDP growth become more decisive for 
monetary policy than the actually observed growth rates in price levels and GDP. A disadvantage of 
this policy is that forecasting mistakes have effects on policy. But one advantage, which we consider 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2003
 to outweigh this, is that monetary policy becomes less disjointed, more predictable and on the whole 
more stabilising for economic developments. Of course, the Riksbank could have raised its rate more 
when inflation rose because of higher food and energy prices during 2001. But would this have rapidly 
subdued inflation and led to a more beneficial development in the economy? I don't think so. 
Secondly, it is difficult both to make and to assess forecasts, as our picture of history and the current 
situation constantly changes as a result of revisions to the statistics. The latest revisions have entailed 
an upward adjustment of GDP and productivity in Sweden during the years 1993-2002. In 2000 and 
2001 the Riksbank made the assessment that there  were unutilised resources in the economy and 
that  inflationary  pressure  was  thus  modest.  When  the  actual  inflation  rate  rose,  we  felt  obliged  to 
review  this  picture,  and  some  adjustment  was  probably  justified.  However,  the  most  recent  figures 
nevertheless indicate that the original assessment was largely correct. It is important not to get carried 
away by the most recent statistics and rapidly draw up new trends to follow. 
Future assessment of the Riksbank 
Let me finish by emphasising something I accentuated in the beginning. We aim to provide you on the 
Committee of Finance with the best possible information for your assessments and discussions. If you 
have any wishes or views with regard to how the material and the information you have received today 
could  be further  developed, we  would of course be happy to  hear them. We shall do  all  we can to 
satisfy your wishes.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 15/2003 
 5
