 Susan S Bies: Retirement savings, equity ownership, and challenges to 
investors  
Speech by Ms Susan S Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, 
at a joint presentation to the National Economics Club and the Committee on the Status of Women in 
the  Economics  Profession  of  the  American  Economic  Association,  Washington,  D.C.,  27  February 
2003.  
 Good  afternoon.  I  am  delighted  to  be  here  to  speak  about  some  of  the  new  challenges  and 
opportunities that American families face from changes in retirement savings and equity ownership in 
the  United  States.  I  know  that  many  of  your  members  are  economists  who  work  in  policy  advisory 
roles  in  government.  As  an  economist  who  enjoys  getting  back  to  her  Ph.D.  roots,  I  want  to  also 
address how traditional economic theory about consumer behavior and corporate governance are, at 
times,  in  apparent  conflict  with  the  practices  that  we  observe.  This  in  turn  raises  issues  about  the 
appropriate economic and policy frameworks for decisionmaking.  
There has been a dramatic shift in employer-sponsored retirement plans over the past two decades - a 
shift from plans in which pension managers controlled most investments and retirees received preset 
benefits to plans in which workers directly control their investment portfolios and keep their investment 
returns. Many American families have responded by purchasing corporate equity - frequently through 
investments in mutual funds or other institutional accounts. With increasing control over their pensions, 
and  broader  participation  in  equity  markets,  Americans  have  far more  options  for  financial  planning 
than they did twenty years ago.  
But with the new opportunities come risks and responsibilities. Households with more control of their 
resources for retirement have a greater need to employ sound financial planning. Moreover, though 
many  might  be  unaware  of  it,  stock-owning  households  share  responsibility  for  oversight  and 
governance of the corporations they own.  
The  headlines  of  the  past  couple  of  years  have  highlighted  the  importance  of  these  risks  and 
responsibilities.  We  have  all  witnessed  a  precipitous  fall  in  stock  prices  and  some  spectacular 
corporate failures and have read accounts of retirement savings accrued over long careers only to be 
lost in a matter of weeks. Some of those corporate meltdowns were accompanied by the revelation of 
shoddy auditing practices and stock analyses tainted by conflicts of interest. And those who should 
have  been  ensuring  sound  corporate  governance  were  often  unwilling  or  unable  to  protect  the 
interests of shareholders.  
Recent  developments  suggest  that  households  may,  in  coming  years,  take  on  even  more 
responsibility  for  their  retirement  saving  and  assume  additional  responsibilities  for  corporate 
governance.  The  President's  recently  released  budget  for  2004  would  considerably  expand  tax-
preferred  savings  accounts  for  American  families.  And  newly  adopted  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission rules that give investors unprecedented access to proxy-voting records of mutual funds 
will enable and encourage investors to take more active roles in corporate governance.  
With  this  backdrop,  I  would  like  to  start  by  discussing  some  of  the  challenges  confronting  families, 
employers, and policymakers as workers assume greater control of their retirement planning. Later, I 
will turn to some issues related to individual investors' roles in corporate governance.  
Retirement savings 
The American pension landscape has changed dramatically in the past twenty years. Mostly gone are 
the days when companies addressed their workers' retirement needs solely by paying fixed pensions 
from  retirement  until  death.  Today's  workers  are  much  more  likely  to  manage  their  own  retirement 
resources  by  participating  in  employee-directed  savings  accounts.  This  trend  has  greatly  expanded 
workers' responsibilities for their retirement planning. But it has also raised significant new questions 
about how effectively employees are handling their new freedoms and responsibilities, and what the 
appropriate role for employers should be in helping their workers plan for retirement.  
What  lies  behind  the  two-decade  trend  toward  worker-directed  savings  accounts?  Companies  like 
them  because  they  relieve  the  firm  of  the  burden  of  managing  a  pension  fund  to  finance  promised 
BIS Review 10/2003 
 1
 benefits.  One  need  only  scan  a  few  recent  headlines  to  be  reminded  of  the  difficulties  that 
underfunded pension plans can impose on corporate balance sheets. With a savings-account plan, in 
contrast, companies need only set up the accounts and let their employees manage the investments. 
And workers also like savings account plans, because they provide more choices and because they 
are portable - that is, they can travel with the employee from job to job. A particularly popular type of 
savings  plan  is  the  401(k),  which  lets  workers  make  pre-tax  contributions  to  retirement  accounts 
through payroll deduction. Twenty-five years ago 401(k) plans did not exist. Today they cover more 
than 40 million workers, take in $150 billion in annual contributions, and hold assets worth more than 
$2 trillion.  
This  is  a  significant  development,  because  along  with  the  greater  flexibility  of  a  401(k)  plan  comes 
greater  responsibility  on  the  part  of  individuals  to  direct  their  own  retirement  saving.  Workers  must 
decide whether to participate in the plan, how much to contribute every pay period, where to invest 
contributions, when to rebalance their asset mix, and what to do with balances when changing jobs.  
Economic theory provides the basis for making these types of choices, but the problems are complex 
and  the  average  employee may  not  have  developed  the  skills  to  formally  evaluate  the  alternatives. 
And, in fact, recent research has found some troubling patterns: Many workers do not participate in 
their employers' retirement plans, contribute a small proportion of their wages, and make questionable 
investment and distribution choices.  
Let me just take a minute to cite some telling facts about 401(k) plans. Despite the tax advantages of 
401(k)  contributions,  one-quarter  of  workers  eligible  for  401(k)  plans  do  not  participate  at  all,  even 
when  their  employers  would  match  a  portion  of  their  contributions.1  These  workers  are  effectively 
turning down a pay raise by leaving compensation on the table. And many who do participate save 
just  a  little.  In  a  survey  last  year,  one-quarter  of  firms  reported  that  their  rank-and-file  401(k) 
participants saved an average of less than 4 percent of pay.2  
How  will  these  plans  affect  retirement  security  in  the  long  run?  Several  studies  suggest  that  many 
workers  are  not  saving  adequately  for  retirement.3  In  2001,  among  households  with  retirement 
accounts  who  were  approaching  retirement  age,  one-half  had  balances  of  less  than  $55,000,  and 
one-quarter had balances of less than $13,000.4 Clearly balances of this size will not be adequate to 
finance many economic emergencies and will barely supplement social security over the two or three 
decades that often follows retirement.  
There are other concerns about the way in which employees manage their 401(k) plans. Some seem 
to give little attention to the way their contributions are invested. For example, some participants divide 
assets equally across all available investment options, or simply invest contributions according to plan 
defaults.5 And, as was made painfully clear last year, many 401(k) participants seem to invest heavily 
in employer stock.6 Overall, about one-quarter of aggregate 401(k) balances are in company stock, but 
for many employees the share is far higher.  
Why  do  workers  invest  so  much  in  company  stock?  The  question  is  particularly  pressing  because 
workers'  financial  outcomes  are  already  heavily  dependent  on  the  fortunes  of  their  employer. 
Moreover,  employers  often  require  that  the  matching  contributions  they  make  on  behalf  of  their 
employees be invested in company stock. Thus, when employees invest their own contributions in the 
company stock, they are ratcheting up an already-risky position. Elementary finance theory suggests 
they shouldn't do it.  
                                                      
1 
2 
3 
 Deloitte and Touche, 2002 401(k) Annual Benchmarking Survey. 
 Deloitte and Touche, 2002 401(k) Annual Benchmarking Survey. 
 For a review, see Olivia Mitchell, Brett Hammond, and Anna Rappaport, Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement 
Wealth, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2000. 
4   Based on the Federal Reserve Board's 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances. 
5   Nellie Liang and Scott Weisbenner, "Investor Behavior and Purchase of Company Stock in 401(k) Plans - The Importance of 
Plan  Design,"  FEDS  Working  Paper  2002-36  and  NBER  Working  Paper  W9131,  2002.  See  also  Shlomo  Benartzi  and 
Richard  Thaler,  "Naïve  Diversification  Strategies  and  Retirement  Savings  Plans,"  American  Economic  Review,  vol.  91 
(2001), pp. 79-98. 
6  Nellie Liang and Scott Weisbenner, "Investor Behavior and Purchase of Company Stock in 401(k) Plans - The Importance of 
Plan  Design."  See  also  Shlomo  Benartzi,  "Excessive  Extrapolation  and  the  Allocation  of  401(k)  Accounts  to  Company 
Stock," Journal of Finance, vol. 56 (2001), pp. 1747-64. 
  Yet many workers believe that their employer's stock is less risky than broad market averages.7 What 
explains this apparent disconnect? As someone who held a large fraction of my own 401(k) plan in my 
company's  stock  for  many  years,  perhaps  I  can  help  answer  this  question.  There  is  a  difference 
between risk and uncertainty. Employees may feel less uncertain about the prospects of the company 
for  which  they  work  relative  to  other  companies  about  which  they  know  little.  This may  make  them 
more comfortable about holding their company's stock - even at the cost of a poorly diversified and 
highly volatile portfolio.  
To summarize, experience has shown that while 401(k) plans offer workers unprecedented flexibility in 
managing their pensions, some workers do not seem to be using them effectively - they contribute too 
little, make questionable investment choices, or fail to participate at all. In response, some employers 
have expressed increased interest in employer-provided financial education.  
But  employers' attention to plan  design turns out to  be just as  important. Contrary to predictions  of 
traditional finance theory, the way retirement-plan options are framed to workers affects the choices 
they  make.  This  is  where  the  new  discipline  of  behavioral  finance  has  begun  to  offer  significant 
contributions.  Some  of  the  most  innovative  and  apparently  effective  ideas  about  retirement-plan 
design owe to the insights of behavioral finance.  
As compelling evidence that framing matters, researchers have found that so-called "opt-out" plans, or 
plans  that  automatically  enroll  workers,  have  significantly  higher  participation  rates  than  plans  that 
require  workers  to  sign  up.8  Not  surprisingly,  employers  have  responded  by  making  automatic 
enrollment  more  prevalent:  A  recent  survey  found  that  nearly  a  quarter  of  large  plans  either  have 
adopted automatic enrollment or are considering adopting it.9  
But automatic enrollment may not be enough, since automatically enrolled employees often give little 
attention to the default options of the plan. One study found that half of automatic enrollees had not 
moved from the defaults even three years after enrollment.10 This could be a problem because default 
contribution rates, which are typically 3 percent of pay, are often too low to allow workers to take full 
advantage  of  employer  matches,  let  alone  to  build  sufficient  assets  for  retirement.  In  fact,  there  is 
some evidence that the low default rates reduce contributions among workers who would likely have 
saved  more  in  the  absence  of  the  default.  Finally,  the  default  investment  choice  in  automatic 
enrollment plans is typically the least risky, such as a money market or stable value fund. While these 
investments are especially safe, their expected returns may be too low to achieve long-term retirement 
security.  
Subsequent research has highlighted how employers might improve their automatic enrollment plans. 
For  example,  they  might  set  higher  default  contribution  rates  and  greater  default  exposure  to  a 
diversified set of higher-yielding assets. Another possibility is to bring new employees on board with 
low contribution rates - just as is often done currently - but then to nudge contribution rates up as the 
workers receive pay raises. Some studies have shown that workers are willing to pre-commit to such a 
plan, which eventually results in significantly higher rates of savings.11  
But along with these new opportunities for employers come difficult new questions. How high should 
their employees' savings rates go? In an ideal  world, all employees  would be  making well-informed 
savings decisions and wouldn't need any encouragement from their employers. But, in reality, a plan's 
design  affects  the  financial  well-being  of  its  participants.  And  though  a  default  savings  rate  of  3 
percent of pay might seem too low, an employer is not necessarily in a good position to know what the 
appropriate saving rate should be. A high default rate may be inappropriate, particularly if employees 
respond by dissaving outside their retirement plan.  
                                                      
7  Vanguard  Center  for  Retirement  Research.  Vanguard  Participant  Monitor:  Expecting  Lower  Market  Returns  in  the  Near 
Term, December 2001. 
8   Brigitte Madrian and Dennis Shea, "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior," NBER 
Working Paper No. W7682, 2000. 
9   Deloitte and Touche, 2002 401(k) Annual Benchmarking Survey. 
10   James  Choi,  David  Laibson,  Brigitte  Madrian,  and  Andrew  Metrick,  "For  Better  or  for Worse:  Default  Effects  and  401(k) 
Savings Behavior," NBER Working Paper No. W8651, 2001. 
11   Richard Thaler and Shlomo Benartzi, "Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving," 
unpublished Manuscript, 2001. 
  Many  employers  will  recoil  from  making  these  choices,  because  they  do  not  want  to  become  too 
paternalistic.  But  a  significant  and  inescapable  implication  of  this  line  of  recent  research  is  that 
employers  cannot  avoid  responsibility  in  this  area,  because  there  is  no  "neutral"  plan  design  - 
whatever design they choose will affect the retirement security of their employees.  
To  summarize,  the  past  two  decades  have  brought  remarkable  expansion  of  the  financial  options 
available  to  ordinary  workers,  including  significant  new  tools  for  retirement  planning.  But  this 
experience  has  also  revealed  some  important  lessons  for  workers,  companies,  and  policymakers. 
While many - perhaps most - workers effectively use the new tools to prepare for retirement, some do 
not.  Moreover,  participants'  choices  are  often  affected  by  the  presentation  of  the  options.  Thus, 
companies offering retirement savings accounts such as 401(k) plans face a delicate balancing act. 
While they desire to shift the maximum degree of decisionmaking to workers, they must acknowledge 
that  basic  plan-design  choices  will  affect  the  long-term  retirement  security  of  their  employees. 
Companies that find the right combination of financial education and plan design will be in the best 
position to help their employees prepare adequately for retirement.  
Equity ownership 
As Americans have stepped up their use of employee-directed savings accounts in the past couple of 
decades, many have also purchased their first shares of corporate equity - often within their 401(k) 
plans.  More  than  half  of  U.S.  households  now  own  either  stock  or  stock mutual  funds.12  Moreover, 
equity ownership reaches further into younger generations and the middle class now than it did in the 
1980s. From 1989 to 2001, the fraction of Americans younger than 35 who owned stock more than 
doubled, as did stock ownership among families with below-median income.13  
This striking increase in equity ownership is, in part, an outgrowth of the move toward worker-directed 
savings plans, as I've already discussed. More than two-thirds of U.S. stockholders now hold some 
stock  in  an  employer-sponsored  retirement  plan.14  In  addition,  the  heightened  popularity  of  owning 
stocks probably reflects a broadened understanding of the potential benefits of equity investments and 
perhaps an increased tolerance for financial risk. Also important, especially for investors of relatively 
modest means, is that mutual funds in particular have substantially reduced the cost of purchasing a 
diversified portfolio. Despite the ease with which corporate equities can be traded directly nowadays - 
through  on-line  brokerage  accounts,  for  example  -  a  recent  survey  found  that  two-thirds  of 
stockholders first bought their equity shares through mutual funds.15  
Besides  its  financial  risks  and  potential  rewards,  stock  ownership  imparts  important  corporate 
governance  responsibilities.  In  fact,  economic  theories  of  firm  behavior  often  stress  the  competing 
interests of management and ownership. With an ownership share in a business, every stock investor 
has a role in providing oversight on how that company is run. The egregious corporate scandals in the 
headlines  last  year  have  highlighted  the  need  for  responsible  oversight  by  corporate  boards  and 
shareholders alike to check the behavior of management. So, as we look for solutions to corporate 
governance problems, we should not forget that every individual who owns stock has a role - perhaps 
a small one, but an important one.  
Yet the growth in households' equity ownership has come with an ironic twist: While more households 
own  shares  of  corporations,  many  of  the  new  stockholders  are  unable  to  play  a  role  in  corporate 
governance. Why? Because Americans have largely purchased their shares through pension funds, 
mutual  funds,  insurance  companies,  and  other  financial  institutions.  These  financial  intermediaries, 
which act as the agents for household investors, have generally not made much, if any, effort to make 
their governance policies transparent and responsive to the preferences of their investors.  
                                                      
12   Aizcorbe, Ana, Arthur Kennickell, and Kevin Moore, "Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 
2001  Survey  of  Consumer  Finances,"  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin,  vol.  89  (January  2003),  pp.  1-32,  and  Federal  Reserve 
Board  staff  calculations  from  the  Survey  of  Consumer  Finances.  See  also  Investment  Company  Institute  and  Securities 
Industry Association (ICI and SIA), Equity Ownership in America, 2002. 
13   Aizcorbe, Kennickell, and Moore, "Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of 
Consumer Finances." 
14   ICI and SIA, Equity Ownership in America. 
15   ICI and SIA, Equity Ownership in America. 
  So, as Americans have been purchasing most of their stock indirectly through institutional investors, 
the responsibilities for active monitoring of corporate management and governance mechanisms have 
been shifting to institutions. There's good news, bad news, and some promising news to report about 
this trend.  
The  good  news  is  that  we  may  have  reason  to  expect  that  institutional  shareholders  would  be 
especially active in  working for good corporate governance. An institutional investor holding a large 
block of stock naturally reaps more of the rewards of good corporate governance than an individual 
holding a small number of shares, and the  big  institutional investor undoubtedly  has more leverage 
with management. In addition, as individuals buy their stock through institutions, the task of forming 
shareholder coalitions to effect good governance ought to become that much easier.  
The bad news is that, with some notable exceptions, institutional investors historically appear to have 
been fairly passive shareholders and have tended to shy away from challenging management directly 
and from initiating reform-oriented proxy proposals. Also some institutional investors may face conflicts 
of  interest  in  providing  active  governance  if  they  also  compete  to  sell  financial  services  -  like 
pension-plan administration - to the firms whose shares they hold.  
To  be  sure,  the  evidence  on  institutional  shareholder  activism  and  conflicts  of  interest  is  limited, 
because  few  institutional  investors  provide  any  information  about  how  they  vote  the  shares  in  their 
portfolios.  So,  individual  investors  interested  in  corporate  governance  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to 
ascertain anything about how an institutional investor has voted shares on their behalf. Although some 
institutional  investors  may  have  been  active  in  behind-the-scenes  attempts  to  promote  good 
management  decisions,  few  details  about  these  efforts  are  made  available  to  the  public,  which 
ultimately bears the risk of stock ownership.  
And the promising news? Just last month, the SEC approved new rules that will require investment 
advisers and mutual funds to disclose their proxy voting policies and specific proxy votes. For most 
investors in mutual funds, the new rule will provide unprecedented information about how votes are 
being cast on their behalf.  
In fact, some have criticized the new disclosure rules for imposing too great a burden on mutual funds 
and for providing too much information to be useful  to most investors. But that criticism misses the 
point. Disclosure of proxy voting records will likely initiate new efforts to educate individual investors on 
corporate governance issues.  
Disclosures about proxy voting are especially important for index funds. Actively managed funds can 
signal dissatisfaction with corporate officers by selling shares, but index funds, which passively hold a 
basket  of  representative  companies,  cannot.  Soon,  by  monitoring  the  proxy-votes  of  index-fund 
managers, investors will be able to gauge their fund managers' satisfaction with corporate officers.  
By the time the first proxy-voting reports are required to become public in 2004, I expect that the initial 
steps  toward  corporate  governance  education  will  already  have  been  taken.  Individual  investors 
looking  for  guidance  on  the  way  mutual  funds  vote  their  proxies  will  be  able  to  turn  to  a  slate  of 
organizations that monitor and analyze mutual funds' voting records. I look forward to learning how my 
mutual funds have voted their proxies and to comparing their voting records with those of other funds. 
As  other  investors  do  the  same,  the  new  disclosures  will  likely  have  the  additional  side  benefit  of 
directing new attention to corporate governance.  
Conclusion 
Some  of  last  year's  most  striking  developments  -  tumbling  stock  prices,  evaporating  retirement 
accounts,  and  improper  corporate  oversight  -  highlighted  the  importance  of  longer-term  trends  in 
pension plans and equity ownership. As more workers have managed their own retirement accounts 
and more become stockholders through pension plans and mutual funds, more have learned about 
both the rewards and the risks of investing in capital markets. With individuals' increasing exposure to 
market fluctuations and greater participation in equity markets come both new opportunities and new 
responsibilities, for both workers and employers. Today I've discussed some of the issues that have 
come to light as a result of long-term trends in pension plans  and  equity ownership.  And I'd  like to 
leave you on an optimistic note with this observation: The issues I discussed today are only possible 
because of the remarkable breadth and depth of capital markets in the United States. I am confident 
that  over  the  long  haul,  the  concerns  I  noted  will  simply  represent  the  ordinary  climb  along  the 
  investment-learning  curve  as  a  broader  segment  of  American  households  work  to  achieve  their 
financial goals.  
 