 Vepa Kamesam: Financing for entrepreneurship and SMEs - an Indian 
perspective  
Address by Mr Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at OECD (cid:147)Workshop 
on Entrepreneurship in a Global Economy: Strategic Issues and Policies(cid:148) in the panel (cid:147)Identifying the 
Real  Policy  Issues(cid:148)  in  the  Session  on  (cid:147)Improving  Financing  for  Entrepreneurship  and  SMEs(cid:148), 
Budapest, 9 September 2003. 
 I  am  indeed  thankful  to  OECD  for  inviting  me  as  speaker  at  this  important  workshop  on 
(cid:147)Entrepreneurship in a Global Economy(cid:148). In my address, I shall share with you some of the initiatives 
that are being taken by the Indian authorities with regard to the Small Scale Industries (SSI), against 
the backdrop of the SME financing in a cross-country perspective. 
In view of the continuing financing problems of the SMEs, at least two broad approaches have been 
adopted at the national level viz.,  
(i) 
(ii) 
facilitating access of SMEs to extant sources of financing; and  
developing  newer  sources  of  financing  in  terms  of  venture  capital  and  business  angle 
networks. 
As far as existing sources of financing are concerned, the trend is towards reduced and more flexible 
loan schemes as well as loan guarantees. Competitive markets and a deregulated interest rate regime 
generally ensure that interest rates on guaranteed loans (including guarantee premium) are relatively 
low.  
With regard to newer sources of financing, many OECD countries are considering liberalizing the rules 
regarding venture capital investment. On-going research at the OECD indicates that effective venture 
capital  policies  include  diversifying  venture  investors,  channeling  venture  capital  to  seed  firms  in 
growth sectors and phasing out of Government equity schemes as private markets develop.  
Like  any  other  developing  countries,  in  India  also,  the  Small  Scale  Industry  (SSI)  plays  a  very 
significant role in terms of balanced and sustainable growth, employment generation, development of 
entrepreneurial  skills  and  contribution  to  export  earnings.  As  at  the  end  of  March  2002,  there  were 
around  3.6  million  SSI  units  -  constituting  95  per  cent  of  the  industrial  units  in  the  country  -  which 
produced  a  large  number  and  a  wide  range  of  items  with  associated  technology  varying  from 
traditional  to  state-of-art.  These  SSI  units  provided  employment  to  nearly  20  million  persons, 
accounted for 40 per cent of the value added in the manufacturing sector, 34 per cent of total national 
exports and 7 per cent of GDP during 2002-03.  
In  the  Indian  context,  the  definition  of  the  SSI  sector  is  largely  framed  in  terms  of  cumulative 
investment in plant and machinery while most of the countries adopt the level of employment as the 
criterion for defining the SSI sector. According to the official definition adopted in India since 1998, the 
investment  limit  up  to  Rs.10  million  in  plant  and  machinery  is  treated  as  SSI  sector.  However,  in 
respect of certain specified items such as hosiery, hand tools, drugs & pharmaceuticals and stationary 
items above investment limit in plant and machinery has been enhanced up to Rs.50 million. Since 
1967,  there  is  a  policy  of  reserving  selected  products  in  the  manufacturing  sector  for  exclusive 
production in the SSI sector. The list of reserved items has been revised from time-to-time.  
The policy initiatives in India have always recognised that SSIs contribute to the material progress of 
the country. Small firms are capable of producing a larger quantum of consumer goods than before to 
meet the possible increase in demand that would arise on account of the spurt in incomes, generated 
by fresh investments in heavy and basic industries. It is also taken for granted that small firms would, 
in the process, create additional employment opportunities. Implicit also is the assumption that SSIs 
are  less  capital  intensive  and  more  labour  absorbing.  This  is  regarded  as  an  important  gain  of 
promoting SSIs, given the country(cid:146)s resource endowments, namely labour abundance and scarcity of 
capital.  
Among  the  developing  countries,  India  was  the  first  to  display  special  consideration  to  SSIs.  As 
alluded to earlier, the basic focus of Indian Government has been that, employment generation is of 
paramount importance in a labour surplus economy. Small enterprises manufacturing labour-intensive 
products make economical use of capital and absorb the abundant labour supply that characterise an 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 1
 underdeveloped economy. Various measures used for the development of SSI have included product 
reservations,  fiscal  concessions,  preferential  allocations  of  credit  and  interest  subsidy  in  a  credit 
rationing framework, extension of business and technical services by the government and preferential 
procurement by the government. SSIs have been given preferential treatment through the provision of 
lower interest rates as well as requirement for a minimum credit allocation from the commercial banks. 
Since 1986, fiscal incentives have also been provided to the SSI units in terms of complete exemption 
from excise duties or payment of lower rates, under specified conditions. Since April 1995, SSI units 
are allowed a deduction of 25 per cent of the profits for a period of ten years, for taxation purpose. In 
case the SSI  units set up  in specified backward  area, full tax exemption  is allowed for the first five 
years and a deduction of 25 per cent in the subsequent five years. 
In  recognition  of  the  contribution  and  the  vast  potential  of  the  SSI  sector  as  well  as  its  inherent 
infirmities,  provision  of  adequate  credit  to  this  sector  has  continued  to  be  an  important  element  of 
banking policy, even though economic and financial policies themselves have undergone significant 
transformation,  particularly  after  the  initiation  of  structural  reforms  in  1991.  Bank  credit  to  the  SSI 
sector increased from Rs.168 billion in March 1991 to Rs.530 billion in March 2003.  
In the policy context, there has been a paradigm shift. The Indian industry remained within a inward 
oriented policy framework up to the 1990s. With globalisation, liberalization, financial and real sector 
reforms, the country adopted an outward  looking  approach. At present, both the industrial sector  in 
general and SSI sector in particular are exposed to international competitive environment. However, 
the most significant aspect is that India has evolved a sound institutional set up for financing of the SSI 
sector. A separate industrial policy was announced as part of the structural reforms in 1991 which not 
only eliminated various controls on the industrial sector, provided a greater role for the private sector 
and encouraged inflow of foreign investment and technology, but also contained specific initiatives for 
the development of the SSI sector. The introduced a comprehensive policy package which includes 
fiscal, credit, infrastructural and technological. Now the emphasis is on quality improvement, marketing 
and streamlining regulations.  
There are multiple institutions in the public, private and cooperative sectors of the Indian economy that 
cater to the credit needs of the SSI sector, both for fixed assets creation as well as for working capital. 
Consequent to the nationalisation of major banks in 1969, banking policy mandated that at least 40 
per cent of bank credit should be directed towards the priority sector constituting agriculture, SSI and 
individual service and business sectors. Preferential treatment was also provided to the SSI sector via 
lower rates of interest on bank credit. The Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) was set 
up in April 1990 as the principal financial institution for promotion, financing and development of the 
SSI sector and for coordinating the activities of other institutions engaged in similar activities. A Fair 
Practices Code has also been adopted by SIDBI which, inter-alia, clearly sets out the procedures that 
would  be  followed  in  respect  of  loan  applications,  appraisals  and  disbursements.  In  order  to  boost 
investment in SSI sector, the benefits of exemption of capital gains arising from the transfer of long-
term  capital  assets  are  allowed  if  such  capital  gains  are  invested  in  bonds  by  the  Small  Scale 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) with effect from April 2002.  
A Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small Industries has been launched and the SIDBI set up the 
Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI), to implement the Guarantee Scheme. The 
main objective of CGTSI is to facilitate hassle-free credit to the SSI sector and encourage banks to 
shift from collateral-based or security-oriented lending to. The CGTSI is in the process of developing a 
Mutual Credit Guarantee Scheme (MCGS) on the lines of similar schemes in Italy and other European 
countries;  such  schemes  essentially  involve  a  guarantee  from  industry  associations  in  which  the 
borrower  is  also  a  member  which,  in  turn,  enhances  the  lender(cid:146)s  confidence.  The  SIDBI  has  also 
encouraged  the  growth  of  the  venture  capital  industry  for  hi-tech  SME  units  in  India  by  promoting 
13 State / regional level funds and setting up an all India Venture Fund.  
The  Government  of  India  had  launched  many  Schemes  for  technological  upgradation  and 
modernisation,  protection  of  workers  affected  by  technological  upgradation  and  modernisation, 
infrastructure development, entrepreneurship development, as well as increase in the investment limit 
(to Rs.50 million) for SSI units producing certain items. The Government of India set up a new Ministry 
in  October  1999  to  provide  more  focussed  attention  to  the  development  of  the  SSI  sector.  Several 
expert committees had also been set up over the 1990s to assess the  problems of the SSI sector. 
Most of the recommendations of these Committees relating to simplification of loan application forms, 
launching of a new Credit  Guarantee Scheme, raising of composite loans,  etc  have been  accepted 
and implemented.  
2 
 BIS Review 40/2003
 The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  has  also  been  emphasising  on  the  flow  of  bank  credit  to  micro 
enterprises in rural and semi-urban areas set up by vulnerable sections of society including women. A 
number  of  initiatives  have  been  taken  in  this  regard  and  banks  have  been  advised  to  provide 
maximum support to Self Help Groups. Furthermore, four informal Groups have been set up by the 
RBI to analyse various micro-finance issues relating to (i) structure and sustainability; (ii) funding; (iii) 
regulations;  and  (iv)  capacity-building.  The  RBI  will  discuss  the  recommendations  of  the  informal 
Groups in a wider forum for possible implementation.  
The SSI sector has so far been resilient to the impact of the policy changes - increasing domestic and 
foreign  competition  following  the  de-reservation  and  import  liberalisation  of  items  as  well  as  the 
relatively high interest rates - and has withstood the general deceleration in the industrial sector during 
1997-98  to  2002-03.  It  has  been  well  recognised  that  the  investment  limit  of  Rs.10  million  for  the 
remaining SSI units leaves little scope for such producers to achieve economies of scale and scope 
and become competitive. Today, it is, in fact, incentive-compatible for SSI units to remain deliberately 
small - by fragmenting production - in order to avail of fiscal benefits and to stay outside the purview of 
labour  laws.  The  pace  of  de-reservation  of  SSI  items,  therefore,  needs  to  be  accelerated  so  as  to 
ensure that size does not remain a constraint to higher production, cost-efficiency and technological 
upgradation.  
Let me now focus on the major problems/challenges faced by the SSI sector which are enumerated as 
under: 
Collateral 
The limit for collateral free loans to tiny sector is Rs. 0.5million and that for other SSI units was Rs. 0.1 
million. This limit has since been raised to Rs. 0.5 million for other SSI units also. Many small-scale 
entrepreneurs  are  facing  difficulties  in  providing  collateral  security  as  per  the  requirements  of  the 
financing banks. The limit of 0.5 million has been further increased to Rs.1.5 million in respect of SSI 
units with good track record and financial position. The problem is addressed to a certain extent with 
the introduction of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust Scheme under which collateral free loans up to a 
limit of Rs. 2.5 million are guaranteed. 
Cost of loans 
The high cost of borrowings was a major constraint affecting the growth of the sector. The Bank Rate 
changes by the RBI combined with CRR and repo rate charges have emerged as signalling devices 
for interest rate changes. The reduction in Bank rate announced in the last Monetary and Credit Policy 
or outside the policy from time to time has resulted in a consequential reduction in the lending rates. 
Banks have now the flexibility to offer lending rates on a fixed rate or on a floating rate. The reduction 
in interest rates and the offer of floating rates will help the SSI units to procure funds at lower costs 
than what was prevailing in earlier years.  
Delayed payments 
Considerable delay in settlement of dues/payment of bills by the large-scale buyers to the SSI units 
adversely affected the recycling of funds and business operation of SSI units. Though the Government 
has enacted the Delayed Payments Act, many of the SSI units are reluctant to pursue cases against 
major  buyers.  The  Act  since  amended  in  1998  has  made  it  compulsory  that  the  payment  of  SSI 
suppliers should be made within 120 days. To improve the plight of SSI entrepreneurs due to delayed 
payments,  steps  for  strengthening  and  popularizing  factoring  services,  without  recourse  to  the  SSI 
suppliers may have to be thought of seriously.  
The banks have also been advised about sub-allotting overall limits to the large borrowers specifically 
for  meeting  the  payment  obligations  in  respect  of  purchases  from  SSI.  It  is  expected  that  these 
measures will improve the situation of delayed payments.  
BIS Review 40/2003 
 3
 Marketing 
Marketing remains the most critical area for the SSI Sector as some of the units are very small and so 
is their output individually. Adopting consortium approach could best solve the marketing problems of 
the SSI sector. Besides finance for marketing related activities, dissemination of requisite information 
on demand pattern, futuristic trend, etc. could be made available by the Development Institutions/SSI 
Associations, etc.  
Challenges emanating from the WTO 
To face the challenges emanating from the WTO agreement, SSI units irrespective of their size need 
technology up-gradation and modernisation. An awareness about the implications of WTO agreement 
has to be created. The preparation for competitiveness needs to be done by the Government as well 
as entrepreneurs and the corporate. The Government should provide good infrastructure and create 
level playing field for the industry. Considering the fund constraints with SSI Sector Government has 
introduced  the  credit  linked  capital  subsidy  scheme  for  Technology  up  gradation  of  Small  Scale 
Industries under which 12% back ended capital subsidy would be admissible on the loans advanced to 
the SSIs by banks/financial institutions for technology up gradation in certain select sectors.  
Sickness 
Growing incidence of sickness of SSIs is yet another area of concern. When the sickness prolongs it 
leads to the closure of units and unemployment. Lately mortality of the SSI units has been showing 
increasing trend. This has wider implications including locking of funds of the lending institutions, loss 
of scarce material resources and loss of employment. The number of sick SSI units as a percentage to 
the total number of SSI units is around 10. The number of units identified as potentially viable as a 
percentage to total sick SSI units is around 8. The causes of sickness are both internal and external. 
The major causes  are  limited  financial  resources,  lack  of  organisational,  financial  and  management 
skills and expertise, diversion of funds, diversification/expansion before stabilisation, non-availability of 
power  supply  shortage  of  raw  materials,  marketing  difficulties,  delayed  and  inadequate  credit, 
globalisation  and  liberalisation  of  the  economy,  obsolete  technology,  inadequate  infrastructure,  etc. 
With a view to ensuring that potentially viable sick SSI units are provided with the timely and adequate 
assistance  by  all  agencies  concerned,  there  are  State  Level  Inter  Institutional  Committees  (SLIIC) 
constituted  in  each  state  involving  State  Government,  Financial  institutions,  commercial  banks  and 
SIDBI. SSI Associations are also invited to the meetings of this committee. A sub-committee of SLIIC 
has also been set up in each state to examine the individual cases referred to it for rehabilitation. To 
address  the  incidence  of  growing  sickness  in  the  sector  RBI  has  recently  issued  a  complete  set  of 
revised guidelines drawn up on the basis of the recommendations of a Working Group constituted by it 
for the purpose.  
Policy initiatives 
The  Indian  industry  remained  within  an  inward  oriented  policy  framework  up  to  the  1990s.  With 
globalisation, liberalization, financial and real sector reforms, the country adopted an outward looking 
approach. At present, both the industrial sector in general and SSI sector in particular are exposed to 
international competitive environment. However, the most significant aspect is that India has evolved a 
sound institutional set up for financing of the SSI sector. New industrial policy was announced as part 
of the structural reforms in 1991, which eliminated various controls on the industrial sector, provided a 
greater  role  for  the  private  sector  and  encouraged  inflow  of  foreign  investment and  technology,  but 
also contained specific initiatives for the development of the SSI sector.  
The pace of de-reservation of SSI items, needs to be accelerated so as to ensure that size does not 
remain a constraint to higher production, cost-efficiency and technological upgradation. The case for 
de-reservation of the SSI sector becomes even stronger in the light of the experience of South-East 
Asian  economies which indicates that (a) their export basket transformed from labour-intensive  and 
relatively 
to 
higher-technology consumer goods and capital-intensive goods (capital goods and petrochemicals) in 
the  1990s  and  (b)  production  of  such  consumer  goods  could  be  achieved  by  large-scale  final 
assembly operations coupled with copious out-sourcing to small enterprises in order to maintain their 
competitiveness. Thus, with the de-reservation of the SSI sector in India, a larger number of industrial 
(textiles,  clothing,  shoes, 
technology  products 
the  1980s 
toys,  etc) 
low 
in 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2003
 units  would  be  in  a  position  to  exploit  the  opportunities  provided  by  globalisation,  given  the  vast 
potential of exports from this sector. 
Ministry of SSI under Govt. of India has been laying  more emphasis on cluster-based approach for 
development of SSI sector. So far Ministry has identified 60 clusters for focused development of SSI 
and banks in these areas are initiating necessary steps to meet their credit requirements effectively.  
Future action 
As the evidence shows, several initiatives are being taken at the national and international levels to 
foster the development of SMEs and improve their access to finance. Notwithstanding these initiatives, 
impediments  to  SME  finance  remain,  in  different  degrees,  in  both  developed  and  developing 
economies,  which  constitute  the  single  most  important  factor  that  could  circumscribe  their  growth 
trajectory. Accordingly, the attention of policy makers may need to focus on the following three broad 
issues,  viz.,  creating  a  conducive  business  environment,  development  of  clusters,  and  enhancing 
credit flows to SMEs as these are widely debated in the contemporary discussions. 
Governments  need  to  take  initiatives  to  ensure  that  the  overall  policy  environment  encourages 
industrial activity in general, and SME activity, in particular, given the latter(cid:146)s significant contribution to 
general  economic  activity  in  many  countries.  This  would  entail  efforts  to  maintain  macroeconomic 
stability in terms of low fiscal deficits and debts (such that private savings are not pre-empted), low 
and stable inflation, low real rates of interest and a sustainable current account. This apart, initiatives 
would  need  to  be  taken,  wherever  necessary,  to  remove  outdated  and  anomalous  restrictions  on 
domestic production, bring about a reduction in tariff and tax rates to internationally competitive levels, 
create  a  competitive  environment  through  appropriate  legislation,  if  necessary  provide  public 
infrastructure support, reduce inflexibilities in the labour market with due cognizance to the need for 
appropriate  social  safety  nets  and  invoke  necessary  reforms  in  bankruptcy  and  exit  procedures. 
Streamlining  of  procedures  to  disburse  loans  to  SMEs,  creating  a  regulatory/legal  framework  that 
ensures timely payment of dues to SMEs, providing technical training to staff of financial institutions 
and organising general awareness programmes on SME financing  would also be necessary. These 
measures would not only encourage SME activity but also have a salutary impact on their efficiency 
and hence, on their overall requirements of finance. 
Newer  forms  of  SME  financing  need  to  be  fostered  viz.,  venture  capital  and  leasing.  Commercial 
banks  and  local  government  funding  agencies  would  need  to  play  a  major  role  in  venture  capital 
financing while insurance funds and pension funds could be tapped as important sources of finance. 
Leasing,  on  the  other  hand,  requires  a  less  rigorous  legal  and  regulatory  framework  vis-(cid:224)-vis  bank 
lending, since the leasing company retains the ownership of assets till the end of the lease. Even so, 
strengthening  of  leasing  laws,  encouraging  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  support  leasing 
companies and appropriate training through technical assistance would help foster the development of 
this alternative important source of finance for SMEs. 
In conclusion major problems/challenges faced by SSI sector in India are: 
      availability of collateral free loans 
cost of loans 
delayed payments 
marketing 
challenges emanating from WTO related issues 
sickness 
A  number  of  steps  have  been  initiated  to  promote  the  healthy  growth  of  SSI  Sector.  However,  to 
ensure the prospects of these enterprises, SMEs, in the coming years will have to gear up to face the 
challenges of liberalisation. I am confident that given the inherent strength, the sector will develop a 
global vision, respond to more demanding standards of the customers and adopt key strategies that 
could take them ahead in competition. Credit should not be a constraint for viable projects. 
I believe that the workshop would bring out valuable policy recommendations for shaping future policy 
initiatives.  
BIS Review 40/2003 
 5
