Glenn Stevens: The economic outlook 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  2003  CEDA 
Economic and Political Overview, Perth, 13 February 2003. 
 I must begin by thanking CEDA for the invitation to join this conference, and saying how pleasant it is 
to be back in Perth. In addition, I would like to express our thanks to the many people here who have 
assisted  members  of  our  staff  based  here  in  their  efforts  to  understand  the  local  and  national 
economic scene. We appreciate very much the time you have offered. 
I am told that many of the people with whom our economists have had recent discussions about the 
outlook are reasonably positive. The resource sector, which of course is quite important in Western 
Australia, has a fair bit  of investment planned. But I  will  not speak in any  detail about the Western 
Australian  economy  in  particular,  as  there  are  others  here  who  are  probably  better  equipped  to  do 
that.  My  remarks  will  be  mainly  focussed  on  the  international  environment,  and  then  the  national 
economic scene. 
Let me now spend a few  minutes talking about the  current conditions abroad,  before turning to the 
issues which will be important in the year ahead. It is helpful that we are discussing this just a few 
days after the release of the Bank's most recent Statement on Monetary Policy, which covers recent 
events and the policy implications in great detail. 
The world economy in 2002 – a promising start but disappointing finish 
A year ago, all eyes were on an apparent recovery in the US economy, which had experienced the 
mildest of recessions in 2001, and appeared to be in the early phase of a recovery, the strength of 
which was taking many people by surprise. Some of the more thoughtful observers wondered whether, 
given  the  particular  nature  of  the  recent  business  cycle,  the  weakness  could  all  be  over  quite  so 
quickly, but at the time the numbers coming in seemed to be lending support to a relatively optimistic 
prognosis. Hence, for several months during the first half of last year, talk of global recovery was in the 
air.  
Unfortunately, this confidence waned during the second half of the year. To be sure, there has been 
continued  expansion  in  the  US  economy,  but  it  seems  hesitant  and  unconvincing.  Measures  of 
consumer  and  business  confidence  declined,  and  share  prices  continued  to  drift  lower,  through  the 
second half of 2002. Since the peak in early 2000, US share prices have fallen by around half. Close 
observers of the market point out that a fall over three successive calendar years had not occurred for 
over sixty years. 
What is the essential characteristic of this episode? Everyone understands, I am sure, that during the 
second half of the 1990s, the United States (and many countries in Europe) experienced a period of 
extraordinary optimism about future returns to capital, particularly capital invested in information and 
communications technology. But while there is no doubt that such technology has powerful potential 
benefits for users, the big question has always been how many of the gains would be captured by the 
producers,  as  opposed  to  the  consumers. The  answer,  apparently,  on  this  occasion  as  in  so  many 
others in history, is: not much, certainly not as much as initially expected and not enough to validate all 
the investment, or valuations, which were a feature of the late 1990s. 
 
 BIS Review 7/2003 
 1
  Remarkably, actual corporate profits in the US peaked in 1997 and declined thereafter, even as the 
valuations  of  expected  future  profits  continued  to  rise  until  early  2000.  It  is  not  that  surprising  in 
retrospect  that  business  capital  spending  in  the  United  States  subsequently  slumped.  Indeed,  that 
single part of demand was responsible for putting the US economy into recession.  
A key feature of the recovery to date, moreover, is that US companies in many sectors have still been 
struggling to deliver the profits that had apparently been expected, as implied by the earlier levels of 
share  prices.  Even  now,  share  prices  in  the  US  appear  to  embody  expectations  of  considerable 
earnings growth in the next few years. 
All of this means that, in some important respects, the nature of this episode has been different to the 
normal  business  cycle  events  which  characterised  the  second  half  of  the  twentieth  century.  The 
upswing  of  the  1990s  did  not  end  in  a  conventional  acceleration  of  inflation  and  abrupt 
macroeconomic  policy  action  to  dampen  those  pressures.  It  ended  with  a  period  of  corporate 
behaviour  which,  if  anything,  has  probably  created  some  deflationary  pressures.  The  behaviour  of 
households has been a stabilising force, keeping consumer demand rising (albeit more slowly than in 
earlier  years),  helped  by  the  ability  to  access  some  of  the  very  large  accumulated  wealth  in  the 
housing stock. In the short term, prospects for modest growth rest on that continuing until businesses 
are once again in a position to expand.  
Hopes which might have been held that Europe would emerge as an independent source of growth 
impetus for the global economy have been disappointed. Europe is an economy as big as the US, but 
in many important respects its structural features seem to leave it much less likely to be a source of 
dynamism.  The  euro  area  followed  the  US  economy  into  another  period  of  weakness  during  the 
second  half  of  2002.  Japan,  too,  has  been  unable  to  chart  an  independent  growth  path  based  on 
domestic  demand.  Such  growth  as  it  experienced  in  2002  was  export  driven.  That  gave  way  to  a 
renewed period of contraction towards the end of the year.  
So  across  several  fronts,  the  international  environment,  having  looked  as  though  it  was  improving 
noticeably early  last  year, turned out to be quite disappointing. The exception to this picture  was in 
parts of Asia, particularly  China,  where  growth has remained  very strong  in  the past  year. China is 
becoming a very significant source of supply for internationally traded manufactures, but also a source 
of demand for raw materials and various high-value services. These trends are already having quite 
noticeable  effects on trade patterns, and  will continue to do so for many  years. Australia  is as  well 
placed as any country to benefit from this.  
International issues for 2003 
The  consensus  of  private  forecasters  calls  for  growth  in  the  US  economy  of  about  2.7  per  cent  in 
2003. This is a forecast which envisages the 'soft spot' in late 2002 giving way to better growth in the 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2003
early part of 2003. This helps to drive a forecast for world growth of about 3½ per cent, which is about 
the average growth over the past couple of decades. 
 
   US economic policies are being altered in a way which will support the economy. For example, as we 
point  out  in  our  most  recent  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  the  US  government  sector's  financial 
balance swung towards deficit by about 4 per cent of GDP over the past two years and will continue in 
that direction in 2003. Some of this movement is the effect of the economy on the budget rather than 
actual measures taken, but discretionary budget measures have been quite substantial. In addition, 
US interest rates have fallen significantly, and are at their lowest levels in four decades. 
Contrary to what we hear in some quarters, macroeconomic policies are still effective. The likelihood is 
that the assistance being given by these policies will continue to support the US economy in the period 
ahead. The fact that the US financial system is not apparently seriously impaired by the fall-out in the 
financial markets is also a major bonus. 
But  getting  over  the  legacy  of  the  boom  will  still  take  some  time.  In  the  interim,  of  course,  the  US 
economy is more vulnerable to the effects of other adverse shocks which may come along than ideally 
we  would  like.  So  while  it  is  sensible,  in  my  view,  to  be  an  optimist  about  the  US  economy  in  the 
medium  term,  people  are  still  a  bit  nervous  about  the  path  from  here  to  that  medium  term.  And, 
unfortunately, the global  economy continues to  be more dependent on US-led  growth than  is ideal, 
due to the chronic weakness of Japan and the apparent lack of dynamism in Europe.  
One issue which I think could well come more sharply into focus this year is the value of the US dollar, 
which has come down in trade-weighted terms by about 12 per cent since the peak. The fall against 
the euro has been particularly noticeable – of the order of 25 per cent. Against the yen the fall has 
been  much  smaller.  Substantial  changes  in  exchange  rates  rarely  occur  without  some  controversy, 
because they always create winners and losers – so they can be uncomfortable for some. All countries 
concerned  will  have  an  interest  in  how  exchange  rate  movements,  especially  among  the  big 
currencies, affect their economies, and I suspect we may see a good deal of discussion about this in 
the year ahead.  
Then there is, of course, the mooted military campaign to disarm the Iraqi regime. Right now, this is 
probably  the  number  one  identifiable  source  of  uncertainty  cited  by  international  decision-makers. 
Historically, wars have usually been expansionary and inflationary for the combatants. But I suppose 
at present the uncertainty may be less about the conflict itself and more about the nature of the world 
which might follow it, so that previous experience, including the Gulf War of 1991, may not provide a 
useful guide as to what to expect.  
  4 
     BIS Review 7/2003
The world must have been an extremely uncertain place after World War II, or in the early 1950s with 
the Korean War and the apparent threat of confrontation at times between the nuclear powers during 
the Cold War. Yet this environment of geo-political tensions did not ultimately prevent the 1950s and 
1960s  from  being  a  period  in  which  prosperity  increased  fairly  steadily  in  the  Western  industrial 
economies.  So  perhaps  we  should  take  care  not  to  overstate  these  uncertainties.  Underlying 
economic  forces  are  still  important.  I  venture  to  suggest  that  the  continued  rapid  expansion  of  the 
Chinese economy will probably have a more profound impact on the world economy in the next ten 
years than a conflict with Iraq.  
The Australian economy 
The above makes clear, I trust, that the international environment facing Australia has been far from 
favourable over the past couple of years. Yet economic growth has remained pretty strong, driven by 
domestic demand. This has been associated with a widening in the current account deficit, which is 
now receiving some attention, so it is worth spending a few minutes considering the arithmetic of trade 
performance. That arithmetic is set out in the table below. The figures incorporate estimates for the 
December quarter of 2002, based on partial data available. 
After a strong recovery from the problems encountered in the Asian crisis, Australian exporters have 
generally found the going tough since about the middle of 2001. Between mid 2001 and the end of 
2002, export volumes declined by about 2½ per cent. Remember that, on average, we expect exports 
to grow by about 7–8 per cent each year. So over the six quarters to the end of 2002, export volumes 
had fallen by some 12–13 per cent relative to the level they would have reached had they grown at 
trend rates. That's 3 per cent of GDP.  
 
Balance of Payments 
Per cent 
 Jun quarter 2001 
– Dec quarter 2002 
Annual average 
growth over 1990s 
Change relative to 
trend by Dec 2002 
Change in Exports 
Change in Imports 
Real trade balance 
(per cent of GDP) 
Terms of trade 
– per cent 
– per cent of GDP 
Trade balance 
(per cent of GDP) 
Current account balance 
(per cent of GDP) 
–2½ 
19 
–4.6 
 2.5 
0.7 
–3.9 
–3.8 
7.6 
7.7 
   –12½ 
7½ 
   Imports, on the other  hand, have risen relatively rapidly,  as domestic demand  has risen at a pretty 
robust pace over the period in question. They rose by some 15 per cent, even before the effects of 
recent aircraft imports. To this we add the effects on investment spending of having one of the world's 
strongest  and  most  profitable  airlines,  which  is  stepping  up  its  capital-expansion  program  at  a  time 
when many of its rivals are struggling to survive. Including the aircraft, we find that in total, imports 
have risen above their trend to the tune of 1½ per cent of GDP. 
The sum of the export and import effects gives us the change in the real trade balance – the drag on 
Australian GDP – over the six quarters in question. It has declined by 4½ per cent of GDP, with two-
thirds of that on the export side, and the other third on the import side. In terms of income, as opposed 
to output, there  is a slight  offset in that Australia's terms of trade – the price of  exports in terms of 
imports  –  has  increased  (which  is  unusual  in  a  period  of  global  weakness).  This  means  that  the 
decline in the current account balance, at 3¾ per cent of GDP, is a bit smaller than the decline in the 
real trade balance over the period in question. This is the basic arithmetic of how the current account 
deficit has widened from about 2 per cent of GDP in mid 2001 to a little under 6 per cent in late 2002. 
No  doubt  we  will  hear  much  about  the  wider  current  account  deficit  in  the  year  ahead.  In  thinking 
about this, it is worth remembering that the alternative to a temporary widening of the current account 
under the circumstances we faced would have been to slow down the  Australian economy and our 
absorption of resources, in line with our lower income. After all, we cannot make the world's growth go 
faster, so if the current account were seen as a binding constraint, we would have had to slow down 
our  own  demand.  That  would  have  affected  domestic  production  as  well.  No-one  is  seriously 
proposing that, and no other country would willingly do it (though some are on occasion forced to).  
Of course, if the world turned out such that markets for our exports were permanently subdued, then 
Australians would have to adjust. We would have to temper our demand for resources from abroad, 
and work harder at making our products relatively more attractive to international markets. But there is 
no good reason to assume that that is the situation at present. Moreover, the capital inflow which is the 
counterpart of the current account deficit is willingly arriving, at interest rates which suit the Australian 
economy quite well. Hence, it is perfectly sensible to allow a temporary widening of this deficit, as the 
economy  copes  with  the  (hopefully  short-lived)  loss  of  foreign  income.  It  is  true  that  this  can't  be 
sustained indefinitely, but it doesn't have to be. 
 
   Indeed, this capacity to allow a temporary widening in the current account has helped the Australian 
economy  to  perform  remarkably  well  in  the  face  of  two  pretty  disappointing  years  for  the  global 
economy. An acceleration of domestic demand has offset, so far, much of the weakening in foreign 
demand so that overall GDP growth has slowed only a little. Despite the weak world, and despite the 
pronounced slowing in several key service sectors of the economy, real GDP grew at an annualised 
pace of 3¼ per cent during the first three quarters of 2002, with the non-farm economy running a bit 
over  3½  per  cent.  The  debilitating  effects  of  drought  on  farmers  and  their  surrounding  regional 
communities  will become more fully  apparent  in the next couple of quarterly figures, but overall the 
economy has turned in a very creditable performance.  
What has driven this growth in domestic demand?  
It has been a combination of ongoing expansion in consumer demand, high  levels of investment in 
housing  and  the  early  phase  of  what  will  probably  be  a  lengthy  upward  trend  in  business  capital 
spending. For the household sector, as we spell out in our Statement on Monetary Policy, moderate 
rises have occurred in income, as employment has grown and wages have increased. Superimposed 
on this is a very large gain in the household sector's wealth over a run of years, due mainly to large 
rises  in  house  prices.  The  stock  of  wealth  is  now  about  7  times  annual  income  for  the  household 
sector. So a rise in wealth of 11 per cent (the average rise per year since 1996) is the equivalent of 
about 75 per cent of a year's income. Only a tiny portion of that wealth is accessed – but even that tiny 
6 
 BIS Review 7/2003
portion adds tangibly to the additional cash resources available to the household sector for other forms 
of  investment  or  consumption.  Over  a  number  of  years  now,  this  has  been  an  expansionary  factor 
pushing along household spending in Australia.  
 
  Housing 
Consumer durables 
Financial assets 
- Superannuation 
and life offices 
- Equities and unit 
trusts 
- Currency and 
deposits 
- Other 
Total  
Level 
$ billion 
 2,085 
191 
1,068 
506 
221 
303 
38 
3,344 
Household Assets* 
September quarter 2002 
Share of total 
Per cent 
 62.4 
5.7 
31.9 
15.1 
6.6 
9.1 
1.1 
100.0 
Annual Growth 
Per cent 
Year to 
Sep 2002 
Average 
Sep 1996– 
Sep 2001 
21.9 
9.7 
3.1 
0.0 
2.5 
10.9 
-7.5 
14.5 
12.2 
6.0 
9.7 
11.5 
13.6 
6.6 
-2.6 
10.9 
* Includes unincorporated sector. 
Sources: ABS, RBA 
 
Associated  with  the  increasing  size  of  the  household  sector's  assets  has  been  a  run  up  in  debt. 
Indeed, the capacity to borrow to acquire assets or to borrow against assets for other purposes has 
been a necessary condition for this dynamic to operate, and that capacity has been fostered by the 
relatively low level of interest rates. There is a good deal of discussion as to how long this process can 
go on, and whether the household sector is becoming overly indebted and so on. 
Relative to current income, debt has increased a lot; relative to the value of assets, debt has increased 
only modestly. Debt-servicing burdens have gradually increased, though they remain well below where 
they were in the period of very high interest rates in the 1980s. For the most part, our view has been 
that this general trend was to be expected in the circumstances of low nominal interest rates, greater 
access  to  financial  products,  and  a  starting  point  where  Australian  households  had  little  debt  by 
international standards. With one exception, we have not rushed to ring alarm bells about excessive 
debt. The exception is, of course, the rapid growth in debt to finance investment in rental properties, 
where we felt during 2002 that people were being drawn into a position of high leverage by unrealistic 
expectations  of  returns.  At  some  stage  down  the  track,  this  is  likely  to  result  in  disappointment  for 
many and distress for some – hence we had a duty to speak up. 
More  generally,  however,  there  is  a  very  large  accumulation  of  wealth  which  remains,  as  yet, 
untapped. One of the important questions is to what extent households will be inclined to draw on this 
in the future. Many factors will be at work in determining the answer. For a start, how permanent is the 
wealth gain? The more confident people are that it is permanent, the more likely they are to draw on it. 
Demographic and distributional factors will also be important – who owns the assets and who owes 
the debts? I think we are only in the early stages of coming to an understanding of all these things, 
and there will be much discussion of them in the years ahead. 
Then there is business investment activity, which as I noted earlier has been rising over the past year. 
Judging by the broad historical patterns, this has some way to run yet. Investment levels still seem a 
little lower than historical averages. Profits are strong, and new funding is readily available. Corporate 
balance sheets are strong. So conditions seem conducive to further investment increases, and indeed 
the available forward indicators point to further growth in the year ahead.  
 
   Conclusion 
Australia still faces a difficult environment abroad. Uncertainty is high internationally at present, and 
confidence  subdued.  It  is  to  our  advantage  that  this  appears  to  have  affected  Australians  relatively 
little (indeed, it is comparatively rare to see Australians more confident in surveys than Americans) and 
this has helped Australia perform well. Nonetheless, global conditions have been a major drag on the 
economy over the past couple of years. 
In  the  coming  year,  domestic  demand  in  Australia  will  continue  to  grow,  although  probably  more 
moderately than in the recent past. Most forecasters anticipate that the drag from abroad will begin to 
ease  as  the  year  goes  on.  If  so,  the  net  of  those  forces  will  mean  that  Australia  will  record  overall 
growth  a  bit  lower  than  we  have  seen  most  of  the  time  in  recent  years,  although  still  a  pretty 
respectable outcome. 
In  the  circumstances,  I  think  that's  about  as  good  a  result  as  we  could  sensibly  hope  to  achieve. 
Provided that we remain relatively free of imbalances at home, we could then expect to benefit from 
better economic conditions abroad once the current adjustment phase gives way to greater optimism 
and expansion – even though we cannot be sure when that will be. A return to more normal weather 
patterns, which we all hope will occur, would also give a boost through the farm sector. Throughout 
that we all face challenges of various kinds, and I wish you well in meeting them. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 7/2003
