 T T Mboweni: Inflation targeting in South Africa 
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the BIS/SARB Reserve 
Management Seminar dinner, South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria, 2 September 2003. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you, our guests and Reserve Bank personnel, to a dinner I gladly host in 
your honour. I know that you have formally been welcomed to the Reserve Bank this morning by Mr 
Plenderleith.  But  at  a  seminar  of  this  stature,  co-hosted  by  our  good  friends  at  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, I, as Governor, felt it correct to re-iterate a warm welcome. I am especially 
delighted that we are able to co-host this reserve management seminar as I believe that all of us can 
learn from each other’s experiences regarding this important central-bank function. 
I know you have had a long day at the seminar and, I believe, a productive one, so I shall keep my 
speech brief. I have chosen not to focus on reserve management in the South African Reserve Bank, 
as the topic was covered to some degree in the seminar this afternoon, but rather to talk to you briefly 
about inflation targeting. 
As  you  probably  know,  inflation  targeting,  initially  adopted  by  New  Zealand  in  1990,  has  been  the 
choice  of  a  growing  number  of  central  banks  in  both  industrialised  and  emerging  countries.  As  on 
November  2000,  authors  Mishkin  and  Schmidt-Hebbel  had  counted  19  inflation-targeting  countries. 
Since then, the numbers have increased. Precisely by how many is debatable and will depend on the 
precise definition of inflation-targeting countries but I note that the merits of inflation targeting continue 
to be debated in the US. 
Inflation  targeting  in  South  Africa  was  formally  introduced  on  23  February  2000  with  the 
announcement of a 3 to 6 per cent target for 2002. At that time, CPIX inflation - the rate we target - 
stood at 7 per cent. (Just for your information, we define CPIX as the CPI excluding the interest cost of 
mortgage bonds, for the historical metropolitan and other urban areas.) The target range of 3 to 6 per 
cent set was an ambitious one. Whilst there may be debates today  about whether the target range 
was set at the correct level, it is important to note that for both the credibility of the central bank, as 
well as the management of expectations in respect of inflation being a problem, the target range had 
to be set at a level which would properly demonstrate commitment to lowering inflation. In spite of the 
above-mentioned  quite  ambitious  target,  by  September  2001,  twelve-month  CPIX  inflation  had 
decelerated  to  5,8%  per  cent  and  many  analysts  thought  that  the  2002  target  would  be  met  fairly 
easily. 
To  say  the  least,  circumstances  changed!  The  exchange  rate  depreciation  of  some  37  per  cent  in 
2001  -  that  is  another  interesting  story!  - mostly  in  the  closing  stages  of  the  year,  was  significantly 
responsible  for  pushing  up  CPIX  inflation  up  to  a  peak  of  11,3%  per  cent  in  November  2002.  On 
12 September 2002, the Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee had announced the fourth and 
final 100 basis points increase for the year of the Bank’s repurchase rate. As you may well imagine, I 
was not everyone’s most-favourite Governor! 
Fortunately,  inflationary  pressures  have  abated,  partly  related  to  the  rand’s  appreciation  since 
December 2001  and as reflected in the  year-on-year change  in CPIX falling to 6,6 per cent  in July 
2003, and the MPC has seen fit to lower the repo rate. On 14 August 2003, following the most recent 
meeting  of  the  MPC,  the  repo  rate  was  further  reduced  by  100bp  to  11  per  cent  effective  from 
15 August  2003.  (Should  there  be  anyone  amongst  you  interested  in  the  factors  weighing  on  this 
decision, I refer you to the statement of the Monetary Policy Committee which is on the Reserve Bank 
website).  Whilst  a  Governor  is  certainly  more  popular  during  a  declining  interest-rate  cycle,  rest 
assured there were critics who felt that the Bank had not been bold enough and should have, at least, 
reduced the repo rate by 150 basis points! 
Technically, what the Reserve Bank is doing could more accurately be described as inflation-forecast 
targeting. Given the roughly 12 to 24-month lag between interest-rate changes and their having their 
full impact felt on inflation, the repurchase rate is set at a level judged to be consistent with bringing 
inflation  to  within  the  target  range  within  an  12-  to  24-month  time  horizon.  I  am  referring  to  the 
intricacies  of  the  transmission  mechanism,  the  clear  understanding  of  which  represents  the  single 
biggest challenge for any inflation-targeting central bank. Inflation targets of 3 to 6 per cent for 2004 
and  2005  have  been  set  by  the  Government,  and  guide  current  policy  formulation.  Given  the  lags, 
BIS Review 38/2003 
 1
 current  policy  changes  clearly  have  virtually  no  impact  on  the  2003  inflation  outcome;  the  focus  is 
further ahead. 
With  the  CPIX  again  approaching  the  target  range,  it  is  relatively  easily  to  somewhat  superficially 
argue  the  merits  of  an  inflation-targeting  regime.  Some  disadvantages  of  inflation  targeting  must, 
however,  be  acknowledged.  Whilst  easily  understood  in  terms  of  its  objective,  it  is  a  complicated 
approach,  more  demanding  and  more  difficult  to  implement  than  a  monetary  framework  based  on 
targeting monetary growth or a more discretionary framework. It implies greater reliance on forward 
indicators  of  inflation  and  a  continuous  assessment  of  the  relationship  between  the  instruments  of 
monetary policy and the inflation target. Where forecasts turn out to be wrong, even if for completely 
unforeseeable  reasons,  the  central  bank’s  credibility  could  be  impaired.  Of  course,  the  counter-
argument  being  that  it  simply  makes  visible  the  uncertainty  that  would  remain  hidden  in  other 
monetary-policy frameworks. 
Inflation targeting, if pursued at any costs, runs the risk of inefficient output stabilisation.  Significant 
supply  shocks  to  the  economy  such  as  sharp  oil  price  movements,  could  require  very  large 
monetary-policy  adjustments  to  bring  inflation  back  inside  the  target  range  within  the  stated  time 
horizon. For such exceptional events, some discretion and patience in re-achieving the target range 
should be allowed for. 
In this regard I wish to confirm that the Reserve Bank generally views it inappropriate to resort to the 
escape clause, and would rather provide an explanation to any deviation from the target range once 
the final outcome of the CPIX average for that year had been published. This view is held so that the 
market has no doubt regarding the Bank’s vigilance and commitment to achieving its targets. Indeed, 
following the CPIX average for the year 2002, which could only be calculated early in 2003, where the 
average exceeded the target, an explanation was provided in the Monetary Policy Review document 
of April 2003. (The bi-annual Monetary Policy Review is also available on our website). 
The advantages of inflation targeting are also worth highlighting. Firstly, transparency - the concept is 
easily  understandable,  with  the  ultimate  policy  objective  translated  into  an  explicit  target  value. 
Secondly, inflation targeting provides enhanced clarity about the objective of monetary policy, which is 
conducive  to sound planning in both private  and  public sectors. Thirdly, the framework provides for 
improved accountability of the Reserve  Bank. It eliminates the need to rely on  a stable relationship 
between  the  money  stock  and  inflation,  which  has  become  increasingly  difficult  to  identify;  inflation 
targeting enhances economic policy co-ordination with government and the central bank both publicly 
committed  to  the  same  inflation  target.  And  lastly  inflation  targeting  provides  an  anchor  for  inflation 
expectations and price and wage setting, thus reducing the friction which arises from widely divergent 
inflation expectations. 
May I conclude with the comment that, whilst inflation targeting is certainly no panacea, the Reserve 
Bank  still  regards  it  as  the most  appropriate  framework  for  achieving  relative  price  stability.  I  quote 
from our Annual Economic report 2003, released last week: (cid:147)Sound and consistent price signals are 
invaluable in directing resources towards their most efficient uses(cid:148); achieving this goal is, we believe, 
our most important contribution we can make towards optimal economic growth and development. 
Finally,  I  also,  as  Governor,  thank  the  BIS  most  sincerely  for  their  invaluable  role  in  co-hosting  the 
seminar. Our relationship with the BIS is excellent and we have derived much value in our interaction 
with this much-esteemed institution over many years. I hope you, as delegates, will extract maximum 
value from the expertise which is available to be shared. May  you all safely return home, and  your 
return on your FX assets be stable and gratifying! 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2003
