 Ishrat Husain: Strategy for development of Microfinance in Pakistan 
Remarks delivered by Dr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, as Chief Guest at the 
launching  ceremony  of  the  Financial  Sector  strengthening  program  of  the  Swiss  Agency  for 
Development and Cooperation, Islamabad, 26 February 2003.  
 I  would  like  to  commend  the  Swiss  Government  and  the  Swiss  Agency  for  Development  and 
Cooperation (SDC) for launching the Financial Sector Strengthening Program (FSSP). I believe that 
the  lack  of  adequate  human  and  institutional  capacity,  shortage  of  local  expertise  and  weak 
coordination  among  the  various  stakeholders  are  indeed  the  factors  inhibiting  the  growth  of 
microfinance sector in Pakistan. The initiative taken by SDC to overcome these constraints is therefore 
both timely and appropriate. But I do expect that once the FSSP has successfully demonstrated the 
business model for capacity building it will be adapted and internalized by our own network without 
any  further  recourse  to  external  donors.  The  transfer  of  technology  and  its  adaptation  to  our  own 
circumstances is the most effective way to utilize external resources. 
At the outset let me place microfinance in the overall context of the efforts the State Bank is making to 
expand the outreach of financial services and help the goal of poverty alleviation in the country. The 
SBP  is,  in  addition  to  microfinance,  encouraging  the  provision  of  credit  to  small  and  medium 
entrepreneurs through a newly set up SME Bank, to small farmers through a newly restructured Zarai 
Taraqqati  Bank  Ltd  and  Cooperative  Banks,  to  women  entrepreneurs,  individuals  and  small  firms 
through  the  First  Women’s  Bank.  These  institutions  will  work  as  the  protype  in  developing  the 
methodology  and  expertise  in  these  areas  and  then  this  protype  will  be  replicated  through  the 
mainstream financial institutions in the country. This is the only durable basis through which the poor 
can benefit from financial sector of the country. 
Pakistan has adopted a sectoral approach to microfinance in Pakistan and assimilated learnings from 
the  experience  of  other  developing  countries  which  have  been  active  in  this  area  for  decades. 
Microfinance is still in its infancy and has a long way to go. Some momentum has been built up during 
the last three years as bulk of the disbursements has taken place since June, 1999. Although there 
has been a big spurt in these three years the numbers of the beneficiaries and the volume of credit 
disbursed is still quite low in relation to the needs and demand of the intended target group. We have 
therefore decided to adopt a holistic, “let thousand flowers bloom”, and inclusive strategy for promotion 
and spread of microfinance in Pakistan. This strategy consists of the following six elements. 
First,  there  is  a  strong  political  commitment  towards  supporting  microfinance  as  an  integral  tool  of 
poverty alleviation program. President of Pakistan has taken keen personal interest in the  nurturing 
and  growth  of  this  sector  and  has  directed  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to  monitor  and  track  the 
microfinance sector on a regular basis. The Government has invited the World Bank, ADB and other 
bilateral  donors  to  actively  assist  us  in  this  sector.  Consequently  the  enabling  environment  for 
development and growth of MF is highly conducive. The constraints, snags and problems faced during 
the  implementation  of  the  program  are  removed  in  consultation  and  full  involvement  of  the 
stakeholders. 
Second, the program involves multiple actors and institutions - community organizations, NGOs, public 
sector, private sector, Rural Support programs - in the delivery of microfinance. The extent of poverty 
prevailing in Pakistan requires ‘all hands - on the deck’ approach rather than and exclusive monopoly 
of the Government or the public sector as has been the case in the past. Khushali Bank is owned by 
several leading financial institutions - private, public and foreign - rather than by the Government of 
Pakistan. This has allowed it to function in a professional manner. 
Third, the complementarities between microfinance and other elements of poverty alleviation such as 
Investment, Infrastructure, Social services and Capacity building are clearly recognized and built in the 
program. Income generation by the poor cannot take place only through availability of credit if there is 
no infrastructure, or markets for selling their produce. Similarly without building the knowledge base 
and enlarging capacity of the poor there won’t be any scope for sustainable microfinance. 
Fourth, the government is experimenting with a variety of institutional models for delivery mechanisms 
and  outreach  to  the  poor.  For  example,  we  have  a  wholesale  organization  such  as  PPAF  which  is 
successfully disbursing a $ 100 million line of credit provided by the World Bank. We have Khushali 
BIS Review 12/2003 
 1
 Bank  which  is  a  retail  bank  and  has  already  reached  out  to  100,000  customers  and  is  targeted  at 
700,000  by  2007.  Then  there  is  First  Mcirofinance  Bank  established  in  the  private  sector  which  is 
expanding its branch network throughout the country. We have integrated program vehicles such as 
the NRSP, PRSP etc. which combine Microcredit with other services. There are several single product 
Microfinance NGOs such as Kashif Foundation in Lahore. Two commercial banks are also providing 
lines of credit for microfinance. Leasing companies have also begun to take some interest and two of 
them are already engaged in the sector. In addition there are several self standing donor supported 
projects  delivering  microfinance.  We  don’t  know  as  to  which  particular  delivery  mechanism  will  be 
effective and that is why there is a need to experiment with plurality and diversity. 
Fifth, an innovative feature of the Microfinance Sector Development is that as the poor segments of 
the population are much more prone and vulnerable to shocks they need to be protected. Thus a bad 
harvest or drought or strikes in the cities or violence completely wipe out the earning capacity of the 
poor and disable them from repaying their credit obligations on time. As labor is their only asset and 
the returns on labor are disrupted for no fault of theirs a risk mitigation mechanism had to be created 
to  insulate  the  poor  borrowers  from  these  unforeseen  hazards.  A  Risk  Mitigation  and  Deposit 
Protection Fund has been created to provide protection to the MFIs borrowers and depositors. They 
can seek recourse to this fund under adverse circumstances beyond their control. 
Sixth, the regulatory regime adopted by the SBP for Microfinance sector is that of a facilitator, guide 
and  problem  solver.  We  do  not  prescribe  for  MFIs  the  same  onerous  regulations  which  prevail  for 
other  financial  institutions.  We  have  a  light  regulatory  oversight  and  are  learning  together  with  the 
practitioners and adopting ourselves to the changing circumstances. We have a Consultative Group 
drawn from the representatives of stakeholders who guide us in the development of our regulations 
and prudential norms. 
To  conclude,  the  strategy  for  microfinance  development  will  undergo  continuous  review  and 
modification to make it responsive to the needs of the poor. The government, State Bank, NGOs and 
all other MF practitioners have to work together to make this strategy work and accelerate the speed 
with which we can reach out to the potential beneficiaries. On the part of the SBP I can assure you our 
full commitment and support to this strategy. We look forward to working together with you in these 
endeavors. 
 