 Joseph Yam: A broad-brush economic picture of the Asia-Pacific region 
Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
2003 Australasian Macroeconomics Workshop, Hong Kong, 22 September 2003. 
 Good Morning, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  open  the  2003  Australasian  Macroeconomics  Workshop  and  to 
welcome all of you to Hong Kong. I understand that this is the eighth time the workshop is being held, 
and that it is the first time you are meeting outside of Australia and New Zealand. I am delighted that 
you have chosen Hong Kong. We are now, I hope, entering a period of optimism for our city after a 
very tough few months, and there are continuing structural adjustments in Hong Kong arising from the 
economic  integration  with  the  Mainland,  which  is  growing  rapidly,  bringing  challenges  as  well  as 
opportunities: it is a very interesting time to see Hong Kong. 
It may surprise you that the HKIMR decided to follow the splendid precedent set by the Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand in 2002 and host this year(cid:146)s workshop. But it should not be too much of a surprise. 
Rather than giving a traditional lecture this morning, let me explain to you why, as Chairman of the 
Board of the HKIMR, I feel that conferences such as this are so important. But I should first say this: 
while the HKIMR was established by the HKMA, its Council of Advisors, of which I am not a member, 
determines its programme of activities. It therefore enjoys professional independence. Thus, I was not 
a party to the Council(cid:146)s deliberation of, and its decision to support, Professor Crosby(cid:146)s proposal to hold 
the Workshop here. But I am very pleased that the Council of Advisors decided to do so. 
I will start from the observation that Hong Kong(cid:146)s economy - like many Asian economies - is a small 
ship in a big ocean. While the weather today may be placid, the winds can pick up without warning and 
the waves can be forbidding. You all know about the series of massive speculative capital flows that 
Asian economies, and even Australia and New Zealand, were exposed to during the Asian financial 
crisis, and how Hong Kong finally rode out that storm. In times such as those, policymakers naturally 
ask what is the right course to steer, what are the right policies to follow. One policy is clear - to ensure 
that the boat is as seaworthy as possible. This, of course, we have sought to do. Following the Asian 
financial crisis we took a large number of measures to improve the functioning of the currency board, 
and  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  infrastructure  in  Hong  Kong  more  broadly.  We  also  continue  to 
monitor and improve our system of banking supervision, in recognition of the fact that one reason we 
did ride out the Asian financial crisis was undoubtedly that banks were strong. 
Some  observers  have  suggested  throwing  some  sand  in  the  wheels  of  international  finance.  By 
limiting capital flows, the argument goes, it becomes easier for central banks to maintain monetary and 
financial stability in turbulent times and to cope with the potency of international finance that comes 
with globalisation. Indeed, control in one form or another has become quite popular in this region. But, 
for an international financial centre such as Hong Kong, whose main source of income stems from an 
ever-growing economic and financial integration with the rest of the world economy, such a policy is, to 
us, clearly undesirable. Moreover, the Basic Law of Hong Kong also bars any foreign exchange control 
policies and any restrictions on the free flow of capital within, into and out of Hong Kong. 
Others suggest that the Hong Kong economy would be better able to withstand economic shocks and 
disturbances if the currency board was adjusted or gave way to something else: different observers 
have different pet ideas and there seems to be no agreement on what that alternative would be. I have 
spoken a great many times on this topic and I do not propose to do so again today. Let me just say 
that  I  remain  convinced  that  the  currency  board  has  remained  a  fundamental  source  of stability  for 
Hong Kong in the 239 months of its existence since it came into being in October 1983. 
What else can be done to ensure monetary and financial stability not just in Hong Kong, but also in 
this rather fragmented and diverse region, in terms of geography, size of markets, culture and stages 
of  economic  development?  To  my  mind,  much  greater  regional  co-operation  in  the  monetary  and 
financial  arenas  should  be  on  the  policy  agenda.  Such  co-operation  can  take  many  forms,  ranging 
from increasing and more open interactions between central banks in the Asian region for the purpose 
of enhancing the stability, integrity, diversity and efficiency of financial intermediation in the region, and 
admittedly very much further down the road, to serious discussions of whether monetary integration 
and the establishment of an Asian Monetary Union should be a goal. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 But to do that, we need to build stronger personal links between economists working on monetary and 
financial issues at universities, in central banks and in international institutions such as the IMF and 
the BIS.  By debating  and  discussing and,  yes, disagreeing,  we can over time generate much more 
clarity  about  what  path  we  need  to  follow  in  enhancing  monetary  and  financial  stability  in  Asia  and 
elsewhere. 
Some may wonder why I include academic economists in that list. I do so for three important reasons. 
First, research undertaken in universities very frequently serves as a starting point for work undertaken 
in central banks. One of you may just have written a very good paper on the sensitivity of the New 
Zealand  economy  to  international  business  cycles  or  the  determination  of  capital  flows  between 
Thailand  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  may  well  be  that  this  paper,  unknown  to  the  author,  triggers 
research at the Hong Kong Monetary Authority on how sensitive our economy is to external factors or 
on the determination of capital flows in and out of Hong Kong. 
Secondly, academic research undertaken in a free and open manner, and presented at conferences 
such as this, serves to improve the quality of research in central banks. There is a strong presumption 
in my mind that competition, no matter whether it be in the market for airline tickets or in econometric 
models of exchange rates, are beneficial to consumers - and central banks are large consumers of 
economic research. More directly, I know that some of the HKMA(cid:146)s research staff will present papers 
here,  and  I  am  sure  that  your  comments  on  the  papers  will  trigger  ideas  for  how  they  could  be 
improved. Next time, they will be better. 
Thirdly, universities are the source of staff for central banks. We do hire your students and sometimes 
we are even able to hire academic researchers. 
In sum, the Asia-Pacific region needs more co-operation and exchange of ideas in the monetary and 
financial sphere, and to achieve that it needs stronger links between economists working in this area in 
central  banks,  international  institutions  and  universities.  This  is  exactly  what  the  Australasian 
Macroeconomics Workshop is all about, and I am delighted that we could tempt you to come to Hong 
Kong for this year(cid:146)s meeting. Thank you and let the fun begin. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
