 Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland in the EU environment 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
Polish-Swiss Chamber of Industry and Commerce, Warsaw, 16 June 2003. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Last weekend the Polish people gave the green light to Poland(cid:146)s membership of the European Union. 
This means that in May next year your country will be seeing the crowning of its political efforts of the 
last 10  years: its accession, alongside nine other states, to the European Union. I congratulate  you 
and share your happiness. The integration within the EU of the countries of the former eastern bloc 
certainly represents a decisive milestone on the way to creating a peaceful, secure and prosperous 
Europe. 
Of  all  the  accession  countries,  Poland  is  Switzerland(cid:146)s  most  important  economic  partner.  Trade 
between our two countries has doubled since 1995. Poland and Switzerland can also look back on 
more than ten years of continuing fruitful cooperation within the same constituency at the International 
Monetary Fund. Your EU membership and further integration will help to reinforce the economic ties 
between our two countries. 
The Polish poet and Nobel prize-winner Czeslaw Milosz once said that Eastern Europe generally knew 
much more about the West than the West did about the East. I have no doubt that this is especially 
true in your case, as members of the Polish-Swiss Chamber of Industry and Commerce. Nonetheless, 
I  hope  to  be  able  to  give  you  some  fresh  insights  into  Switzerland(cid:146)s  position  in  the  European 
framework. 
I shall first give  you a brief overview of the present  economic situation in Switzerland and then talk 
more specifically about our relationship with our neighbour countries. As you know, Switzerland is not 
a member of the European Union. But it is by no means an island or an isolated place in the Alps. 
Second, I should like to focus on Switzerland as a financial centre located in the heart of the continent 
and the challenges it currently faces. Finally, I shall outline the Swiss National Bank(cid:146)s monetary policy 
and what degree of freedom it has in a country fully surrounded by the euro zone. This question is 
particularly  relevant,  since  progressive  globalisation  and  Switzerland(cid:146)s  close  economic  links  with 
Europe  regularly  raise  the  question  whether  pursuing  an  autonomous  monetary  policy  is  still 
appropriate. 
Let me begin with the current economic situation in Switzerland. 
The economic situation in brief 
2. 
In Switzerland, as elsewhere, the boom of the late nineties has been followed by a prolonged period of 
stagnation accompanied by rising unemployment. Not only was last year disappointing, but 2003 also 
began badly. Given the sluggish economic development, especially in Europe, we have been forced to 
gradually downgrade our forecasts. On the exchange market, the strength of the Swiss franc has been 
an additional factor creating further difficulties for our export sector. Investment has declined sharply in 
an international comparison, suggesting that the excess capacities created in the late nineties were 
particularly pronounced. The bursting of the equity market bubble had a severe impact on the financial 
sector and business in the once flourishing investment banking and asset management sectors has 
slumped, resulting in the need for radical structural reforms and consolidation. 
The Swiss National Bank has responded to the difficult economic situation with a rapid and massive 
easing of monetary policy. In the course of the last two years we have cut our reference interest rate - 
the three-month Libor - by 325 basis points to practically zero. With the marked slowdown in economic 
activity and the appreciation of the Swiss franc, inflationary pressures were also easing. Indeed, since 
spring 2001 our inflation forecast has indicated that the risk of inflation is very limited in the years to 
come,  which  has  enabled  us  to  bring  about  a  significant  reduction  in  short-term  interest  rates.  Our 
expansive policy has aimed at supporting demand and limiting the upward pressure on the franc. 
BIS Review 27/2003 
 1
 So far we see no sign of a concrete recovery. We expect GDP to stagnate in 2003. Growth should 
accelerate again at the end of this year following a strengthening of the world economy. Basically, our 
business cycle closely follows the economic development of our neighbours: Germany, France  and 
Italy, which absorb the bulk of our foreign trade. 
Let me now turn to Switzerland as partner of the EU. 
Switzerland as a partner of the EU 
3. 
Switzerland  is  deeply  integrated  in  the  European  economy.  Although  it  is  not  a  member  of  the 
European Union, it has very close ties with it. The EU accounts for 60% of our exports and as much as 
80 % of our imports. In 2001, one-third of the 30 billion Swiss francs that were transferred abroad in 
the  form  of  Swiss  direct  investment  went  to  the  EU,  while  80%  of  foreign  direct  investment  in 
Switzerland came from the EU. 
It is therefore not surprising that the Swiss business cycle is highly correlated with the activity in the 
EU, and that the exchange rate between the Swiss franc and the euro is of crucial importance to us. 
Close  economic  ties  also  mean  close  institutional  co-operation.  An  initial  step  in  this  direction  was 
taken  with  the  1972  Free  Trade  Agreement  concluded  with  the  European  Economic  Community 
(EEC).  Full  membership  was  never  a  serious  option.  In  1992,  the  Swiss  people  even  rejected  the 
option of becoming a member of the European Economic Area. Further progress was made with the 
implementation, one year ago, of bilateral agreements between Switzerland and the EU. The purpose 
of this set of agreements is to secure for Switzerland sectoral access to the European single market. 
They  cover  seven  issues,  among  them  an  agreement  on  labour  mobility  and  an  agreement  on 
transportation. 
Since the middle of last year new negotiations have been under way between Switzerland and the EU 
on a further ten issues. Some of these are (cid:147)left-overs(cid:148) from the first bilateral agreements, some are 
new issues which have been raised by either the EU or Switzerland. The EU wanted the adoption of 
anti-fraud measures and the creation of a tax system in Switzerland which would allow the EU to adopt 
a  regime  of  exchange  of  information  between  tax  authorities.  On  their  side,  the  Swiss  sought  an 
improved cooperation in the areas of internal security and asylum policy. The negotiations on seven 
out  of  the  ten  issues  have  now  been  substantially  completed.  We  hope  that  this  second  round  of 
negotiations will be concluded this year, provided that the right balance can be struck in the overall 
package. 
You may well be asking yourselves: why doesn(cid:146)t Switzerland simply join the EU instead of following 
the bumpy path of bilateral agreements ? The reason is that there is still no consensus in Switzerland 
on the question of EU membership. Winston Churchill used to say to his chauffeur: (cid:147)Drive slowly. We 
are  in  a  hurry(cid:148).  These  words  could  apply  to  Switzerland(cid:146)s  policy  on  Europe.  Eleven  years  ago  the 
Swiss people voted (cid:147)no(cid:148) to entry into the European Economic Area, because many saw this as a first 
step  towards  EU  membership.  Two  years  ago  a  referendum  aimed  at  speeding  up  the  process 
towards  EU membership  was likewise roundly rejected.  Since any further moves would clearly  lack 
political support within the country, EU membership is not on the Swiss agenda at the present time. 
There are many reasons for Switzerland(cid:146)s scepticism. Many people see EU membership as posing a 
threat to Swiss federalism and direct democracy. A full membership would also have a major impact 
on our monetary and exchange rate policy. 
Indeed, if Switzerland joined the EU, it would have to abandon its independent monetary policy and its 
own currency. This would deprive us of an essential component of our flexibility in setting economic 
policy. We could no longer pursue an interest rate policy geared to the needs of the Swiss economy. 
Membership  would  also  spell  the  end  of  the  interest  rate  advantage  with  respect  to  the  euro  area, 
which still stands at one and a half to two percentage points. This would entail the loss for the Swiss 
economy of an important competitive advantage. 
If there are grounds for hoping that an enlarged EU will lead to greater stability and prosperity on the 
European  continent,  it  is  also  conceivable  that  a  larger  market  will  open  new  opportunities  for 
Switzerland. Once the bilateral agreements have been extended to cover the new member countries, 
our economic relations with the enlarged EU will be regulated by the same network of bilateral treaties, 
as  is  the  case  with  the  current  EU.  The  Swiss  economy  will  thus  enjoy  easier  access  to  a  greatly 
expanded market totalling 450 million people. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2003
 However, EU enlargement also represents a challenge for Switzerland. A larger Union needs to work 
out  its  joint  position  in  lengthy  internal  consultation  and  decision-making  procedures.  It  could  thus 
become increasingly difficult for us to defend our own interests. Enlargement is therefore very likely to 
influence our relationship with the EU. 
Let me now move to one of the key features of our economy: our financial sector, which currently also 
faces some major challenges. 
Switzerland as a European financial centre 
4. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  last  century  the  Swiss  financial  sector  has  been  a  mainstay  of  our 
economy. It accounts for just under 6% of total employment, but currently generates over 10% of the 
country(cid:146)s GDP. Relatively speaking, therefore, it is more than twice as big as the German or French 
financial sectors, for example. Switzerland(cid:146)s globally active big banks and insurance groups are also 
major international competitors in most market segments. The two big banks are among the world(cid:146)s 
ten largest banks. In terms of value added by the financial sector, Switzerland occupies fourth place 
behind New York, London and Paris, but is ahead of Frankfurt. 
Switzerland plays a leading role in banking, above all, in asset management. Almost four trillion francs 
worth  of  assets  are  managed  in  Switzerland.  This  accounts  for  around  one-third  of  the  world(cid:146)s 
portfolios of cross-border investments. 
Over the last 10 years, our financial institutions have also greatly expanded their activities abroad on a 
global basis. In 2000 the value of their foreign investments amounted to some 54 billion Swiss francs, 
which is equivalent to around 14% of total Swiss investments abroad. 
Switzerland  is  also  a  magnet  for  foreign  banks.  Nearly  one  in  every  two  banks  in  Switzerland  is 
foreign-owned. Foreign banks contribute around 2% to Switzerland(cid:146)s gross domestic product, which 
makes them as important as the Swiss insurance industry and even more important than, for example, 
the watchmaking or the food industries. 
What are the reasons for Switzerland(cid:146)s success as a financial centre? 
For more than a century Switzerland  has enjoyed  peace. This has enabled it  to develop conditions 
that  are  favourable  to  the  economy  as  a  whole,  but  especially  to  the  financial  sector.  Among  other 
benefits  are  political  and  economic  stability,  relatively  moderate  taxation,  a  reasonable  regulatory 
environment, a very well-developed infrastructure and, not least, an independent monetary policy. The 
positive interaction of these various factors have in turn produced a strong currency, low inflation, a 
large current account surplus and, in international terms, a low interest rate level. These have been 
crucial factors in maintaining Switzerland(cid:146)s attractiveness as a market in which to invest. 
In addition to the positive macroeconomic environment, efficiency and technical know-how are equally 
crucial  for  our  success.  This  applies  particularly  to  companies  exposed  to  intense  and  global 
competition like the banking industry. Over many years the Swiss financial sector has been nurturing 
qualities such as efficiency, a diversified and globally oriented range of services and a highly educated 
workforce. Technological innovations in the area of electronic payments, the electronic stock market 
and automated settlement systems have given Swiss banks a further comparative advantage in terms 
of  international  competition.  Close  cross-border  cooperation  has  been  established  with  other 
European  centres.  Our  stock  exchange  for  blue-chips  is  located  in  London,  our  future  exchange  is 
associated with the German exchange. 
While technical and professional know-how are important, integrity, reputation and trustworthiness are 
more and more of the essence. 
Swiss banking secrecy has sometimes proved a source of misunderstanding and even tension in our 
relations with our partners. The objective of our bank secrecy is to protect the private sphere and to 
enhance the depositors(cid:146) confidence in the banking system. It does not aim at encouraging tax evasion 
or protecting funds of dubious origin. 
As I mentioned earlier on, an agreement on the taxation of savings has recently been negotiated with 
the  EU.  EU  deposits  with  Swiss  banks  will  be  subject  to  a  withholding  tax  whose  proceeds  will  be 
transferred to the country of origin of the funds. Within this new tax regime no harmful tax competition 
between Switzerland and the EU will take place despite the presence of bank secrecy. 
BIS Review 27/2003 
 3
 The importance we give to the integrity of our banking system can also be highlighted by our efforts 
made to combat money laundering and terrorist financing. Switzerland has done much in this area to 
protect its good name as a financial centre. Six years ago it placed its commitment to the fight against 
money laundering on a statutory footing. Our anti-money laundering laws serve today as reference for 
many countries. 
Let me move on to the National Bank(cid:146)s monetary policy and the significance of the euro. 
Switzerland as an independent monetary zone 
5. 
As  is  the  case  in  most countries  today,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  pursues  a monetary  policy  that  is 
independent  of  the  political  authorities.  We  regard  this  independence  as  a  key  prerequisite  for  a 
successful policy. Our main goal is to maintain price stability. Thereby we create the basis for rational 
investment and expenditure decisions, and we contribute to a balanced economic growth. 
Price stability has been the traditional objective of our policy for decades, but our monetary strategy 
had to be adapted to changing circumstances. 
Following the transition to floating exchange rates some 30 years ago, monetary policy was based on 
the  control  of  the  monetary  aggregates.  We  had  to  fight  against  inflation  by  far  exceeding  today(cid:146)s 
levels. 
Inflation  could  be  sustainably  reduced  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  although  the  monetary 
aggregates became increasingly unreliable as monetary indicators. Monetary policy needed to be re-
designed. In 1999, we adopted a new strategy based on three elements: 
   The  first  element  is  an  explicit  definition  of  price  stability:  price  stability  is  achieved  when 
inflation, as measured by the consumer price index, is less than 2%. We want to achieve this 
objective  over  the  medium  term  since  controlling  inflation  on  a  short-term  basis  would 
translate into high costs to the national economy. A monetary policy geared to medium-term 
price stability also helps to smooth out cyclical fluctuations. In a boom phase such a policy 
will  tend  to  have  a  restrictive  effect  and  in  a  cyclical  downturn  it  will  tend  to  have  an 
expansionary impact. 
The second element is an inflation forecast. We publish a quarterly forecast of medium-term 
inflation.  Not  only  does  our  forecast  provide  extremely  valuable  information  on  the  future 
effect of monetary policy; it also plays a key role in explaining the central bank action to the 
public. 
The third element is the publication of a target range for the three-month interest rate. The 
target range sets the parameters for day-to-day implementation of monetary policy. 
Our experience with the new approach is positive. We have been able to enhance the transparency of 
monetary policy and to simplify lines of communication with the market.  
How do we take account of the fact that Switzerland is now fully surrounded by the euro zone? 
Indeed, the introduction of the single European currency at the start of 1999 has profoundly changed 
the  environment  for  our  monetary  policy.  But  the  fears  that  were  expressed  when  the  euro  was 
introduced four years ago failed to materialise. 
In particular, the Swiss franc is no more volatile against the euro than it had previously been against 
the D-mark. Immediately following the introduction of the euro it remained remarkably stable for more 
than a year. This was due in part to the fact that the economies of Switzerland and the euro area were 
strongly converging and that both central banks were pursuing a similar monetary policy. The franc did 
not really begin to appreciate until after the events of 11 September. Within a very short space of time 
it had appreciated by 5% against the euro. Later on, the way the Swiss franc was moving caused us 
concern on numerous occasions. This led us to ease monetary policy further last year as well. It is 
only  recently  that  the  franc  corrected  itself  against  the  euro.  The  stabilisation  of  the  geopolitical 
situation is likely to have played a major role in this. 
All in all, the Swiss franc has appreciated by 4% against the euro since its introduction - much less 
than  had  originally  been  feared.  If  one  also  takes  into  account  the  inflation  differential  between 
Switzerland and the euro area, the appreciation has been even more modest. 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2003
 Our  monetary  policy  concept  enables  us  to  take  greater  account  of  developments  on  the  foreign 
exchange markets and to communicate our intentions openly. We do not, however, actually seek to 
manage the exchange rate. Only on rare exceptional occasions - such as the extreme appreciation of 
the franc in the late 1970s - does an explicit exchange rate target make sense for Switzerland. 
The frequently expressed concern that the introduction of the euro would mean the disappearance of 
the interest rate differential between Swiss franc and euro investments has also proved groundless. It 
was  feared  that,  in  order  to  keep  the  exchange  rate  stable,  the  National  Bank  would  be  forced  to 
shadow the policy of the ECB, and, with a lower exchange rate risk, that the interest rate differential 
between Swiss franc and euro investments would gradually narrow. This has not occurred : both short-
term  and  long-term  interest  rates  in  Switzerland  are  still  around  2 and  1.5 percentage  points 
respectively  below  those  applying  in  the  euro  area.  We  can  continue  to  pursue  an  independent 
monetary course. 
Conclusion 
Against the background of the persistent weakness of the international economy, Switzerland is stuck 
in a rut as well. In the past few months we have had to revise our forecasts downwards on a number 
of  occasions,  most  recently  in  last  week(cid:146)s  quarterly  monetary  policy  situation  assessment.  For  this 
year  as  a  whole  we  are  forecasting  that  real  GDP  will  stagnate.  Even  this  modest  projection 
presupposes that the economy will pick up in the second half-year. There are still considerable risks in 
this regard. 
The  exchange  rate  remains  also  a  significant  downside  risk.  Although  the  geopolitical  situation  has 
eased since the end of the war in Iraq, it cannot be ruled out that the franc will come under renewed 
upward pressure as a safe haven currency. In the present context of business stagnation, the recent 
correction in the exchange rate of the franc against the euro has brought our currency back to a more 
realistic level, which is good news for our export industry. The current weakness of the dollar, although 
it  had  been  expected  for  some  time,  is  a  cause  for  concern  for  us  especially  as  it  comes  at  an 
unfavourable time. We watch therefore the exchange rate development very closely. 
In the present economic situation it is not easy to identify positive factors. One of them is definitely the 
environment of price stability and strong competition which is keeping inflationary expectations at an 
historical low level. As a result, monetary policy can remain expansionary. This is clearly the case in 
Switzerland. 
A  second  positive  element  are  the  structural  adjustments.  In  Switzerland,  the  private  sector  has 
adjusted courageously to the new low-growth environment in which the price/quality ratio becomes a 
key factor of success. I think that our economy is well positioned now to benefit fully from an upturn in 
international trade. 
Last  but  not  least  -  and  here  we  join  Poland  -  our  main  source  of  hope  lies  in  Europe.  Since 
Switzerland  is  heavily  dependent  on  exports,  sluggish  economic  performance  in  Europe,  and 
especially in Germany, is a major cause for concern. But there are now signs of hope : the German 
government  is  considering  a  reform  programme  which  should  increase  potential  growth,  and 
manufacturing orders are improving; in France GDP growth is positive; in the UK industrial production 
is accelerating again. 
We  can  now  expect  a  gradual  improvement  in  the  overall  economic  picture  and  a  progressive 
strengthening of consumer and investor confidence. Only renewed confidence in the future can lead 
us out of this delicate phase of economic stagnation. In this respect, the decision taken by a country 
as important as Poland to join the EU in 2004 will be a triggering factor. 
No  doubt  that  joining  the  EU  next  year  will  give  the  Polish  economy  an  additional  boost.  But  your 
accession  will  also  contribute  to  creating  a  more  dynamic  and  competitive  Europe.  And  this  is  our 
common interest. 
BIS Review 27/2003 
 5
