 Ingimundur Friðriksson: The Central Bank of Iceland and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ingimundur Friðriksson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a civic club meeting 
in Reykjavík, 12 February 2003. 
 In recent  years substantial changes have been taking place in central banking in many parts of the 
world. The main reason is the gradual acceptance of the view that it is natural to anchor central bank 
monetary policy to a single main objective. Simplified objectives were therefore set for central banks 
and they were granted greater independence to apply their monetary policy instruments, while more 
stringent  demands  were  made  regarding  transparency  of  monetary  policy  and  central  banking 
activities, and accountability to the government and general public. As a rule, simplification of central 
bank objectives involved defining a single main objective, i.e. to promote price stability. Central banks 
were often also assigned a second objective, namely to promote the security of financial systems, or 
financial stability.  
Price  stability  was  made  the  main  objective  of  monetary  policy  because  inflation  is  above  all  a 
monetary phenomenon. There is little point in setting an objective for monetary policy which it cannot 
attain.  Applying  monetary  policy  in  order  to  achieve  price  stability  also  contributes  to  economic 
stability. This, in turn, provides a basis for the economy to be able to achieve lasting growth and make 
the most efficient use of its scarce resources. 
The year 2001 was an eventful one in the history of the Central Bank of Iceland. In March that year the 
government and the Central Bank issued a joint declaration abandoning the fixed exchange rate policy 
and adopting inflation targeting as the mainstay of monetary policy in its place. A target was set for the 
Central Bank’s monetary policy to keep inflation as close as possible to 2½%, to be attained before the 
end of 2003. One consequence was that the exchange rate of the króna was floated. Just under two 
months  later,  parliament  unanimously  passed  a  new  Central  Bank  Act  which  entailed  extensive 
changes  from  the  earlier  legislation.  Inflation  targeting  has  established  itself  in  many  countries  in 
recent years and has formed the backbone of monetary policy in countries such as the UK, Sweden, 
Norway and New Zealand, with good results. 
The  new  act  took  account  of  central  bank  legislation  in  other  countries  and  one  of  its  aims  is  to 
consolidate  the  new  inflation  targeting  policy.  The  most  important  change  from  the  legislation  it 
replaced was to set a single principal objective for the Central Bank, i.e. to contribute towards price 
stability.  It  was  granted  independence  to  apply  its  instruments  in  order  to  attain  this  objective. 
Furthermore, the Bank was assigned the task of maintaining Iceland’s foreign exchange reserve and 
contributing to an efficient and reliable financial system, i.e. financial stability. The act also stipulated 
that the treasury may not borrow from the Central Bank. Specific requirements were made concerning 
accountability and transparency. For example, the Bank is now obliged to present public explanations 
every quarter of its monetary policy and monetary, exchange rate and currency developments, and its 
measures in these areas.  
As I said earlier, the main objective of Central Bank monetary policy is to keep inflation as close as 
possible to 2½%. The Central Bank has only a single instrument for achieving this objective: interest 
rates. The crucial interest  rate here  is that used  in the Central  Bank’s repurchase transactions  with 
credit institutions, sometimes called the policy interest rate. Such transactions effectively represent the 
Bank’s liquidity facility for these institutions. The commercial and savings banks then decide their own 
rates of interest with reference to the Central Bank’s policy rate and short-term interest rates invariably 
alter in pace with the Central Bank rate. Other things being equal, changes in the Central Bank interest 
rate also affect long-term interest rates, but other factors have an impact as well. Their responses to 
the Central Bank’s interest rate changes are therefore not always foreseeable and tend to take place 
with some lag.  
Inflation  forecasting  plays  a  crucial  role  in  the  Central  Bank’s  current  activities.  It  produces  four 
forecasts  a  year  and  publishes  them  in  its  quarterly  Monetary  Bulletin.  The  inflation  forecast  is 
projected  just  over  two  years  into  the  future,  on  a  quarter-by-quarter  basis.  As  in  other  countries, 
Central Bank interest rate changes take a long while to have an impact on the economy. The inflation 
forecast  therefore  needs  to  be  forward-looking  and  based  on  the  best  available  methodologies. 
Besides inflation forecasting, the Central Bank publishes a quarterly assessment of the economic and 
monetary situation and prospects, including a national economic forecast, and their probable impact 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 1
 on price developments. If inflation is heading beyond the Bank’s target on a longer-term scenario, the 
Bank raises its policy interest rate, but cuts it if inflation is heading below the target.  
In preparing its inflation forecasts and regular assessments of the economic situation and prospects, 
the Central Bank examines a wide range of indicators. These are both statistical data and information 
obtained  from  interviews  with  representatives  of  industry,  organisations  with  vested  interests,  credit 
institutions and others. The Bank publishes the bulk of its statistical indicators and data on its website. 
Central  Bank  decisions  are  made  after  in-depth  examinations  of  indicators  about  economic 
developments,  its  assessment  of  the  situation  and  outlook,  the  assumptions  behind  the  inflation 
forecast and the inflation forecast itself. Under the Central Bank Act, the Bank’s Board of Governors 
have set internal rules on the preparations of, arguments for and presentation of its monetary policy 
decisions.  These  rules  were  formally  set  in  the  beginning  of  2002  and  published  in  the  quarterly 
Monetary Bulletin. 
Having said this, it is tempting to try to assess the success of monetary policy implementation after the 
framework  was  changed  and  the  new  Central  Bank  Act  went  into  effect  in  spring  2001.  There  was 
already some inflation in spring 2001 and a rapid slide in the exchange rate of the króna until the end 
of November 2001 caused inflation to increase substantially, from around 4% when inflation targeting 
was adopted to 9½% in the beginning of 2002. Inflation surged following heavy demand pressure in 
the economy which was driven by large-scale credit expansion and resulted in an enormous current 
account  deficit,  peaking in 2000 at 10% of GDP. For most of the period of overheating the Central 
Bank did not follow a direct inflation target and the backbone of monetary policy was a fixed exchange 
rate, with a fluctuation band, i.e. a soft exchange rate peg. Nonetheless, the Central Bank sought to 
counter  inflationary  pressures  as  soon  as  1999  and  began  raising  interest  rates,  which  caused  the 
króna to strengthen until spring 2000. Expectations changed then, partly under the impact of the wide 
current  account  deficit,  and  the  currency  inflow  diminished.  A  downward  exchange  rate  trend  then 
began. 
The Bank raised its policy interest rate in phases until the end of 2000 when it reached 11.4%, where it 
remained until spring 2001 when a minor cut was made. The interest rate remained unchanged until 
late 2001 when the Bank felt it could discern clear signs that inflation was beginning to come down 
again. By then, the exchange rate of the króna had fallen by almost one-third from its highest point in 
spring 2000. By then the Central Bank had repeatedly stated that the exchange rate of the króna had 
become much weaker than warranted by economic fundamentals.  
The impact of the tight monetary stance was increasingly felt as the year 2001 wore on. The sharp 
turnaround in the exchange rate at the end of November that year and the agreement between the 
Federation  of  Icelandic  Labour  and  Confederation  of  Employees  in  December  2001,  postponing  an 
inflation-triggered review of wage agreements, eased the uncertainty and changed expectations. Both 
these events led to a rapid drop in inflation in 2002, and by last November the Central Bank’s inflation 
target was attained, one year before this was envisaged in the joint declaration by the government and 
the Central Bank from March 2001.  
When it became clear that inflation was on a significant downward path, the Central Bank gradually 
began to lower its interest rates. It also announced that it aimed to cut them in more and smaller steps 
rather  than  fewer  and  larger  ones,  not  least  with  the  idea  of  maintaining  calm  in  the  forex  market. 
Since  April  last  year  the  Central  Bank  has  lowered  its  interest  rates  eleven  times  by  a  total  of 
4.8 percentage  points,  including the cut announced  on February 10. The Central  Bank’s rate for its 
repo  agreements  with  credit  institutions  is  now  lower  than  it  has  ever  been  since  the  current 
arrangements for such transactions were introduced early in 1998, when it was 7.2%, and in fact is at 
its lowest level since 1994. The policy rate is currently 5.3%. The exchange rate of the króna was fairly 
stable from last spring and until the winter, then strengthened again towards the end of the year and in 
the  beginning  of  this  year,  to  reach  its  highest  point  for  two  years.  Undoubtedly  the  expected 
power-intensive industrial project in east Iceland is a contributing factor.  
The new monetary policy framework was introduced in a fairly tough climate of a sliding exchange rate 
and mounting inflation. It is fair to say that the tight monetary stance is the main reason that inflation 
went back down so quickly. Experience has shown that the monetary policy passed its initial test with 
flying  colours  and  no  one  should  have  any  doubts  now  about  the  value  of  monetary  policy  in  the 
Icelandic economy. It works in Iceland, just as it does everywhere else.  
On February 10 the Central Bank published its quarterly Monetary Bulletin. As usual, this contains a 
new inflation forecast along with the Bank’s latest national economic forecast and a new assessment 
  of economic and monetary developments and prospects. The bulletin also contains an evaluation of 
the  impact  of  the  proposed  power-intensive  industry  and  hydropower  development  projects  in  east 
Iceland, which were incorporated into the inflation forecast and national economic forecast.  
The forecast assumes that inflation will be below the Bank’s target over the next two  years. On the 
basis of this and the new economic forecast, the Governors announced a cut of 0.5 percentage points 
in  the  Bank’s  policy  rate  last  Monday.  One  of  the  standard  assumptions  behind  the  forecast  is  an 
unchanged exchange rate from the forecasting day, and it should be borne in mind that it did not take 
into account the interest rate cut which was announced on February 10. The impact of the cut will be a 
marginally higher rate of inflation than was assumed in the forecast.  
It should also be mentioned that Monetary Bulletin contains an announcement about pending changes 
to  rules  on  required  reserves  aimed  at  harmonising  the  operating  conditions  of  Icelandic  credit 
institutions with those of comparable institutions in EMU. To be implemented in phases this year, the 
new rules involve a considerable reduction in the credit institutions’ required reserve from the present 
levels, thus entailing some easing of the monetary stance.  
Broadly  speaking,  the  Central  Bank’s  assessment  and  forecasts  entail  a  fairly  moderate  rate  of 
economic  growth  this  year,  unemployment  of  around  3½%  this  year  (excluding  the  effects  of  new 
government measures in this area) but falling somewhat next year, a minor current account deficit this 
year and next year – in particular caused by imports connected with the construction programmes in 
east Iceland – and a very moderate rate of inflation. Thus it can be said that the outlook is for good 
macroeconomic balance.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  Monetary  Bulletin  includes  an  in-depth  assessment  by  the  Bank  of  the 
proposed  power-intensive  industrial  projects  in  east  Iceland  and  conceivable  economic  policy 
responses to them. In this context it is important to remember that relatively little development will take 
place in east Iceland this  year and for most of next year. The effect will not begin to be felt to  any 
extent until well into next year and the bulk of construction work will take place in 2005 and 2006. The 
main  conclusion  of  the  Bank’s  analysis  is  that  even  though  this  will  be  the  largest  construction 
programme in the history of Iceland, it should be able to go through without disrupting the economy. 
However, this calls for cautious economic policy implementation. The Central Bank’s analysis shows 
that  with  a  somewhat  stronger  exchange  rate  and  higher  interest  rates  than  would  otherwise  have 
prevailed,  and  a  tighter  fiscal  stance  than  would  have  been  needed,  inflation  will  remain  inside  the 
tolerance limits of the target, i.e. below 4%, and that this will prevent the economic instability that the 
construction programme in east Iceland would otherwise have caused. Exchange rate developments 
and  the  fiscal  input  will  be  major  factors  in  determining  how  much  interest  rates  will  need  to  rise. 
However,  neither  an  exchange  rate  adjustment  nor  fiscal  measures  can  entirely  replace  monetary 
measures,  since  the  change  in  exchange  rate  partly  reflects  expectations  of  a  rise  in  Central  Bank 
interest rates, beside which the scope of the east Iceland construction programme will simply be too 
great to be countered solely by cutting back public sector activity.  
Without  sensible  economic  policy  implementation,  however,  the  construction  programme  would  be 
likely  to  lead  to  overheating  of  the  economy,  high  inflation  and  instability.  There  is  no  the  scope  to 
discuss the Bank’s analysis further here, however, so I shall merely refer to the coverage in the latest 
Monetary Bulletin. 
In recent public discussions it has repeatedly been claimed that the exchange rate of the króna is too 
high and the Central Bank needs to take measures to bring it back down, such as a large-scale cut in 
interest rates, which are said to be much higher in Iceland than elsewhere. The fact of the matter is 
that the interest rate differential between Iceland and its main trading partner countries has narrowed 
significantly  recently.  The  short-term  interest  rate  differential  has  not  been  less  since  1996.  The 
Central Bank of Iceland’s policy rate is now lower than, for example, those of the Norwegian Central 
Bank  and  the  New  Zealand  Reserve  Bank,  both  of  which  also  apply  inflation  targeting.  The  same 
applies to the policy rate in real terms, calculated relative to these banks’ respective inflation targets. 
In fact, in real terms the Central Bank of Iceland’s policy rate is at its lowest point since 1996.  
In  this  context  it  is  also  important  to  point  out  that  after  the  change  in  the  monetary  framework  in 
March 2001, i.e. after an inflation target was set for monetary policy and the króna was floated, the 
Central Bank has no specific objective as regards defending the exchange rate of the króna, which is 
determined on a day-to-day basis by supply and demand in the domestic forex market. Various factors 
affect  currency  flows,  such  as  interest  rates  and  the  interest  rate  differential  with  abroad,  the 
merchandise and services balance and, last but not least, expectations about the future.  
BIS Review 8/2003 
 3
 It  may  also  be  noted  that,  since  the  autumn,  the  Central  Bank  has  regularly  purchased  foreign 
currency  in  the  domestic  interbank  market.  The  purpose  of  such  purchases  is  to  boost  the  Bank’s 
foreign reserve, which was significantly depleted during its efforts to control the slide in the króna in 
2000  and  2001,  and  not  to  influence  the  exchange  rate,  although  undoubtedly  they  do  so  to  some 
extent.  The  Bank’s  experience  shows  that  direct  intervention  in  the  forex  market  with  the  aim  of 
influencing  the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  only  has  a  short-term  effect  at  best.  Regular  foreign 
exchange purchases were stepped up in January and again in February. Now, the Bank purchases 
1½ million US dollars daily and has purchased the equivalent of 11 b.kr. since the autumn.  
In the Central Bank’s view, various factors may have caused the króna to strengthen in recent weeks, 
not least expectations about the east Iceland construction projects, a possible underestimation of the 
degree  of  slack  in  the  economy  at  the  moment,  and  increased  fishing  quotas.  In  assessing  the 
exchange rate it is important to point out that in real terms the exchange rate is not much higher at 
present  than  its  average  over  the  past  ten  years.  Thus  there  is  no  possible  way  to  claim  that  the 
current exchange rate is blatantly out of step with what is appropriate for the economy or is far from 
the real equilibrium exchange rate.  
It  has  also  been  claimed  that  there  is  a  significant  risk  of  deflation  in  Iceland.  The  Central  Bank 
considers the likelihood of this to be negligible. In fact, the talk of deflation can largely be expected to 
reflect international discussion of the same issue, with claims from various quarters that there is a risk 
of deflation in Germany and the USA in the same way that has happened in Japan. Nothing suggests 
that deflation is looming in Iceland – wage costs have risen, growth in money supply is robust, inflation 
expectations in the market are around 2% or above, and one of the largest construction programmes 
in Icelandic history is on the horizon. It may be added that, up until now, Iceland has never had any 
problems in kindling inflation.  
In light of all the above, the Central Bank does not believe that there are grounds for a large cut in 
interest  rates  in  order  to  bring  down  the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  or  dispel  the  risk  of  deflation, 
which is virtually nil anyway. Such action would probably pave the way for subsequent overheating of 
the  economy  and  inflation.  The  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  base  its  interest  rate  decisions  on  its 
mandatory role of contributing towards price stability and on the joint declaration of the government 
and the Bank from March 2001 which specifies the inflation target. Through steadfast monetary policy 
which ensures price stability, monetary measures will contribute towards promoting a stable economic 
environment which is the foundation for the economy’s growth capacity in the long run.  
On  the  basis  of  the  new  inflation  forecast  and  national  economic  forecast,  the  Central  Bank 
announced a cut of 0.5 percentage points in the policy interest rate on February 10. The Consumer 
Price Index for the beginning of February was published this morning and the change in it turned out 
to be fully consistent with the Bank’s latest inflation forecast. Developments in the next few weeks and 
the  prospects  ahead  will  determine  the  next  step  as  regards  interest  rates.  Opposing  trends  are  at 
work  there  and  at  present  it  is  impossible  to  state  in  which  direction  or  when  the  next  step  will  be 
taken. It also needs to be underlined that if the current outlook turns out to be correct, the proposed 
construction programme in east Iceland will gradually begin to influence the formulation of monetary 
policy. To conclude, I would like to reiterate that monetary decisions by the Governors of the Central 
Bank of Iceland are made after extremely careful consideration of a large number of indicators. 
 