 Willem F Duisenberg: Coordination of structural policies in Europe 
Address  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the  occasion  of 
being decorated with the Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold with Sash for Services to the Republic 
of Austria by Dr Thomas Klestil, President of the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 9 May 2003. 
 It is a great honour for me, for a number of reasons, to receive this high decoration of the Republic of 
Austria. 
First, I am deeply honoured that this decoration has been awarded personally by you, Mr. President, in 
these historic quarters, at the centre of one of the most powerful and influential nations in the history of 
Europe.  Moreover,  I  highly  appreciate  being  awarded  a  decoration  of  the  Republic  of  Austria,  a 
country that has always supported stability-oriented policies, even when Austria was not yet a member 
of  the  European  Union.  Indeed,  among  the  countries  of  Europe,  it  was  for  a  very  long  period  only 
really Austria and my own country, the Netherlands, which were able to pursue a successful exchange 
rate  policy,  more  or  less  pegging  their  national  currencies  to  the  Deutsche  Mark.  Finally,  to  be 
decorated on 9 May - the anniversary of the declaration by Robert Schuman which marked the start of 
the European integration process - is of particular symbolic value for me. As you are aware, 9 May is 
celebrated  in  particular  by  the  European  institutions.  The  celebration  of  this  day  by  all  European 
institutions marks the importance of the process of European integration in the history of our continent, 
a process that is irreversible and has greatly contributed to peace and economic welfare in Europe. 
Indeed, with the latest enlargement of the European Union, which will come into effect on 1 May 2004, 
the post-war rifts in Europe have finally been healed again. 
Mr. President, listening to your kind words, I can only repeat what I have already said on many other 
occasions: I was really only an eyewitness to the process of European monetary integration, a process 
which more or less started with the Werner Report in 1969 and which culminated on 1 January 2002 
with  the  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins.  I  call  myself  only  an  eyewitness,  as  I  am 
convinced that the introduction of the euro would not have been successful without the efforts of the 
national central banks of the euro area, national and European administrations and the private sector, 
in particular the European financial sector. And let us not forget the European citizens, who appear to 
have fully accepted the euro as their currency. 
In terms of European economic integration, the introduction of the euro is often regarded as an end 
point. However, in my view, this is not the case. In addition to the political dimension of the introduction 
of the euro, representing as it does a step towards ever closer union, its introduction is also a catalyst 
for further economic integration in Europe. This has already become apparent in the area of financial 
integration;  here  increased  integration  has  been  brought  about  by  market  developments  as  well  as 
policy initiatives, in particular the European Commission’s goal to create a truly integrated European 
financial market by 2005. 
I  should  like  to  take  the  opportunity  today  to  address  another  area  where,  at  least  in  my  view,  the 
introduction of the euro has illustrated the need for more co-ordinated efforts in the European Union. I 
refer in particular to an increased need to enhance the co-ordination of structural policies in Europe, 
i.e.  policies  which  aim  to  improve  the  functioning  of  market  mechanisms  and  the  operation  of  the 
economy  as  a  whole.  In  my  view,  there  are  three  reasons  why  such  enhanced  co-ordination  of 
structural policies is necessary. 
First, the introduction of the euro has made exchange rate fluctuations obsolete as an instrument of 
adjustment. For instance, before the establishment of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), divergent 
national  economic  developments  could  be  addressed  by  a  depreciation  or  appreciation  of  national 
currencies. In a monetary union, such adjustment has to take place via other mechanisms, such as 
price and wage adjustments, labour mobility, or, most unwanted, a temporary rise in unemployment. In 
order  to  avoid  the  latter,  and  to  enhance  economic  adjustment  via  wages  and  prices  so  that  it  is 
comparable to the level of adjustment existing between regions of the United States, policies aiming at 
increasing the flexibility of the markets are necessary. 
Second,  in  our  Monetary  Union,  with  increased  trade  and  financial  links  between  the  member 
countries, the significance of spillovers from national economic policies has also increased. In other 
words, if governments embark on economic policies that are not sound, or hamper the functioning of 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 1
 their economies, the adverse consequences will not be limited to the country concerned, but will also 
have  an  impact  on  other  countries  participating  in  the  euro  area.  Hence,  the  increased  risk  of 
spillovers  from  insufficiently  effective  structural  policies  warrants  enhanced  co-ordination  of  such 
policies at the European level. 
Finally,  it  has  become  increasingly  clear  -  on  the  basis  of  both  practical  experience  and  economic 
theory and empirical evidence - that economic growth can only be lifted to a structurally higher level by 
improving  the  functioning  of  the  economy,  which  in  the  European  context  implies  embarking  on 
far-reaching  structural  reforms.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policy-makers  are  often  used  as  scapegoats, 
especially in times of weak economic development, as we are witnessing at the moment. But the best 
and  only  contribution  both  monetary  and  fiscal  policy-makers  can  make  to  increasing  potential 
economic growth is to foster macroeconomic stability, thereby creating  an environment that is most 
conducive  to  consumption,  investment,  trade  and  economic  growth.  The  European  Union  has 
embarked on a very ambitious reform agenda, agreed upon at the Lisbon European Council in 2000. 
However, as has already been noted by the European Commission, the pace of structural reforms in 
the  Member  States  lost  momentum  in  2001  and  remained  sluggish  last  year.  Unless  the  slow  and 
partial approach of most Member States with regard to structural reform is improved, it will become 
increasingly  difficult  to  attain  the  Lisbon  objectives.  This  lack  of  progress  with  respect  to  structural 
reform and the apparently weak commitment on the part of governments to embark upon such reform 
call for enhanced co-ordination of structural policies at the European level. 
When I refer to increased European co-ordination of structural policies, I certainly do not wish to imply 
that  structural  policies  must  be  harmonised.  I  would  even  say  that  this  is  undesirable.  Economic 
structures in the individual Member States are still rather divergent, and improving the functioning of 
these  structures  often  demands  different  solutions  and  policies,  depending  on  the  countries 
concerned. 
For me, increased European co-ordination of structural policies would mean introducing co-ordination 
mechanisms  and  tools  that  increase  Member  States’  incentives  to  step  up  structural  reforms  and 
increase their commitment, while at the same time leaving them sufficient leeway to embark on those 
policies  that  are  most  appropriate  from  their  own  perspective.  My  view  is  supported  by  current 
developments, in particular the failure of some countries to step up such reforms. However, I must add 
that  I  am  extremely  happy  with  the  efforts  made  by  the  governments  of  some  Member  States  to 
seriously embark on effective structural policies aimed at economic reform. 
Mr.  President,  I  sincerely  hope  -  both  in  my  capacity  as  President  of  the  ECB  and  as  a  European 
citizen and staunch supporter of European integration - that the introduction of the euro will act as a 
catalyst for increased co-ordination in the area of structural policies. And, as I already mentioned, I 
hope the euro will also perform this function in other areas. 
After a period of quantum leaps in the process of European integration - a period which started with 
the Single European Act in 1987 and has ended with the introduction of the euro and the decision to 
enlarge  the  European  Union  to  the  south  and  to  the  east  -  some  would  say  that  the  pendulum  of 
European  integration  appears  to  be  swinging  once  again  in  the  direction  of  Eurosclerosis,  i.e.  to  a 
period of standstill in the process of European integration, as witnessed in particular in the 1970s and 
early 1980s. This is particularly apparent in the area of European political integration. I am, however, 
not  too  sceptical.  First,  I  am  convinced  that  the  Convention  on  the  Future  of  Europe  -  chaired  by 
Valéry Giscard d’Estaing - and the upcoming Intergovernmental Conference will provide new impetus 
to the European integration process. Indeed, the birth of a European Constitution, as foreseen by the 
Convention, would be a major landmark in the history of European integration. Second, as I already 
mentioned, I am sure that the introduction of the euro will also provide impetus for further European 
integration, both in political and economic terms. Finally, experience has shown that periods in which 
the  pace  of  European  integration  was  very  high  have  often  been  followed  by  periods  of  slower 
progress.  Indeed,  some  commentators  have  compared  the  European  integration  process  to  the 
famous  procession  in  Echternach,  Luxembourg,  in  which  until  recently  three  steps  forward  were 
followed  by  two  steps  backward.  In  other  words,  current  developments  in  the  process  of  European 
integration are not atypical in a historical context, and should hence not be looked upon with too much 
pessimism. 
I should now like to conclude. Mr. President, I should again like to express my sincere gratitude for this 
high decoration. It strengthens my belief that the cause I - and so many others - have been working for 
for  so many  years  is  worthwhile  and  appreciated.  I  am  also  convinced  that  Austria,  although  still  a 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2003
 relatively young member of the European Union, will continue to play an outstanding and supportive 
role in the area of European integration and as ambassador of stability-oriented monetary policies. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 3
