 Bimil Jalan: Strengthening Indian banking and finance - progress and 
prospects 
Speech  by  Dr  Bimal  Jalan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Bank  Economists’ 
Conference, Bangalore, 27 December 2002. 
I am thankful to Dr Michael Debabrata Patra of the Reserve Bank of India for his help in the preparation of this 
address. 
 The  Bank  Economists’  Conference  has  become  an  important  annual  event  for  constructive 
interactions and informed debate on the state of our financial system. The theme chosen for this year, 
“Indian Banking: Managing Transformation”, provides an excellent opportunity to reflect on the ground 
that  has  been  covered  in  transforming  Indian  banking  into  a  vibrant,  sound  and  a  well-functioning 
system, and to chart out a plan for the future. I  am happy to be here  with  you again to deliver the 
inaugural address to the 24th Conference of Bank Economists. 
As  I  have  emphasised  during  our  earlier  interactions,  there  are  several  elements  that  must  come 
together  in  order  to  make  the  Indian  banking  system  stronger,  efficient  and  low-cost.  These 
‘fundamentals’ include: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
We have made some progress in each of these areas; yet some concerns persist regarding the pace 
and  quality  of  our  progress.  Macroeconomic  and  financial  conditions  around  us  are  also  changing 
swiftly, posing new challenges and lending urgency to accelerating our efforts towards our vision. In 
my  address  today,  I  propose  to  take  stock  of  the  ground  covered  in  each  of  the  areas  that  I  have 
outlined. I hope this will help to shed some light on the road ahead. 
strengthening of prudential norms and market discipline; 
adoption of international benchmarks as appropriate to our situation; 
management of organisational change and consolidation within the financial system; 
upgradation of the technological infrastructure of the financial system, and 
human resource development as the catalyst of the transformation. 
Recent macroeconomic and financial developments 
II. 
The  global  financial  markets  have  weakened  significantly  since  end-March  2002,  reflecting  a 
downward revision in profit forecasts and concerns about the sustainability of the recovery. Corporate 
sector  distress  and  auditing  and  accounting  irregularities  in  June  and  early  July  2002  severely 
undermined  investor  confidence  and  deepened  the  slump  in  equity  markets.  Negative  sentiment 
spilled  over  into  the  corporate  bond  market,  reflected  in  a  sharp  rise  in  interest  rate  spreads;  and 
portfolio  changes  indicate  a  continuing  flight  to  quality  and  safety.  International  banking  activity 
experienced  a  slowdown,  affected  by  subdued  demand  for  credit  and  consolidation  of  off-shore 
lending.  Adjustments  are  underway  between  the  major  currencies,  driven  by  the  decline  in  equity 
markets  and  the  realignment  of  the  US  dollar.  Emerging  markets  have  also  witnessed  turbulence, 
largely  due  to  country-specific  factors,  including  concerns  about  debt  dynamics  and  political 
uncertainties. 
The  current  phase  of  the  banking  cycle  appears  to  be  driven  by  the  downturn  in  economic  activity 
rather than financial distress. Significantly, the largest financial institutions are among those affected 
by credit concerns. The slowdown in the demand for financing has been aggravated by a deterioration 
in the quality of portfolios on the assets side and the consequent tightening of lending norms. All this 
has  rendered  the  short-term  outlook  uncertain.  The  silver  lining  in  the  otherwise  sombre  global 
macroeconomic  and  financial  situation  has  been  Asia.  Emerging  Asia  has  been  experiencing  a 
stronger than expected recovery. Although equity markets have exhibited a decline, most countries of 
the region have retained access to international capital markets and international bank lending. 
BIS Review 2/2003 
 1
 The Indian economy has recently been exhibiting signs of staying ahead of global activity. Some signs 
of  cyclical  recovery  are  currently  evident,  although  border  tensions,  a  relatively  weak  and  uneven 
monsoon and concerns relating to the fiscal position are downside risks restraining a fuller surge of 
growth. Real GDP in agriculture could decline by about 1.5 per cent for the year as a whole, reflecting 
mainly the anticipated shortfall in foodgrains production. Industrial performance in the first half of the 
year appears to have shrugged off the sluggishness experienced in the preceding year. All constituent 
sectors  of  industry  have  recorded  improvement  in  growth,  led  by  manufacturing.  Significantly,  the 
production of the infrastructure industries and capital goods growth has also revived. Export growth 
has turned out to be robust in the first half of the year. Non-oil imports have risen over last year’s level 
suggesting  that  the  slackening  of  domestic  demand  seems  to  be  flattening  out.  Given  these  lead 
indicators, real GDP growth of 5.0 to 5.5 per cent during 2002-03 appears feasible. Inflation, measured 
as year-on-year variations in the wholesale price index (WPI), has been hovering around 3.0 per cent 
in recent weeks. The range of inflation indicators has shifted down to 2.3-3.9 per cent from 3.0-6.3 per 
cent a year ago. Nevertheless, the inflation outlook is uncertain with international oil prices volatile with 
perceptions  of  war  risk,  and  with  domestic  oilseeds  and  edible  oil  prices  rising.  For  the  year  as  a 
whole, inflation is expected to remain within 4.0 per cent in the current year. 
The  financial  system  is  also  providing  clear  indications  of  a  pick  up  in  activity.  There  has  been 
improvement  in  the  growth  of  non-food  bank  credit  reflecting  a  better  outlook  for  industrial  growth. 
There has been an increase in the credit disbursed to the housing sector and industries like coal, iron 
and  steel,  textiles,  fertiliser,  drugs  and  pharmaceuticals,  cement,  construction,  petroleum,  computer 
software, automobiles, gems and jewellery and power. The increase in credit demand is not, however, 
evenly spread. The investment of scheduled commercial banks in non-SLR instruments has shown a 
distinct  improvement  from  a  comparatively  negligible  level  last  year.  Money  supply  (M3)  has  been 
tracking  real  output  developments  and  inflation  conditions  with  a  continuing  preference  for  safety 
reflected in the appetite for bank deposits. 
Although  various  segments  of  the  Indian  financial  markets  have  remained  relatively  unaffected  by 
international  financial  developments,  equity  markets  have  moved  down  along  with  global  equity 
markets. On the other hand, the strength of capital flows has resulted in a modest appreciation of the 
exchange rate of the rupee vis-a-vis the US dollar. First quarter balance of payments data indicate that 
the current account remains in surplus as in the preceding year. The foreign exchange reserves have 
risen to a level of US $ 67 billion, currently the seventh largest in the world. Under these conditions, 
the stance of monetary policy, reiterated recently in the Statement on the mid-term review of monetary 
and credit policy  on  October 29, 2002,  is provision of adequate liquidity  to meet credit growth and 
support investment demand, consistent with price stability; to continue the soft interest rate stance and 
greater flexibility in the interest rate structure over the medium term. The policy stance was signalled 
through 25 basis points cuts each in the Bank Rate and the repo rate. Monetary policy also renewed 
its commitment to monitoring conditions in the foreign exchange market with watchfulness as well as 
flexibility. 
Financial intermediation is not just a mirror of the real economy; it is also a derivative. Around us, the 
prolonged  global  slowdown  is  increasingly  reflected  in  heightened  risk  aversion  in  international 
financial markets. Fortunately for us in India, we seem to be breaking out early from the synchronised 
global downturn. Our banks, financial institutions and financial markets have responded encouragingly 
to  the  impulses  for  growth,  reinforcing  the  virtuous  aspects  of  the  movement  between  real  and 
financial  activity.  It  is  vital  that  we  take  advantage  of  this  early  lead  and  seize  the  opportunities  for 
financial intermediation in the recovery phase of the business cycle. 
Strengthening the financial system 
III. 
Strengthening  of  the  financial  sector  and  improving  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  can  be 
described  as  the  core  principles  of  financial  sector  reforms  in  India.  The  central  plank  is  a  set  of 
prudential norms that are aimed at imparting strength to banks and financial institutions, and inducing 
greater  accountability  and  market  discipline.  These  norms  include  not  only  capital  adequacy,  asset 
classification  and  provisioning  but  also  accounting  standards,  exposure  and  disclosure  norms  and 
guidelines for investment, risk management and asset-liability management. Our approach has been 
to benchmark our norms against international standards. 
By the end of March 2002, 25 out of 27 public sector banks had risk weighted capital adequacy ratios 
above the prescribed minimum of 9 per cent with 23 in excess of 10 per cent. Strategies are being 
worked  out  to  turn  around  the  two  weak  public  sector  banks  including  recapitalisation.  Capital 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2003
 adequacy has improved significantly in other segments too i.e., financial institutions in the regulatory 
domain  of  the  Reserve  Bank  (except  for  IFCI),  non-bank  financial  companies  (NBFCs)  and  other 
segments  of  the  banking  industry  except  for  cooperative  banks.  Banks  have  been  making  equity 
offerings and issuances of subordinated debt for inclusion under tier-II capital under transparent and 
non-discretionary  guidelines.  A  cumulative  amount  of  capital  of  Rs.867  crore  has  been  returned  by 
public sector banks to the Government. 
Capital adequacy in banks and financial institutions has become a matter of considerable international 
attention,  particularly  after  the  Asian  crisis.  The  draft  of  a  new  Capital  Accord,  proposed  for 
implementation in 2006, envisages increased risk sensitivity of capital ratios, refinement of measures 
of credit risk including a greater role for external credit rating, flexibility and national discretion rather 
than a one-size-fits-all approach. The Reserve Bank’s position has been that the new Accord should 
focus primarily on complex and internationally active banks while national choices of methodologies 
for  assigning  risk  weights  on  capital  ratios  be  accommodated  within  its  framework.  India  is  also 
engaging in collaborative studies to assess the potential impact of the new Accord. 
Banks  are  being  prepared  for  tightening  of  the  norms  for  asset  classification  with  convergence  to 
international standards by March 2005. The 90-day norm for recognition of loan impairment will come 
into  operation  from  2004-05  and  this  is  now  applicable  for  all  segments  of  the  financial  system. 
Phased  provisioning  and  charging  of  interest  on  monthly  rests  are  seen  as  immediate  steps  in  the 
preparation. 
Exposure norms in respect of single/group borrowers have been set up to limit the credit risk in banks’ 
portfolios and are linked to capital. Additional disclosures have been prescribed in notes to accounts of 
balance sheets. Asset liability management systems are being constantly refined with tolerance levels 
prescribed  on  all  time  bands  for  liquidity/interest  rate  sensitivity  mismatches.  There  has  been 
considerable progress in the implementation of risk management systems although there is a need for 
substantial  upgradation  of  management  information  systems,  preparation  of  contingency  plans  and 
stress  testing.  Internal  systems  need  to  be  developed  further  for  quantifying  and  monitoring 
operational risk. 
A  major  drag  on  financial  sector  reforms  in  India  is  the  slow  progress  in  the  management  of  non-
performing assets (NPA). Although net NPAs have undergone a steady decline since 1992-93, they 
are still high by the international standard of about 2 per cent. The cumulative provisions against loan 
losses  at  43  per  cent  of  gross  NPAs  is  also  extremely  low  by  international  standards.  From  the 
regulator’s perspective, NPA management involves four steps i.e., assessment, provisioning, recovery 
and prevention. A menu approach is adopted in India which involves intensification of recovery with 
ongoing tightening of norms for assessment and provisioning. 
Settlement advisory committees were introduced in 1999 to provide a simplified non-discretionary and 
non-discriminatory  mechanism  to  deal  with  the  stock  or  ‘overhang’  of  NPAs  especially  in  the  small 
sector. The effectiveness of debt recovery tribunals was enhanced through the amendment of relevant 
legislation in 2000. In the recent period, there has been a substantial increase in the number of cases 
disposed of by these tribunals. In 2001, a corporate debt restructuring mechanism as prevalent in the 
UK and South East Asian countries was finalised for restructuring debts of viable corporate entities. 
Lok Adalats have proved to be an effective institution for settlement of similar dues. The Union Budget 
for 2002-03 announced the setting up of a pilot Asset Reconstruction Company with the participation 
of  banks,  financial  institutions  and  multilateral  agencies.  The  new  Credit  Information  Bureau  will 
provide an institutional mechanism for sharing of information on borrowers. 
A recent landmark development which should have a long term favourable impact in reducing the level 
of NPAs is the passage of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement 
of Security Interest Act. It lays out the conditions to be satisfied for the establishment of securitisation 
or  reconstruction  companies,  the  terms  for  acquisition  of  financial  assets  by  these  companies, 
enforcement  of  security  interest,  dispute  settlement  procedures,  prudential  norms,  offences  and 
penalties. The Act empowers banks and financial institutions with appropriate legal authority to speed 
up the recovery of the stock of impaired assets through a one-time cleaning of balance sheets. This is 
expected to improve their financial health and functioning considerably. 
Efforts  have  been  simultaneously  undertaken  to  broaden  and  deepen  the  various  segments  of  the 
financial market spectrum. The call money market is emerging as a pure inter-bank market and activity 
is  rising  in  the  repo  market  for  non-banks.  The  development  of  money  market  segments  has  gone 
hand in hand with rationalisation of standing liquidity facilities at the Reserve Bank. In the gilt market, 
there  is  greater  transparency,  new  instruments  have  been  introduced,  and  there  is  a  progressive 
BIS Review 2/2003 
 3
 widening of the investor base. With the operationalisation of the Negotiated Dealing System, price and 
trade information is available on a near real time basis. The Clearing Corporation of India has also 
launched  net  foreign  exchange  clearing  in  India  on  a  guaranteed  settlement  basis.  These 
developments  bring  us  closer  to  our  goal  of  transforming  our  financial  system  into  a  resilient  and 
competitive structure with market participants operating in different segments of the financial markets 
catering to varying classes of financial assets and liabilities. 
Transparency and market discipline 
IV. 
There is now a wider appreciation that high quality financial reporting - described as the ‘cornerstone 
of  market  discipline’  -  is  essential  for  the  efficiency  and  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Structural 
changes  underway  in  the  financial  system  have  only  served  to  raise  the  premium  on  market 
disclosure. Globalisation has brought with it stringent quality criteria as the emphasis is increasingly on 
comparability of information. Pillar III in the revised Basel Capital Accord is the most recent example. 
Financial  innovations  have  made  the  interpretation  of  disclosures  more  difficult,  testing  severely 
existing measurement techniques. At the same time, availability of information is vital since it is the 
basis  on  which  perceptions  and  expectations  are  formed,  which  ultimately  drive  markets  and  even 
business cycles. 
Information conveyed by the balance sheet, income and cash flow statements is the bread and butter 
of traditional accounting. Risk information is supplied primarily through supplementary risk disclosures. 
Both  are  important  for  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources  and  financial  discipline.  We  have  been 
intensifying  ongoing  efforts  to  make  the  balance  sheet  and  profit  and  loss  accounts  of  banks more 
reflective  of  their  true  financial  health.  From  March,  2003  banks  would  be  required  to  conform  to 
Accounting  Standards  issued  by  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  India.  Banks  are  also 
required to make additional disclosures in notes to accounts on risk features such as movement in 
provisions  held  towards  non-performing  assets  and  depreciation  of  investments,  capital  market 
exposures  and  loans  subject  to  corporate  debt  restructuring.  These  requirements  are  applicable  to 
financial institutions as well. In the April, 2002 Monetary and Credit Policy Statement banks have been 
required to announce the maximum spread over their prime lending rates (PLR) along with their PLR 
announcements, the minimum and maximum rates charged to borrowers, deposit rates, the effective 
annualised return to the depositor and processing and service charges. These disclosures serve the 
interests of customers, besides fostering healthy competition among banks. The Reserve Bank, too, is 
expanding its disclosure to the markets, even while setting for itself exacting standards of quality and 
timeliness.  A  recent  example  is  the  release  of  daily  cumulative  balances  held  by  banks  with  the 
Reserve Bank, over and above its daily, weekly, monthly and less frequent disclosure of information 
and analysis of a wide array of macroeconomic and financial variables. 
In India, credit-related information in the banking sector is confidential in nature and lenders are bound 
by the secrecy embodied in the present legal framework. The Credit Information Bureau is intended to 
economise on the production costs associated with the supply of financial information for a potential 
clientele  comprising  101  banks,  22  non-banking  finance  companies  and  30  housing  finance 
companies  in  India,  as  well  as  a  large  number  of  co-operative  banks  and  other  regional  credit 
grantors. The Bureau expects to provide more effectively organised information and to circumvent the 
constraint of limited infrastructure of some of the participants in the financial system. The Bureau is 
expected to launch commercial operations in the first quarter of 2003. 
The  content  of  information  is  important  and  perhaps  the  most  difficult  to  address  in  the  context  of 
financial  sector  reforms.  The  key  challenge  is  to  close  the  gap  between  economic  and  accounting 
valuations. The prevailing mixture of historical cost and mark-to-market accounting is unsatisfactory. 
For traded assets and liabilities, marking to market is suitable. For non-traded instruments, imputing 
valuations  in  a  verifiable  manner  is  a  major  challenge.  Since  September  30,  2000  in  line  with 
international  best  practice,  banks  are  required  to  classify  their  investment  portfolios  into  ‘held  to 
maturity’, ‘available for sale’ and ‘held for trading’ categories, the first being in the nature of permanent 
investments at historical valuation, not exceeding 25 per cent of total investments, but the latter two 
categories  being  marked-to-market  at  yearly  and  monthly  intervals  (or  even  more  frequently), 
respectively. 
Banks  are  being  encouraged  to  set  up  Investment  Fluctuation  Reserve  (IFR)  accounts  as  part  of 
prudent  policies  for  utilising  the  gains  from  sale  of  investments  in  securities  in  the  current  benign 
interest  rate  regime  so  that  they  are  adequately  protected  against  any  reversal  of  the  interest  rate 
environment.  Realised  gains  from  sale  of  securities  can  be  transferred  to  these  IFRs,  which  vary 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2003
 between 5 and 10 per cent of bank portfolios and qualify for inclusion in tier II capital. Unrealised gains 
should not be taken to the income account or to the IFR. 
As regards the reliability of disclosure, the choice is narrowing down world wide to rule-based versus 
principle-based standards. Undoubtedly, principles need to be given added content before they can be 
applied  effectively  and  enforced.  The  growing  complexity  of  financial  innovations  is  defeating  the 
sustainable application of detailed rules: they can be circumvented through creative accounting. It is 
for this reason that a decisive preference is emerging for principle-based disclosure. There is also a 
distinct shift in the approach of the Reserve Bank, for instance, with circulars and instructions being 
replaced  rapidly  by  guidelines,  guidance  notes,  illustrations  of  conformity  nuances  and  extensive 
consultations  with  banks  on  recommendations  of  relevant  working  groups  before  they  are 
implemented. Indeed, similar considerations are pushing prudential authorities away from quantitative 
rules towards qualitative supervisory oversight in recent years. 
Structural changes in the banking system 
V. 
Financial  systems  worldwide  are  undergoing  structural  transformation.  Technological  innovation, 
deregulation  of  financial  services  at  the  national  level,  external  financial  liberalisation,  and 
organisational  changes  in  the  corporate  world  are  some  of  the  global  factors  driving  the 
transformation. Banking and finance in emerging economies is also caught up in this change. In these 
economies, in  addition  to  global developments, country-specific factors are motivating the structural 
shifts.  Consequently,  two  separate  directions  of  reform  are  evident.  There  is  an  expansion  of  the 
financial system due to vacation of policy interventions in entry, exit and operations, the application of 
new  advances  in  information  technology  and  in  general,  a  greater  emphasis  on  competition  and 
market-based outcomes. Almost contemporaneously, there is a strong drive towards consolidation in a 
quest for exploiting core competitiveness and for developing “niche” strategies. 
In India, the primary force for transformation was structural reforms launched in the aftermath of the 
balance  of  payments  crisis  of  1990-91.  It  was  recognised  that  a  vibrant,  resilient  and  competitive 
financial  sector  is  vital  for  sustaining  the  reform  process  in  the  real  sectors  of  the  economy. 
Significantly, financial sector reforms in India were pre-emptive and proactive rather than a result of 
banking crises, as has been the experience of several emerging economies. Secondly, the momentum 
of  change  in  the  financial  system  has  been  the  motivation  for  upgrading  the  technological 
infrastructure in Indian banking and finance rather than the other way round. In that sense, the Indian 
financial  system  has  been  a  late  entrant  in  the  expressway  created  by  the  information  and 
communication  technology  revolution.  Thirdly,  competitive  pressure  -  a  major  force  of  change 
worldwide  -  has  been  reforms-driven  rather  than  a  driver  of  the  transformation.  Finally,  a  large 
measure of the impetus for change has come from reforms in the regulatory and supervisory regime 
and the aspiration to apply international best practices to the country-specific situation. 
The role of the public sector banks has come under close scrutiny in the recent period. It is necessary 
to recognise that these banks have played a critical role in the development of the Indian economy in 
the  period  1969-90,  particularly  in  the  spread  of  banking  and  monetisation  of  the  economy,  the 
mobilisation  of  savings  and  their  allocation  by  plan  priorities.  For  all  economies  in  the  early  and 
intermediate stages of development, credit markets face a persistent excess demand, reflecting the 
existing resource constraints. Moreover, market processes can well exclude the genuine credit needs 
of the weaker sections of society which do not have the competitive strength to bid for funds in the 
market for bank credit. Public ownership in Indian banking was intended to address both concerns i.e., 
the rationing of credit in the face of excess demand not cleared by the market, and the channelling of 
bank credit flow to the  economically  disadvantaged sections of society. Over the period  1970-90,  a 
massive  expansion  of  bank  branches  occurred,  and  credit  allocations  ensured  some  equity  in  the 
distribution of bank credit. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  there  was  erosion  in  the  financial  health  of  public  sector  banks  and 
deterioration in the quality of customer service. Within the ambit of financial sector reforms therefore, 
the focus since the early 1990s has been on the viability, efficiency and competitiveness of banks and 
financial institutions. Liberalisation and deregulation has to go hand in hand with a greater emphasis 
on  consolidation,  productivity,  asset  quality  and  profitability.  There  is  also  an  urgent  need  for 
Government  to  divest  substantial  shareholding  to  the  public,  so  that  these  banks  can  respond 
effectively to changing market conditions. Under the present circumstances, improvement in the cost 
structure of the banks and work culture are important priorities. 
BIS Review 2/2003 
 5
 In  order  to  enable  the  public  sector  banks  to  deal  with  the  new  capital  requirements  as  per 
international guidelines, recapitalisation was initiated in 1993, aggregating Rs. 20,446 crore by the end 
of  the  1990s.  The  Verma  Committee’s  recommendation  that  recapitalisation  of  ‘weak’  public  sector 
banks be accompanied by conditionality relating to managerial and operational aspects of the banks’ 
functioning was endorsed in the Union Budget, 2000-01. Accordingly, in 2001-02, a sum of Rs.1,300 
crore  was  provided  to  one  of  the  weak  nationalised  banks.  Two  of  the  weak  banks  have  already 
turned around and are reporting profits and a capital adequacy ratio of 9 per cent. The last one is also 
going through a turnaround. Recapitalisation is associated with a monitorable reform programme and 
operational restructuring to ensure that flow problems in a bank’s performance are dealt with. 
Mergers  have  reflected  efforts  to  reap  economies  of  scale  and  scope  through  joint  production  of 
financial  services  and  one-stop  delivery  wherever  synergies  in  service  supply  can  be  exploited  to 
lower  costs  of  production.  In  general,  these  mergers  have  come  about  as  a  result  of  government 
efforts to restructure inefficient national financial systems. Market-driven consolidation is a relatively 
new  phenomenon  in  these  countries.  A  critical  issue  in  almost  all  emerging  economies  is  a 
reassessment of the ownership of the  State in the financial system and a redefinition of the role  of 
State-owned  banks  and  financial  institutions.  The  changing  structure  of  the  banking  and  financial 
systems in emerging economies has implications for systemic stability and the supervisory regime. 
A  major  structural  change  in  our  financial  system  is  the  infusion  of  competition.  The  enabling 
conditions  for  a  more  competitive  environment  initially  took  the  form  of  shifts  in  the  policy  regime. 
Statutory pre-emptions were progressively lowered, interest rates were deregulated and restrictions on 
entry and exit were eased. Financial markets were developed to enable financial intermediaries to deal 
in  assets  and  liabilities  of  varying  maturities  and  risk  profiles.  Activity  restrictions  were  eased  and 
banks  can  now  undertake  various  types  of  activities  reserved  earlier  for  development  financial 
institutions. Likewise, the term-lending financial institutions have been allowed to undertake working 
capital financing. Elements of this growing convergence have determined the pace and sequencing of 
the approach to universal banking in the recent years. 
Within  the  banking  system,  there  is  heightened  competition  with  the  introduction  of  new  generation 
private sector banks. In January 2001, revised guidelines were issued for entry of new banks in the 
private sector. Despite the preponderant share of domestic banks in banking activity in India, foreign 
banks  have  been  a  source  of  competition,  at  least  potentially,  given  their  use  of  sophisticated 
technology, risk monitoring analysis and exposure management. In recent years, the policy thrust has 
been to level the playing field for domestic and foreign banks. For example, foreign banks that were 
earlier allowed to operate only branches but not subsidiaries, are now free to choose to set up either 
branches  or  subsidiaries  under  common  banking  regulations  including  lending  norms.  Appropriate 
legislative changes are also under consideration of the Government. Foreign direct investment up to 
49 per cent  has been  allowed  in  private sector banks and up to 20 per cent  in nationalised  banks. 
Guidelines  have  been  issued  for  the  entry  of  banks  into  insurance  business  either  as  joint  venture 
participants or to take up strategic investment for providing infrastructure and services support without 
any contingent liability. 
Issues in supervision and regulation 
VI. 
Recent  international financial  developments have underscored the critical role  of the regulatory and 
supervisory  function  in  ensuring  the  health  and  stability  of  the  financial  system.  There  is  now  a 
worldwide  debate  on  how  to  strengthen  financial  regulation  even  further,  including  proactively,  to 
contend  with  the  dangers  posed  by  creative  accounting  practices,  even  as  the  depressed  state  of 
economic  activity  exerts  conflicting  pulls  on  the  extent  of  supervisory  rigour.  At  the  same  time,  the 
impact  of  technological  advancement,  financial  liberalisation  and  the  degree  of  integration  between 
domestic  and  international  financial  markets  has  rendered  the  conduct  of  oversight  of  the  financial 
system a highly complex task. 
Regulatory and supervisory authorities need to be regarded as providing a range of services to the 
community.  This  includes  the  establishment  of  specific  rules  of  behaviour  for  participants  in  the 
financial system, monitoring the observance of the rules, and general supervision of the behaviour of 
financial entities. Unlike other services, however, these are not supplied through market processes but 
laid down by the regulator after necessary consultations. The primary need for regulation arises from 
the fact that consumers of financial services are not in a position to evaluate the soundness and safety 
of  financial  entities  since  even  the  most  stringent  laws  regarding  enforceability  of  contracts  cannot 
protect for post-contract-signing behaviour. Therefore, the rationale for financial regulation lies in the 
6 
 BIS Review 2/2003
 economic  costs  imposed  on  society  by  the  external  effects  of  financial  market  failure  which  can 
threaten systemic stability. There is also a potential for gridlocks in the financial system due to adverse 
selection  and  moral  hazard  problems.  At  the  same  time,  substantial  benefits  can  accrue  from 
correction of market imperfections, reduced transaction costs, and in general, providing people with a 
financial system they can trust. 
In  India,  progressive  strengthening  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  has  been  a  key 
element  of  financial  sector  reforms  since  their  inception.  There  has  been  progress  in  achieving 
international  best  practices  in  banking  supervision  and  this  has  been  noted  even  in  external  audits 
conducted  by  the  IMF.  Within  the  process  of  convergence  with  the  best  practices,  fine-tuning  is 
undertaken keeping  in  view  the  country-specific  circumstances.  An  example  of  this  is  the  approach 
being  evolved  towards  consolidated  supervision  and  the  compliance  of  banks  with  accounting 
standards. 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  shift  in  emphasis  from  micro-regulation  to  macro-management, 
supported  by  a  tightening  of  prudential  norms  and  improvements  in  the  functioning  of  financial 
markets. A clearer definition of the regulatory role of the Reserve Bank is also being considered within 
the  broader  debate  on  the  conflict  of  interest  between  ownership  and  regulation.  The  supervisory 
strategy of the Board for Financial Supervision, which is entrusted with the supervision of banks, all-
India  financial  institutions,  non-bank  financial  companies  and  systemically  important  institutions, 
consists of combining a restructured system of on-site inspection with off-site surveillance, enhancing 
the  role  of  external  auditors  and  strengthening  corporate  governance,  internal  controls  and  audit 
procedures. Under the OSMOS system, monthly returns provide information on exposure to sensitive 
sectors,  market  risks  and  macro-prudential  early  warning  indicators.  Banks  need  to  prepare  for 
switching to risk-based supervision by 2003 by identifying information gaps in the compilation of risk 
profiles and training to personnel. The supervisory follow-up process will then involve a monitorable 
action plan including remedial actions and timely corrective steps. 
Banks  are  being  encouraged  to  improve  the  reliability  and  robustness  of  their  risk  management, 
management  information  and  supervisory  reporting  systems.  A  scheme  of  prompt  corrective  action 
based on early warning triggers is being developed as a supervisory tool. Rule-based actions would 
be delineated not only for shortfall in capital, but also for other indicators of incipient weakness. Trigger 
points would be set for three parameters - capital, non-performing assets, return on assets - and for 
each trigger a set of mandatory and  discretionary prompt corrective actions  would be  laid down. In 
addition  to  macro-prudential  indicators  of  financial  vulnerability  being  reviewed  in  India,  financial 
soundness  indicators  have  been  proposed  for  monitoring  the  health  and  soundness  of  financial 
institutions and markets. The Reserve Bank and the Government have initiated a wide range of legal 
reforms  to  enable  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  regime  to  keep  pace  with  advancements  in 
information  and  communication  technology.  The  envisaged  reforms  relate  to  electronic  cheques, 
cheque  truncation,  securitisation  and  reconstruction  of  financial  assets,  the  payment  system  and 
money  laundering. With  regard  to  the  cooperative  banking  sector,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  proposed 
that  there  is  need  for  an  apex  supervisory  body  to  deal  with  the  existing  regulatory  overlap  among 
multiple  agencies.  In  respect  of  the  financial  institutions,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  in  favour  of 
divesting  all  or  part  of  its  holdings  to  mitigate  the  conflict  of  interest  that  could  potentially  arise  in 
regulating the entities. 
Regulation is largely perceived to be free or costless and as such, tends to be over-demanded by the 
public  and  over-supplied  by  the  regulator.  However,  regulation  involves  a  range  of  costs  which  are 
ultimately reflected in the price of financial intermediation. In fact, the focus in the current debate is 
whether  regulation  should  be  imposed  externally  through  prescriptive  and  detailed  rules  or 
alternatively,  by  the  regulator  creating  incentive  compatible  contracts  that  reward  appropriate 
behaviour. The main responsibility for risk management and compliant behaviour has to be placed on 
the management of financial institutions. In the  ultimate reckoning, it is necessary to recognise that 
there  are  distinct  limits  to  what  regulation  and  supervision  can  achieve.  In  particular,  it  does  not 
provide  a  fool-proof  of  assured  contract  of  safety  and  does  not  absolve  either  management  or 
consumers of their responsibilities. 
Corporate governance 
VII. 
The  recent  spate  of  interlocked  occurrences  of  corporate  distress  and  accounting  irregularities, 
including financial restatements by mega corporates in the United States have severely undermined 
investor confidence and pulled global financial markets into the steepest declines since September 11, 
BIS Review 2/2003 
 7
 2001. It is increasingly recognised that the health of corporate entities has societal implications and 
that high ethical standards are necessary to ensure their accountability to society. In particular, it has 
become  vital  to  set  up  firewalls  against  what  has  come  to  be  termed  as  aggressive  accounting 
practices  that  ultimately  compromise  the  stake  of  shareholders  in  the  corporate  entity.  Today, 
corporate  governance  means  much  more  than  the  conduct  of  business  in  accordance  with 
shareholders’  desires,  a  statement  attributed  to  Nobel  laureate  Milton  Friedman.  It  has  come  to 
encompass systems by which business corporations are directed and controlled and thus takes into 
account  not  just  the  interests  of shareholders  but  others  who  have  a  stake  in  the  well-being  of  the 
corporate enterprise. ‘Doing everything better’ is how corporate governance is defined today. It covers 
in its ambit risk assessment and providing for risk cover, early warning systems against failure as well 
as  prompt  corrective  action.  Good  corporate  governance  encompasses  appropriate  checks  and 
balances  through  external  and  internal  audits  and  accounting,  clear  division  of  responsibility,  both 
horizontal  and  vertical,  disclosure  and  transparency.  While  there  are  several  models  of  corporate 
governance, the choice essentially is between the ‘outsider’ model of the US and the UK which entails 
separation of ownership and management, and the insider model of Europe and Asia, where a small 
group of interconnected shareholders exercise control over management. Public sector banks in India 
are  a  prototype  of  the  outsider  model  while  private  sector  banks,  non-bank  finance  companies  are 
more in the insider model tradition. Most Indian companies follow insider models of governance. 
The public interest in corporate governance dates back to the late 1970s when, in the aftermath of the 
Watergate scandal,  legislation specifically mandating  the establishment, maintenance and review  of 
systems of internal control, was passed in the US. Subsequently in 1985, the Savings and Loan crisis 
led  to  the  formation  of  the  Treadway  Commission.  Throughout  the  1980s,  there  was  a  clear 
recognition that the existing legal infrastructure was inadequate to deal with corporate failures due to 
poor  business  practices.  The  Cadbury  Committee’s  code  of  best  practices  in  the  UK  in  1991,  the 
Combined Code of the London Stock Exchange, The Blue Ribbon Committee of the US, the OECD’s 
Code of 1998, the joint efforts of the World Bank and the OECD to develop benchmarks in corporate 
governance that qualify as best practices under the standards and codes identified by the Financial 
Stability Forum are all reflections of the debate that has dominated the last twenty years. 
Several  forces  have  been  driving  the  debate  i.e.,  deregulation  and  financial  liberalisation,  systemic 
implications of certain failures of corporate governance and the fear of contagion, to name a few. The 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, signed into law in the US in July 2002, represents a response to the series of 
accounting irregularities in the US. It recognises the importance of sound information for improving the 
allocative efficiency of markets. The Act emphasises timely and reliable public disclosure of financial 
statements  and  changes  in  ownership  of  shares  due  to  trading  activity,  independence  of  audit 
committees and obligations, strengthening of criminal penalties and addressing of conflict of interest 
by  security  analysts.  These  elements  are  expected  to  make  for  far  reaching  changes  in  the 
management of corporate entities. 
As I mentioned earlier, variants of the two dominant models of corporate governance exist in India with 
important differences from the US, Europe or Asia. While the outsider model may appear intuitively 
appealing,  country-specific  factors  have  to  be  taken  into  account.  For  instance,  although  there  is 
separation of ownership and management in public sector banks and financial institutions, there are 
weak checks and balances. The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) as well as the Board is appointed by 
the owner i.e., the Government. As such, the Board itself has no role in continuation or otherwise of 
the  CEO  irrespective  of  performance.  Further,  the  fact  that  staff  issues  are  outside  the  purview  of 
management also limits the role of the Board substantially. 
There  has  been  considerable 
too.  The 
Kumaramangalam  Birla  Committee  appointed  by  the  SEBI  in  1999  framed  codes  of  disclosure  for 
corporates.  The  R.  H.  Patil  Advisory  Group  on  Corporate  Governance  made 
important 
recommendations regarding the responsibilities of boards to stake/share holders, selection procedures 
for  appointment  of  directors,  oversight  of  corporate  governance  practices,  amendment  of  the 
Companies Act for enforcing good governance, to name a few. The M. S. Verma Advisory Group on 
Banking Supervision advocated uniform quality of corporate governance, irrespective of ownership. It 
recommended  clear  lines  of  responsibility  and  accountability  for  boards  as  well  as  for  senior 
management throughout the organisation. The Consultative Group of Directors of Banks/ FIs under Dr 
A.  S.  Ganguly,  Member  of  the  Board  for  Financial  Supervision  has  made  recommendations  to 
strengthen the supervisory role of the boards of banks. The Group has also focused on the role and 
responsibilities of directors. 
thinking  on  corporate  governance 
issues 
India 
in 
8 
 BIS Review 2/2003
 In  view  of  the  sweeping  changes  taking  place  in  the  environment  in  which  the  financial  system 
operates,  corporate  governance  has  never  been  more  important  than  now.  As  emphasised  earlier, 
corporate  governance  relates  not  merely  to  the  individual  firms  or  banks,  but  to  the  stability  of  the 
entire financial structure. The approach should be to have in place the best standards of governance 
as early as possible. In many areas, we have made progress in setting out what needs to be done. It is 
important now to put in place implementation and enforcement mechanisms, early warning systems 
and prompt corrective action strategies. 
Technology, payment and settlement system 
VIII. 
The information technology revolution has brought about a fundamental transformation ushering in, as 
Alvin Toffler describes it, the fourth wave. Perhaps no other sector has been affected by advances in 
technology as much as banking and finance. It has become the most important factor for dealing with 
the  intensifying  competition  and  the  rapid  proliferation  of  financial  innovations.  It  has  enabled,  in 
general,  raising  the  efficiency  of  financial  intermediation  in  the  face  of  ever-rising  volumes  of 
transactions, falling margins and more empowered customer expectations. In particular, there are four 
or  five  key  areas  in  which  the  financial  system  has  experienced  the  benefits  of  the  technology 
revolution: product development, market infrastructure, risk control and market reach. The interaction 
of technology with globalisation has contributed to the expansion of financial markets beyond national 
borders,  heralding  the  end  of  geography.  In  the  process,  technology  has  changed  the  contours  of 
three  major  functions  of  financial  intermediaries:  access  to  liquidity,  transformation  of  assets  and 
monitoring of risks. 
The  Indian  financial  system  is  quickly  adapting  itself  to  these  developments  and  is  acquiring  a 
customer-centric focus. The proliferation of Automated Teller Machines (ATMs), networking of these 
ATMs and Shared Payment Network based ATMs is a feature that has been welcomed by the banking 
public. Other  innovations  already  within the domain of banks and financial systems in India include 
Internet  Banking,  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  and  ‘Anywhere/  Anytime  Banking’,  all  of  which  have  a 
high level of technology embedded in the systems offering these services. Many of the older banks are 
migrating towards the implementation of Core Banking or Clustered Solutions which would contribute 
significantly  towards  increasing  customer  satisfaction.  In  all  this,  business  process  re-engineering 
becomes an essential concomitant to ensure best results in technology upgradation. 
In  recent  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  assigned  priority  to  the  upgradation  of  technological 
infrastructure  in  the  Indian  financial  system.  Efforts  have  been  made  to  modernise  clearing  and 
payment  through  MICR  based  cheque  clearing,  Electronic  Clearing  Services  and  Funds  Transfer 
(ECS  and  EFT)  and  the  Centralised  Funds  Management  System.  For  the  traditional  paper-based 
cheque systems, introduction of cheque truncation and imaging of cheques is envisaged to reduce the 
time  lags  in  realisation  of  cheques.  Substantial  efforts  have  gone  into  developing  what  has  been 
described as the ‘plumbing’ in the financial architecture - a modern, efficient, integrated and secure 
payment and settlement system for the financial services industry  in India.  Significant milestones in 
this  path  are  the  Negotiated  Dealing  System  for  transactions  in  government  securities  and  the 
Clearing  Corporation  of  India.  In  order  to  establish  an  efficient,  cost-effective  and  dependable 
communication  backbone,  the  INFINET  has  been  set  up.  About  150  banks,  primary  dealers  and 
mutual  funds  have  become  members.  Structured  Financial  Messaging  Solutions  are  being 
implemented  for  secure  message  transfers  across  members  of  the  INFINET  (Indian  Financial 
Network).  Common  inter-bank  application  software  has  been  designed,  taking  into  account  the 
security requirements. The medium-term goal is the operationalisation of Real Time Gross Settlement 
which would enable real time funds transfers across different banks and thereby the optimal utilisation 
of  funds.  Critical  to  the  future  of  the  payment  and  settlement  system  of  the  country  is  the  ongoing 
research in the IDRBT on messaging systems, security and design specifications for RTGS. 
Adequate  security  is  a  prerequisite  for  a  modern,  technology-intensive  payment  and  settlement 
system, especially  one functioning in a highly networked environment. Information Systems Audit  is 
another area  which needs to  be  adequately  addressed.  Some progress has been made in  defining 
what we need but implementation would require a system-wide collaboration to obtain the best results. 
It  is  with  this  objective  that  the  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  circulated  the  recommendations  of  its 
Working Group on Information Systems Security for the Banking and Financial Sector among all banks 
and financial institutions. Legal changes to deal with electronic data interchange and legal wherewithal 
for participants in the payment system are on the anvil. These changes are intended to enable the 
BIS Review 2/2003 
 9
 benchmarking of our payment and settlement system against international standards such as the Core 
Principles for Systemically Important Payment Systems of the Bank for International Settlements. 
The  future  of  banking  and  finance  hinges  around  exploiting  the  opportunities  thrown  up  by  the 
technology explosion. This requires the combined efforts of all participants in the financial system. In 
December, 2001 the  Reserve  Bank set out  its  vision of the road ahead in the  document Payments 
System in India to share this vision with all participants and the nature and direction of reforms needed 
to achieve it. The collective goal should be to make use of synergies between technology and finance 
to maximise the benefits to society. 
Human resource development 
IX. 
The  content  of  human  resource  development  (HRD)  has  been  changing  in  tune  with  the  business 
environment. Nonetheless, the core function of HRD is to facilitate performance improvement and/or 
personal  growth  within  the  institutional  goal  of  delivering  value  to  customers  and  maximisation  of 
value-added.  Capital  and  technology  are  replicable,  but  not  human  resources.  Accordingly,  the 
fundamental  principle  of  human  resource management  (HRM)  is  to  treat  people  as  an  asset  rather 
than as a mere factor of production. The emphasis on human resource management is in the common 
interests of management and the workforce: by enabling employees to actualise their full potential, the 
collective  goal  is  achieved.  Personnel  policies  and  practices  including  elements  like  ‘institutional 
culture’  have  to  be  integrated  with  the  business  strategy.  This  involves  developing  the  employees’ 
skills,  knowledge  and  attitudes  on  an  ongoing  basis,  creating  and  maintaining  a  ‘learning’ 
environment, focusing on management development and career planning. 
The  response  of  Indian  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  the  challenges  imposed  by  the  changing 
economic  and  business  environment  will  mainly  depend  on  the  extent  to  which  they  leverage  their 
primary strength, namely, their human resources. Certain rigidities confront the banking system in this 
regard.  The  large  public  ownership  has  sometimes  operated  as  a  drag  on  human  resource 
development,  particularly  in  skill  development,  management  change  and  career  planning.  The 
recommendations  of  the  second  Narasimham  Committee  could  provide  useful  guidance  to  banks 
particularly in recruiting skilled manpower from the open market, including lateral induction of experts 
and  redeployment  of  existing  staff  in  new  businesses  and  activities  after  suitable  training.  A  major 
challenge for many banks will be to develop the special competencies and skills for credit appraisal 
and  risk  management  in  an  environment  of  deregulation  and  openness.  Obviously,  information 
technology is a key input in human resource development. The importance of building and reinforcing 
a  corporate  vision  and  culture  that  fosters  creativity  and  recognises  talent  and  merit  cannot  be 
overemphasised. 
In my earlier addresses to the BECON I have emphasised the need to integrate bank economists with 
the mainstream of operational activity in the financial system in India. I do believe that economists can 
perform an extremely useful function in the progress of Indian banking and finance. Economists have 
traditionally been well placed to advise on strategies which depend on macroeconomic developments, 
and  to  identify  developmental  constraints.  Economic  appraisal  is  another  traditional  area  of  the 
involvement of economists and cost-benefit analysis is regarded as synonymous with the economists’ 
work  in  the  realm  of  finance.  In  the  rapidly  changing  environment,  the  work  of  economists  has 
broadened  beyond  the  confines  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  analysis  and  abstract  research. 
Today, the role of the economist is increasingly being viewed as providing specialist inputs to assist 
administrators in formulating departmental policies and programmes on the one hand, and in placing 
before management an appraisal of the overall view of the institution’s goals and functioning, on the 
other. Thus economists play a key role throughout the organisation in helping define policy, strategy 
and  programme  implementation.  Economics  itself  is  a  ‘cross-cutting’  discipline,  and  economists  are 
particularly suited to apply their expertise in a range of areas in which a financial institution interacts 
with its environment. 
In most risk assessment and asset pricing models, for example, there is the assumption that the law of 
large  numbers  prevails.  The  assumption  of  ‘normality’  is  convenient  since  it  does  away  with 
specification and testing the complex relationships that rule financial markets. Yet, as Chairman Alan 
Greenspan of the US Federal Reserve System points out, the biggest problem in the evaluation of risk 
is  the  “fat-tail”  problem  and  the  prevalence  of  “non-normality”.  We  need  economists  to  correctly 
determine the underlying model for important portfolio decisions. 
10 
 BIS Review 2/2003
 As  the  organisational  structure  of  the  financial  system  changes,  institutional  economics  is  likely  to 
provide directions to manage the forces of change. Economics itself is becoming multi-disciplinary to 
cope with these pressures and practical research is driving economists beyond the frontiers of their 
vocation.  Here,  a  good  starting  point  for  economists  is  impact  assessment  of  changes  in 
organisational structure, management practices and employer-employee relationships on productivity, 
operational  efficiency  and  institutional  dynamics.  This  would  involve  designing  monitoring  and 
evaluation frameworks, in measuring and judging impact and in feeding results and practice through 
into new interventions by the institution into the financial system. 
Economists need to assist in the development of financial engineering labs, whether virtual or real, to 
handle the profusion of financial innovation and product and process changes. This often requires the 
interaction of economists from various core specialisations, statisticians and experts in business and 
finance.  Indeed,  these  compulsions  are  bringing  about  a  transformation  in  research,  data  base 
management and information analysis - the core interests of economists. 
India  has  produced  economists  of  the  finest  calibre  in  every  generation.  Their  work  has  been 
recognised  internationally  and  honoured.  There  is  no  reason  why  our  banks  and  financial  system 
should  not  use  this  innate  strength  to  greater  advantage.  It  may  be  useful  for  banks  and  financial 
institutions to sponsor educational courses in our universities and technical institutes which develop a 
cadre of economists which is specific to their requirements. Recruitment strategies, career planning 
and appropriate personnel development avenues can bring forth the best in them and encourage them 
to make valuable contributions to the development of the industry. 
Conclusion 
X. 
To sum up, I believe that we have made progress in several areas - strengthening the balance sheets 
of regulated financial entities through risk-weighted capital adequacy ratios; setting out a convergence 
path  for  asset  classification  norms  with  international  standards;  expanding  the  ambit  of  prudential 
norms to include monitoring exposures to credit risk, liquidity and interest rate risk; developing internal 
systems  for  risk  management;  enhancing  transparency  and  market  disclosure  and  thereby, 
accountability;  improving  management  practices  and  corporate  governance;  and  managing  the 
pressures of structural changes in our financial system. We have also made considerable headway in 
refining  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  function,  and  fine-tuning  it  to  the  country  specific 
circumstances.  There  is  now  a  greater  appreciation  all  around  of  the  priority  that  is  attached  to 
financial  stability,  even  while  efforts  are  intensifying  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  financial 
intermediation, the performance of financial intermediaries and the evolution of financial markets. 
It  is  also  a  matter  of  satisfaction  that  the  overall  policy  environment  has  fostered  macroeconomic 
stability,  complementing  financial  stability  and  providing  a  measure  of  protection  from  the  turbulent 
international  financial  events  over  the  decade  gone  by.  In  other  areas,  however,  our  progress  has 
been slow. These continue to remain areas of vulnerability from the point of view of systemic stability. 
We  have  not  been  able  to  bring  down  the  levels  of  NPAs  in  our  financial  system  to  internationally 
acceptable  levels.  The  management  of  NPAs  is  proving  to  be  daunting  in  terms  of  the  sheer 
magnitude  and  this  is  acting  as  a  drag  on  operational  efficiency  and  transaction  costs.  The  recent 
legislative changes for faster recovery of NPAs are most welcome, but actual results on the ground will 
depend on early resolution of potential conflict between what is legally possible and what is practical, 
reasonable  and  feasible.  We  also  need  to  cover  considerable  ground  in  developing  robust  internal 
control  systems,  management  information  systems  and  early  warning  triggers.  These  are  going  to 
become prerequisites in the evolution of prudential norms envisaged over the medium term. 
We  have  to  redouble  our  efforts  to  adapt  to  the  advances  in  technology  which  are  changing  the 
contours of financial intermediation  worldwide.  Unless we catch up, the technology  lag could  widen 
with adverse implications for efficiency and costs. We also need to imbue our financial institutions with 
flexibility to absorb and adapt to institutional change. Our banks must shed their inward-looking focus 
and develop an outward orientation. And, most important of all, we have to invest more resources into 
human resource development with a focus on the quality, timeliness and delivery of financial services. 
The human resource model of the future will require professionals to be both driving and anticipating 
change, understanding the complexities of the new business environment and forces shaping it. 
In  financial  systems  worldwide,  today’s  buzzwords  are  competition,  consolidation  and  stability. 
Proactive  strengthening  of  prudential  regulations,  enhanced  transparency  and  accountability, 
initiatives in setting best practices of corporate governance, and comprehensive, sound and effective 
BIS Review 2/2003 
 11
 regulation  and  supervision  have  together  played  a  key  role  in  creating  a  secure  and  conducive 
environment  for  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  There  is  currently  a  strong  emphasis  on 
upgrading the technological infrastructure for our financial institutions and markets. This is expected to 
provide  significant  gains  in  terms  of  the  efficiency  and  cost  of  intermediation.  The  full  benefits  of 
technological transformation, especially in terms of dealing with the vulnerabilities that persist in our 
system, will hinge upon enabling changes in the legal architecture. 
I believe that the driving force in the path ahead will be the immense skill capabilities that we possess 
in terms of human resources. I am glad to see the emphasis on human resource development among 
the themes being addressed in this year’s conference. In the years to come, this ‘human’ bias is likely 
to get stronger and the quality of human resources would become the cutting edge of competitiveness. 
A  forward-looking  approach  to  our  long-term  vision  must  focus  on  building  human  resources  in  a 
continuous cycle of competency and development. I leave this thought with you for your consideration, 
and wish you success in your deliberations. 
Thank you. 
12 
 BIS Review 2/2003
