 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Frankfurt, 6 February 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the 
Governing Council of the ECB. 
We have reviewed monetary, financial and economic developments and have  incorporated new 
information into our assessment. Overall, the current monetary policy stance remains appropriate to 
preserve a favourable outlook for price stability in the medium term. Consequently, we have kept our 
key  interest  rates  unchanged.  Their  low  level  should  help  counterbalance  the  negative  effects  on 
economic  activity  that  currently  stem  from  the  high  degree  of  worldwide  uncertainty  and  should, 
thereby, contribute to a sustainable economic recovery in the course of 2003. For the time being, we 
still assume that the high degree of uncertainty will decline in the course of this year. However, at this 
juncture  it  is  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  form  a  conclusive  judgement  on  the  impact  of 
geopolitical developments on the world economy in general, and the euro area in particular.  
Turning to the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average 
of the annual growth rates of M3 declined to 6.9% in the period from October to December 2002, from 
7.1% in the period from September to November 2002. The continued strong monetary growth reflects 
an  ongoing  pronounced  preference  for  liquidity  in  an  environment  of  high  financial,  economic  and 
geopolitical  uncertainty.  However,  it  also  mirrors  the  low  level  of  short-term  and  long-term  interest 
rates in the euro area.  
Although liquidity remains ample, it is unlikely at this stage that it will give rise to inflationary pressures, 
given the current economic environment and the expectation that some of the portfolio shifts will be 
reversed once the financial market uncertainty diminishes. This assessment is also supported by the 
continuing moderate growth of loans to the private sector.  
As  regards  the  information  under  the  second  pillar,  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  remained 
subdued around the turn of the year, as suggested by recently published data and survey information. 
These  indications  are  broadly  in  line  with  previous  expectations  which  suggest  a  gradual  increase, 
starting in the second half of the year, in real GDP growth rates to levels close to potential. Whereas 
the appreciation of the euro over recent months may contribute to dampening export growth to some 
extent,  the  price  competitiveness  of  euro  area  companies  remains  favourable  in  a  medium-term 
perspective  and  export  growth  should  benefit  from  the  expected  recovery  of  the  world  economy. 
Therefore, recent exchange rate movements should not fundamentally affect the main scenario for the 
economic outlook. 
At the same time, several factors contributing to the general climate of uncertainty are still in place. In 
particular, investors remain risk averse against the background of ongoing geopolitical tension. Further 
turbulence in the oil markets could have a negative impact on economic activity throughout the world 
and,  thereby,  also  on  euro  area  employment.  These  concerns  are  also  weighing  on  consumer 
confidence.  Finally,  the  accumulated  macroeconomic  imbalances  give  rise  to  uncertainty  about  the 
strength of the recovery in other major economies. Taken together, there remain downside risks to the 
outlook for euro area economic activity. 
Considering  price  developments,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  annual  HICP  inflation 
decreased to 2.1% in January 2003, from 2.3% in the previous month. As usual, these estimates are 
subject to uncertainty and there is no precise breakdown available as  yet. However, it appears that 
compensating factors played a role: on the one hand, there was upward pressure from the recent hike 
in oil prices and from various increases in indirect taxes and administered prices at the beginning of 
2003;  on  the  other  hand,  the  strengthening  of  the  euro  and  benign  base  effects  are  dampening 
consumer price increases. These two latter factors should also help to further reduce annual rates of 
HICP inflation over the next few months. However, given the high volatility in oil markets, short-term 
forecasts for HICP inflation are currently subject to a particularly high degree of uncertainty.  
Beyond the immediate future, the gradual pass-through of the appreciation of the euro, together with 
the expected moderate improvement in economic growth, should reduce inflationary pressures. The 
BIS Review 6/2003 
 1
 most likely outcome remains that inflation will fall and eventually stabilise at a level below 2% in the 
course of 2003. A major condition for price stability to also prevail in the medium term will be moderate 
wage developments. Wage moderation would also help improve the prospects for economic growth 
and further employment creation. It is therefore of particular importance that the upward trend in wage 
growth finally comes to a halt. However, the indications for this are still mixed, despite weak economic 
activity throughout last year.  
As for fiscal policy, the framework laid down in the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact limits the 
risk  of  fiscal  imbalances  occurring,  and  therefore  contributes  significantly  to  favourable  financing 
conditions for the private sector. At the same time, it allows an appropriate medium-term orientation of 
fiscal  policy  which  fosters  confidence  and  thereby  growth.  In  order  to  fully  reap  the  benefits  of  this 
framework, it is important that countries respect its objectives and implement appropriate consolidation 
plans where needed. Hence, the commitments made in the stability programmes and the requests to 
further improve fiscal positions, as subsequently agreed in the ECOFIN Council, must be met in full. 
These benefits would be magnified if the underlying policy measures were part of a comprehensive 
reform strategy to support economic growth. 
It  is,  in  fact,  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  at  the  micro  level  that  ultimately  raises  the 
production  potential,  improves  flexibility  in  the  economy  and  makes  the  euro  area  more  resilient  to 
external  shocks.  Clearly,  lack  of  progress  in  structural  reform  is  one  of  the  key  factors  currently 
hampering  a  recovery  in  confidence.  Therefore,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  a  recent 
communication by the Commission on the implementation of the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines. It 
emphasises the need to step up the pace of labour market reform to achieve the Lisbon objectives, to 
fully implement the Internal Market and to enhance competition in product markets as well as to foster 
capital  market  integration,  entrepreneurship,  a  knowledge-based  economy,  and  research  and 
development. We fully share the Commission’s assessment that  policy  inertia  and  backtracking are 
widespread. Against this background, renewed momentum in the process of structural reform will be 
crucial to foster confidence among consumers and investors. 
 