 Jaime Caruana: The impact of geopolitical events on the world economy 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of The Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the International Securities Market Association Annual General Meeting, 
Madrid, 27 June 2003. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  today  in  this  International  Securities  Market  Association 
Annual  General  Meeting.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  their  kind  invitation  to  open  this 
meeting and also to welcome you all to Madrid. The matters to be addressed in the Conference are 
not only highly topical, but are of crucial importance for all of us. Given the prestige of those who will 
be  offering  their  opinions,  I  believe  it  will  be  a  great  opportunity  to  draw  conclusions  of  enormous 
interest.  
The broad theme for this conference is the impact of geopolitical events on the world economy. By 
way of introduction, let me briefly share with you some thoughts on this topic. 
The world economy has been through a complicated period in recent years. The expected recovery 
has been slow, hesitant and disappointing. Several factors have come into play in this connection. On 
one  hand,  the  persistent  impact  of  the  bursting  of  the  IT  and  stock  exchange  bubbles  has  had  a 
negative effect on business and consumer confidence as well as on investment. On the other hand, 
several  shocks  have  further  undermined  confidence,  among  which  I  would  highlight  September  11, 
geopolitical tensions - in particular the conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq - and corporate scandals. All 
this  has  created  an  environment  of  uncertainty  over  world  economic  prospects  and  has  led  to 
heightened risk aversion. Finally, crises have continued to beset certain emerging market economies, 
such as Argentina and Turkey. 
Both the real sector and certain segments of the financial sector have been affected by this series of 
shocks. Equity markets have suffered a protracted depression worldwide. The fall in stock prices has 
fed  back  into  aggregate  demand,  although  in  many  countries  this  negative  wealth  effect  has  been 
offset, at least partially, by a buoyant home market.  
As usual, one can see the bottle as being half-empty or half-full: admittedly, the recovery is proving 
mild, but it is also true that this is partly a result of the mildness of the previous recession and that a 
deep recession has been avoided. Conditions for higher global growth in the second half of this year 
seem  to  be  in  place  and  prospects  for  2003  point  to  world  GDP  growth  of  between  3%  and  3.5%, 
slightly above that for 2002, and an additional improvement is expected in 2004 (around 4%).  
However, it is also true that this recovery is proving atypical in several respects, among which I would 
stress five:  
First, in geographical terms, the recovery has been rather uneven so far. On one hand, the United 
States,  central  and  eastern  Europe  and  -  until  the  recent  SARS  epidemic  -  East  Asia  have  been 
showing  greater  vigour.  On  the  other  hand,  there  has  been  economic  stagnation  in  Japan,  very 
modest growth in the euro-zone and a very disappointing performance in Latin America.  
Second, in contrast with the usual pattern in recovery phases, certain variables are showing no signs 
of improvement. Let me mention two: first, investment, despite the low level of interest rates, perhaps 
because of overcapacity in certain sectors, but mainly because of an overall lack of confidence in the 
recovery; and second, employment, which, particularly in the case of the US, continues showing signs 
of weakness. 
Third,  macroeconomic  policies  have  generally  been  more  expansionary.  Interest  rates  are  at 
historically low levels, both in nominal and real terms, in most countries, and this applies also to the 
longer segments of the yield curve. Overall, fiscal policies are clearly expansionary, although the room 
for manoeuvre available to different countries in this regard varies greatly. 
Fourth, the current-account imbalances among the largest economies were exacerbated during the 
recession and the early stages of the recovery and their geographical distribution does not bode well 
for  their  correction.  One  particular  reason  for  concern  is  that  the  huge  US  current-account  deficit 
coincides with the role of the US as the only locomotive of the world economy in recent years.  
BIS Review 31/2003 
 1
 As mentioned before, forecasts generally point to a firming of the recovery in the second half of 2003 
and  an  additional  improvement  in  2004.  Despite  the  rapid  conclusion  of  the  war  in  Iraq  and  the 
improvement in financial markets sentiment in recent weeks, the economic data and indicators do not 
yet  show  an  unambiguous  improvement,  partly  because  some  of  them  are  still  contaminated  by 
geopolitical uncertainties, and partly because other imbalances and factors of uncertainty still persist.  
The fifth element I would like to stress today is the resilience of the global banking system in most 
developed countries. This capacity of the banking system to withstand diverse shocks was pivotal in 
maintaining a certain degree of dynamism in the world economy. 
One of the lessons of the past few years is the importance of financial markets in the functioning of the 
world economy, and the complexity of the channels of interaction between such markets and the real 
economy. 
This simple idea has fostered quite a number of initiatives, at the national and international level, to 
reinforce the resilience and efficiency of financial markets. Topics that used to be too technical and 
tedious, such as accounting and corporate governance, have become exciting and the centrepiece of 
many reform agendas.  
Let me mention just three issues in this regard: 
First: Financial market integration 
I believe that one factor which can and should prove fundamental to strengthening the world economy 
is the integration of international financial markets.  
The integration of financial markets will promote both competition and transparency and will enhance 
liquidity. Investors will benefit not only from a reduction in transaction costs, but also from an increase 
in investment opportunities, allowing them to manage risk better. Companies, for their part, will find it 
easier to raise funds to develop their activities. 
To  be  sure,  in  recent  years,  we  have  seen  impressive  advances  in  the  degree  of  integration  of 
international  capital  markets.  This  has  fostered  a  better  allocation  of  saving  and  improvements  in 
efficiency from which we have all benefited. At the same time, this process has also entailed a more 
rapid transmission of shocks, whether or not these are generated in financial markets.  
In  the  European  Union,  although  the  process  has  been  given  notable  momentum  thanks  to  the 
introduction  of  the  euro  and  to  a  series  of  measures  such  as  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan 
(FSAP), we are still a long way from achieving fully integrated markets, so that an additional impulse is 
required. 
Second: Accounting harmonisation 
Among all the developments needed to bring about market integration, let me mention one that seems 
to me particularly important: accounting harmonization or convergence at the international level. 
Financial information is of crucial importance for the proper functioning of the financial system, since it 
is  the  basis  on  which  agents  make  their  decisions.  Retaining  their  confidence  in  the  reliability, 
relevance and timeliness of such information is vital. 
Currently, the cross-country comparison of financial information is difficult, since the set of rules under 
which such information is compiled varies from country to country. Moreover, the interpretation of such 
rules is not always uniform. This is cost-inefficient for those companies having to comply with different 
accounting regulations because they operate in more than one geographical region. Likewise, the lack 
of comparability may hamper cross-border activity and decision-making by investors.  
There  have  been  some  encouraging  developments  in  this  area.  First,  is  the  memorandum  of 
understanding between the IASB and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) formalising a 
commitment to convergence towards common principle based accounting standards. Admittedly, this 
will not be an easy task, but it seems vital to move in this direction. 
Second, the European Union has taken a significant step forward. It has resolutely considered need to 
promote the comparability of different countries(cid:146) financial information as an unavoidable prerequisite 
for achieving the single financial market. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 Accordingly,  a  Regulation  was  approved  last  year  adopting  the  International  Accounting  Standards 
(IAS). Specifically, in 2005 companies listed on regulated financial markets will have to prepare their 
consolidated financial statements in accordance with these standards. The thrust of this Regulation is 
to  achieve  clear  pan-European  rules  for  comparable,  transparent  financial  reporting  throughout  the 
European  Union.  Rules  which  will  make  companies  provide  relevant  and  reliable  information  for 
investors  and  other  stakeholders  so  that  they  can  make  meaningful  cross-border  and  cross-sector 
comparisons. 
But  accounting  regulation  also  poses  significant  difficulties.  In  banking,  one  of  the  most  important 
challenges  for  accounting  standard  setters  is  to  achieve  consistency  with  sound  risk-management 
practices. Incentives built in to the accounting rules should be compatible with and encourage good 
risk management. In this connection, the areas of financial instrument accounting and transparency 
rules require special attention.  
This  idea  of  market  friendly  incentive-oriented  rules  leads  me  to  my  last  remark  on  the  role  of 
prudential regulation.  
Third: Efficient risk management 
One key question that we prudential regulators should ask ourselves is whether regulations provide 
the  right  incentives  to  assess  and  to  manage  risks  properly.  This  question  is  directed  at  the  very 
essence  of  financial  regulation,  whose  basic  aim  is  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial  system 
without  being  too  intrusive  or  undermining  its  efficiency.  Providing  market  friendly  incentives  for 
efficient risk management is probably the best contribution we can make to foster financial resilience. 
As you know this is one of the key objectives of the new Basel Capital Accord, the so-called Basel II. 
Let  me  just  mention  that  in  designing  the  new  standards  we  have  been  and  will  continue  to  be 
sensitive  to  the  possible  implications  for  financial  markets  in  terms  of  liquidity  and  potential 
development. This is especially so in areas such us securitisation and collateralised transactions. 
The implementation of Basel II will contribute to enhanced risk management by banking institutions. 
This  initiative,  along  with  others  related  to  a  general  improvement  of  standards  and  practices  in 
several areas, would contribute to the better functioning of financial institutions and markets, leading 
ultimately to a full harnessing of the benefits of financial integration.  
I trust that, with fluent dialogue between regulators, institutions and market participants, we may be 
able to improve the combination of sound regulation and flexibility that would ultimately lead to a more 
robust and efficient financial system. I am convinced that this is a most important contribution to the 
smooth functioning of the world economy.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 3
