 Alan Greenspan: Aging global population 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Special Committee on Aging, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C., 27 February 2003.  
 Mr.  Chairman  and  other  members  of  the  committee,  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  to  discuss  the 
economic effects of the aging of the global population. In so doing, I would like to emphasize that the 
views I will express are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board.  
The  world's  population  is  growing  older  as  a  result  of  both  declining  fertility  and  increasing  life 
expectancy. These trends  manifest themselves in at  least two important dimensions: a more slowly 
growing  population  and  labor  force,  and  an  increase  in  the  ratio  of  the  elderly  to  the  working-age 
population.  
The  so-called  elderly  dependency  ratio  has  been  rising  in  the  industrialized  world  for  at  least 
150 years. The pace of increase slowed greatly with the birth of the baby-boom generation after World 
War  II.  But  elderly  dependency  will  almost  certainly  rise  more  rapidly  as  that  generation  reaches 
retirement age. The acceleration will be particularly dramatic in Japan and Europe. For example, in 
Japan the population share of the elderly, defined here as those at least 65 years of age, climbed from 
12 percent to 17 percent in the past decade, and demographers expect it to reach 30 percent by 2030. 
The  absolute  size  of  Japan's  working-age  population  is  already  declining  and  is  projected  to  fall 
20 percent  over  the  next  three  decades.  Europe's  working-age  population  is  also  anticipated  to 
recede, and the share of the elderly in its overall population is expected to rise markedly, though less 
so than in Japan.  
The  changes  projected  for  the  United  States  are  not  so  severe  as  those  projected  for  Europe  and 
Japan, but nonetheless present daunting challenges. Over the next thirty years, the growth rate of the 
working-age population in the United States is anticipated to slow, from about 1 percent per year today 
to about 1/2 percent per year by 2030. At the same time, the percentage of the population that is over 
65 will rise markedly - from less than 13 percent today to perhaps 20 percent by 2030.  
Though the overall population is expected to continue to age, much of the aging of the labor force has 
already occurred with the aging of the baby-boom generation. Once the baby boomers begin to retire, 
the mean age of the U.S. labor force is expected to stabilize.  
These anticipated changes in the age structure of our population and work force result largely from the 
decline in fertility that occurred following the birth of the baby-boom generation. After peaking in 1957 
at about 3-1/2 births over a woman's lifetime, the fertility rate in the United States fell to less than 2 by 
the early 1970s, and then rose to about 2.1 by 1990.1 Since then, the fertility rate has remained close 
to  2.1,  the  so-called  replacement  rate,  or  the  level  required  to  hold  the  population  constant  in  the 
absence of immigration  or changes  in longevity. The decrease in the  number of children per family 
since the baby boom has inevitably led, with a lag, to a projected increase in the ratio of elderly to 
working-age population.  
Increases in life expectancy, too, have been substantial. In 1950, a man 65 years of age could expect, 
on average, to live until age 78, whereas now he can expect to live until over 81. And if current trends 
continue,  by  2025  he  can  expect  to  live  to  83  and,  by  2060,  to  85.  Women's  life  expectancy  is 
projected to increase about the same amount, from 81 in 1950 to roughly 85 today, 86 in 2025 and 
88 in 2060.  
Of  course,  it  is  difficult  to  predict  the  age  structure  of  the  population  in  the  more  distant  future. 
Although we have a good idea of the size of the working-age population over the next twenty years or 
so - its members are largely already born - forecasting the number of children and future immigration 
and  population  growth  is  much  more  conjectural.  Just  recently,  for  example,  the  United  Nations 
revised  its  forecast  of  world  fertility  rates  downward  from  its  projection  only  three  years  earlier; 
                                                      
1   The fertility rate used here is the total fertility rate. It is measured as the average number of children who would be born to a 
woman in her lifetime if she were to experience the birth rates by age observed in any given year. 
BIS Review 10/2003 
 1
 according to the new forecast, world population is expected to begin actually declining in the latter part 
of this century, whereas under the previous forecast, it was expected to continue growing.  
Even  with  the  substantial  uncertainty  that  surrounds  these  forecasts,  population  aging  in  the 
developed world is not likely to be a temporary phenomenon, associated solely with the retirement of 
the baby-boom generation. Rather, under current projections, the retirement of that generation should 
be  viewed as  hastening the transition  between the current distribution of age and one in  which  the 
population is notably older.  
The populations in most developing countries likewise are expected to have a rising median age, but 
they will remain significantly younger and grow faster than our population over the foreseeable future. 
Eventually, declines in fertility rates and increases in longevity may lead to similar issues with aging 
populations in the developing world but likely only well after the demographic transition in the United 
States.  
As you know, the aging of the population in the United States will have significant effects on our fiscal 
situation. In particular, it makes our social security and Medicare programs unsustainable in the long 
run, short of a major increase in immigration rates, a dramatic acceleration in productivity growth well 
beyond historical experience, a significant increase in the age of eligibility for benefits, or the use of 
general revenues to fund benefits.2  
Indeed,  according  to  the  intermediate  projection  of  the  social  security  trustees,  the  level  of  social 
security  contributions  under  current  law  begins  falling  short  of  legislated  benefits  by  approximately 
2017.  While  the  prospect  of  a  shortfall  in  social  security  is  reasonably  certain  given  the  changing 
composition  of  the  population,  the  range  of  possible  outcomes  in  Medicare  is  far  wider.  Rapidly 
advancing medical technologies, essentially inelastic demand for medical services for the elderly, and 
a subsidized third-party payment system have created virtually unconstrained demand.3  
How the financing pressures that accompany increasing retirement are resolved will have profound, 
but uncertain, effects on the structure of both private and public pension plans. Private pension assets 
already account for about 12 percent of household financial assets in the United States, a level that 
will  almost  certainly  increase  over  the  next  decade.  The  total  investment  income  of  these  funds,  in 
conjunction with retirees' other forms of income, must be sufficient to finance a satisfactory standard of 
living.  
The real resources available to fund pension benefits depend on the economy's long-term growth rate, 
which in its simplest terms is determined by the growth rate of labor employed plus the growth rate of 
the productivity of that labor. As already noted, by 2030 the growth rate of our working-age population 
is expected to decline by half.  
The  fraction  of  the  working-age  population  actually  employed  will  doubtless  be  affected  by 
improvements  in  health  or  changes  in  the  economic  returns  to  working.  Labor  productivity  has 
historically been affected by changes in the amount of capital available to each worker, the pace of 
technical  progress  and,  perhaps  more  subtly,  changes  in  the  experience  of  our  workforce.  These 
elements are key to assessing the economic effects of aging.  
One  natural  response  to  population  aging  will  almost  surely  be  for  a  more  fit  elderly  population  to 
increase  their  participation  in  the  labor  force.  Americans  not  only  are  living  longer,  but  they  are 
generally  living  healthier.  Rates  of  disability  for  the  elderly  have  been  declining,  reflecting  both 
improvements in health and changes in technology that accommodate the physical impairments that 
are  associated  with  aging.  In  addition,  work  is  becoming  less  physically  strenuous  but  more 
demanding  intellectually,  continuing  a  century-long  trend  toward  a  more  conceptual  and  a  less 
physical  economic  output.  For  example,  in  1900,  only  one  out  of  every  ten  workers  was  in  a 
professional,  technical,  or  managerial  occupation.  By  1970,  that  proportion  had  doubled,  and  today 
those types of jobs account for about one-third of our workforce.  
Despite the improving feasibility of work at older ages, Americans have been retiring at younger and 
younger  ages.  Some  analysts  believe  this  trend  has  slowed,  although  few  anticipate  a  rapid 
                                                      
2   Because  social  security  benefits  are  tied  to  productivity  growth  with  a  lag,  only  a  rate  of  productivity  growth  well  above 
historical experience could completely resolve social security’s long-term financing problem. 
3   Constraining these outlays by any mechanism other than prices will involve some form of rationing - an approach that in the 
past has not been popular in the United States. 
  turnaround. But rising pressures on retirement incomes and a growing scarcity of experienced labor 
could induce greater labor-force participation.  
Immigration, if we choose to expand it, could prove an even more potent antidote for slowing growth in 
the working-age population. As the influx of foreign workers in response to the tight labor markets of 
the 1990s showed, immigration does respond to labor shortages.  
An expansion of labor-force participation by immigrants and the healthy elderly offers some offset to 
an aging population. However, it is heightened growth of output per worker that presents the greatest 
potential  to  boost  the  growth  of  gross  domestic  product.  A  significant  rise  in  the  growth  of  labor 
productivity  will  be  necessary  if  the  standard  of  living  of  retirees  is  to  be  maintained  and  that  of 
workers is to continue advancing.  
One of the more direct ways to raise growth in output per hour is to increase saving and investment, 
which  augment  the  capital  stock  available  to  workers.  Another  is  to  increase  the  incentives  for 
innovation;  efficiency  gains,  broadly  defined,  currently  account  for  roughly  half  the  growth  in  labor 
productivity.  
Though  augmenting  saving  and  investment  should  raise  future  labor  productivity  and  thereby  help 
provide for an aging population, the incremental benefit of additional investment may itself be affected 
by aging. Without a growing labor force, the amount of new equipment that can be used productively 
will be more limited, and the return to capital investment could decline as a consequence.  
What  actually  happens  to  the  saving  rate  in  the  next  three  decades  will  depend  importantly  on  the 
behavior of the baby-boom cohort during their retirement years. Over the post-World War II period, the 
elderly in the United States, contrary to conventional wisdom, seem to have drawn down their savings 
only modestly. The reasons are not entirely clear. Often people bequeath a significant proportion of 
their  savings  to  their  children  or  others  rather  than  spending  it  during  retirement.  If  the  baby-boom 
generation continues this pattern, then the U.S. household saving rate may not decline significantly, if 
at all.  
The  faster  rates  of  aging  in  Europe  and  Japan  may  also  directly  affect  investment  and,  hence,  the 
growth of labor productivity here in the United States. If saving rates in these countries decline, global 
capital  flows  to  the  United  States  that  have  contributed  significantly  in  recent  years  to  financing 
domestic investment are likely to decline. As in the United States, much will depend on the extent to 
which retirees in these countries draw down their savings. For example, the saving rate in Japan, even 
with the rapidly aging population, has not declined to the extent that some had predicted. However, if 
households in Japan were to start consuming more and saving less, Japan's trade surplus would likely 
shrink as consumption of imported goods rose. Some of the elevated level of their imports would be 
exports from the United States, and our trade balance would improve, all else being equal.  
Jobs requiring unskilled labor are likely to continue moving to developing countries, and this transfer 
may increase foreign direct investment by U.S. firms. Most other developed countries are unlikely to 
be able to offer higher rates of return because they are already aging faster than the United States.  
Many developing countries have the potential to offer higher rates of return because of their younger 
and  more  rapidly  growing  populations  and  currently  low  stocks  of  capital,  but  the  realization  of  this 
potential is far from guaranteed. Historically, returns to investment in many developing countries have 
been held down by several inhibiting factors: low levels of education, poor infrastructure, and, perhaps 
most important of all, capricious legal protections.  
Clearly,  if  net  capital  inflows  into  the  United  States  decline,  so  must  our  current  account  and  trade 
deficits. Any such declines must be offset by higher domestic saving - including government saving - if 
domestic investment in plant and equipment and in housing are to be maintained.  
Future  labor  productivity,  however,  is  determined  by  more  than  just  saving,  investment,  and  capital 
intensity. One of the remarkable features of the economy over the past seven years or so has been 
the  acceleration  in  the  pace  of  innovative  use  of  capital  by  workers,  rather  than  increases  in  the 
amount  of capital  per  worker.  Indeed,  as  I  pointed  out  earlier,  such  innovation  accounted  for  about 
one-half of the rapid increase in labor productivity that we observed in the late 1990s. Therefore, it is 
important  to  address  the  possibility  that  aging  will  affect  the  rate  of  innovation,  either  through  a 
rearrangement of existing capital resources or through technological advance.  
Economists understand very little about how technological progress occurs, and research about the 
effects  of  aging  populations  on  technological  innovation  has  been  sparse.  On  the  one  hand,  some 
commentators have worried that an aging population will lead to a less dynamic economy and a lower 
  rate of technological progress; they cite, for example, the fact that the majority of Nobel prizes in the 
"hard" sciences were awarded for discoveries made by the winners early in their careers. Such issues 
may  have  less  import  going  forward,  however,  as  most  of  the  aging  of  the  workforce  has  already 
occurred. On the other hand, a slowed rate of growth or a decline in the working-age population may 
raise technological growth. Although discovery of new technologies is to some degree a matter of luck, 
we  know  that  human  activities  do  respond  to  economic  incentives.  A  relative  shortage  of  workers 
should  increase  the  incentives  for  developing  labor-saving  technologies  and  may  actually  spur 
technological development. Economic historians have argued that one reason that the United States 
surpassed Great Britain in the early nineteenth century as the leader in technological innovation was 
the relative scarcity of labor in the United States. Patent records of this period show that innovation did 
respond to economic incentives and that the scarcity of labor clearly provided incentives to develop 
new methods of production.  
 The  aging  of  the  population  means  that  the  government  will  inevitably  need  to  make  a  number  of 
changes  to  its  retirement  programs.  These  changes  in  themselves  can  have  profound  economic 
effects. For example, aside from suppressing economic growth, large increases in payroll taxes can 
exacerbate the problem of reductions in labor supply, whereas policies to promote longer working life 
can  ameliorate  it.  Reductions  in  benefits  -  through  changes  to  the  age  for  receiving  full  retirement 
benefits or through reforms to slow the growth of Medicare spending or through other means - can 
affect  retirement,  the  labor  force,  and  saving  behavior.  In  addition,  policies  that  link  increases  in 
longevity  over  time  to  the  eligibility  age  for  social  security,  and  perhaps  Medicare,  may  need  to  be 
considered. Such linkages would help protect the financial and, hence, the economic viability of these 
programs.  
The  aging  of  the  population  is  bound  to  bring  with  it  many  changes  to  our  economy  -  some 
foreseeable, many probably not. Though the challenges here seem great, the necessary adjustments 
will likely be smaller than those required  in most other developed countries. But how  we adjust  will 
also matter. Early initiatives to address the economic effects of baby-boom retirements could smooth 
the transition to a new balance between workers and retirees. If we delay, the adjustments could be 
abrupt and painful.  
Fortunately,  the  U.S.  economy  is  uniquely  well  suited  to  make  those  adjustments.  Our  open  labor 
markets can adapt to the differing needs and abilities of our older population. Our capital markets can 
allow for the creation and rapid adoption of new labor-saving technologies, and our open society has 
been receptive to immigrants. All these factors put us in a good position to adjust to the inexorabilities 
of an aging population.  
 