 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Electronic payments in Malaysia 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Promotion  of 
Electronic Banking and Payments Launching Ceremony, Electronic Banking: The Way Forward, Kuala 
Lumpur, 8 May 2003. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirahim 
Dr. Rozali bin Mohamed Ali 
Chairman of the Association of Banks in Malaysia (ABM) 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Good morning, 
It gives me great pleasure to launch the ABM programme to promote electronic payments in Malaysia. 
This programme is to raise the awareness on the changes in technology and how they are affecting 
banking and payments in Malaysia. 
There  is  enormous  potential  that  technological  developments  can  bring  to  transform  the  financial 
industry in a manner that will bring significant gains to businesses and consumers. The rapid pace of 
advancement in information technology and communication networking has offered a wide range of 
delivering channels in retail banking. Banking institutions need to exploit the opportunities that arise 
from these developments and changes to remain competitive. The successful financial institutions in 
the  future  will  be  those  that  are  able  to  leverage  most  from  the  information  and  communications 
technology  revolution.  Increasingly,  consumers  are  also  demanding  more  efficient  banking  services 
and are becoming more discerning of the power that the technology brings. The winners will be those 
financial institutions that are able to harness on the capability of ICT in making strategic decisions in 
terms of enabling better alignment of business, enhancing organisational capacity and capability, risk 
management and building better customer relationship. Attention at the highest management level is 
therefore  vital  to  ensure  the  formulation  of  the  most appropriate  ICT  strategies  for  banks  to  remain 
competitive. 
The  new  banking  environment  is  about  differentiating  banking  products  and  services  that  provide 
increased  choices,  control,  security  and  accessibility.  The  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  deliver 
products  and  services  in  the  most  efficient  and  effective  manner  will  be  key  to  determining 
performance and relevance. 
In this area, financial institutions in Malaysia have not been behind in embracing the rapidly evolving 
technologies and in taking initiatives to enhance the delivery channels. There are 12 banks offering 
Internet banking facilities while five have introduced mobile banking. The adoption of chip technology 
now also offers new forms of payment choices and higher security to the public. The introduction of 
the  Bankcard  to  replace  the  magnetic  stripe  ATM  cards  and  efforts  towards  migrating  to  EMV 
compliant credit cards before end-2004  is indeed an important step forward. A further development 
has been the introduction of the MEPS Cash, the national e-purse scheme as an alternative electronic 
payment  mode  to  using  cash  for  making  retail  payments.  The  ATM  machines  of  the  participating 
banks and terminals at retail outlets are being upgraded to facilitate MEPS Cash transactions. With 
these developments, specific programmes need to be implemented to promote the usage of MEPS 
Cash  among  the  public  and  business  entities.  Indeed,  this  e-payment  program  is  a  good  start  to 
promote a wider use an acceptance of this means of payment. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
While the efficiency of electronic means of doing banking is valued, the basic tenet of banking services 
that  is  providing  security  and  safety  still  remains.  The  potential  benefits  from  electronic  delivery 
channels need to be exploited without undermining the security and confidence of the banking public. 
The  challenge  to  providing  multi  channel  services  in  today’s  banking  is  the  ability  to  integrate  and 
interface  the  different  delivery  channels.  Multi  channelling  strategies  therefore  needs  to  be 
approached holistically. 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 1
 Technological  development  is  not  only  about  creating  alternative  delivery  channels,  but  it  is  also 
redefining  the  financial  landscape.  Indeed,  as  a  result  of  significant  innovations  in  technology,  the 
payments industry landscape will be redefined with the entry of non-banks into payment services once 
thought to be the domain  of banks. Banks need to be more proactive in their role in the  payments 
mechanism. This includes continually finding new effective ways to provide the payment services in a 
cost-effective, and efficient manner by taking advantage of technological advances and meeting the 
changing  demands  of  businesses  and  consumers.  Banking  institutions  need  to  innovate  to  reach 
potentially  new  markets  and  consumers.  It  is  not  just  about  web  enabling  existing  products  and 
services  but  also  being  able  to  provide  the  complete  financial  services  required  by  consumers  and 
businesses. It is also not just about implementing technology solutions but being able to customise the 
product offerings to our local requirements and preferences. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  growing  evolution  and  demand  for  online  financial  services  will  lead  to  greater  digitisation  of 
banking services. While the use of cash and cheques will continue to be important, more consumers 
are realising the convenience and flexibility of electronic banking in meeting their daily payment needs. 
The change in consumer behaviour is reflected in the increasing use of electronic payment systems in 
the  country.  The  volume  of  cheques  processed  through  the  cheque  clearing  centres  has  shown  a 
declining trend in terms of both volume and value. This has been reinforced by the introduction of the 
interbank  Giro  and  Internet  banking  three  years  ago.  The  number  of  interbank  Giro  payments  has 
more than quadrupled in 2002, while electronic funds transfer and bill payments conducted through 
Internet banking has been on an increasing trend. More customers are likely to be drawn to Internet 
banking, which is gaining acceptance in Malaysia with now over 1 million subscribers. Increases have 
also been recorded in the number and value of ATM transactions and card payments. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
While  the  pace  of  the  transition  from  paper-based  payment  instruments  and  systems  to  electronic 
instruments  is  increasing,  the  adoption  of  electronic  payment  solutions  needs  to  be  accelerated. 
Consumers and businesses have to become familiar with using the new payment methods and their 
advantages. The SMEs, in particular, should take advantage of electronic delivery systems to improve 
their  access  to  banking  services  and  finance.  This  would  be  an  initial  step  toward  venturing  into 
e-commerce as a means to penetrate new markets. In this respect, I note that the banking industry 
has drawn up a communication strategy to raise consumers awareness of its convenience, speed and 
efficiency and to encourage its use. 
A smooth functioning payment system is critical to the effective functioning of  the economy.  As the 
payment systems continue to evolve, Bank Negara Malaysia, will continue to facilitate and foster the 
safety and efficiency of the payment systems to safeguard public interest. To enhance the efficiency of 
the  payment  systems,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  recently  reviewed  the  legal  and  regulatory 
framework of the payments system. A comprehensive legislation on the payment systems is being put 
in place to provide the mandate for Bank Negara Malaysia to effectively oversee and facilitate greater 
development of the payment systems. The legislation would also promote a conducive and liberalised 
environment for the modernisation of the payment systems in Malaysia. 
Several policy decisions have also been made. Access to the payments system has been broadened 
with the relaxation of the policy on the offering of payment gateway services and issuance of credit 
cards.  Banks  are  allowed  to  operate  their  own  payment  gateways  and  non-banks  are  permitted  to 
issue credit cards if they have established line of credit mechanism from the banks, or have set up a 
joint venture company with the banking institutions. The relaxation on the policy on payment gateway 
would  promote  greater  competition  in  the  payments  system  while  the  flexibility  accorded  on  the 
issuance  of  credit  cards  would  enable  the  partnering  of  licensed  institutions  with  non-banking 
institutions in offering greater choices to consumers.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  re-emphasise  that  banks  should  continuously  seek  to  educate  and 
familiarise consumers in the use of electronic and other technology based banking applications which 
are  more  efficient  and  cost  effective.  The  occasion  today  is  an  important  step  towards  maximising 
banking convenience that technology can offer to the consumers. I am delighted to take part in today’s 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2003
 launch and would urge the participation of all financial institutions in this effort to promote the use of 
electronic payments in the country. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 3
