David Dodge: Fostering confidence 
Speech  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Vancouver  Board  of  Trade, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, 10 September 2003. 
 Good afternoon. It(cid:146)s great to be back in Vancouver and to renew acquaintances at the Board of Trade. 
I(cid:146)m  going  to  spend  some  time  today  discussing  the  Bank  of  Canada(cid:146)s  outlook  for  the  Canadian 
economy and inflation, and how we are responding. But in order to understand the current economic 
situation, we need to look at some of the extraordinary events of the past year or so and how those 
events have affected the economy. 
My last public speech here was almost exactly a year ago. You will recall that, at the time, markets 
were still in turmoil in the wake of Enron, WorldCom, and other corporate governance and accounting 
scandals of late 2001 and early 2002. In the United States and Canada - as well as in many other 
countries  -  corporations,  regulators,  and  governments  were  beginning  to  respond  with  measures 
aimed at restoring and maintaining investor confidence.  
Then came 2003 - which could well be named (cid:147)The Year of the Shocks.(cid:148) There was the war in Iraq, 
which is still being played out. The worldwide outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) 
was a blow to Canada and to Asia. The human toll of SARS in Toronto was accompanied by a severe 
drop in Canada(cid:146)s tourism and travel industry. We also had an isolated case of mad-cow disease that 
blocked our exports of beef and cattle. Many of these export restrictions remain. And the forest fires in 
British Columbia have caused extensive financial and emotional pain. Meanwhile, the softwood lumber 
dispute  with the United States has not been resolved. And recently, Ontario suffered through North 
America(cid:146)s biggest-ever power outage.  
However, the good news is that Canadian consumers and businesses have been remarkably resilient 
through the past  year or two in the face of all these shocks. But these kinds of shocks can have a 
significant  impact  on  consumer  and  business  confidence,  especially  when  they  happen  in  quick 
succession.  
Today, I want to talk about the role that confidence plays in our economy and the measures that are 
being taken to strengthen it. Trust and confidence are essential if markets are to operate efficiently, so 
that  businesses  can  finance  themselves  in  good  times  and  bad.  And  Canadians  need  to  maintain 
confidence  in  the  macroeconomic  framework  so  that  we  can  all  reap  the  benefits  of  a  smoothly 
functioning economy. 
The role of confidence in monetary policy 
At the Bank of Canada, we spend a lot of time thinking about confidence, because it is important to the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy,  which  is  focused  on  inflation  targeting.  We  aim  to  keep  the  trend  of 
inflation at the 2 per cent target midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range. When the trend strays away from 
that midpoint, either upwards or downwards, we take action to return it to 2 per cent over the medium 
term. We do that by adjusting our target for the overnight interest rate. 
Over  the  past  decade  or  so,  we  have  successfully  kept  inflation  at  around  2  per  cent,  on  average. 
Here(cid:146)s where the confidence factor enters into the equation: Canadians now expect that inflation will 
stay near the target - not just for the near term, but into the future. They believe that the value of their 
earnings  and  savings  won(cid:146)t  be  eroded  by  inflation  and  that  the  real  burden  of  their  debt  won(cid:146)t  be 
increased by deflation.  
That confidence has paid a real dividend in terms of monetary policy effectiveness. Inflation targeting 
works best when Canadians believe that it will work - in other words, when they have confidence that 
we will keep inflation near the 2 per cent target.  
With this confidence, inflation and inflation expectations, as well as interest rates, have become more 
stable - and this benefits the whole economy.  
How did we achieve this confidence dividend? By establishing a track record of credible, consistent 
monetary policy, together with greater accountability and transparency. Like many other major central 
banks,  we  have  embraced  the  notion  that  monetary  policy  is  more  effective  when  people  can 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 1
understand what their central bank is doing and why. That is the motivation behind our semi-annual 
Monetary  Policy  Reports  and  Updates,  our  eight  interest  rate  announcements  every  year,  and  our 
many public appearances and speeches.  
Of course, monetary policy does not function in isolation. It works best when it is complemented by 
fiscal  policies  aimed  at  avoiding  deficits  and  lightening  government  debt  burdens.  Reducing,  and 
ultimately eliminating, the federal deficit in the 1990s helped Canada(cid:146)s international credibility, lowered 
the  risk  premium  demanded  by  investors,  and  gave  Canada  more  flexibility  to  adjust  to  changing 
economic  circumstances.  And  continued  fiscal  prudence  has  given  us  the  flexibility  to  weather  the 
recent economic turmoil rather well.  
Canadians have now seen the benefits of low, stable, and predictable inflation, and balanced budgets. 
And they expect that their central bank and their governments will continue to deliver those benefits 
through responsible monetary policy and prudent fiscal management.  
Confidence in markets 
So,  good  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  deliver  a  confidence  dividend.  But,  of  course,  trust  and 
transparency are crucial factors all across the economy and the financial system. We all know that a 
business will not last long if it squanders the confidence of its customers, suppliers, and investors.  
The  corporate  finance  and  accounting  scandals  of  2001  and  2002  hurt  more  than  just  profits  and 
portfolio  gains.  They  also  sideswiped  the  confidence  of  financial  market  participants.  The  problems 
that  brought  down  Enron,  WorldCom,  and  others  were  not  limited  to  those  companies.  In  fact,  the 
international  task  force  appointed  by  the  International  Federation  of  Accountants  -  and  chaired  by 
John Crow, a former Bank of Canada Governor - correctly notes that Enron was the event which, by 
its sheer size, awoke many to issues that had been significant for some time.  
What(cid:146)s encouraging is that this awakening has happened quickly and that considerable effort is being 
made to address those issues and reinforce trust in the financial system. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 
the  United  States,  for  example,  is  aimed  at  restoring  trust  in  corporate  financial  reporting.  Other 
international efforts are underway to improve both reporting and monitoring of public companies.  
In Canada, federal and provincial governments have been working with the private sector to review 
and  improve  the  framework  governing  public  companies  and  capital  markets.  These  initiatives  are 
summarized in a document entitled Fostering Investor Confidence in Canadian Capital Markets, which 
can be found on the Department of Finance(cid:146)s Web site.  
Efforts are focused on four areas:  
    improving financial reporting and disclosure; 
enhancing the quality of the audit process; 
strengthening corporate governance and management accountability; and  
toughening enforcement. 
All  of  these  efforts  are  aimed  at  building  the  confidence  needed  to  allow  markets  to  protect  the 
interests  of  investors  and  creditors  and  to  operate  efficiently  so  that  businesses  can  finance  their 
operations at the lowest cost. 
Steps to foster confidence 
Let(cid:146)s look first at what(cid:146)s been done to date to improve financial reporting and disclosure. Our system, 
which  has  already  worked  quite  well  for  Canadians,  is  being  strengthened.  The  proposed  new 
changes are aimed at building confidence while keeping compliance costs relatively low.  
New  guidelines  on  continuous  disclosure  obligations  of  public  companies  are  being  drafted  by  the 
Canadian Securities Administrators. The goal is to implement them by January 2004. There are also 
new  guidelines  from  the  Canadian  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  (CICA)  on  stock  options, 
financial  guarantees,  and  off-balance-sheet  arrangements.  And  the  Investment  Dealers  Association 
(IDA) has developed new rules to promote the independence of financial analysts. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2003
To improve the quality of the audit process, a new Canadian Public Accountability Board will oversee 
the  practices  of  firms  that  audit  publicly  listed  companies.  Its  chairman  is  Gordon  Thiessen,  my 
predecessor  as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada.  And  David  Scott,  a  senior  partner  with 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, was recently appointed as CEO. The Board will inspect audit firms and will 
make recommendations on accounting and assurance standards, rules of conduct, and governance 
practices. Its efforts are being augmented by the new Auditing and Assurance Standards Oversight 
Council,  which  is  designed  to  provide  perspectives  from  outside  the  accounting  profession  on  the 
oversight and setting of corporate audit standards. 
Critical  initiatives  to  restore  investor  confidence  are  also  being  taken  in  the  areas  of  corporate 
governance and management accountability. Most importantly, many companies have taken, or are 
taking, action on their own in this regard. Their efforts are being supported by the actions of provincial 
securities commissions. In January, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions released 
new  guidelines  on  corporate  governance  for  federally  incorporated  financial  institutions.  In  last 
February(cid:146)s budget, the federal government announced a plan to strengthen the corporate governance 
standards in the Canada Business Corporations Act and the financial institutions statutes.  
Institutional  investors  have  also  been  pushing  for  better  corporate  governance  practices  and 
management  accountability.  They  have  established  the  Canadian  Coalition  for  Good  Governance, 
chaired  by  Michael  Wilson,  former  Minister  of  Finance.  The  Coalition  recently  published  new 
Corporate Governance Guidelines for Building High Performance Boards.  
There  has  been  a  perception  that  the  authorities  have  not  been  vigilant  in  enforcing  the  rules  with 
respect  to  fraud  and  insider  trading  violations.  Recent  studies  suggest  that  Canadian  firms  pay  a 
penalty, in terms of their market valuations, as a result of this perception. That is why it is encouraging 
to see that steps have been taken to toughen enforcement. The B.C. government has draft legislation 
to increase fines, give more power to the provincial Securities Commission, and increase the rights of 
investors.  Ontario  and  Quebec  have  passed  legislation  to  increase  penalties  and  to  broaden  the 
investigative  powers  of  their  securities  commissions.  New  guidelines  from  the  IDA  include  stiffer 
penalties for securities dealers that break IDA rules.  
In  last  February(cid:146)s  budget,  the  federal  government  announced  stronger  enforcement  measures  to 
combat fraud in capital markets. Amendments to the Criminal Code will make it easier to prosecute 
lawbreakers. More money will be dedicated to investigating serious cases of capital market fraud. And 
special  teams  of  investigators,  forensic  accountants,  and  lawyers  will  be  set  up  in  key  financial 
centres. 
These  are  just  some  examples  of  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in  Canada  by  companies, 
regulators,  and  governments  to  build  investor  confidence  in  our  financial  markets.  Of  course,  these 
efforts also promote better corporate decision-making, greater efficiency,  and stronger corporations. 
That is why it(cid:146)s in the interest of all of us that we make further progress.  
What should  we bear in mind as  we continue to make these improvements? First,  we must not  be 
lulled into thinking that all the problems are behind us. Unless we remain vigilant and rigorous in our 
efforts, we risk squandering the good work done so far.  
Second, while we must apply the same principles to all companies, they must be applied in ways that 
do not impose undue compliance costs, especially on smaller businesses.  
Third, while our standards don(cid:146)t have to be identical to those in other countries, they must be seen to 
be as effective. Canadian and U.S. capital markets are already highly integrated and Canadians (and 
Americans) have benefited greatly from these open, transparent, and competitive markets.  
Indeed, since world markets are increasingly integrated, there is a great benefit to having standards 
that are globally consistent. Right now, there appears to be willingness on the part of authorities in a 
number  of  countries  to  find  a  reasonable  mix  of  principles  and  rules  for  accounting  standards  and 
securities regulation that could be applied globally. The International Accounting Standards Board and 
the  U.S.  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  are  cooperating  in  such  an  undertaking,  with  the 
support  of  other  countries,  including  Canada.  It  is  important  that  Canada  continue  to  work  towards 
sensible global standards. We must identify how our practices should change to fit those standards in 
order to help our capital markets stay competitive in an increasingly global environment. 
Markets  work more  efficiently  when  they  all  operate  under  clear,  transparent,  and  reasonable  rules 
and principles - both internationally, and also within Canada. That is why we at the Bank of Canada 
encourage efforts to achieve uniform securities law, regulation, and enforcement across this country.  
BIS Review 40/2003 
 3
Finally, as we set new rules to promote confidence, we must be careful to avoid creating a regime that 
stifles  financial  market  innovation.  We  need  to  create  a  framework  that  balances  the  necessity  for 
effective and enforceable rules to promote confidence with the need to facilitate new and innovative 
methods of corporate financing to improve the allocation of capital. 
This type of framework is the best support we can provide for the efficient operation and continued 
growth of our financial markets. But it won(cid:146)t do the whole job. A sound legal and regulatory framework 
must be combined with strong and widespread ethical standards. CEOs and other corporate officers 
must take it upon themselves to communicate with investors clearly, openly, and fairly. Investors, for 
their  part,  have  a  responsibility  to  take  into  account  all  available  information.  And  regulators, 
politicians, and public servants must all perform their functions in a way that reinforces trust. We all 
benefit when everyone plays by the rules. Only by reaffirming the integrity of individuals, corporations, 
and public institutions can we restore and maintain the confidence dividend. 
Indeed, as I said at the outset, the resiliency of Canadian consumers, investors, and businesses has 
helped us weather recent economic shocks. Confidence will be critical to strengthening our economy 
in  the  months  ahead  and  to  a  sustained  expansion  over  the  medium  term.  So  let  me  now  briefly 
discuss the Bank(cid:146)s views on the economy and inflation.  
The current economic situation 
Since  our  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update  in  July,  inflation  pressures  in  Canada  have  continued  to 
ease. Part of the recent decline in inflation has come from an increase in the amount of slack in the 
economy.  The  pace  of  growth  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year  was  interrupted  by  a  number  of 
near-term  factors,  especially  SARS  and  trade  restrictions  on  Canadian  exports  of  cattle  and  beef 
because of an isolated case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). Growth in the third quarter 
will also  likely remain below the economy(cid:146)s potential because of the remaining trade restrictions on 
beef and cattle, as well as the effects of the power blackout in Ontario and of forest fires in Western 
Canada.  
The prices of some services have been temporarily depressed by SARS. In addition, there has been a 
greater-than-anticipated  reduction  in  the  prices  of  a  number  of  goods,  such  as  motor  vehicles, 
clothing, and household furniture and appliances. We had expected our core rate of inflation - which 
strips  out  the  eight  most  volatile  components  of  the  consumer  price  index,  as  well  as  the  effect  of 
changes in indirect taxes on the remaining components - to decline below the 2 per cent target. In fact, 
that  happened  earlier than the  Bank had anticipated. Our core inflation measure is  likely  to  decline 
somewhat further in the next few months. And we see the trend of inflation remaining below the 2 per 
cent target for some time.  
As I(cid:146)ve said, part of this lower trend in inflation is a result of the slack in the economy that has opened 
up in 2003. In addition, prices of many traded goods have fallen worldwide because of excess supply. 
The rise in the Canadian dollar earlier this year pulled down the price of imported goods, and some 
retailers have passed on these savings to consumers. As well, vendors are lowering prices to clear 
their inventory, especially in the automobile sector. Price pressures that we saw from higher insurance 
premiums earlier this year appear to be dissipating as the year progresses.  
The  total  CPI  inflation  rate  has  come  down  from  4.6  per  cent  in  February  to  2.2  per  cent  recently, 
because of the decline in core inflation and because of smaller increases in energy prices. Swings in 
energy prices remain a risk to our total inflation outlook in the months ahead, although we assume oil 
prices of about US$27 per barrel in 2004.  
Notwithstanding  the  temporary  factors  that  have  affected  the  economy  in  the  second  and  third 
quarters of this year, we see indications that the conditions are in place for stronger economic growth. 
Here(cid:146)s  why.  Growth  of  final  domestic  demand  has  remained  robust,  and  the  adverse  effects  of  the 
shocks that I just mentioned are beginning to dissipate. The economic rebound in the United States 
began  earlier,  and  will  be  stronger,  than  previously  expected.  More  robust  consumer  demand  and 
strengthening business investment in the United States should augur well for Canadian exports. We 
are also seeing a strengthening trend in Asia. As well, the tone of capital markets remains favourable.  
So, despite current weakness, the accumulation of economic evidence to date reinforces the Bank(cid:146)s 
view that growth in the Canadian economy will strengthen towards the end of 2003 and through 2004.  
Last  week,  we  lowered  our  target  for  the  overnight  rate  by  one-quarter  of  one  percentage  point,  to 
2 3/4 per cent.  With  this  decision,  policy  interest  rates  will  support  the  return  to  levels  of  economic 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2003
activity  that  are  consistent  with  an  overall  balance  between  supply  and  demand  in  the  economy. 
Achieving that balance will work to return inflation to the target over the medium term.  
Conclusion 
Canadians  have  been  through  a  lot  this  year.  But  each  shock  also  represented  an  opportunity  -  to 
learn, to improve our ability to handle a crisis, and to strengthen our sense of community.  
No one can predict what kind of shocks our economy will face in the future, but we know that shocks 
will occur. What(cid:146)s important is that we have a robust economic and financial framework that allows us 
to deal with those disturbances and to seize opportunities as they arise. It is that strong framework that 
gives businesses and investors the confidence to take risks and to innovate.  
We are making progress in building the framework that supports the confidence dividend. During the 
1990s,  we  improved  our  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  Now,  as  I  have  described,  we(cid:146)re  working  to 
make our financial systems more robust and efficient.  
These  continuing  efforts  promote  confidence.  They  improve  our  ability  to  withstand  all  types  of 
economic shocks and to capitalize on opportunities.  
BIS Review 40/2003 
 5
