 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: A broadbrush review of the UK economy 
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England,  at the  Lord  Mayor(cid:146)s 
Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, Mansion House, London, 18 June 2003. 
 My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, Ladies and Gentlemen - 
dear friends and colleagues. 
How many of you here this evening have ever run the London Marathon - perhaps we could have a 
show  of  hands? Well  of  course  I  have  (cid:133)(cid:133).  never,  ever  contemplated  doing  so  for  a moment.  But 
someone who did complete it once described to me the surge of adrenaline he experienced with just a 
mile to go, followed shortly afterwards by near-exhaustion, until he finally collapsed over the finishing 
line! I think I(cid:146)m now beginning to understand what he meant. 
If I have my arithmetic right - and that(cid:146)s a big (cid:147)if(cid:148) - I was recently beaten all ends up at maths games by 
group of primary school children from Tower Hamlets - but if I(cid:146)m right, after 41 years in the Bank, this 
is my 27th successive attendance at this great annual Bankers and Merchants dinner and, you(cid:146)ll be 
relieved to hear, the 10th and last time that I will have the honour of addressing you in my capacity as 
Governor.  And  I  should  like  to  take  this  opportunity  above  all  to  thank  all  of  you  -  and  the  various 
organisations that you represent - for the tremendous support that you have given to me and to the 
Bank over so many years. 
I must begin, Gordon, by thanking you. 
In fact I(cid:146)ve been immensely fortunate to have first Ken Clarke and then you, Gordon, in charge at the 
Treasury during my time as Governor. You shared the conviction that overall macro-economic stability 
-  reflected  in  consistently  low  inflation  -  is  a  necessary  condition  for  sustainable  growth.  That(cid:146)s  a 
conviction  that  is  deeply  embedded  in  my  soul  as  a  lifelong  central  banker  -  if  indeed  as  a  central 
banker I(cid:146)m allowed to admit to having a soul! 
You  inherited from Ken an inflation target  in the form of a cap and a degree  of transparency - and 
public accountability - that we(cid:146)d never had before. And, in your own, very first - and inspired - decision 
as  Chancellor,  you  advanced  that  approach  radically  further.  You  -  rightly  -  kept  the  political 
responsibility  for  setting  the  inflation  target  -  opting  crucially  for  a  symmetrical  point  target.  But  you 
devolved the technical responsibility for meeting that target to your new creation - the MPC - to which 
you appointed independent, external, experts in fields which are relevant to monetary policy to work 
with our team at the Bank. And you reinforced the procedures for transparency and accountability. 
In terms of the overall macro-economy this framework has served us well. 
Annual  inflation  -  on  the  present  RPIX  target  measure  -  perhaps  fortuitously  -  I  don(cid:146)t  really  mind  - 
averaged exactly 2.5% over the past 10 years. 
But more than just consistently low inflation, we have also enjoyed continuous quarter by quarter GDP 
growth, over the 10 years to the first quarter, at an average four-quarterly rate of 2.9% - which is well 
above its earlier trend. And the rate of employment has recently been around its all-time high, with the 
number of people claiming unemployment benefit at around a 25 year low - and that(cid:146)s true for the UK 
as a whole and in almost every region. 
Of  course  it  hasn(cid:146)t  all  been  plain  sailing.  We(cid:146)ve  had  to  cope  with  a  painful  imbalance  within  the 
economy over the past few years as a result of successive storms emanating from overseas. And it 
has  been  truly  painful  for  the  externally-exposed  sectors  of  our  economy.  To  stay  on  course  while 
those  storms  persisted  we(cid:146)ve  had  to  compensate  for  the  external  weakness  by  accepting  -  indeed 
positively encouraging through monetary policy - domestic consumer demand growth at a rate that we 
knew could not be sustained indefinitely. We have been helped more recently - and it(cid:146)s not often you(cid:146)ll 
hear a central banker say this - by a timely increase in public spending, consistent with your own rules 
designed  to  ensure  medium-term  fiscal  sustainability.  Without  that  we(cid:146)d  have  been  even  more 
dependent upon the consumer. 
A year ago there were grounds for hoping that the external storms were beginning to abate, but those 
hopes were deferred - by the after-effects of corporate governance and accounting failures in the US 
and by uncertainty associated with the war in Iraq. There nevertheless remain reasonable grounds for 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 1
 thinking that the external environment will now gradually improve as we move through the second half 
of this year into next, and that this will help to offset the gradual moderation we are beginning to see in 
the growth of consumer spending. That would open the way to continued relatively steady and better 
balanced growth - at or above trend, with inflation remaining close to target. 
But there are certainly short-term risks on either side, and given those risks - including the risk of slow 
growth  in  the  Eurozone,  particularly  in  Germany  -  I  agree  with  your  assessment  that  the  economic 
case for euro-entry has not yet been made. More generally on that subject, I very much welcome the 
Treasury(cid:146)s  exhausting - I  mean exhaustive - broader assessment of the  longer-term pros and cons 
which I hope, when people have had time to digest it properly, will result in a better balanced - less 
polarised - debate on the economics of the euro question. 
I confess that I had hoped that we would by now be further along the narrow channel I have described 
on past occasions between the Charybdis of external weakness and Scylla of unsustainable consumer 
demand. And I(cid:146)m sorry in this respect to be jumping ship at this particular point. But I(cid:146)m convinced that 
calmer waters lie not too far ahead. And I(cid:146)ve every confidence that Mervyn King - who has in effect 
been our Chief Navigating Officer for much of the past decade, and who will take over as skipper at 
the  end  of  the  month,  with  an  outstanding  MPC  and  Bank  crew  to  support  him  -  will  find  the  way 
through. I certainly wish them safe passage! 
My Lord Mayor, if the harsh international climate made life difficult for us on the macro-economic front, 
the associated, sustained, fall, in global equity markets in particular, made it an unusually tough time 
for  many  financial  institutions  here  in  the  City.  Happily,  here  too,  there  are  more  recent  signs  of 
improvement. Perhaps the truly remarkable thing about that is that the financial system as a whole 
withstood the pressures as well as it did. 
But  over  a  longer  time  horizon  the  City(cid:146)s  financial  institutions  have  responded  remarkably  well  to 
sustained  market  pressure  for  change,  and  we  have  been  outstandingly  successful  in  fulfilling  the 
City(cid:146)s vital economic, and social, function of promoting growth and employment both in this country 
and across the globe. 
One can think of lots of reasons for that success - I pick out two in particular. 
First,  we  have  managed  over  time  to  maintain  a  reasonable  balance  between  creative  market 
dynamics on the one hand and official intervention and regulation on the other. It is well understood 
that markets must be (cid:147)fair(cid:148) as well as (cid:147)free(cid:148) to do their job effectively - and that we have to have rules 
that  reflect  public  policy  concerns.  But  it  is  equally  understood  that,  carried  too  far,  prescriptive 
intervention can stifle competition and the market appetite for risk. In getting the balance right, market 
participants can do a lot for themselves. My impression certainly is that there is a growing recognition 
that  high  standards  of  professional  competence  and  integrity  are  vital  to  a  firm(cid:146)s  reputation  and 
commercial success, or even its survival - and that helps to limit recourse to intervention. But it(cid:146)s also 
true that  we have a critically  important,  longstanding, tradition  in this country  that,  where there  is a 
perceived  need  for  intervention,  the  relevant  authorities  consult  extensively  with  the  markets  which 
helps to avoid unintended consequences and to ensure a measured and properly targeted approach. 
It(cid:146)s a tradition which others would do well to adopt. 
My second explanation for the City(cid:146)s success in financial services is non-discrimination. Provided they 
meet the standards of professional competence and integrity we expect in London, it makes no sense 
at all - in fact it would be self-inflicted injury - to distinguish between the firms or individuals who work 
here, on grounds of nationality  or ethnic or religious background - or, in the case of individuals, on 
grounds of gender, which is a point, my Lord Mayor, which I know that you have made forcefully from 
the beginning of your term in office. I think we(cid:146)ve made real progress on this front. Non-nationals for 
example, play an important part not just in our commercial life but in the governance of our market 
institutions. And I very much welcomed the initiative by the Foreign Bankers(cid:146) Association to establish 
the Guild of International Bankers, which itself followed the opening up, to non-nationals, of the City 
Freedom. It is economic activity - not nationality - that generates employment and income - and even, 
Chancellor,  tax  revenue  -  and  that(cid:146)s  something,  too,  which  is  now  better  understood  than  in  many 
other jurisdictions. 
It is crucial that these approaches continue - as I have no doubt they will - into the future - whatever 
that might hold. 
I  have  also  been  impressed,  my  Lord  Mayor,  by  the  increasing  commitment  among  City  firms  - 
including many firms from overseas - not just to professional, but also to social responsibility. And in 
this  context  I  have  been  greatly  encouraged  by  the  widespread  and  very  positive  response  to  the 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 Heart of the City campaign launched nearly three years ago to encourage and extend City corporate 
community involvement. I hope that that, too, will continue. 
So I take the opportunity this evening to express my thanks to all of you represented here who have 
worked with us at the Bank over the years in so many different ways, through good times and bad, to 
secure the City(cid:146)s position as the pre-eminent global financial market place. 
And that, of course, my Lord Mayor includes the holders of your high office over so many years - and it 
includes the City Corporation. We at the Bank have enjoyed tremendous moral and practical - not to 
mention gastronomical - support in all our efforts to promote the reputation and prosperity of the City, 
and I hope that you may feel that we have been equally supportive of initiatives that you have taken to 
the same end. From my perspective it(cid:146)s been a very warm and constructive relationship which I have 
no doubt will continue. 
You,  Gavyn,  have  certainly  contributed  to  that  relationship  during  your  period  in  office  and  I  am 
grateful to you for that. But more than that you have maintained the finest traditions of the Mayoralty in 
the lead that you have given to the City. You have taken on an exhausting - and in this case I really 
mean exhausting - program - both at home and around the world in promotion of our interests and you 
have still found time, with the Lady Mayoress, to entertain us right royally this evening. We are all most 
grateful to you. 
So to you all - as I make the transition from Who(cid:146)s Who? To Who(cid:146)s He? - I say thank you and farewell 
until we meet again - as I very much hope we will if ever Vanessa and I manage to tear ourselves 
away from Cornwall. 
I invite you all to rise and to join me in a toast of good health and prosperity to (cid:147)The Lord Mayor and 
the Lady Mayoress(cid:148). 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 3
