 Joseph O Sanusi: Ongoing efforts towards a monetary union in the West 
African sub-region 
Speech by Dr Joseph O Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the MEFMI Central Bank 
Governors Forum, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 30 June - 1 July 2003. 
 Fellow Governors, 
Members of the Diplomatic Corp, 
Distinguished Delegates, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Introduction 
I am pleased to be given the privilege to brief Governors about on-going efforts to move towards a 
monetary  union  (establishment  of  a  single  Central  Bank  and  introduction  of  single  currency)  in  the 
West African sub-region. I thank the organisers and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) for 
hosting the Forum. 
In recent years, especially following the emergence of the Euro as the single currency of the European 
Union, there has been a renewed and growing interest globally in fostering economic and monetary 
integration as a means of facilitating economic growth and development of the integrating entity. The 
benefits of a monetary union are expected to include:  
     enhancement  of  the  payments  system  for  goods  and  services  in  the  sub-region,  thereby 
promoting trade; 
creation of a larger regional market and widening of business/trade-related income-earning 
opportunities for the citizenry for improvement of their standard of living; 
facilitation  of  unhindered  movements  of  persons  and  labour  in  the  sub-region  through 
dismantling  of  barriers,  thereby  strengthening  cultural,  economic,  social  and  political 
cooperation (common central bank, judiciary, parliament, etc); 
creation  of  a  more  favourable  environment  for  collective  pooling  of  resources  for 
development of essential regional infrastructure; 
enhancement of economic competitiveness, derivation of economics of scale, and reduction 
in transactions costs. 
In  order  to  hasten  the  realisation  of  afore-mentioned  economic,  political  and  social  benefits,  the 
Authority  of  Heads  of  State  and  Government  of  the  West  African  sub-region  agreed  to  the 
establishment of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) comprising 15 countries 
in 1975. ECOWAS, in 1987, adopted ECOWAS Monetary Cooperation Programme (EMCP) with the 
specific  objectives  of  improving  and  strengthening  sub-regional  payments  systems  under  the  West 
African Clearing House (now West African Monetary Agency - WAMA); introducing limited currency 
convertibility; establishing a single monetary zone, and eventually a common central bank and a single 
currency by the year 2000. The EMCP contained a set of macroeconomic convergence criteria which 
member countries were expected to observe prior to the emergence of the monetary union. 
By 1999 however, it was generally observed that the pace of implementation of the EMCP, especially 
the  establishment  of  the  single  monetary  zone,  had  not  matched  the  expectations  of  the  founding 
fathers.  Some  perceived  major  obstacles  to  successful  implementation  of  the  programme  included: 
lack  of  political  will  and  commitment;  non-uniformity  in  the  adoption  of  required  macroeconomic 
framework and lack of policy coordination and harmonization between the Francophone West African 
countries, with the exception of the Republic of Guinea, which established an economic and monetary 
Union  (Union  Economique  et  Monetaire  Ouest  Africaine  -  UEMOA  in  1994)  and  the  Anglophone 
countries. 
The  recognition  of  this  problem  necessitated  the  Authority  of  Heads  of  State  and  Government  of 
ECOWAS, at its 22nd Summit in Lome, Togo, in December 1999 to adopt a strategy of a Two-Track 
Fast-Track approach, to the implementation of the EMCP. 
BIS Review 33/2003 
 1
 Following the initiative of Nigeria and Ghana, consultations were held with the Governments of The 
Gambia,  Guinea,  Liberia,  and  Sierra  Leone,  and  at  a  Summit  of  the  Heads  of  State  of  the  six 
countries,  in  Accra,  Ghana,  in  April  2000,  the  Accra  Declaration  on  the  creation  of  the  Second 
Monetary  Zone  was  signed.  The  Authorities  of  these  countries  committed  themselves  to  the 
introduction of a single currency and the establishment of a common central bank by the year 2003 for 
eventual merger with the UEMOA zone by the year 2004 under the aegis of the ECOWAS integration 
programme. 
At  the  second  Summit  in  Bamako,  Mali  in  December,  2000,  the  Authorities  formally  launched  and 
established the Second Monetary Zone as the West African Monetary Zone (WAMZ) and approved 
a  set  of  convergence  criteria  to  be  attained  by  member  states  before  the  commencement  of  the 
monetary union. The West African Monetary Institute (WAMI) was also established to undertake all the 
preparatory work for the introduction of the single currency, and a common central bank in the WAMZ. 
WAMI was also to study and make proposals on how to address issues of monetary policy, financial 
sector  surveillance,  currency  and  external  reserves  management  as  well  as  legal  framework  and 
institutional arrangement associated with eventual establishment of the West African Central Bank. 
The West African Monetary Zone (WAMZ) 
Institutions of the WAMZ 
Six  institutions,  including  WAMI,  have  been  created  under  the  WAMZ  Agreement  to  facilitate 
arrangements for eventual introduction of the single currency and establishment of a common central 
bank in the zone. These are: 
(i) 
the Authority of Heads of States and Government - this is the political and supreme body of 
the zone, with the overall responsibility for the achievement of the objectives of the WAMZ; 
the  Convergence  Council  of  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  -  the  supervisory 
authority of the WAMZ and its institutions; 
the Technical Committee which works in collaboration with WAMI, to facilitate the integration 
process; 
the West  African  Central  Bank  (WACB),  when  established,  would  be  the  common  Central 
Bank of the zone, while the existing National Central Banks will be national branches of the 
WACB; and 
WAMZ Stabilization and Cooperation Fund (SCF) to provide financial assistance to member 
states that may experience temporary disequilibria in their balance of payments. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Convergence criteria under the WAMZ 
The convergence criteria for the West African Monetary Zone focus on achieving inflation rate of 5 per 
cent by 2003; fiscal deficit GDP ratio of 4 per cent by 2002; limiting of deficit financing by the central 
bank to 10 percent and maintaining sufficient level of gross official foreign exchange reserves of at 
least  6  months  of  imports  by  2003.  The  Agreement  establishing  the  zone  stipulates  that  the 
convergence criteria be achieved and sustained within a given time frame. However, there have been 
slippages and inconsistencies in the performances of member countries regarding attainment of the 
stipulated  targets. While  some  countries  of  the  zone  were  negatively  affected  by  civil  conflicts,  the 
situation  was compounded by severe terms to trade  experienced by many countries in the  last few 
years. A major militating factor was expansionary fiscal policies which tended to weaken relatively tight 
monetary policies pursued by the sub-region’s central banks. The poor state of infrastructure was also 
unconducive  to  investments  and  economic  growth.  The  poor  country  performances  relative  to  the 
stipulated targets necessitated the extension of the period for meeting the convergence criteria, before 
the establishment of the common Central Bank, from January 2003 to June 2005. 
Progress/prospects of actualizing the single currency objective of the WAMZ 
The  Authorities  of  the  WAMZ  have  programmed  several  actions  to  be  taken  to  strengthen 
macroeconomic  convergence  and  stability.  The  WAMI,  in  collaboration  with  Experts  from  member 
countries  and the Technical Committee, has been taking concrete steps  and providing some viable 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2003
 (ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
solutions to various technical issues involved in the arrangement. A Forum for Ministers of Finance of 
member  countries  of  the  Zone  was  established  in  2002  to  be  discussing  how  best  to  address  the 
problem of fiscal dominance in a co-ordinated manner that would reduce fiscal deficits and recourse to 
central bank financing of such deficits and facilitate achievement of macroeconomic convergence. In 
this connection, 
(i) 
member  countries  are  urged  to  vigorously  implement  a  medium  term  budget  framework 
which captures a steady improvement in revenue mobilization and expenditure control. Such 
a  framework,  which  would  be  consistent  with  a  balanced  budget,  should  ensure  that 
expenditures are synchronised with revenues. 
Macroeconomic  Coordinating  Committees  have  been  set  up  both  at  national  and  zonal 
levels to ensure macroeconomic surveillance of member states. 
Committees of Experts have started to harmonise the payments systems as well as the legal 
frameworks of member countries to strengthen the monetary and other financial policies as 
well as the banking rules  and regulations  of the  zone. An external supervisory agency for 
banking supervision in the zone, the West African Financial Supervisory Authority (WAFSA), 
would be established as well as a deposit insurance scheme. 
technical  issues  relating  to  the  currency  operations  in  the  zone  are  being  worked  out  by 
WAMI, in collaboration with Technical Experts from member central banks. 
an  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism (ERM)  has  been  put  in  place  since  April  2002  to  enhance 
macroeconomic convergence. 
a decision has been taken to adopt a market-based monetary management strategy under 
the unified monetary and exchange rate policy regime in the sub-region. 
agreement has been reached that the primary goal of the common central bank, the WACB, 
would  be  maintenance  of  price  stability.  This  would  be  accompanied  through  a  phased 
movement towards inflation targeting. 
Final phase of monetary integration in ECOWAS sub-region 
The ultimate phase of ECOWAS sub-regional monetary integration efforts would be a merger of the 
WAMZ arrangement with the UEMOA which already has a common central bank, the BCEAO. 
In addition to efforts at monetary integration in West Africa, the African Union is supportive of other 
similar efforts elsewhere in the continent to evolve a single currency and an African Central Bank. 
It  would  be  recalled  that  in  accordance  with  Articles  6  (2)  f(iii)  and  44  of  the  Abuja  Treaty,  the 
Association of African Central Bank (AACB) Governors recognised that achievement of the objectives 
of harmonisation of monetary, financial and payments systems policies and boosting intra-community 
trade would be predicated on, among others, the strengthening of the sub-regional integration efforts 
and  enhancing  monetary  cooperation  among  member  states  for  the  eventual  evolvement  of  a 
monetary union in Africa. In fact, the AACB envisages that monetary cooperation, which would bring 
about macroeconomic convergence at sub-regional levels would serve as building blocks for the future 
African Central Bank. Toward realisation of this goal, the AACB has developed an African Monetary 
Cooperation  Programme  (AMCP)  with  stipulated  convergence  criteria,  for  implementation  in  the 
continent. 
The AMCP is sub-divided into six stages, beginning from the year 2002 to 2021, during which period 
all preparatory processes for introduction of a single African currency and African Central Bank would 
have been completed. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 33/2003 
 3
