 Bodil Nyboe Andersen: Recent economic developments in Denmark 
Speech  by  Mrs  Bodil  Nyboe  Andersen,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 30 April 2003. 
 We live at a time when the global economy is hard to get going. Growth is low, stock prices have fallen 
by 40-50 per cent in three years, and interest rates are at a historically low level. 
In recent months, the “geopolitical situation”, a euphemism for the conflict in Iraq, has been used to 
explain the extraordinary uncertainty currently affecting all economic forecasts. 
Now that the military situation has been clarified, focus is returning to the structural problems affecting 
the large economies of the USA, Japan and the euro area. 
Japan’s  structural  problems  have  been  discussed  for  10-15  years  without  getting  any  closer  to  an 
actual solution, i.e. economic and political reforms. The expectation is rather that, as time passes, the 
cyclical downturn will have reached a point where the economy sooner or later recovers by itself. 
The  structural  problems  faced  by  the  euro  area  are  especially  related  to  the  rigidity  of  the  labour 
market, and to very high and rising unemployment, especially  in the two largest euro area member 
states.  These  countries  also  typically  have  the  largest  budget  deficits.  So  there  is  no  scope  to 
stimulate demand via fiscal policy. This would be in conflict with the requirements of the Stability and 
Growth Pact, and would entail even larger structural budget deficits. 
When the economy  was stronger, these euro member states failed to  improve the underlying fiscal 
position, and in several countries it was even weakened. Therefore we now face a situation with large 
structural  budget  deficits,  and  have  forfeited  the  flexibility  which  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is 
intended to give. 
For a number of  years the USA  has been the locomotive driving global growth, and the end of the 
1990s saw an exceptionally strong boom in the USA. During those  years, the  USA built up a large 
current-account deficit. Many other countries would have faced considerable problems with financing a 
current-account deficit that expanded from around 1½ per cent to 4 per cent of GDP in three years. 
But  at  the  same  time  the  rest  of  the  world  wanted  to  increase  investments  in  the  USA,  especially 
equity  investments.  Therefore  the  large  deficits  were  easy  to  finance,  and  the  dollar  in  fact  rose  in 
those years. 
Now that the economy is growing less strongly, the USA still faces large current-account deficits of up 
to 5 per cent of GDP. 
By definition the counterpart of a current-account deficit is a savings deficit. The interesting aspect in 
the USA’s case is that since 2000 the federal budget has swung from a surplus to a deficit of around 
3½ per cent of GDP, so that the savings deficit no longer relates to the private sector, but primarily 
derives from the public sector. This is reminiscent of the situation that in the 1980s was termed “The 
Twin Deficits”: the current-account deficit is “twinned” by a large government deficit. 
Especially international organisations and European economists have begun to describe these deficits 
as  a  structural  problem  for  not  only  the  USA,  but  also  for  the  global  economy.  The  Americans 
apparently do not consider this to be a fundamental problem. 
From a European viewpoint, a particular concern is that if this development continues the dollar may 
fall  substantially,  thereby  hampering  European  exports  and  making  a  further  contribution  to  the 
slowdown in Europe. 
Higher savings in the USA will create other problems, however. The classical solution to this deficit 
problem is, as in Denmark’s case in the second  half of the  1980s, a strong tightening of economic 
policy and thereby a reduction of domestic demand. However, if the USA were to follow this course 
today,  this  would  exacerbate  the  international  problem  of  excessively  weak  demand,  and  thereby 
growth. 
How is demand to be stimulated? Neither Japan nor Europe are making any significant contributions 
to  growth  in  current  years.  The  development  in  Asia,  which  seemed  so  promising  in  2002,  is  now 
subject to uncertainty because nobody really knows whether SARS will cause growth to be seriously 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 1
 undermined. All over the world, people are hoping that the economic upswing will come from the USA. 
To paraphrase a central-banking term, the USA has the role of the world’s “Spender of last resort”. 
The Danish economy is not particularly “European”  in current  years, in terms of the situation  in the 
euro area. 
From 1994 to 2000, Denmark’s economic development was sound, unemployment was reduced, and 
a  favourable  current-account  surplus  was  achieved.  Concurrently,  the  development  in  prices  was 
moderate. Growth has been a little  weaker in recent  years, however. Nonetheless, the reduction  of 
unemployment achieved  in the second half of the 1990s has not been jeopardised. Public finances 
and the balance of payments continue to show sound surpluses. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  therefore  characterised  the  Danish  economy  as  “robust”.  This  can  be 
interpreted in two ways, and both are of relevance to the current situation. Robust can either be used 
to describe an overall favourable macroeconomic balance. It can also mean that the Danish economy 
is  not  particularly  sensitive  to  the  international  development.  But  this  is  not  to  say  that  we  are  not 
affected at all. 
Unemployment has risen during the past half-year, but the level is still low compared to other countries 
in Europe and compared to the situation in the 1990s. 
Some economic indicators, e.g. car sales and unemployment, show signs of slowing down, while other 
statistics,  e.g.  retail  turnover  and  wage  and  price  increases,  point  to  the  opposite.  The  economic 
picture is thus not completely clear at the moment. Therefore, Danmarks Nationalbank does not find 
any grounds to discuss any adjustments to fiscal policy in the current situation. 
The picture was completely different in 1993, when fiscal policy was relaxed, popularly described as a 
kick-start of the economy. In 1993 Denmark had undergone 7 years with by and large zero growth in 
GDP. This stagnation was necessary to correct the imbalances of the economy, especially the current 
account deficit, in the mid-1980s. During this restoration period unemployment had risen to 12 per cent 
by 1993, i.e. more than twice today’s level. Danish wage increases in 1993 were furthermore lower 
than among our trading partners. 
The relaxation of fiscal policy achieved in 1993 had an effect concurrently with a considerable stimulus 
to demand as a consequence of the extensive wave of mortgage conversions. The strong decline in 
international  interest  rates  in  1993  also  had  an  impact  on  Denmark,  and  from  mid-1993  to  the 
beginning of 1995 mortgage-credit loans for approximately kr. 300 billion were converted. The fact that 
the conversion wave was so extensive was not only due to the drop in interest rates, but was also a 
consequence  of  adjustments  to  the  Mortgage  Credit  Act  and  to  tax  acts,  underpinning  the  new 
conversion opportunities. 
At Danmarks Nationalbank we have sought to assess the effects of both the expansionary fiscal policy 
and the conversion wave from 1993. Calculations show that the contribution to growth from the drop in 
interest rates was at least as strong as the contribution attributable to the fiscal-policy relaxation. 
The calculations also indicate an upswing in consumption, which statistically cannot be attributed to 
either the conversions or to fiscal policy. It seems that the expectations became more positive, and 
that this change of mood among consumers also helps to explain the upswing in 1994. 
As  stated,  Denmark’s  economic  situation  today  is  significantly  better  than  in  1993.  If  the  slowdown 
becomes  more  pronounced  in  the  near  future,  public  finances,  via  the  automatic  stabilisers,  will 
themselves help to stimulate the economy. 
The automatic stabilisers in the Danish economy are rather strong compared to many other countries, 
and  when  they  come  into  play  in  a  downturn,  the  surplus  on  government  finances  will  diminish. 
However,  since  the  starting  point  is  the  strong  budget  balance  that  Denmark has  built  up  in  recent 
years there is also scope to allow this to take effect when the economy dampens. 
Finally,  there  is  one  similarity  between  1993  and  the  situation  today  in  that  the  low  interest  rate 
stimulates  the  economy.  This  will  not  only  affect  business  investments  since  the  current  wave  of 
conversions will help to reduce homeowners’ interest expenditure, as was the case in 1993. This will 
stimulate the households’ consumption and their maintenance and modernisation of owner-occupied 
homes. 
In view of Denmark’s fixed-exchange-rate policy Danish interest rates closely match European interest 
rates. As the euro area’s cyclical position is weak, the monetary-policy interest rates are very low, and 
therefore the financial conditions are more relaxed than Danish factors alone would indicate. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2003
 Four  years  ago,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  made  a  number  of  adjustments  to  the  monetary-policy 
instruments. This e.g. entailed that mortgage-credit bonds, like government bonds, can be pledged as 
collateral for Danmarks Nationalbank’s monetary-policy lending. 
On the same occasion, without any relation to the adjustment of the lending basis, the mortgage-credit 
institutes also became monetary-policy counterparties on an equal footing with the banks. 
In my speech at the Annual Meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks in 1999, I stated the 
following: 
“Danmarks  Nationalbank  expects  that  the  mortgage-credit  institutes  will  not  only  use  this  access  to 
accommodate  their  own  liquidity  requirements,  but  will  also  actively  contribute  to  broadening  and 
revitalising an already well-functioning money market.” 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  remind  the  mortgage-credit  institutes  of  this.  In  the  view  of 
Danmarks Nationalbank, the mortgage-credit institutes could be rather more active participants in the 
money market, and also utilise the related earnings potential. It will be in all parties’ interest to have 
more  players  in  this  market,  and  that  these  are  participants  with  a  different  liquidity  profile,  i.e.  the 
mortgage-credit institutes. 
At  a  time  when  many  new  financial  products  are  being  developed,  boundaries  between  different 
sectors are being eroded, and financial conglomerates are emerging, while the financial markets are 
globalising, it is remarkable to note the strength of the traditional mortgage-credit product. 
The new Mortgage Credit Act currently being considered by the Folketing (Parliament) still maintains 
the foundation stones on which the mortgage-credit system is based. Innovations are being made that 
give borrowers more choice, e.g. the opportunity for repayment-free loans for a long period, i.e. up to 
10 years. 
However, the basis is still the balance principle, which requires a high degree of accordance between 
the terms of lending and the issued bonds. 
Over the years, the mortgage-credit sector has often suggested that the balance principle be removed, 
or at any rate softened considerably. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  always  advised  against  a  more  than  marginal  relaxation.  The  balance 
principle is important to maintaining the blue-chip status of the bonds and has a great deal of the credit 
for  the  very  high  rating  enjoyed  by  Danish  mortgage-credit  bonds.  The  balance  principle  is 
fundamentally a very simple way of managing risk. 
The mortgage-credit product may not be very exciting, but it is a good, simple and inexpensive product 
that gives even small borrowers the opportunity to finance homes and businesses on financial-market 
terms. 
These are characteristics that are also needed in other countries, and currently distant Mexico is in the 
process  of  establishing  a  mortgage-credit  system 
fundamental 
characteristics from the Danish system. 
The  US  Treasury  and  a  firm  of  consultants  have  acted  as  intermediaries  in  this  process  and  have 
pointed  out  the  uniqueness  of  the  Danish  model  in  terms  of  efficiency,  transparency,  security  and 
protection of the interests of both borrowers and investors. 
Representatives  of  the  Mexican  authorities  have  visited  Denmark  on  several  occasions,  seeking 
technical assistance in building up a mortgage-credit system step by step. 
This international recognition reinforces our pride in Denmark’s mortgage-credit system. 
that  borrows  a  number  of 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 3
