 Ernst Welteke: The global economic situation 
Speech  by  Mr  Ernst Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Governor  of  the  IMF  for 
Germany, at the 2003 IMF/World Bank Annual Meeting, Dubai, 23 September 2003. 
 I. 
I am pleased that the IMF and the World Bank are holding their annual meetings in the United Arab 
Emirates this year. For the first time, these meetings are being hosted by a country in this region. 
I am sure that the IMF and the World Bank have made an excellent choice in selecting Dubai as the 
venue. I thank the United  Arab  Emirates for their  warm hospitality and their splendid organizational 
performance. 
II. 
The economic situation in many parts of the world has improved. The IMF(cid:146)s latest forecasts indicate 
that an upswing is under way. While we broadly share this view, we see, however, still a number of 
risks. 
In this context, I wish to mention three problems: 
First,  there  are  widespread  concerns  that  the  large  current  account  deficits  and  surpluses  are  not 
sustainable. 
Reducing trade restrictions and internal imbalances would mitigate the risk of disorderly exchange rate 
adjustments.  However,  measures  distorting  exchange  rates,  trade,  or  capital  movements  are 
counterproductive. Global economic problems require multilateral resolutions. 
Second, despite some progress in consolidating government budgets, the risks associated with large 
budget deficits have by no means been averted: This is not least reflected in the recent rise in long-
term interest rates. Therefore, fiscal consolidation must be continued. This is a particular challenge in 
periods  of  insufficient  growth.  A  medium-term  fiscal  framework  could  help  to  overcome  these 
problems. 
Third, monetary policy makers are currently facing an unfamiliar situation: For several years now, both 
inflation rates and nominal interest rates have been at their lowest level in decades. At the same time, 
there is ample liquidity which is still growing. New bubbles must be avoided. Therefore, central banks 
must remain vigilant. As a central bank Governor, I am particularly keen on making that point. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  despite  these  risks,  the  economic  upswing  will  broaden  and  gain  strength. 
This will provide an opportunity which must be seized to fully implement the ongoing reforms. We all 
know that reforms may be painful in the short run. However, they provide the basis for higher growth in 
the long term for the benefit of all. 
III. 
IV. 
We  have  to  make  sure  that  the  economic  upswing  stabilizes  and  broadens  in  a  sound  financial 
environment.  The  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  have  an  important  role  to  play  with  regard  to  crisis 
prevention and crisis resolution. 
I welcome the progress made in this area: 
  The IMF(cid:146)s surveillance will be further strengthened. 
Transparency will be enhanced. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
   More  and  more  countries  are  realizing  the  benefits  of  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Program. 
And the rules governing access to the Fund(cid:146)s financial resources in capital account crises 
have been strengthened. 
Going forward, the focus should be on implementing these measures. 
V. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, the World Bank and the developing countries are facing major challenges too. 
Let  me  begin  with  the  Doha  round.  I  find  it  inappropriate  that  industrial  countries  spend 
hundreds of billions of dollars each year to protect their own products. These subsidies are 
several  times  larger  than  the  amount  of  development  assistance.  This makes  it  difficult  to 
exploit the virtues of globalisation for the benefit of all. It would be extremely unfortunate if 
the  failure  of  the  Cancun  negotiations  would  lead  to  trade  conflicts.  Again,  there  is  no 
reasonable alternative to the multilateral approach. 
Second,  the  (cid:147)Millennium  Development  Goals(cid:148)  reaffirmed  at  Monterrey  are  a  guideline  for 
German  policy.  Achieving  these  goals  requires  joint  efforts.  Well-targeted  financial  aid  to 
developing countries can only be successful if combined with good governance and sound 
institutions. 
Last  but  not  least,  a  remark  on  quotas  and  voting  rights.  I  know  that  many  countries  are 
seeking higher voting shares. Yet, the proper functioning of the IMF and the World Bank as 
financial  institutions  requires  that  a  strong  link  is  maintained  between  member  countries(cid:146) 
quota shares and their capacity to contribute to the financial resources as reflected by their 
economic weight. However, I believe there is certainly some justification for an increase in 
basic votes. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
