 Lee Hsien Loong: Remaking the Singapore economy  
Keynote address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Annual  Dinner  of  the  Economics  Society  of  Singapore, 
Singapore, 8 April 2003.  
 Introduction 
I agreed to speak on the theme of Remaking the Singapore Economy many months ago. It seemed an 
appropriate  subject  to  talk  about,  given  that  we  were  engaged  in  a  major  exercise  to  remake  the 
Singapore  economy.  As  part  of  the  exercise,  we  pondered  the  likely  risks  that  might  derail  our 
recovery and longer-term plans - a double dip in the US economy, more terrorist attacks, the war in 
Iraq going awry, and oil prices shooting up. But events have a habit of taking plans by surprise. I did 
not imagine that we would be fighting the threat of a new and dangerous disease.  
SARS 
SARS  has  significantly  disrupted  our  economy.  It  has  affected  not  only  tourist  spending  but  also 
domestic consumption. We are not yet certain how prolonged or serious the impact of SARS will be. It 
will depend not just on how we manage the problem in Singapore, but also on how widely the disease 
spreads around the world. But certainly our first half growth will be affected, and we will have to revise 
down our growth forecasts for the year. 
The Government has acted decisively to contain the outbreak. We have set up a ministerial taskforce 
to deal with all aspects of the problem. We are tracking the situation closely, and will take further steps 
as these become necessary. 
Singaporeans must be psychologically prepared for the problem to stay with us for some time. Each of 
us will have to learn more about the disease, adjust our habits and take sensible precautions, so that 
we can protect ourselves, our families and the people around us, and carry on with our lives. SARS is 
not just a medical issue; it is a test of how well Singaporeans can respond collectively to resolve a 
serious problem facing our society.  
Synopsis 
The same ability to respond collectively is critical to our remaking of the Singapore economy. So far 
the debate on economic reforms has focussed predominantly  on  Singapore's present situation, and 
indeed  on  our  immediate  problems.  We  need  to  take  a  step  back  from  the  close-up  snapshots  of 
where we now are, and see our challenges in a historical and international perspective. 
The story of a country consciously restructuring its economy to adapt to a changed environment is not 
unique to today's Singapore. It is a recurring theme in world economic history. Tonight, I will explore 
the challenges of remaking the Singapore economy against the broader context offered by the lessons 
and experiences of history. In particular, the experiences of Japan, China and UK offer useful insights 
into the process of our ongoing reforms. What matters is not just sound economic policy, but effective 
leadership,  a  collective  response  from  the  people,  social  cohesion  and  political  will,  to  see  difficult 
changes through and make them work.  
Economic reforms around the world 
Japan 
Japan  is  my  first  example  of  an  economy  transforming  itself  fundamentally.  For  two  and  a  half 
centuries up to the middle of the 19th century, Japan was ruled by the Tokugawa Shogunate. It was 
inward-looking and insular. The Tokugawas only allowed coastal vessels that could not make ocean 
voyages. Foreigners landing on Japanese soil, even if by accident, faced severe punishment. But in 
1853 Commodore Perry arrived in Tokyo Bay with a quarter of the US navy - the "Black Ships". This 
demonstration of US military supremacy forced Japan to open itself up to foreign trade and influence.  
BIS Review 19/2003 
 1
 Behind its closed doors, Japan had fallen behind the West. It became clear that the Tokugawa regime 
was not able to lead the country into the new era. So in 1867 a group of young samurais led a coup to 
overthrow the Shogunate. They restored the Meiji Emperor, and ruled Japan in his name.  
The reformers were determined to make Japan a strong country again. They made a decisive break 
from feudalism and set about systematically modernising the country. Their strategy was to learn from 
the West and set Japan on the path of industrialisation. They succeeded brilliantly. Within 40 years, 
the Japanese Navy defeated the Russian fleet in battle (1904-1905). Japan's take-off continued right 
up to the onset of World War II. Economic historians have estimated that Japan experienced a 14-fold 
increase in income levels over this period. 
Total defeat in World War II reduced Japan to ruins. After the war, Japan faced the massive task of 
reconstruction and development. Japanese firms cooperated with the Americans, raised their technical 
expertise, and benefited from institutional reforms of the Occupation period for a new, market-based 
economy. By 1950, the pre-war zaibatsu conglomerates were dissolved and family control had been 
eliminated. The zaibatsu system was replaced by the keiretsu system, built around the main banks, 
which shared large cross-shareholdings with the corporate sector. Control passed from shareholders 
to top managers. Managers and workers worked together as one to rebuild the country. The whole 
system was underpinned by the consistent and coherent political leadership of the Liberal Democratic 
Party, supported by an elite civil service. This strategy yielded 30 years of unparalleled growth. By the 
1980s, Japan had become an economic superpower.  
But  the  formula  did  not  work  forever.  In  1990,  the  excesses  of  the  bubble  economy  ended  in  the 
collapse  of  Japan's  property  and  stock  markets.  Japan  entered  a  prolonged  period  of  stagnation, 
whose  end  is  still  not  yet  in  sight.  Policies  and  institutions  had  not  kept  up  with  the  demands  of 
globalisation. The keiretsu model and the lifelong employment system were too rigid to adapt to the 
rapid changes of the new economy. And changing the economic model would mean radically altering 
the social and political framework as well. This time, the national consensus for reform, and the will to 
change,  has  proved  elusive.  But  given  Japan's  past  ability  to  remake  itself,  it  would  be  hasty  to 
conclude that it will not do so again. 
China 
China offers an interesting contrast to Japan's experience of modernisation. In the 18th century, at the 
zenith of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Qian Long promulgated a "closed door policy" to restrict foreign 
trade to the single port of Canton, cutting China off from Western technology and influence. In 1793, 
Britain  sent  Lord  George  Macartney  on  a  diplomatic  mission  to  request  for  broader  trading 
opportunities  and  diplomatic  representation  in  Beijing.  The  request  was  refused.  The  Emperor 
declared  in  his  reply  to  King  George  III  that  China  "possesses  all  things  in  prolific  abundance  and 
lacks no products within its own borders". The shiploads of manufactured products from the ongoing 
Industrial Revolution in Britain failed to alert China to the technological progress beyond its shore.  
Within 50  years, China's weakness and backwardness became painfully obvious. China was forced 
open by the western powers, and compelled to sign unequal treaties with them. Amidst internal unrest 
and foreign invasions, the Qing dynasty made repeated attempts to reform and modernise itself, but all 
these efforts failed. China was in political disarray, and the turmoil continued into the 20th century. 
Under the Communists, China established a centrally planned economy, rejected free markets and the 
profit  motive,  and  emphasised  egalitarianism. The  economy  grew  rapidly  in  the  early  years  but  the 
communist system, plus upheavals like the Great  Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution,  led to 
inefficiency, backwardness and chaos.  
In 1977, after Mao Zedong died, Deng Xiaoping returned to power. He made a decisive break with 
Maoist dogma, and launched far-reaching market reforms under the slogan "Reform and Open Up". 
The profit motive, and the new social attitude that to get rich was glorious, unleashed huge energies 
and  transformed  the  lives  of  hundreds  of  millions  of  Chinese  people.  By  producing  widespread 
benefits  across  the  country,  Deng's  reforms  became  entrenched  and  irreversible,  even  though  they 
are still far from complete. Deng had accomplished what successive reformers and modernisers had 
tried and failed to do for a century. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 UK 
Post-war Britain offers a third example of a remaking of an economy, although on a smaller compass. 
Emerging from the post-war reconstruction of Europe, Britain shared in the world economic boom of 
the 1950s and early 1960s. But by the mid 1960s, the "English disease" had set in. The country was 
plagued by militant trade unions, poor management, and unsustainable state welfarism. Industries that 
had  once  been  world  leaders  fell  behind.  British  governments  were  trapped  in  a  cycle  of  stop-go 
policies,  chronic  balance-of-payments  difficulties  and  sterling  crises.  The  heavy  involvement  of  the 
state in economic activities and transfers had led to a dead end.  
Margaret  Thatcher  swept  into  office  in  1979,  bringing  with  her  a  strongly  held  and  clear  political 
philosophy: to reduce the role of the state in the economy and rid the country of its "wasting disease". 
Thatcher embraced the free-market views of Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman. She resolved to 
break the monopoly of nationalised industries and curb the oppressive power of the trade unions. She 
revamped policies, cut back the role of government and the extent of the welfare state, and privatised 
inefficient  public  enterprises.  She  confronted  the  unions  and  defeated  them,  notably  in  a  prolonged 
miners' strike. In short, she succeeded in changing the prevailing economic paradigm from a socialist 
welfare state to a much more laissez-faire system.  
Thatcher had to tackle strong vested interests, and could only reshape Britain's economy and society 
with the support of the people. This was by no means an easy task after three decades of heavy state 
welfarism. Yet she won four successive elections and, with them, the mandate to make fundamental 
changes  to  the  country.  Her  reforms  outlasted  her  -  even  the  Labour  Party,  to  be  elected,  had  to 
reinvent itself as New Labour and espouse policies not so different from what the Conservatives stood 
for. 
The remaking of Singapore 
Singapore too has had to remake itself to get to where we are today. Since independence, we have 
always  been  on  the  move,  adapting  to  an  ever-changing  environment.  Being  a  small  and  open 
economy, we are constantly subject to the vagaries of the external environment. We have thrived by 
being  nimble  and  efficient,  and  by  doing  what  is  in  the  long-term  interest  of  our  people.  These 
attributes have taken us from third world to first in one generation. In the process, we have remade 
ourselves at least twice.  
Third World to NIE 
The  first  phase  of  our  take-off,  from  third  world  to  NIE,  started  at  the  time  of  independence.  Our 
success despite great uncertainties and dangers was the result of several paradigm shifts. The first 
shift was to industrialise our economy. Our entrepot trade had reached its limits, and going forward, 
the only way to create more jobs was to build a manufacturing sector. We started industrialising even 
before we joined Malaysia. Indeed, one major reason for Merger was to create a Common Market, so 
that our factories could sell to all the states of Malaysia. Such an import-substitution strategy was then 
the conventional wisdom for developing countries. Our factories produced mosquito coils, cosmetics, 
toys and garments, and we protected locally assembled cars, refrigerators, air-conditioners, and even 
a sugar factory with tariffs and quotas. 
But  this  vision  of  a  Common  Market  of  10  million  people  did  not  materialise.  Singapore  never 
succeeded  in  getting  its  products  into  the  rest  of  Malaysia  tariff  free.  For  this  and  other  reasons, 
Singapore separated from Malaysia in 1965. We were now left with a domestic market of less than two 
million  people.  An  import  substitution  strategy  had  become  patently  unworkable. We  made  another 
paradigm shift, to re-orientate our industries towards serving world markets. We dismantled the import 
barriers protecting our industries, which forced them to hold their own against global competition.  
We  also  had  to  overhaul  our  labour  relations.  We  had  inherited  the  adversarial  style  of 
labour-management relations from the British. Worse, the communists had infiltrated the unions and 
used  them  to  foment  unrest  and  chaos.  After  independence,  with  the  Communists  defeated,  the 
government worked with the unions and employers to alter the nature of industrial relations. In 1968, 
we passed the Employment Act and the Industrial Relations (Amendment) Act, to vest the power to 
hire  and  fire  clearly  with  employers.  We  replaced  the  old  adversarial  approach  with  a  cooperative 
tripartite relationship based on trust and confidence. This was institutionalised in 1972 with the setting 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 3
 up  of  the  National  Wages  Council.  Since  then  we  have  enjoyed  harmonious  labour  relations,  a 
precious and unique advantage in attracting foreign investments to Singapore. 
Unlike other emerging Asian economies like Korea and Taiwan, we also opened the door fully to MNC 
investments.  It  was  the  fastest  way  for  us  to  create  jobs,  penetrate  overseas  markets  and  bring  in 
Western  and  Japanese  technologies.  Other  countries  in  the  region  eventually  followed,  making 
Southeast Asia a major production location, which in turn benefited Singapore.  
These  remaking  and  growth  strategies  succeeded,  and  brought  full  employment  and  steadily  rising 
incomes. Over time, we moved into higher value-added activities. After two decades of robust growth, 
Singapore  had transformed itself into  a newly  industrialised  economy.  But in the early  1980s, rapid 
wage  increases  outpaced  productivity  gains,  and  when  the  international  economy  turned  down  in 
1985, we fell into a deep recession. We had lost competitiveness vis-à-vis other regional economies.  
NIE to First World 
The  1985  recession  forced  us  to  reassess  our  economic  policies.  We  formed  the  Economic 
Committee,  whose  report  refocused  our  growth  strategy.  To  restore  our  cost  competitiveness,  we 
reduced  employer  CPF  contributions  (from  25%  to  10%),  and  implemented  two  years  of  wage 
restraint.  We  began  making  wages  more  flexible,  by  introducing  variable  components  into 
remuneration  packages  and  cutting  back  on  seniority-based  pay. We  cut  direct  taxes  sharply  (from 
40%  to  33%),  and  laid  the  ground  for  introducing  the  GST  a  few  years  later.  Competitiveness  and 
flexibility became important yardsticks for economic policy and collective bargaining. 
In our overall development strategy, we put more emphasis on the services sector as a major growth 
engine,  alongside  manufacturing  that  had  long  been  a  key  driver.  In  manufacturing,  we  made  a 
conscious effort to assimilate and adopt new technology from the advanced economies, moving up the 
value chain as our incomes and capabilities rose.  
These policy changes worked better than we had hoped for, aided by favourable external conditions. 
East Asia was undergoing an economic boom, the global electronics industry was expanding rapidly, 
and the  US economy  was experiencing  its longest post-war recovery. For a  decade until the  Asian 
financial crisis broke in 1997, growth averaged 9.2% a year. By 1994, per capita income had doubled 
to  US$20,000,  well  in  the  league  of  developed  countries.  Within  a  generation,  the  lives  of 
Singaporeans have been transformed beyond recognition. 
Towards a knowledge-based economy 
We always knew that as our economy matured, and we approached income levels of the developed 
world, our growth would slow down. But we did not expect the transition to be so sudden and difficult. 
The Asian Crisis was a major setback for the whole region. Before the region could fully recover, the 
US  economy  went  into  recession.  In  Asia,  China  continues  to  prosper,  which  is  both  a  major 
opportunity and a huge competitive challenge. On top of that, September 11th and the discovery of 
terrorist  groups  in  Southeast  Asia  linked  to  Al-Qaeda,  signalled  a  new  and  troubling  long-term 
problem. In these troubled circumstances, we entered the third phase of our economic development. 
We  needed  to  rethink  all  our  economic  policies  and  strategies.  The  Economic  Review  Committee 
(ERC) report sets out what policies we need to change, and what new strategies to pursue. The ERC 
made many specific recommendations to prepare Singapore for the transition to a knowledge-based 
economy. But underlying them all are three fundamental, related ideas: 
Firstly, we must promote innovation, creativity, and entrepreneurship. 
Secondly, we must deregulate and liberalise the economy, to allow enterprise to flourish.  
And  thirdly,  we  must  encourage  self-reliance  complemented  by  community  support,  and  minimise 
dependence on the state.  
These ideas emphasise that private enterprise must increasingly lead growth, and that to continue to 
thrive,  we  must  be  willing  to  venture  into  the  unknown,  explore  new  ideas,  and  establish  new 
enterprises.  To  succeed,  the  initiative  must  come  from  individuals  rather  than  the  state.  The 
government's role is to facilitate the creation of wealth and to enable individuals to do well. It is not to 
provide handouts or excessive social safety nets. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 Many Singaporeans, particularly the workers, feel instinctively that the ERC changes are far-reaching, 
and worry that we are moving too fast. On the other hand, some analysts and journalists have faulted 
the  ERC  recommendations  for  not  being  bold  enough.  I  hope  that  setting  the  changes  within  this 
larger philosophical context will help to bring out their true significance. Much more so than the two 
previous paradigm shifts of the 1960s and 1985, the current one calls for a mindset change - on the 
part of everyone. That is the fundamental remaking that we are striving for. 
Singapore is by no means alone in facing the challenges of a fundamentally altered landscape. The 
other NIEs also face similar environmental changes, and are also searching for new strategies and 
policies. South Korea has been revamping its chaebol-centred industrial system and has also opened 
up its economy to foreign investment and competition. Taiwan is confronting the hollowing out of its 
manufacturing  industries  to  mainland  China,  while  Hong  Kong  is  adjusting  to  the  deflationary 
consequences of its currency peg system. Compared to these other countries, we are not badly off, 
though we are still far from having solutions to all our problems. 
Lessons drawn 
What lessons can we draw from these international and historical comparisons? How do they apply to 
Singapore in the current remaking process?  
Remaking is essential 
The  first  lesson  is  that  no  system  works  forever.  As  the  external  environment  changes,  and  as 
economies  evolve,  institutions  and  policies  that  used  to  work  can  become  outdated  or  even 
dysfunctional.  Countries  will  adjust  incrementally  over  time  to  these  changes,  but  eventually 
incremental change is not enough. Then it becomes necessary for countries to break the mould and 
remake themselves - a difficult but essential process.  
This applies directly to us. However difficult the changes we have to make, the status quo is not an 
option. Our system is still working - the economy continues to grow, investments are still coming in, 
business carries on. But the world around us has changed, and is continuing to change. If we delay 
adapting ourselves to the  changing environment,  we will only make the eventual adjustment harder 
and more painful. 
The ERC's proposals to remake the economy will not be the final solutions to our problems. Policies 
will need to be constantly reviewed and updated as situations unfold. New challenges will arise, and 
we will need to set fresh goals for ourselves. We will need to remake Singapore again, and again. But 
the  more  promptly  and  flexibly  we  can  adjust  our  policies,  the  less  traumatic  and  disruptive  the 
remaking will be. 
Leadership 
Second,  strong  and  far-sighted  leadership  plays  a  key  role  in  countries  making  the  successful 
transformation.  Such  leadership  can  come  from  one  or  two  key  individuals,  like  Deng  Xiaoping  in 
China  or  Margaret  Thatcher  in  Britain.  Or  it  can  be  a  group,  as  in  the  Meiji  Restoration,  where  the 
young samurais who led the reforms remained in key leadership positions for a whole generation. In 
the  current  crisis  too,  the  different  responses  of  the  NIEs  partly  reflect  the  different  nature  of  their 
political leaderships. 
Singapore being so small and open, able, committed leadership is doubly important to us. We do not 
enjoy the advantages of the other NIEs - the larger critical masses of South Korea or Taiwan, or the 
proximity  of  Hong  Kong  to  Southern  China.  To  make  up  for  this,  we  need  the  highest  quality 
leadership that we can muster. Our size makes us more vulnerable, but also gives us a nimbleness 
that  other  countries  cannot  match.  However,  this  demands  responsive,  forward  looking  leadership, 
and not blind flying on autopilot. 
Indeed, we must place our hopes not in a few key leaders, but in a broad leadership group at many 
levels across all segments of society - in government, in the business sector, in the labour movement, 
and  in  academic  and  civic  groups.  The  more  we  develop  such  a  leadership  group,  the  better  our 
chances will be.” 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 5
 Collective response 
Third,  while  strong  and  visionary  leadership  is  necessary,  it  is  not  enough.  To  be  effective,  the 
leadership must evoke a response, a resonance from the society as a whole. The society must rise to 
the challenge  of changing  itself and establishing  a new order. There needs to  be broad consensus 
among the population in support of the changes.  
In the Meiji Restoration, crucial roles were played by the peasant class that formed the armies and the 
merchant  class  that  financed  the  military.  In  19th  century  China,  the  reformers  failed  because  of 
infighting within a weak leadership, as well as the advanced state of decay of the entire society. But a 
century  later,  Deng  Xiaoping's  reforms  took  root  as  the  people  experienced  the  benefits  of  rapid 
growth and the widespread improvements in living standards. In post-war Britain, the turning point in 
the public mood began with a sense of humiliation when the Labour Government had to call in the IMF 
in 1976, after the Exchequer ran out of money. 
In Singapore, our previous remakings succeeded because we mounted a strong collective response - 
at  independence  a  determination  to  beat  the  odds  and  survive,  in  1985  a  sense  that  if  we  made 
sacrifices  together,  we  could  make  our  economy  competitive  again.  Without  that  sense  of  group 
interest, we could not have cut employer CPF rates, nor restored our competitiveness in a way that 
few other countries could do. 
This collective response continues to be critical. In our current remaking, the key changes are in our 
mindsets, and the main driver of change is private initiative and enterprise. To succeed, the change 
must come from the people themselves. In this process, the government can only play an encouraging 
and facilitating role.  
The additional challenge for us is that this time, the motivation for remaking ourselves is less obvious. 
Previously we were catching up from behind, but now we are at developed country standards of living. 
Why  do  we  need  to  sacrifice  what  we  already  enjoy?  Yet  if  we  do  not  accept  the  sacrifices  and 
change, not only will we not make progress, but we will even likely lose what we already have. No 
union leader who has visited Shanghai doubts this. It is the reality that we must get home to every 
Singaporean.  
Social consensus and political will 
Fourth, reform and restructuring is never a purely economic exercise. Success depends critically on 
social and political factors. Economic reforms are not painless. There will be winners and losers, at 
least  in  the  short-term.  Therefore  there  must  be  political  support  for  the  changes,  a  willingness  to 
accept the pain of the transition, and a confidence that those adversely affected will be helped. This 
depends on a feeling of shared nationhood, of going through thick and thin together. To maintain the 
social  compact,  a  balance  needs  to  be  struck  between  pushing  through  needed  changes  without 
delay, and spacing them out to reduce the political pain.  
Thus  the  Meiji  reformers'  slogan  was  fukoku  kyohei,  meaning  "rich  country,  strong  military".  Their 
objective was not just better lives for individual Japanese, but a strong Japan taking its rightful place 
among the nations of the world. This assertion of Japan's role in world affairs led to the Pacific War. 
Margaret Thatcher believed in a strong Britain too, but hers was a very different model. She famously 
declared  that  "there  is  no  such  thing  as  society",  only  individuals,  and  that  people  must  look  to 
themselves rather than the government. But she went too far down this path. When she persisted in 
implementing the poll tax in 1990, the people revolted, and even her own party turned against her. The 
Iron Lady was out. 
In Singapore, consensus building  is especially important as  the remaking is to lead to an economy 
more reliant on private enterprise and individual effort. This can only work if Singaporeans feel that the 
system  is  fair  to  all,  and  benefits  everybody  over  the  long  run.  Hence  we  have  worked  hard  to 
strengthen  the  social  and  political  consensus  in  support  of  our  remaking  plans.  We  involved  and 
consulted Singaporeans as widely as possible. We worked in partnership with both the employers and 
the trade unions in policy deliberations. We have introduced major reforms carefully, to minimise the 
disruption and side-effects, as we have done with the tax and CPF changes. We are providing social 
support  to  those  adversely  affected  by  the  changes,  to  ensure  that  no  one  is  left  behind,  without 
undermining  the  incentive  to  work.  Our  concern  is  not  just  social  cohesion,  but  racial  and  religious 
harmony. If remaking our economy splits our society along racial or religious lines, we will be in deep 
trouble.  
6 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 This  will  be  one  of  our  most  difficult  challenges  for  a  long  time  to  come.  Our  future  depends  on 
Singaporeans being resilient and self-reliant, yet we must make sure that those who are truly unable to 
cope get the help they need. We will continually need to balance these two objectives, to ensure that 
we do not have any free riders on our ship, and yet that all of us will reach the destination together. 
Conclusion 
This  will  not  be  the  last  time  that  we  have  to  remake  the  Singapore  economy.  Companies  find  it 
difficult to successfully ride even one wave of changes. For countries, the challenge is even greater as 
they have to be ready to transform themselves repeatedly.  
If a company fails to remake itself it goes under. The creative destruction of the market economy then 
recycles the freed-up resources to other more productive purposes. But if a country fails to remake 
itself, the consequences for its people are dire. The experience of Japan and Germany over the last 
decade  shows  how  difficult  and  painful  this  process  can  be,  even  in  wealthy,  advanced  countries. 
What more for a small and vulnerable economy like Singapore? 
Over the past three decades, we have built up significant strengths that will stand us in good stead for 
the challenges ahead. We have weathered many shocks since independence - regional recession in 
the mid-1980s, and most recently, the Asian financial crisis and global electronics downturn. Each test 
has made us stronger. We must now rise up to the latest challenge, and by remaking our economy, 
lay the basis for many more years of progress and prosperity for Singapore. 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 7
