 T T Mboweni: Recent economic developments in South Africa 
Speech  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Cape  Times 
Business Breakfast, Cape Town, 20 May 2003. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Against the backdrop of a weak international economy, the salient recent economic developments in 
South Africa from the Reserve Bank’s perspective are the promising trends in inflation, the slowdown 
in the pace of domestic economic activity and the behaviour of the exchange rate of the rand. Before 
we address these issues, however, we would like to briefly reiterate the Bank’s mandate and our view 
of our role in the economic growth process.  
According to the Constitution, the task of the Bank is to protect the value of the currency in the interest 
of balanced and sustained economic growth in the country. The overriding objective is therefore price 
stability, by  which  we mean achieving  and maintaining a low  and stable rate of inflation. Within the 
inflation targeting framework, we have been mandated by Government to achieve an inflation target of 
3-6 per cent. Achieving low inflation is not an end in itself: it is important because it is a prerequisite to 
the  growth  process.  Furthermore, from  a  welfare  perspective,  the  distributional  impacts  of  high  and 
variable inflation are such that it is generally the poor that are hardest hit by inflation as they are the 
least able to protect themselves or hedge against this. 
It is sometimes argued that by focusing on inflation we are not concerned about growth. As I have just 
stated,  our  longer-term  concern  is  precisely  with  economic  growth,  employment  creation  and 
sustainable  development.  At  issue  then  are  short-term  growth  fluctuations.  Although  this  is  not  our 
primary focus, it does not mean that we ignore cyclical movements. Most central banks, even inflation 
targeting central banks, are concerned with such fluctuations, but central banks may differ in terms of 
the weight they put on these fluctuations in their reaction function. Some central banks have a dual 
mandate and therefore have to focus more directly on cyclical growth whereas others, such as in our 
case, have a single mandate. It is also generally the case that in the early phase of inflation targeting, 
a greater weight is put on inflation as credibility is built up. Although inflation is our main objective, we 
are nevertheless sensitive to the real effects of our policy actions. 
In any event, the current and particularly the expected state of the domestic economy is an important 
consideration  in  making  monetary  policy  decisions.  The  state  of  domestic  demand  is  an  important 
determinant of inflation, so, although we may not be targeting short-term growth, our monetary policy 
is not set independently of such developments. 
Inflation developments 
2. 
As is now well known, the depreciation of the rand during the last quarter of 2001 resulted in a surge 
in inflation which prevented us from realising our inflation target for 2002. We had been well on course 
to achieving that target, with CPIX inflation having fallen below the 6 per cent level in September and 
October of 2001. Since November 2001, inflation accelerated and the average for 2002 was 10 per 
cent,  4  percentage  points  above  the  upper  band  of  the  inflation  target.  Fortunately  CPIX  inflation 
appears to have peaked in November of 2002 at 12,7 per cent. Since then we have seen a gradual 
decline, with rates of 11,3 per cent in February and 11,2 per cent in March. At these levels, we are still 
significantly far off from our inflation target of 3-6 per cent.  
However, there are a number of pointers to a sharper decline in the inflation rate over the next few 
months. Firstly, the quarter-on-quarter figures which give a better indication of the short-term trends 
show that on an annualised basis CPIX decelerated from 14,5 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2002 to 
6,7 per cent in the first quarter of 2003. What was particularly gratifying was that the main driver of 
inflation  in  2002,  food  price  inflation,  fell  steeply  from  an  annualised  rate  of  18,7  per  cent  to  only 
2,4 per cent over the same period. 
Secondly, to the extent that the Producer Price Index is an indicator of future consumer price inflation, 
the  prognosis  for  a  significant  decline  in  CPIX  inflation  is  good.  The  year-on-year  all-goods  PPI  in 
March 2003 was down to 5,1 per cent, with a lot of impetus coming from the recovering exchange rate 
of the rand - the imported component of the CPI fell to 0,5 per cent, the lowest rate of increase since 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 1
 May 1998. Measured quarter-to-quarter and annualised, these rates were even more encouraging with 
negative  inflation  being  recorded.  The  all-goods  PPI  inflation  was  minus  3,6  per  cent,  while  the 
imported component was minus 10,4 per cent. 
Thirdly, the forecasting model of the SARB also indicates a sustained decline in CPIX inflation during 
the course of the year. However, a word of caution is necessary. As we have consistently emphasised, 
we conduct monetary policy on a forward-looking basis. What our forecasts show, as published in the 
most  recent  Monetary  Policy  Review,  is  that  CPIX  inflation  is  expected  to  bottom  out  to  average 
around 5,7 per cent in 2004. These forecasts may of course be superseded by subsequent events, 
and we will be seeing the latest forecast at the forthcoming MPC meeting. However, most forecasts 
project a significant slowdown in the pace of at which inflation is expected to fall later in the year or 
early next year. Bearing in mind that we should be focusing not on the upper end of 6 per cent but 
more  around  the  mid-point  of  the  target  range,  even  if  the  latest  forecast  turns  out  to  be  more 
optimistic with respect to the longer-term outlook, it is unlikely to move right down to the mid-point.  
Finally, this outlook for inflation is also supported by recent monetary developments. The year-on-year 
growth rate of M3 decelerated from 12,8 per cent in December 2002 to reach 5,7 per cent in March 
2003. The quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted and annualised growth rate in M3 decelerated from 
6,9 per cent in the fourth quarter to 1,9 per cent in the first quarter of 2003. Similar trends have been 
observed in the growth rates of the narrower monetary aggregates as well. Growth in credit extension 
to  the  private  sector  from  the  monetary  institutions  was  also  subdued,  although  the  figures  were 
distorted  by  regulatory  and  accounting  changes  of  a  technical  nature  which  came  into  effect  from 
January  2003.  Although private sector credit extension accelerated to twelve-month  growth rates of 
13,8 per cent in February and 16,6 per cent in March 2003, adjusting for the reporting changes, these 
growth rates would have been 9,1 and 9,3 per cent respectively. 
Recent labour market developments 
3. 
As our MPC statements have emphasised, there are a number of risks to the inflation outlook. One 
that  is  emphasised  repeatedly  is  the  trend  of  unit  labour  costs.  In  reviewing  recent  economic 
developments, we feel it is important to say something not only about unit labour costs, but also about 
some  positive  developments  on  the  employment  front.  We  often  hear  the  criticism  that  inflation 
targeting is detrimental to growth and employment creation. However we wish to point out that these 
positive  developments  occurred  within  our  inflation  targeting  framework.  That  is  not  to  say  that 
monetary policy should take credit for employment creation, but rather to illustrate the point that an 
inflation targeting framework is not necessarily an impediment to employment creation. 
According to the Survey of Employment and Earnings in Selected Industries by Statistics South Africa, 
regularly surveyed formal non-agricultural employment rose in the each of the last three quarters of 
2002.  This  resulted  in  employment  gains  of  about  70,000  workers  and  follows  three  years  of 
continuous decline. These positive developments occurred in both the private and public sectors of the 
economy.  In  both  these  sectors,  employment  rose  at  a  rate  of  1,2  per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of 
2002. 
This  turnaround  in  employment  trends  suggests  that  employment  has  begun  to  be  responsive  to 
economic growth and that  the restructuring process that characterised the economy since the early 
1990s is bearing fruit. The unemployment rate nevertheless remains high at 30 per cent, but there are 
encouraging signs that it is not increasing. Unemployment remains one of the main challenges facing 
South Africa and will be addressed at the planned Growth and Development Summit on 7 June 2003 
between  Government,  Business  and  Labour.  The  summit  will  endeavour  to  formulate  sectoral  and 
developmental agreements that foster economic growth and job creation. 
Although  things  are  looking  better  on  the  employment  front  than  they  have  done  for  a  number  of 
years, the concern for the Bank is the trend in unit labour cost, which plays an important role in the 
inflation process in South Africa. During 2002, wage settlements have trended higher, in response to 
the  higher  inflation.  The  slowdown  in  economy-wide  productivity  growth  and  rising  nominal  wage 
growth resulted in non-agricultural unit labour cost accelerating from a year-to-year rate of 4,1 per cent 
in 2001 to 7,0 per cent in 2002.  
Central to our concern is the fact that wage settlements often tend to be set in a backward-looking 
manner, particularly in the case of multi-year agreements. This acts as a constraint on the downward 
movement  of  inflation  and  leads  to  so-called  inflation  persistence.  There  is  evidence  that  not  only 
wages,  but  also inflation  expectations, are set  in  a backward-looking fashion.  We would  like to see 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2003
 wages (and prices) being set in a forward-looking manner, i.e. on the basis of the inflation rate that is 
expected to prevail over the period for which wages are being set. This will result in a lower sacrifice 
ratio  i.e.  the  output  cost  of  reducing  inflation  will  be  much  lower  if  wages  and  prices  are  set  in  a 
forward-looking manner on the basis of the inflation target. Of course for this to happen, there has to 
be credibility that the Reserve Bank will be able to achieve the inflation target. This credibility can only 
be built up by the Bank achieving the inflation target and having a proven track record of maintaining 
low  inflation.  For  this  reason  we  are  determined  to  achieve  the  inflation  target.  The  benefits  to  the 
economy will not only be higher long-term growth, but also lower short-term output costs in reacting to 
unexpected shocks in the future. 
There is also some evidence of backward-looking behaviour in the formation of inflation expectations. 
In the survey conducted for the Bank by the Bureau for Economic Research, for example, labour and 
business respondents in particular appear to adjust their expectations to follow actual inflation, with the 
expectation that these levels will be maintained over the next three years. If wages and prices are set 
on the basis of such expectations, inflation will remain higher and the job of monetary policy that much 
more difficult. 
Domestic Output and Expenditure 
4. 
Domestically,  2002  was  a  relatively  good  year  for  economic  growth.  Despite  the  slowdown  in  the 
international economy and the short-lived global recovery, South Africa’s growth performance of 3 per 
cent in 2002 was relatively sound despite the tighter monetary policy stance adopted during the year.  
However there are signs that economic activity  is slowing down. The slowdown can be seen in the 
quarter-to-quarter annualised growth figures in 2002 which declined from 3,8 per cent in the second 
quarter  to  2,4  per  cent  in  the  final  quarter.  The  slowdown  in  the  fourth  quarter  was  mainly  due  to 
slower growth in the real value added by the secondary sectors and the fact that there was virtually no 
growth  in  the  primary  sectors  of  the  economy.  These  sectors  appear  to  have  been  affected  by  the 
recovery in the rand and the continued global slowdown.  
Overall there was a robust increase of 4,1 per cent in manufacturing output during 2002, but this has 
tapered off significantly. The latest released data show that although growth between the first quarter 
of 2002 and the first quarter of 2003 was 0,4 per cent, quarter-on-quarter manufacturing production fell 
at  a  seasonally  adjusted  and  annualised  rate  of  7,4  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2003.  Other 
indicators, such as the latest Purchasing Managers Index also point to a slowdown in activity. 
Although there appears to be some slowing down of the economy, there are indications that domestic 
final  demand  remains  fairly  strong.  Despite  the  increase  in  interest  rates  over  the  past  year,  real 
growth in household consumption expenditure was unchanged from 2001 at 3,1 per cent although on 
a  quarterly  basis  there  was  a  decline  over  the  year  in  durable  goods  consumption.  Government 
consumption expenditure growth remained relatively strong and increased slightly. 
From  a  future  growth  perspective,  the  promising  aspect  of  the  domestic  expenditure  growth  is  the 
increase in domestic capital formation. Gross fixed capital formation increased in successive quarters, 
reaching 11,5 per cent growth in the fourth quarter and 6,5 per cent for the year in 2002 compared to 
3,2 per cent the previous year. Although part of this was due to the purchases of new aircraft by SAA, 
the expenditure related to Coega and other projects was also significant. Indications are that because 
the capital expenditure of all tiers of government is improving, there is greater capacity for delivery, 
and much-needed infrastructural expenditure is now taking place. 
The weak international environment and the stronger rand have resulted in a deterioration in the trade 
account of the balance of payments, which is likely to be reflected in a less favourable current account 
than in the fourth quarter of 2002 when a surplus of R4,3 billion was recorded. The physical volume of 
merchandise exports declined by 5,3 per cent in the first quarter of 2003. This, together with a decline 
in  prices  of  merchandise  exports,  resulted  in  the  seasonally  adjusted  and  annualised  value  of 
merchandise exports falling by approximately 13 per cent over the past quarter, from R295,9 billion in 
the fourth quarter of 2002 to R257,8 billion in the first quarter of this year. Net gold exports declined 
from  R40,2  billion  to  R35,6  billion  over  the  same  period.  The  10,8  per  cent  decline  in  imports  was 
insufficient  to  offset  the  decline  in  exports,  and  this  resulted  in  a  contraction  of  the  trade  account 
surplus in the first quarter of 2003 to R32 billion, from R43,1 billion in the final quarter of 2002. 
Looking  at  the  market  activity,  the  monthly  average  turnover  on  the  JSE  Securities  Exchange  SA 
(JSE) during the 12 months ending in April 2003 amounted to R75 billion. This was slightly higher than 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 3
 the monthly average for the preceding 12 months (R70 billion). The domestic equity market performed 
exceptionally well during the first five months of 2002, benefiting from the sound performance of the 
gold index. However, by the end of April this year, the monthly average share price level had fallen by 
32 percent from its all-time high of 11 686 reached on 22 May 2002.  
The turnover on the JSE increased from R55,8 billion in January 2002 to R104,2 billion in June 2002. 
In January 2003 turnover amounted to R61,8 billion, falling to R46,9 billion in April this year. The total 
annual turnover for 2002 also increased to R842 billion from R607 billion in 2001. 
Since  July  2002,  foreign  investors  became  large  net  sellers  of  domestic  bonds  and  equities.  A  net 
amount of R5,6 billion worth of equities was sold during the calendar year 2002. This trend continued 
in January 2003, when R3 billion worth of equities was sold in that month. In February 2003, however, 
foreigners turned buyers of equities and they bought a net cumulative amount of R1,6 billion over the 
last four months. From the beginning of 2003 to mid-May non-residents sold shares to the value of 
R1 billion on a net basis. 
Foreign  holdings  of  domestic  bonds  also  decreased  substantially  since  July  2002.  A  net  amount  of 
R12,7 billion was sold by them over that period. During April 2003, a large net amount of R5,8 billion 
was bought by foreigners as the interest rate differential brought profitable opportunities to the foreign 
investors. From the beginning of 2003 to mid-May, non-residents were net buyers of bonds amounting 
to R1,5 billion.  
International Economic Developments 
5. 
South Africa’s recent economic performance has to be seen against the backdrop of an international 
economy  that  continues  to  move  at  a  sluggish  pace.  The  expectations  of  an  early  recovery  in  the 
United States and the euro area have receded, and most analysts have downgraded their forecasts 
for world growth, particularly in the advanced economies. Given that the US is still the engine for world 
growth, this does not indicate that there will be a general world recovery very soon. The euro area is 
not seen as a viable alternative engine for growth, and first quarter growth in the region was around 
zero, with Germany, Italy and the Netherlands recording negative growth. The timing of the recovery is 
very uncertain, and the more pessimistic forecasts see a low growth scenario for at least another two 
years.  Even  the  more  optimistic  forecasts,  which  see  some  recovery  later  this  year,  have  had  to 
continually  push  out  the  timing  of  the  recovery  against  the  initial  expectation  of  a  recovery  in  early 
2002. 
Adding to this sobering outlook is the uncertain effect that the outbreak of SARS will have not only on 
the Asian economies (which was the one region that was expected to show significant positive growth 
this year) but on the tourist industry world-wide. South Africa will not be immune to this fall-out, and 
there is already evidence of some decline in tourism, particularly from East Asia. Tourism has been 
one  of  the  important  growth  areas  of  late  in  the  South  African  economy  and  during  January  and 
February of this year, the number of visitors to South Africa increased by over 8 per cent, compared to 
the same period last year. This is despite an unfavourable tourist environment of slow global growth 
and increased fears of travelling. 
But  it  is  not  only  tourism  that  is  negatively  affected  by  the  slow  global  growth.  The  decline  in 
manufacturing  output  mentioned  above  is  to  a  large  extent  a  result  of  declining  export  volumes. 
Although part of that is no doubt attributable to the recovery of the rand, the decline in demand due to 
the global slowdown is significant. 
The low growth, and in fact fears of deflation in some countries, does mean that we remain in a low 
inflation international environment, which will help to contain inflation domestically. Similarly, the near 
conclusion of the war in Iraq has meant that we have returned to a more orderly world oil market, and 
a major risk factor to our inflation targets has in fact receded. 
NOFP and Exchange Rate Developments 
6. 
The  recent  successful  government  bond  issue  of  Euro  1,25  billion  has  allowed  us  to  achieve  our 
objective of expunging of the NOFP. The US dollar equivalent of this amount, which was received on 
16  May,  was  delivered  against  outstanding  forward  commitments  which  effectively  eliminated  the 
outstanding  net  open  foreign  currency  position  (NOFP)  of  the  Reserve  Bank. The  net  open  foreign 
currency position stood at US$1,2 billion as at the end of March 2003. The exact details of the impact 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2003
 of this, and other transactions, which took place during the month of April and May, will be released in 
accordance  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s  regular  data  releases  to  the  market.  The  outstanding  forward 
book on 30 March 2003 was US$6,6 billion. 
Probably the most important reason for the Reserve Bank to further reduce the outstanding forward 
book,  now  that  the  NOFP  has  been  eliminated,  is  to  eliminate  a  source  of  instability  in  the  South 
African  economy.  According  to  many  observers  the  total  elimination  of  the  forward  book  may 
contribute to a more stable exchange rate of the rand over time. 
As  and  when  the  forward  book  has  been  eliminated,  the  focus  of  the  Bank  will  turn  increasingly  to 
managing the foreign exchange reserves. Whilst there are a number of reasons for managing foreign 
reserves more actively, the most obvious reason would be to earn income on foreign currency assets. 
A  higher  level  of  reserves  tends  to  provide  a  higher  degree  of  comfort  to  investors  from  a  credit 
worthiness  point  of  view,  and  experience  has  shown  that  during  times  of  financial  market  crises, 
countries with higher reserves tend to be more resilient. 
Partly because of these positive developments in the NOFP, the international ratings agency Standard 
and  Poor’s  recently  raised  South  Africa’s  long-term  foreign  currency  ratings  to  BBB  and  a  stable 
outlook. This follows the re-rating by Moody’s of South Africa’s outlook to positive. This agency cited 
improved government debt ratios, improved external liquidity, (cid:147)careful(cid:148) macroeconomic management 
and the reduction in the NOFP. Fitch had also previously upgraded South Africa’s long-term foreign 
currency rating to BBB. These improved ratings have already assisted in reducing South Africa’s cost 
of borrowing as seen in the recent government eurobond issue. 
Of all the recent economic developments, the behaviour of the rand has perhaps attracted the most 
attention. After depreciating by 0,4 per cent during January  2003 on a  weighted average basis, the 
rand appreciated by 8,2 per cent and 0,4 per cent respectively during February and March, resulting in 
an increase of 7,5 per cent from the end of December 2002 to the end of March 2003. This followed a 
26  per  cent  appreciation  for  2002  as  a  whole.  The  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand 
improved  by  a further 10,2 per cent  during  April. More recently however, there  has been a sudden 
reversal  and  as  of  yesterday  afternoon,  the  trade-weighted  appreciation  of  the  rand  since  the 
beginning of the year was just over 5 per cent. 
Much has been said about the behaviour of the exchange rate over the past two years in particular. 
The  fact  that  there  was  pressure  to  appoint  a  commission  of  enquiry  into  the  rand’s  depreciation 
implies that there was no obvious reason for such a sharp move in the exchange rate and that the 
move was clearly overdone. Given that there was a significant overshoot, it is not surprising that there 
has been a significant recovery. Prior to the depreciation in 2001, there was not a general view that 
the rand was overvalued. If anything, the current fundamentals are in better shape than they were at 
that time, so it would not be surprising to see the rand making a strong recovery.  
Although there can be no doubt that interest rate differentials have played a role in the recent strength 
of the rand, even market analysts are sharply divided as to the extent of this effect. On the one hand, 
the currency pessimists argue that it is all a question of interest rate differentials, and that once the 
Bank starts lowering interest rates, the rand will retrace its steps to significantly weaker levels. On the 
other  hand,  the  currency  optimists  point  to  the  fundamentals,  and  in  particular  commodity  price 
developments,  and  argue  that  the  rand  is  around  ’fair  value’  levels,  and  that  any  interest  rate 
reductions will have a marginal effect. Some go as far as to say that there is still substantial scope for 
further recovery of the rand.  
Whatever the case may be, the Bank’s focus is on the inflation target. The Bank does not have a view 
on the appropriate value of the rand. Obviously from an inflation perspective, a stronger rand is better 
than  a  weaker  rand,  but  as  we  have  emphasised  on  numerous  occasions,  it  is  not  Bank  policy  to 
intervene in order to influence the level or direction of the exchange rate. What activity there has been 
was for normal portfolio purposes.  
Although there are disagreements as to the appropriate level of the exchange rate, there is general 
consensus that the more important issue is the volatility of the exchange rate. The volatility observed 
over  the  past  few  months  is  clearly  not  healthy  for  the  economy.  The  uncertainty  caused  by  such 
movements  makes  investment  and  export  planning  extremely  difficult. What  may  seem  a  profitable 
venture under one exchange rate scenario, may turn out to be totally unviable should the exchange 
rate change substantially. Unless the exchange rate is driven by the underlying fundamentals, trying to 
predict  exchange  rate  movements  can  be  extremely  hazardous  and  adds  to  the  riskiness  of 
investment.  
BIS Review 23/2003 
 5
 Although the expunging of the NOFP was expected to eliminate an important source of volatility in the 
exchange  rate,  volatility  is  however  a  fact  of  life  for  most  emerging  market  economies.  In  a  recent 
Bank  for  International  Settlements  study  comparing  the  experience  of  12  emerging  market  inflation 
targeters  with  that  of  six  of  their  industrial  country  counterparts,  it  was  found  that  emerging  market 
economies tend to be relatively more exposed to exchange rate fluctuations for a range of structural 
and  historical  reasons.  The  study  concludes  however  that  ’in  the  longer  run,(cid:133)(cid:133)  improved  inflation 
outcomes,  consolidation  of  policy  credibility  and  economic  development  can  be  expected  to  help 
reduce some of the vulnerabilities of emerging market economies’. In addition, the study argues that 
although exchange rate considerations pose a challenge to emerging market inflation targeters, the 
cost of exchange rate movements are not only of concern to emerging markets. Current experience in 
Europe and the United States reminds us that having to keep an eye on the exchange rate is also a 
fact of life in industrial economies, inflation-targeting or not.  
Conclusion 
7. 
With low or at best moderate growth forecasted in the United States, the euro area and Japan, exports 
cannot  be  counted  on  to  continue  to  lead  South  African  economic  growth  in  the  near  term.  South 
African exporters will have to focus on improving competitiveness through productivity enhancements. 
They  cannot  just  rely  on  the  exchange  rate.  The  mining  industry  and  other  exporters  are  crucially 
important to the South African economy but so are the many industries that source inputs from abroad. 
The  current  slowdown  observed  in  the  manufacturing  sector  is  not  simply  a  question  of  a  strong 
exchange rate, but also the weak state of global demand. 
The bottom line for us at the Bank, however, is that our actions will be guided by the need to achieve 
our mandate. There are currently promising signs that the inflation rate is on a sustainable downward 
trajectory. However, monetary policy will be determined by how the Monetary Policy Committee sees 
the  future  course  of  the  factors  that  determine  inflation.  These  factors  include  not  only  the  state  of 
domestic demand or output, but also the extent to which unit labour costs and inflation expectations 
react to these factors. On the whole, the outlook for inflation looks good.  
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS Review 23/2003
