 Lars Nyberg: Developments in the property market  
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  seminar  on  properties, 
Malm(cid:246), 2 September 2003. 
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  opportunity  to  come  to  Malm(cid:246)  and  speak  about  the 
Riksbank’s view of developments in the property market. Of course, these developments are not only 
of interest to those of us present today. They are important to all people, as movements in property 
prices  have  significance  both  for  the  real  economy  and  financial  developments  in  Sweden.  When 
property prices rise, we feel more financially secure and increase our consumption, which leads to a 
rise in employment and growth. We might even borrow a bit more from the bank if we can. Normally, 
there  is  no  harm  in  this.  But  there  is  a  limit,  of course,  to  the  burden  of  debt  households  can  bear 
without giving rise to worrisome risks. Should the debt of commercial property companies also swell, it 
could  entail  risks  for  the  stability  of  the  entire  banking  system,  a  point  that  was  illustrated  so  well 
during the crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. 
On account of this, the Riksbank monitors developments in the property market carefully. We usually 
divide it into two segments, which give rise to different questions and reflections. 
The first segment is the housing market. Since 1997, housing prices have risen by just over 50 per 
cent,  measured  in  current  prices.  The  price  boom  has  continued  in  spite  of  the  generally  weak 
economic activity of the last two years. This is a new experience which differs from previous business 
cycles, when prices have tended to recede during periods of economic decline. Similar developments 
have occurred in other countries, for example in the US, England and Holland.  
The  situation  could  appear  worrying,  particularly  given  that  the  rise  in  housing  prices  has  been 
accompanied by an increase in household indebtedness. 
The upsurge in prices has raised questions about the healthiness of this trend. Are the price rises in 
the Swedish housing market the result of a bubble? Are the higher levels of household indebtedness 
sustainable? The Riksbank’s view is that the current price developments in the housing market do not 
reflect any speculative expectations of future price rises which would warrant the term (cid:147)bubble(cid:148). Nor is 
household indebtedness a bigger problem than usual for this stage of the business cycle. I will explain 
this in a moment. 
The  other  segment  is  the  market  for  commercial  property.  Here,  it  is  primarily  prices  for  office 
premises  which  have  displayed  a  different  trend  to  that  seen  in  the  housing  market.  Commercial 
property  prices  have  adjusted  to  the  economic  slowdown.  In  Sweden,  both  prices  and  rents  have 
fallen since 2000 at the same time as vacancy rates  have risen.  I myself do not believe that these 
price  declines  are  a  concern  from  an  economic  perspective,  as  was  very  much  the  case  with  the 
property crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. Although some similarities do exist between the two, the 
differences nevertheless outweigh them, and I will be coming back to these later. I will also be looking 
ahead and briefly discussing the driving forces behind price developments in the property market. 
Developments in the housing market 
In  principle,  there  are  two  different  methods  to  explain  rapid  price  changes.  The  first  approach  is 
based  on  the  fundamental  driving  forces  that  govern  prices,  and  explains  price  changes  through 
changes in these variables. Such fundamental factors include interest rate levels, household income 
and the production of new homes. 
The  second  approach  assumes  instead  that  prices  are  not  governed  by  these  fundamental  driving 
forces, but rather are based on expectations of future price rises. Such a situation is usually referred to 
as a (cid:147)bubble(cid:148). A recent example of this is the surge in prices seen in IT shares during the latter part of 
the 1990s. The rate of increase observed then proved gradually to be unrelated to fundamental driving 
forces but rather to unrealistic expectations of a trend that never materialised. When this eventually 
became evident, prices plummeted. 
So  the  price  rises  seen  during  a  bubble  do  not  mirror  fundamental  factors  but  simply  reflect 
expectations of future price increases. Investors become involved in a process of speculation where 
BIS Review 38/2003 
 1
 estimates of future cash flow are no longer of importance and price rises are instead assumed to be 
the trend. If you buy today, you will always be able to sell at a better price tomorrow. 
Where  the  housing  market  is  concerned,  however,  there  is  reason  to  question  whether  a  bubble  is 
possible at all. This is because most people do not purchase a home primarily as an investment but 
rather  as  a  place  to  live.  Consequently,  a  house  buyer  neither  thinks  nor  behaves  as  an  investor 
speculating  on  a  quick  and  persistent  rise  in  prices.  There  can  hardly  be  many  people  who  buy  a 
home solely because they expect to gain financially through a rise in house prices! So assuming that 
speculation on future price increases doesn’t exist, a bubble should quite simply not be able to occur. 
Some of you might now be thinking that this is just a convenient academic approach to the issue. After 
all,  we  have  witnessed  rapid  price  increases  and  even  faster  declines  in  the  housing  market,  for 
example for tenant-owned apartments in metropolitan areas during the crisis at the beginning of the 
1990s. In principle, I would be prepared to agree, if it proved impossible to explain the price rises with 
fundamental factors. 
In order to see if there are fundamental factors that could explain the recent price increases, it makes 
sense to look at the driving forces that could have been important for house prices, i.e. interest rates, 
primarily the post-tax real interest rate, household disposable income, the supply of housing and the 
demand that results from people moving to metropolitan areas in particular. 
As regards interest rates, both real and nominal rates have fallen continuously since the mid 1990s. 
For  households  this  has  entailed  significantly  lower  mortgage  costs.  At  the  end  of  1992  the  banks’ 
average nominal lending rate to households was just over 15 per cent and inflation stood at just over 
2 per cent. Now, the average lending rate is around 6 per cent, while inflation has remained at about 
the same level. So households can incur more than double the amount of debt today and still have 
lower debt-servicing costs. 
The favourable economic climate from the mid 1990s also contributed to a drop in unemployment, on 
the  one  hand,  and  an  increase  in  wages  on  the  other.  All  in  all,  this  led  to  a  rise  in  household 
disposable  income.  Moreover,  disposable  income  has  continued  to  increase  during  the  period  of 
relatively  weak  economic  activity  in  recent  years.  This  has  been  mainly  due  to  unemployment 
remaining low, in spite of the economic slowdown. 
So low interest rates and high growth  in household  disposable  income are two fundamental factors 
that could explain the rise in prices in the housing market. 
Furthermore, there is no excess supply in the housing market similar to that seen at the beginning of 
the  1990s  when  housing  construction  was  encouraged  through  various  kinds  of  grants  and  tax 
subsidies. Instead, there is very  little construction of housing today, and discussions are concerned 
rather with how to step this up. In addition to the low level of housing construction, demand for housing 
has risen mainly in metropolitan areas due to the greater numbers moving to these regions during the 
latter  part  of  the  1990s.  It  is  not  surprising  that  a  relatively  constant,  low  supply,  as  well  as  high 
demand, should have contributed to the substantial price rises. 
Thus, low interest rates, an increase in disposable income and a low supply of new housing, together 
with high demand, are the fundamental factors that I believe have driven the rate of price increases 
from the mid 1990s. They also suffice to show that current price rises should not be described as an 
expectations-driven  (cid:147)bubble(cid:148).  The  same  analysis  can  be  performed  for  several  other  countries 
experiencing similar developments in their housing market, in particular the US. 
So did we have a housing market bubble during the crisis years at the beginning of the 1990s? I don’t 
really believe that we did, at least not in the sense that homes were being bought for the purpose of 
speculation with a view to being sold once prices had risen further. Yes, prices rose sharply, especially 
in  metropolitan  regions,  but  these  were  due  to  reasons  of  a  fundamental  nature.  Households’ 
willingness to pay increased in line with their income during the economic upswing, the deregulation of 
the credit market led to the removal of some financing obstacles, and the supply of housing was, in the 
short term, highly inflexible. This is enough to fuel a steep rise in prices. When demand subsequently 
waned as a result of a deterioration in household finances, at the same time as real interest rates rose 
and  the  supply  of  housing  -  both  new  and  old  -  increased,  prices  fell  again.  Even  substantial  price 
movements can have natural explanations and do not have to be due to unrealistic expectations that 
are first raised and then dashed. 
Households have continued to borrow from banks and mortgage institutions throughout the economic 
decline, which is not the normal pattern of behaviour, but this is of course due to low interest rates. 
Their debt burden has grown and raised questions about whether we are heading back towards an 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2003
 imbalance  that  sooner  or  later  will  have  to  be  corrected.  However,  I  myself  do  not  believe  that 
household debt per se constitutes any immediate source of concern. Households’ debt ratio, i.e. debt 
as  a  percentage  of  income,  is  just  over  110  per  cent.  However,  as  a  result  of  the  historically  low 
interest rates, it appears that households’ debt-servicing costs  will continue  to  be manageable. The 
interest  ratio,  i.e.  households’  debt-servicing  costs  in  relation  to  disposable  income,  is  today  barely 
5 per cent. 
The situation for Swedish households is therefore considerably more favourable than at the end of the 
1980s and beginning of the 1990s. At that time, the credit expansion which was caused partly by the 
deregulation of the credit market resulted in a debt ratio of around 130 per cent, while the interest ratio 
increased rapidly over a couple of years from around 6 per cent to almost 10 per cent. 
However,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  recent  rise  in  indebtedness  has made  households  increasingly 
sensitive  to  changes  in  interest  rates.  Households  tend  to  focus  on  their  cash  flow  and  are 
unperturbed as long as their debt-servicing costs can be accommodated in their monthly budget. But 
an interest rate rise of just a few percentage points would have a much bigger impact on cash flow 
today than when levels were around 15 per cent. An interest rate rise of four to six per cent would 
cause  monthly  costs  to  increase  by  50  per  cent.  Higher  mortgage  rates  could  therefore  prompt 
households to increase their saving and reduce their consumption more than expected or intended. 
Hopefully we will be able to avoid sharp, quick interest rate rises in our conduct of monetary policy, 
although mortgage rates are also influenced by events outside Sweden. To some extent though, the 
effect  of  any  increases  in  rates  could  be  alleviated  by  the  fact  that  an  increasing  number  of 
households have recently been switching over to fixed-rate loans. 
Developments in the commercial property market 
Prices in the commercial property market have been driven by somewhat different forces than in the 
housing  market.  The  trend  here  has  also  been  more  closely  correlated  to  the  level  of  economic 
activity, with prices falling over the last three years. However, the price decline in Malm(cid:246) [9 per cent] 
has  been  considerably  gentler  than  in  Stockholm  [24  per  cent]  or  Gothenburg  [18  per  cent].  These 
declines  have  been  mainly  caused  by  lower  rents,  which  essentially  have  been  a  result  of  lower 
demand for office premises due to the subdued economic activity. It also makes sense that Malm(cid:246) has 
been affected less than the other major cities given that the slowdown has not been as severe here. 
The rapid rise in  prices and their subsequently rapid  decline points to a trend  not all that  dissimilar 
from that experienced during the property crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. Nevertheless, there are 
many differences between the two situations. There is no doubt that we experienced a bubble at the 
beginning of the 1990s, when prices largely lost their relationship to fundamentals and were instead 
underpinned by expectations of future price rises. For a period of time the direct yield on property was 
8  percentage  points  lower  than  the  yield  on  a  government  bond.  So  investors  must  have  expected 
prices  to  increase  a  good  deal  more  than  8  per  cent  in  order  to  compensate  them  for  the  risk  of 
investing in property rather than bonds. In this case, you can really say that expectations of price rises 
were high! This is not the situation today. 
Speculation in construction was also less prevalent during the upswing at the end of the 1990s than 
during the rise in activity a decade earlier. Production of property has been relatively low, and projects 
have had pre-contracted tenants to a greater extent. In addition, the property crisis at the beginning of 
the  1990s  was  affected  significantly  by  the  structural  changes  that  occurred  during  the  period.  The 
deregulation  of  the  credit  market  together  with  the  changes  in  economic  policy  required  substantial 
adjustments in the market. 
So the present situation is not a cause for concern in the same way as the situation at the beginning of 
the 1990s. 
Some thoughts on the future 
The fact that the situation is not a source of concern does not mean that I am predicting a significant 
recovery in property prices. An increase in economic activity will of course stimulate demand, which 
sooner or later will apply upward pressure on prices. But at the same time I can see several factors 
which could restrain a rise in property prices, especially with regard to office premises. 
BIS Review 38/2003 
 3
 Firstly, there is a risk that demand for office premises will be weaker than the general level of demand 
in  the  economy.  From  the  mid  1990s,  there  was  a  gradual  improvement  in  economic  activity  in 
Sweden,  which  resulted  in  higher  employment  in  general,  but  particularly  within  office-intensive 
businesses such as IT and telecommunications. So the increase in demand for office premises was 
partly attributable to economic conditions in general, but also to especially favourable conditions within 
office-intensive businesses in particular. The subsequent slowdown in activity also hit some of these 
businesses hardest, which affected demand for office premises. Thus, a recovery in demand for office 
premises would not only be associated with a revival in general economic activity but also in activity 
within these office-intensive businesses. 
Irrespective of business area, it  also appears that companies today, unlike at the end of the 1990s 
when expectations of growth and expansion were high, are seeking to reduce the area of office space 
per  employee.  This  is  one  way  for  them  to  adapt  their  costs  to  new,  more  strained  economic 
conditions. 
All in all, these aspects suggest that demand for office space may not recover at the same rate as the 
general level of activity. 
Secondly, unlike single-family dwellings for instance, commercial properties are a form of investment. 
Consequently, prices of commercial properties are affected more than single-family dwellings by the 
return on other investments. 
In  times  of  uncertainty,  property  has  often  been  seen  as  an  attractive  alternative  to  equities  in 
particular,  and  investors  tend  to  increase  the  share  of  property  in  their  portfolios,  thus  leading  to 
upward pressure on prices. According to Swedish Property Index, the return on property in Sweden 
over the past three years has exceeded that on equities. Moreover, in 2000 and 2001, the return on 
property  surpassed  that  on  all  alternative  forms  of  investment.  Last  year,  however,  the  return  on 
property was exceeded by that on bonds and Treasury bills. 
Thus, in a more optimistic economic climate, there is a risk that investment in property will appear less 
attractive than in equities, for example. In such a situation, as investors reduce the share of property in 
their  portfolios, there  is a risk that prices  will not rise as much as warranted by the  higher  demand 
alone. Consequently, this is a factor that could restrain property prices during an upswing. 
Summary and conclusions 
The markets for housing and commercial property differ in terms of both their developments in recent 
years and the challenges facing them in the near future. 
In  the  housing  market,  prices  have  continued  to  rise  despite  the  recent  economic  slowdown.  The 
market for commercial property has instead undergone a period of adjustment towards lower prices 
and rents since 2000. 
By  all  appearances,  the  price  rises  in  the  housing  market  have  been  due  to  changes  in  the 
fundamental factors of significance for house prices. To speak of a housing market bubble is therefore 
not  very  constructive.  Persistently  low  interest  rates,  strong  growth  in  disposable  income  and  low 
growth in the supply of residential property justifies current price levels, in spite of the weak economy. 
In the event of an increase in activity and higher income, which we all hope and believe will happen, 
there  is  no  reason  to  expect  a  broad  decline  in  housing  prices.  Of  course,  local  differences  in  the 
production of new homes, for instance, could have an impact on prices. 
In  the  commercial  property  market,  where  rents  and  prices  have  already  adjusted  to  a  different 
demand climate, the price increases that naturally follow a rise in economic activity could take time, 
particularly  as  there  appears  to  be  considerable  excess  supply  of  office  space  in  various  locations. 
Moreover, property as a form of investment is usually considered less attractive when the economy 
turns around in earnest. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2003
