Bank of Japan’s August report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 11 August 2003. 
 The Bank’s view2 
Economic activity remains virtually flat. 
With regard to final demand, business fixed investment is on a gradual recovery trend, albeit showing 
some fluctuations. Meanwhile, private consumption continues to be weak, housing investment remains 
sluggish, and public investment is declining. Net exports are virtually flat.  
Industrial  production  continues  to  be  basically  level  in  response  to  these  developments  in  final 
demand. As for the employment situation, the number of employees including non-regular employees 
such  as  temporary  workers  has  almost  stopped  falling,  and  the  pace  of  decline  in  wages  has  also 
slowed. However, the increase in the overtime hours worked and new job offers has come to a halt, 
and the number of regular employees continues to decline. Thus household income still seems to be 
on a gradual downtrend on average, and the employment and income situation of households overall 
remains severe. 
Turning  to  the  economic  outlook,  it  is  fairly  possible  that  the  growth  rate  of  overseas  economies, 
especially that of the U.S. economy, will accelerate in the second half of this year. However, as for the 
U.S.  economy,  although  improvements  have  been  observed  in  some  recent  economic  indicators, 
careful examination is still required to judge to what extent business fixed investment and employment 
will increase following these developments. The pace of economic expansion in East Asia still remains 
slow  compared  to  what  it  was  a  while  ago,  although  there  seem  to  be  signs  of  recovery.  In  this 
situation, both exports and industrial production are projected to remain virtually flat for the immediate 
future.  
With  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  declining  trend,  and 
private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time since the employment and income situation 
is unlikely to improve markedly. Meanwhile, the uptrend of business fixed investment is expected to 
become established in the period ahead, mainly in large manufacturing firms, whose investment has 
been  thus  far  significantly  restrained  despite  the  recovery  in  their  profits.  However,  the  pace  of 
increase in overall business investment is likely to remain modest, as long as uncertainty regarding a 
recovery in exports and production remains.  
Overall, with the anticipation that the growth rate of overseas economies will accelerate in the second 
half of this year, the uptrend in exports and production will resume gradually, which in turn will initiate 
the momentum for an economic recovery in Japan. However, a self-sustaining recovery in domestic 
demand  is  unlikely  to  gain  momentum  for  some  time,  since  production  is  expected  to  be  virtually 
unchanged  for  the  immediate  future  while  downward  pressures  such  as  excessive  labor  input  and 
debt persist. In addition, as for the outlook for the external environment, there still remains uncertainty 
about, among other things, the recovery of the U.S. economy. On the domestic side, given the fragility 
of the financial system, continued attention should be paid to developments in stock prices and long-
term interest rates.  
On the price front, import prices and domestic corporate goods prices are declining, mainly reflecting 
crude  oil  prices  that  fell  back  in  early  spring.  Corporate  services  prices  continue  a  year-on-year 
decrease of slightly over 1 percent; the rate of decline expanded in April, as many firms reprice at the 
                                                      
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
August 7 and 8, 2003. 
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on August 7 and 8, 2003 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
   1/3 
beginning  of a new fiscal  year. The rate  of decline in consumer prices remains virtually unchanged 
from April, when the rate diminished due mainly to the rise in medical treatment costs in line with the 
reform of the medical insurance system.  
Looking  at  the  conditions  influencing  price  developments,  import  prices  are  expected  to  continue 
declining for the immediate future, but are likely to stop declining before long since crude oil prices 
have recently been firm after they fell back in early spring. On the other hand, turning to the domestic 
side,  the  supply-demand  balance  in  the  macroeconomy,  ongoing  technological  innovations  in 
machinery, and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to exert downward pressure on 
prices. Hence domestic corporate goods prices are likely to continue a gradual downtrend, although 
the  pace  of  decline  will  slow  with  the  halt  in  the  decline  in  import  prices  gradually  having  effects. 
Meanwhile, consumer prices are projected to continue falling at the current moderate pace on a year-
on-year basis.  
As for the financial environment, the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank of Japan is 
moving  at  around  29  trillion  yen,  as  the  Bank  has  been  providing  ample  liquidity.  Under  these 
circumstances, the overnight call rate continues to move at around zero percent. Interest rates on term 
instruments remain steady at low levels. 
Yields on long-term government bonds have been declining gradually partly because investors bought 
medium- and long-term bonds on dips,  and are recently moving at around 0.9  percent. Meanwhile, 
yield  spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  bonds  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds 
continue to be at low levels on the whole, although those between bank bonds and government bonds 
are widening slightly. 
Stock prices have become weak due mainly to a concern over the rapid increase in stock prices, even 
though market participants’ view on the outlook for Japan’s economy has been improving gradually. 
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average is recently moving at the 9,000-9,500 yen level. 
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  appreciated  toward  mid-July  as  foreign  investors  kept  on 
investing in Japanese stocks, but it fell back as the dollar was purchased reflecting expectations for a 
recovery in the U.S.  economy. The  yen  is currently  traded  in the range of 119-121  yen to the  U.S. 
dollar.  
With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high 
credit risks, while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. Their 
lending  attitudes  seem  to  be  becoming  slightly  more  accommodative  in  areas  such  as  terms  and 
conditions for lending. Meanwhile, the lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms 
are improving somewhat, although small firms continue to perceive them as severe. In the corporate 
bond  and  CP  markets,  the  issuing  environment  for  firms  with  high  credit  ratings  continues  to  be 
favorable  on  the  whole,  although  some  firms  still  seem  to  be  taking  a  wait-and-see  stance  in  the 
corporate bond issuance market. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because business fixed 
investment is at low levels and firms are continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2.0-2.5 percent on a 
year-on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is slightly below the previous 
year’s level.  
Meanwhile, according to business surveys, financial positions of firms are improving slightly, although 
those of small firms in particular remain severe. 
The  year-on-year  growth rate of the monetary base is around  20 percent. The  year-on-year growth 
rate of the money stock is somewhat less than 2 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions  continue  to  be  extremely  easy.  Meanwhile,  long-term  interest  rates  and  stock  prices  are 
slightly declining. The money stock and the monetary base maintain high growth rates relative to that 
of economic activity as a whole. In corporate finance, the fund-raising environment has not changed 
significantly,  that  is,  the  environment  for  firms,  particularly  with  high  credit  risks,  remains  severe, 
although the issuing environment of corporate bonds and CP continues to be favorable on the whole, 
especially  for  firms  with  low  credit  risks.  Developments  in  the  financial  and  capital  markets,  the 
   2/3 
behavior  of  financial  institutions,  and  the  situation  of  corporate  finance  continue  to  require  close 
monitoring. 
   3/3 
