2. 
3. 
1. 
 Yves Mersch: The reform of the Governing Council of the ECB 
Panel statement by Mr Yves Mersch, President of the Central Bank of Luxembourg and Member of the 
Governing Council of the ECB, at the Central Bankers' Panel, European Banking & Financial Forum 
Prague, 25 March 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to participate once again in the European Banking and Financial Forum and to 
be back in Prague in order to speak before such a distinguished audience. 
My  brief  presentation  will  perhaps  not  directly  cover  the  topic  "When  and  how  Europe  can  again 
become the global superpower" but is nevertheless closely related to both Europe and power. It will 
deal  with  how  power,  and  more  specifically  voting  power  at  the  ECB's  Governing  Council,  will  be 
reallocated in order to cope with the ongoing expansion of the EU. It is also an excellent example of 
how  the  EU  works:  decisions  are  taking  after  a  vigorous  democratic  debate,  and  a  consensus  is 
sought whereby the interests of all those involved are taken into account. 
My presentation is structured as follows: 
1. 
I will start by briefly describing the Governing Council and how, as a result of enlargement, it 
was considered necessary to reform its voting procedure.  
Subsequently,  I  will  analyse  how  the  discussions  in  the  Governing  Council  led  to  the 
approval of a dynamic rotation model and the utilisation of a composite indicator, made up of 
both an economic and a financial variable. I will also go in some detail in the formal ECB 
recommendation, notably in terms of group composition and voting frequency.  
Before concluding, I will look at the reactions of all the institutions involved in the enabling 
clause procedure: the Council, the Commission and the European Parliament (EP).  
The need for reform 
The Governing Council 
1.1. 
The Governing Council is the supreme decision-making power of the ECB. It comprises the members 
of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  and  the  Governors  of  the  national  central  banks  or  NCBs.  The 
Executive Board has 6 members: the President, the Vice President and 4 other members. They are all 
nominated  by  a  European  procedure,  contrary  to  the  NCB  governors  who  are  appointed  at  the 
national level. 
The Treaty and the Statute assign to the Governing Council the power to take the most important and 
strategically significant decisions for the Eurosystem. It defines and implements the monetary policy of 
the  euro  area.  In  particular  when  taking  monetary  policy  decisions,  the  Governing  Council  normally 
acts by a simple majority of the votes cast by the members who are present in person. Each member 
has one vote. The principle of 'one member, one vote' reflects the status of all the members of the 
Governing Council, including the governors of the NCBs of the Eurosystem, who are appointed in their 
personal capacity and not as representatives of their Member States. For some decisions on financial 
matters relating to the status of the NCB as shareholders of the capital of the ECB, the votes of the 
Governing Council are weighted according to the NCBs' share in the subscribed capital of the ECB. 
On such occasions the votes of the members of the Executive Board are zero-weighted. 
At  the  time  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  the  EU  counted  12  Member  States  and  the  arrival  of  3  new 
members  was  widely  expected.Consequently  the  Treaty  envisaged  Governing  Council  eventually 
comprising 21 members: 6 Executive Board Members and 15 NCB Governors. 
BIS Review 16/2003 
 1
 1.2. 
Enlargement 
The enabling clause of the Treaty of Nice 
1.2.1. 
In  order  to  cope  with  the  EU's  current  enlargement,  the  Treaty  of  Nice,  which  became  effective  on 
February 1 of this year, called for a revision of the decision-making procedures for, or composition of, 
several European institutions such as the Commission, the Council, the European Parliament and the 
ECB. 
Indeed,  many  feared  that  the  Governing  Council's  capacity  for  efficient  and  timely  decision-making 
would  be  hampered  if  its  membership  expanded  to  up  to  33  members,  namely  6  Executive  Board 
Members and, eventually, 27 NCB Governors. A solution therefore implies that the overall number of 
Governing Council members having voting rights would have to be smaller than the overall number of 
Governing Council members. 
To this end, the Treaty of Nice contained a so-called enabling clause which, in essence, enabled the 
Council to amend Article 10.2 of the ECB Statute on a recommendation from either the ECB or the 
Commission.  In  case  of  an  ECB  recommendation,  the  procedure  also  involved  consulting  the 
Commission and the European Parliament. It should be emphasised that the reform of the Governing 
Council should in no way be compared to the reform of other institutions such as the Council. It is also 
remarkable  that  the  Treaty  of  Nice  included  the  possibility  for  the  ECB  to  come  up  with  a 
recommendation for its own reform. 
It should also be underlined that the enabling clause is limited in scope. It concerns only the voting 
rights  of  the  Governing  Council  and  does  not,  for  example,  allow  modifying  the  composition  of  the 
Governing Council or of the Executive Board. Similarly, it does not allow to restrict the membership of 
the  Governing  Council;  or  to  some  form  of  Monetary  Policy  Committee  or  Board.  Moreover,  the 
procedure  is  very  complex.  The  ECB  recommendation  had  to  be  taken  by  unanimity,  and  to  be 
approved unanimously by the Council, meeting in its composition of Heads of State or Government, 
before ratification by all Member States according to their respective constitutional requirements. 
Within these constraints and on 3 February 2003, only two days after the Nice Treaty took effect, the 
ECB  adopted  unanimously  a  recommendation,  which  I  will  explain  and  discuss  in  more  detail. 
However, prior to doing so, I would like to turn a moment to the expansion of the Eurosystem, in order 
to clearly distinguish this from EU enlargement. 
The expansion of the Eurosystem 
1.2.2. 
The Eurosystem consists of the ECB and of the NCBs of all countries having adopted the euro. The 
timing of its expansion from the current 12 to the eventual "steady state" of 27 members is, however, 
highly uncertain. 
Currently three EU countries are outside the euro area. The United Kingdom and Denmark have an 
exemption, while Sweden has the statute of a country with derogation. 
All  the  new  members  will,  upon  joining  the  EU,  automatically  have  the  statute  of  countries  with  a 
derogation, that is to say with a clear commitment to join the euro area at a later stage. According to a 
position  published  by  the  ECB,  the  adoption  of  the  euro  is  considered  the  result  of  a  complex 
convergence  process,  rather  than  a  mere  exchange  rate  measure.  Hence  unilateral  euroisation  is 
considered  unacceptable.  The  accession  countries  have  to  respect  the  converge  criteria  set  by  the 
Maastricht Treaty in terms of inflation, public finances and interest rates, and are expected to achieve 
high levels of real and nominal convergence, meaning that their economic structure and inflation levels 
have to converge to EU levels. In addition, they have to participate for at least two years in ERM II. 
2. 
The ECB recommendation 
Initial discussions 
2.1. 
Initially  a  multitude  of  possible  solutions  were  analysed.  Relatively  soon,  a  constituency  model,  a 
capital key inspired voting system and a double majority system, to name only the principal proposals, 
were all abandoned. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2003
      A constituency model, based on regional groupings like in the IMF and the World Bank, was 
rejected  as  it  was  felt  that  this  would  violate  the  principle  of  total  independence  of  the 
individual  NCB  governors  because  a  representative  of  a  constituency  would  probably  feel 
obliged  to  defend  the  interests  of  his  /  her  constituency  in  the  Governing  Council.  This  is 
contrary to the current system, whereby each NCB Governor votes with the interests of the 
entire euro area at heart, rather than on basis of national interests.  
A  system  of  weighted  voting  which,  by  the  way,  is  also  used  in  the  Bretton  Woods 
institutions, is contrary to the "one member, one vote" principle of the EU Treaty. As we have 
seen  earlier,  the  Statute  of  the  ESCB  foresees  only  this  scenario  for  voting  related  to 
shareholdership,  i.e.  national  central  banks,  issues.  In  these  circumstances  the  Executive 
Board has, accordingly, a zero-weight.  
A double majority system, inspired by the revision of voting in the Council as decided by the 
Nice Treaty, was also rejected. First, the Council is not a relevant example for the ECB as 
the  former  is  an  intergovernmental  body  while  the  latter  is  a  supranational  institution. 
Second,  many  members  felt  this  would  result  in  a  directoire,  dominated  by  the  largest 
countries. Under one version of this model, a proposal first requires approval by a majority of 
the Governing  Council, including  at  least 3  of the 6  Executive  Board Members. Moreover, 
any  Governing  Council  member  would  have  the  right  to  request  verification  that  a  pre-set 
GDP level is represented. In case this representativeness level is set at for example 62%, 
Germany and France jointly could block any decision. Interestingly, as we shall see later, the 
European Parliament, with a German rapporteur, also made a proposal for a double majority, 
consisting of, first, the population and second, the total size of the economy and the financial 
sector.  
The  creation  of  a  Monetary  Board,  consisting  of  theExecutive  Board  and  a  few  additional 
members,  as  sometimes  suggested  in  the  press  or  academia,  was  rejected  for  being 
incompatible  with  the  model  and  the  structure  of  the  Governing  Council.  It  violates  the 
principle of decentralisation, on which the Eurosystem is based. When large areas of policy 
making are still national in the EU, the case for excessive concentration of decision making 
seems out of touch with political reality. As the EU is not a single nation, the structure from 
the ECB is different from the Fed's structure.  
An election system could appear appropriate but entails many practical difficulties in a body 
like  the  Governing  Council.  An  unrestricted  election  might  not  fulfil  the  representativeness 
criteria  and  might  lead  to  a  "market"  for  votes  and  a  less  cooperative  atmosphere  in  the 
Governing  Council. 
Imposing  certain  conditions  or  safeguard  clauses  concerning 
representativeness, and maximum and minimum participation though simple in theory may 
well, in practice, present many drawbacks.  
Fundamental principles 
Dynamic rotation models and representativeness 
2.2. 
In  order  to  allay  fears  that  decisions  in  the  Governing  Council  might  be  taken  by  a  majority  not 
necessarily  representative  of  the  euro  area's  economy,  discussions  turned  to  a  system  of  dynamic 
rotation  models,  whereby  governors  are  allocated  to  different  groups  with  varying  voting  rights  on 
basis  of  a  to  be  defined  economic  criterion.  Such  a  system  would  maintain  the  principle  of  equal 
treatment for the NCB governors and ensure sufficient levels of representativeness. 
2.2.1. 
A  dynamic  rotation  system  was  considered  the  most  equitable,  efficient  and  acceptable  way  of 
assigning  voting  rights  among  the  governors,  particularly  as  the  design  of  the  rotation  system  was 
guided by a handful of guiding principles: 
• 
'One  member,  one  vote'  and  'ad  personam  participation':  All  members  of  the  Governing 
Council  will  continue  to  attend  meetings  in  a  personal  and  independent  capacity,  and  the 
"one member, one vote" principle, as opposed to weighted voting, will continue to apply to 
those NCB Governors exercising a voting right.  
Representativeness: At any moment, the NCB Governors with the right to vote must, as a 
whole, be representative of the euro area.  
 BIS Review 16/2003 
 3
   2.2.2. 
    Transparency: The language of the revised Article 10.2 of the Statute has to be reasonably 
accessible and meet the requirements of primary Community Law.  
Consistency. During the transition phase, great care should be taken in order to avoid that 
governors of certain NCBs move randomly up and down between certain groups.  
Number and Composition of Groups, voting rights, composite indicator and 
representativeness 
Two-group  versus  three-group  models.  A  long  debate  went  on  concerning  the  number  of 
groups and their composition. Three-group models for the steady state were favoured from 
the  outset,  although  a  two-group  model,  consisting  of  15  and  12  countries  was  also 
considered. In the final event, preference was given to a three-group model, which allows, 
roughly speaking, to rank countries according to whether they are large, medium or small. 
However, in an intermediary phase a two-group model will be used.  
Voting rights. At one stage it was discussed to limit the number of votes to the current 18. A 
consensus  was  eventually  reached  to  set  the  number  of  votes  at  21,  (6  for  the  Executive 
Board and 15 for the NCB Governors). It was also decided to grant the 6 Executive Board 
permanent voting rights, as they are appointed by a special European procedure.  
Representativeness indicator. As the ECB is an economic and not a political body, the use of 
the  population  criterion  appeared  as  inappropriate,  even  if  it  is  used  for  the  capital  key 
together  with  GDP,  and  initially  using  exclusively  GDP  was  favoured.  However,  it  was 
increasingly found that the contribution of the financial sector, through which the ECB steers 
liquidity and interest rates, should also be taken into consideration. Moreover, the financial 
criterion,  in  contrast  to  GDP  or  population,  is  not  purely  national,  but  reflects  the  effective 
contribution  of  the  various  central  banks  to  the  Eurosystem.  It  is  also  in  line  with  the 
experience of the American Federal Reserve System where no reference has been made to 
the relative weight of the various US states. Instead, according to section 2 of the Federal 
Reserve  Act,  the  criteria  are  based  on  convenience  and  "customary  course  of  business". 
Reflecting their importance as financial centres, the Presidents of the New York and Chicago 
Federal Reserve Banks enjoy respectively a permanent voting right and a 50% voting right in 
the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC),  against  a  33%  voting  right  for  virtually  all 
other  Fed  Presidents.  Several  financial  indicators  such  as  the  monetary  aggregate  M3, 
capital of credit institutions, bank deposits / loans and the Total Aggregated Balance Sheet 
of the Monetary Financial Institutions were analysed. Preference was given to TABS-MFI for 
conceptual, legal and statistical considerations. From a conceptual point of view, TABS-MFI 
is  the  broadest  measure  for  the  size  of  the  financial  sector.  A  legal  definition  exists  in 
Community law and the statistical framework is well established and consistent.  
Concerning the relative weights for the composite indicator, the ECB proposed in its official 
recommendation  to  give  GDP  a  weight  of  5/6  th,  against  a  relative  weight  of  1/6  th  for 
TABS-MFI  
Technical elements of the ECB recommendation 
2.3. 
In its recommendation, the ECB proposed a dynamic rotation model which, in the steady state,  will 
have 21 voting rights. The Executive Board will have 6 permanent voting rights while the 27 governors, 
allocated to three groups on basis of the composite GDP-TABS indicator, will have 15 voting rights. In 
an initial phase, the model will consist of 2 groups. 
The  detailed  implementation  provisions,  including  the  possible  decision  to  postpone  the  start  of  the 
rotation  system  so  as  to  avoid  the  situation  that  governors  within  any  voting  group  have  a  voting 
frequency of 100%, are to be adopted by the Governing Council, acting by a two-thirds majority of all 
its members, with and without a voting right. 
The  ECB  recommends  introducing  a  two-group  rotation  system  when  the  number  of  euro  area 
Member States ranges from 16 to 21 Member States. Once the number of euro area Member States 
exceeds 21, a rotation system based on three groups will start operating. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2003
 Group composition in the steady state 
In a euro area with 27 Member States, and on basis of the available figures for GDP and TABS-MFI, 
the first group would consist of the 5 Governors of Germany, the United Kingdom, France, Italy and 
Spain. NCB Governors in this group would have a voting frequency of 80%. 
The  second  group  would  consist  of  14  members,  namely  the  NCB  Governors  of  the  Netherlands, 
Belgium,  Sweden,  Austria,  Denmark,  Poland,  Finland,  Greece,  Portugal,  Ireland,  Luxembourg,  the 
Czech Republic, Hungary and Romania. These Governors would vote 8 times out of 14, equivalent to 
a voting frequency of 57%. 
The  third  group  would  consist  of  the  remaining  8  NCB  Governors  and  have  a  voting  frequency  of 
3/8 or 37,5%. This can be compared to their cumulative share in the composite GDP-TABS indicator 
of less than 1 %. 
In the steady state, the 3 groups of NCB governors will thus be made up of respectively 5, 14 and 
8 members. This is the result of a pragmatic and empirical approach, which attempted, to the extent 
possible, to have clear separations between the different groups. Thus, the first member of the second 
group, the Netherlands, has a composite indicator  which is 41% inferior to the  indicator for the last 
country of the first group, Spain. The corresponding figure for the separation between the last country 
of the second group -Romania- and the first country of the third group -the Slovak Republic- is an even 
more striking 80%. 
Follow up to the ECB recommendation 
3. 
The Council unanimously accepted the ECB's recommendation on 21 March, after a positive opinion 
from the European Commission and a non-binding rejection by the European Parliament. The Council 
also confirmed that the model for voting modalities in the Governing Council of the ECB should not be 
seen  as  a  precedent  for  other  EU-institutions.  It  is  now  up  to  the  Member  States  to  ratify 
therecommendation according to their own constitutional procedure. Let me add that, as the Treaty of 
Nice was already ratified, there seems to be no need for national referenda, something which should 
facilitate this gratification process. 
It  is  noteworthy,  however,  that  both  the  Commission  and  the  EP  favoured  a  more  comprehensive 
revision  of 
the  upcoming 
Intergovernmental Conference. I will analyse the position of these two institutions in more detail. 
the  Governing  Council 
functioning  of 
framework  of 
the 
the 
in 
The Commission's opinion 
3.1. 
On 19 February, roughly two weeks after the ECB made its recommendation, the Commission issued 
a  press  release  in  which  it  indicated  that,  and  I  quote,  "…the  proposed  model  constitutes  a  step 
towards  securing  the  continued  efficiency  of  decision-making  within  the  ECB  in  the  perspective  of 
enlargement." 
The Commission also emphasised that, and I quote, "…the severe limitations of the enabling clause of 
Art.10.6. of the ECB statutes…More fundamental and comprehensive reform of the ECB's governance 
structures could not be envisaged on this basis, but can only be achieved in the wider framework of 
the Convention and the upcoming IGC." 
On the same occasion, the Commission reiterated also the importance it attaches to the "population" 
criterion, a matter I have dealt with above. 
The European Parliament's opinion 
3.2. 
The EP rejected on 11 March the ECB's recommendation, notably on the grounds "that it has been 
widely criticised for being excessively complex". 
In the short term the EP "…reaffirms the existing rule whereby all central bank governors of Member 
States in the eurozone have full and unrestricted voting rights, and whereby the Governing Council of 
the ECB takes decisions by simple majority." 
In  the  longer  term,  however,  the  EP  "…Calls  for  the  adoption  of  a  solution  at  the  next 
Intergovernmental Conference, after consulting the EP, which would distinguish between operational 
decisions, to be taken by an enlarged Executive Board of nine Members, adequately representing the 
BIS Review 16/2003 
 5
 euro  area  economy,  and  strategic  and  general  monetary  policy  decisions,  to  be  taken  by  the 
Governing Council acting  on a double majority, based on the population of the Member States, the 
total size of the economy and the relative size within it of the financial services sector;" 
The essential points of the EP consist therefore of: 
• 
• 
maintaining the statu quo in the short term, meaning that each NCB Governor has a vote;  
requesting the Intergovernmental Conference to create an enlarged Executive Board of nine 
members. Such an enlarged Board may well turn out be similar to the Monetary Board some 
academics and journalists have in mind;  
Most  interestingly,  the  EP  accepts  the  use  of  a  composite  indicator,  based  partly  on  a 
financial criterion.  
 Conclusion 
4. 
Please let me finish my presentation with a few concluding remarks. One of my fellow countrymen, 
Member  of  the  European  Parliament,  stated  during  the  recent  debate  in  this  institution,  less  than 
2 weeks  ago,  that  the  debate  about  the  enabling  clause  seemed  to  result  from  the  fact  that  larger 
countries suffer from a Gulliver syndrome: they fear to be bound and tied up by the Lilliputians who 
outnumber them and, by definition, act in an irresponsible manner. Interestingly, this MEP reminded 
the Parliament that most blockages to European integration originated from the large, rather than from 
the small nations. Similarly, the small nations are the ones who abide punctiliously by the Growth and 
Stability  Pact.  Nevertheless,  the  fear  seems  to  exist  among  larger  Member  States  that  the  smaller 
ones might impose a lax monetary policy, even though it is generally accepted that NCB governors 
vote in the Governing Council on an ad personam basis and in the interest of the entire euro area. To 
this MEP, the whole debate about the enabling clause seemed therefore somewhat artificial and taken 
under unnecessary time pressure. 
All this was two weeks ago and in the meantime the Council approved the enabling clause. Particularly 
important and heartening, in my eyes, is the fact that a handful of guiding principles which the ECB 
considered  of  particular  relevance  were  respected  such  as  'one  member,  one  vote',  ad  personam 
participation, representativeness and transparency. 
Moreover, the ECB recommendation managed to avoid several perilous pitfalls: 
• 
As  I  mentioned,  the  'one  member,  one  vote'  principle  is  maintained,  even  though  all 
governors do not vote all of the time. However, whenever they are entitled to vote, the votes 
of all Governors carry the same weight and this is an important element of fairness between 
large and smaller countries.  
There  is  no  re-nationalisation  of  monetary  policy,  as  would  have  been  the  case  if  the 
Governing Council had moved to a system of IMF-style regional constituencies.  
Similarly,  the  fact  that  no  Governor  member  of  the  Governing  Council  has  a  permanent 
voting right, and that they are all subject to a rotation scheme, is another important element 
of fairness between large and smaller countries.  
Finally, in the steady state, 4 new member countries are expected to become member of the 
second group while many of the remaining countries will gradually move from the third to the 
second  group  as  real  convergence,  or  "catching  up"  in  plain  English,  progresses.  In  this 
respect, the ECB proposal also strikes a fair balance between current and new members, an 
important point I wish to emphasise here in Prague.  
   6 
 BIS Review 16/2003
