 Jaime Caruana: Savings banks - efficiency and an ongoing commitment to 
society. Efficiency of financial institutions 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of The Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the 20th World Congress of Savings Banks, Madrid, 23 May 2003. 
 It is a great honour to participate today in this World Congress of Savings Banks. It is also a pleasure 
to be sharing the panel with two individuals for whom I have the deepest respect. Although I am sure 
they are very well known to you, allow me a few words about these two friends. 
Andrew Crocket has been the General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements ((cid:147)the BIS(cid:148)) in 
Basel for a number of years until last month. This institution, traditionally the global forum for central 
bankers, underwent an important transformation in the mid-nineties.  
Under  Mr.  Crockett(cid:146)s  masterful  leadership,  the  BIS  was  able  to  evolve  and  adapt  itself  to  the  new 
environment.  His  insightful  decisions,  first,  to  broaden  BIS  membership  to  emerging  markets,  and 
second, to pay special attention to financial stability issues, placed the BIS in an excellent position to 
make an outstanding contribution to the  debates on financial matters and, in particular, on financial 
crises  in  recent  years.  Partly  in  acknowledgment  of  this,  Andrew  Crockett  was  appointed  as  first 
Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, in a personal capacity, when it was created in 1999. 
I  want  to  emphasise  that  in  all  these  key  positions  Andrew  has  shown  a  remarkable  capacity  to 
generate new ideas, foster consensus, fuse different views and encourage dialogue, and all this with a 
subtle sense of humour and extraordinary attention for the human touch.  
Let  me  add  that  during  his  term  at  the  helm  of  both  the  BIS  and  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  his 
steady hand has been behind the international financial system(cid:146)s success in confronting the serious 
shocks arising in recent years. 
In the case of Otmar Issing, I have the pleasure of meeting him regularly in the Governing Council of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  where  his  illuminating  presentations  on  economic  developments  in  the 
euro  area  are  pivotal  in  guiding  our  monetary  policy  decisions.  You  should  know  that  Otmar,  an 
academic  of  outstanding  personal  and  professional  integrity,  is  a  truly  remarkable  and  experienced 
central banker. 
 For many years as Chief Economist of the Bundesbank and a Member of its Board, he contributed to 
enhancing the reputation of this institution as one of the most successful central banks in the world. 
When the European Central Bank was created in June 1998 he became its Chief Economist and a 
member of the Executive Board. Over what has been nearly five years he has been deeply involved in 
the  fascinating  tasks  of  putting  in  place  and  managing  the  single  monetary  policy.  Otmar  Issing(cid:146)s 
contribution  to  these  tasks  has,  in  my  view,  been  outstanding.  Bearing  in  mind  the  structure  of  the 
European System of Central Banks, the merit of endowing the euro zone monetary policy with a single 
voice and, more important, a single soul in such a short time has been immense.  
It  is  thus  a  privilege  for  me  today  to  be  accompanied  by  two  very  distinguished  economists  and 
policymakers, from whose experience and expertise I am sure we will all benefit greatly.  
Introduction: The concept of efficiency 
The analysis of efficiency is a matter that has required the attention of a sizable number of papers in 
the literature. Both the approaches adopted and the results obtained differ. Of what there is no doubt 
is how important the idea of efficiency has been and continues to be. It is a pleasure for me today to 
share some thoughts with you on the dimension this concept acquires for the financial system as a 
whole  and  for  savings  banks.  I  would  wish  these  thoughts  to  be  of  a  general  nature;  but  they  will 
inevitably be influenced by the Spanish savings-bank experience. 
Efficiency  relates  the  cost  incurred  to  the  product  obtained.  In  general  terms,  the  idea  of  efficiency 
broadly  refers  to  the  fact  of  using  limited  resources  in  the  best  possible  way.  In  other  words,  an 
economic  system  is  efficient  if  it  does  not  waste  its  resources,  in  such  a  way  that  it  maximises 
individuals(cid:146) well-being. 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 1
 I  would  add  two  further  thoughts  on  applying  the  idea  of  efficiency  to  credit  institutions.  First,  the 
efficiency  of a credit institution  introduces an additional condition; the  issue is not only to maximise 
output by minimising costs, but also not to alter the institution(cid:146)s risk profile. Here, then we have three 
elements output, costs and risk. 
This idea factors in significant constraints and makes it necessary to focus on improved efficiency as a 
balanced process in which attention must be paid to a series of management elements that cannot be 
run down in cost-cutting drives. For example, no clear efficiency gain is achieved if it is done at the 
expense of increasing operational risk. 
Second, in the financial sector efficiency can  be analysed from a dual perspective: from that of the 
system  as  a  whole,  a  macro  perspective,  and  from  that  of  the  individual  institutions,  a  micro 
perspective.  
The financial system and intermediation 
I  shall  refer  firstly  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  which  enables  saving  to  be  channelled  from 
agents  wishing  to  lend  funds,  because  they  have  a  surplus  of  them,  to  others  who  wish  to  borrow 
funds, since they  are lacking financing. Adding to this important function  performed by the financial 
system is that of allowing the transmission of risks to those who have a greater wish or capacity to 
assume it. This is especially important in an environment of uncertainty. 
An efficient financial system will enable a greater volume of funds to be channeled towards productive 
investment  and  therefore  will  help  to  boost  economic  growth  and  to  achieve  greater  levels  of 
well-being. 
But the role of an efficient financial system is not confined solely to the important task of channeling 
savings, liquidity and risks. An efficient financial system should also contribute to improving financial 
stability and reducing procyclicality, i.e. the amplification of business cycles resulting from the interplay 
of the real economy and the financial system. An efficient financial system allows the impact of various 
shocks  to  be  absorbed,  distributing  them  over  a  lengthier  period  of  time.  Conversely,  an  inefficient 
financial  system  overreacts  at  a  later  juncture,  ultimately  impacting  the  real  economy  considerably. 
While we know from recent experience that the interaction between the real and the financial economy 
is increasingly important and intense, we also know that it is likewise very complex.  
This is not only because of the progressive increase in the relative size of financial markets, but also 
because of the growing weight of financial channels in the international transmission of shocks and 
economic conditions: uncertainty and instability on financial markets and the fall in stock market prices 
affect households(cid:146) financial wealth; the cost for companies of resorting to the stock markets to obtain 
financing to undertake new projects rises substantially; financial institutions readjust their strategies in 
step with the new risk context, etc. 
Progress  in  market  participants(cid:146)  practices  and  standards  supported  by  financial  regulation  and 
supervision  that  provide  incentives  for  forward-looking  strategies  are  necessary  elements  of  such 
macro efficiency. In this way, it is possible to gain robustness and room for manoeuvre in good times, 
and at the same time encourage good risk management. 
Efficiency in individual financial institutions 
As regards individual efficiency, deposits institutions have the capacity to pursue selection processes 
among  potential  borrowers  and,  at  the  same  time,  on  the  basis  of  the  relative  risk,  to  set  different 
prices. Moreover, they undertake monitoring, seeking to minimise the risk of borrowers not meeting 
their  obligations.  In  sum,  deposit  institutions  help  reduce  both  adverse  selection  and  moral  hazard 
problems,  while  their  ability  to  transform  maturities  allows  them  to  provide  liquidity.  The  enabling 
mechanism for the proper functioning of this system is depositors(cid:146) confidence in deposit institutions. 
Efficiency in savings banks 
Among overall deposit institutions, savings banks undoubtedly play a significant role, contributing as 
they  do to the  distribution  of market share among a  bigger number of institutions, thereby fostering 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 competition. Likewise, in a sector whose cornerstone is depositors(cid:146) confidence, properly run savings 
banks contribute to reinforcing the stability of the financial system.  
Savings banks are an old and peculiar form of financial institutions, and display a set of particularities 
relating both to the significant social content of their action and to their strong regional roots. I shall 
address these two aspects. 
First,  savings  banks  have,  since  the  outset,  been  characterised  by  their  contribution  to  preventing 
financial  exclusion.  That  is  to  say,  central  to  their  objectives  is  a  concern  to  ensure  that  the  more 
disadvantaged  segments  of  the  population  may  have  access  to  financial  services.  In  this  respect, 
savings  banks  have  always  paid  particular  attention  to  the  financial  needs  of  households  and 
companies integrated into the social fabric. Thus, by granting access to financial services to a large 
segment  of  society,  they  have  made  a  considerable  contribution  to  the  increased  efficiency  of  the 
financial sector and the economy. 
Secondly,  we  should  not  forget  that  savings  banks  allocate  a  high  percentage  of  the  profits  they 
generate each year to financing social projects.  
Last  but  not  least,  the  close  relationship  savings  banks  have  with  the  region  in  which  they  are 
established is another of their differentiating and defining features. Throughout their history, they have 
been  clearly  committed  to  strengthening  the  social  and  economic  fabric  of  their  heartland,  thus 
becoming  key  players  in  regional  development.  This,  in  turn,  provides  them  with  greater  retail 
customer loyalty, which no doubt offers a higher degree of stability for their business model. 
Yet while all the foregoing is acknowledged and given the broad consensus that savings banks should 
retain  their  social  commitments,  I  believe  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that,  above  all  other 
considerations, they are deposit institutions. As such, and so as to promote the sound working of the 
financial system risk management, profitability and solvency should be at the heart of their concerns. 
Indeed,  it  is  precisely  through  controlling  risks,  maintaining  acceptable  profitability  and  a  level  of 
solvency appropriate to their risk profile that savings banks will be able to survive and prosper over 
time.  It  is  only  through  operating  properly  as  business  concerns,  basing  their  management  on 
professional  criteria  relating  to  economic  and  financial  rationale,  that  savings  banks  can  continue 
creating value for society and for their regions. 
Let me turn now for a moment to the Spanish experience. Our (cid:147)cajas de ahorros(cid:148) are also very old 
financial institutions and our story has been a successful one. When I explain the characteristics of the 
Spanish financial system, and in particular the prominent role of savings banks, some of my foreign 
counterparts  ask  about  potential  problems  of fragility  and  inefficiency  and  my  answer  is  always  the 
same. Not only are they neither fragile nor inefficient, but they are also as profitable as their banking 
counterparts, and they are increasing their market share year after year. They are a major contributor 
to making the Spanish banking sector an efficient and competitive one.  
I earlier drew a distinction between macro and micro efficiency. Savings banks in Spain have made 
significant contributions to the macroeconomic efficiency of our system. In bolstering efficiency at firm 
level, certain factors, which I shall now refer to, should be given particular consideration by savings 
banks.  Any  management  action  geared  to  cost-rationalisation  should  pass  a  careful  and  thorough 
cost/benefit analysis so that certain elements of their long-term strategy or their risk profile should not 
deteriorate. Let me mention a few of these elements. 
Investment in new technologies 
Efforts to improve efficiency must be compatible with the challenges posed by new technologies. In 
fact,  investment  in  technology,  in  which  process  savings  banks  have  played  a  notable  part,  is  an 
additional  and  important  mechanism  for  attaining  greater  efficiency.  This  is  because  technological 
development allows processes to be undertaken more easily, simultaneously eliminating certain time- 
and labour-intensive tasks so that operating cost cuts are achieved. In addition the capacity to process 
massive  amounts  of  data  efficiently  in  real  time  allows  for  better  risk  management  and  also  for 
services better tailored to client needs. 
In  line  with  the  foregoing,  appropriate  human  resources  management  will  also  be  conducive  to 
achieving greater efficiency. The importance of the role of human capital is beyond all doubt, and all 
the more so in the sector we are discussing today. 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 3
 Business risk 
In terms of not changing the risk profile while trying to gain efficiency, business and operational risks 
deserve some attention. 
I  have  signalled  before  some  of  the  specific  features  associated  with  savings  banks.  Ensuring  the 
objective  of  efficiency  also  involves  moderation  to  some  extent  in  those  activities  and  risks furthest 
removed from their nature and character.  
A  latent  danger  arising  when  cutting  costs  to  improve  efficiency,  is  an  increase  in  the  level  of 
operational risk. As I mentioned, efficiency improvements may only be understood as such when the 
risk profile remains unchanged.  
As  you  know,  operational  risk  is  increasingly  under  the  scrutiny  not  only  of  supervisors  but  also  of 
institutions.  It  is  not  easy  to  grasp  the  concept  of  operational  risk,  although  the  Basel  Committee(cid:146)s 
definition is a good start: (cid:147)risk of losses resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people 
and  systems,  or  external  events(cid:148).  Although  public  opinion  associates  operational  risk  with  dire 
consequences for specific institutions, you and I know that it is present in all banks(cid:146) daily operations, 
and in all their areas, from the most traditional to the most complex. 
Given the relevance of operational risk, it is not surprising that both supervisors and the leading banks 
are making an increasing effort to measure its impact. Only if progress is made in such measurement 
will it be possible first, to conduct analyses of the impact that strategic decisions (expansion in new 
areas  or  regions,  rationalisation  of  expenses,  outsourcing,  etc.)  may  have  on  the  operational  risk 
profile and, therefore, on the possibility of introducing corrective measures aimed at improving this risk 
profile. As things stand we are still far from achieving - in technical terms- a satisfactorily broad and 
deep measurement of operational risk.  
This is why the Basel Committee, by setting for the first time an explicit capital charge for operational 
risk at banks, has done so avoiding, in the most advanced alternatives, mechanistic formulas that may 
curb  operational  risk  management  developments  in  the  coming  years.  This  is  what  lies  behind  the 
AMA  (Advanced  Measurement  Approach)  proposal:  on  one  hand,  recognition  of  the  growing 
importance of operational risk but, on the other, to allow unrestricted development, without regulatory 
constraints,  of  their  management  techniques.  It  is  difficult  to  find  another  area  where  a  regulator  is 
willing to grant such a broad degree of flexibility as the Basel Committee is prepared to do. In turn, its 
inclusion as a defined regulatory capital heading ensures that institutions will have a strong incentive 
to measure and control such risks. 
Risk management and the New Capital Accord 
To  be  sure,  running  risks  is  an  integral  part  of  banking.  However,  the  leveraged  nature  of  banking 
business, the risks of systemic contagion, the particular weakness of the depositor as a creditor, and 
the interaction between the real and the financial economy all mean that it does not suffice to expect 
banks to manage their risks well. 
There  are  three  additional  factors  overarching  this  management  of  risks.  The  first  is  capital:  banks 
should have sufficient capital of good quality to withstand not only expected losses from activity (which 
should be covered by provisions), but also unexpected losses, so that the continuity of banks may be 
ensured in normal times and in crises alike. This factor was already of vital importance at the outset of 
the  financial  system  as  such,  when  there  were  no  additional  safeguards,  nor  any  regulation  of 
economic capital. 
The  second  and  third  factors  are  common  ones,  as  they  involve  extra  surveillance  of  a  bank(cid:146)s 
management of risks. The first check stems from public supervisory powers: a characteristic common 
to  all  financial  systems  is  the  existence  of  prudential  supervision.  The  second  stems  from  minor 
shareholders and bank creditors (either holders of ordinary or subordinated debt, or mere depositors), 
who exert scrutiny in what we know as market discipline. 
I am sure that these arrangements sound familiar to you: they are the three pillars of the New Capital 
Accord, or Basel II. But the great worth of Basel II is precisely the acknowledgement that these three 
levels  are  part  of  the  structure  which,  since  the  very  inception  of  financial  systems,  has  promoted 
sound banking systems.  
The  three  Pillars  reflect  well-known  aspects  of  the  workings  of  financial  and  banking  systems  over 
many years. And there lies the merit of Basel II. It has been able to identify these three elements and 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 to  integrate  them  so  as  to  achieve  regulation  which  is  more  closely  aligned  to  the  management  of 
banks and which, therefore, is more efficient. 
Let me conclude my remarks by raising the issue of corporate governance and transparency in deposit 
institutions,  including  savings  banks.  One  could  argue  against  paying  much  attention  to  corporate 
governance in savings banks, based on the lack of a shareholder structure. I do not agree. 
First, we should never forget that the issue of corporate governance is related not just to the minority 
shareholder  issue,  but  also  to  that  of  companies  raising  resources  from  capital  markets.  Second, 
saving banks may well need a sound corporate governance scheme precisely because of the special 
ownership and control structure. Third, corporate governance that reinforces transparency is always 
an important contribution to increased efficiency. Fourth, we supervisors see corporate governance as 
a way not just to safeguard minority shareholders, but also depositors, arguably the weakest part of 
the banking framework. 
As  regards  the  efficiency  of  institutions,  we  all  know  that  the  application  of  appropriate  corporate 
governance  rules  improves  the  quality  of  their  management,  their  reputation,  their  stability  and,  by 
extension,  their  risk  profile.  This  is  why  the  Banco  de  Espaæa  is  and  has  always  been  in  favour  of 
strengthening  corporate  governance  and  transparency  in  savings  banks  and  will  assign  more 
resources to analysing both corporate governance requirements and the practical application of these 
requirements at each institution. 
Conclusions 
To  conclude,  let  me  add  that  the  process  of  improving  efficiency  levels  should  not  be  viewed  as  a 
solution for times when the revenue arising on ordinary activity is adversely affected. Rather, it should 
be tackled as a process to be pursued over the medium and long term, in parallel to the improvement 
in risk management systems. 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 5
