 Jean-Claude Trichet: The European Monetary Union and the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Financial  Forum  2003, 
organised  by  The  Wall  Street  Journal  Europe  and  The  New  Economy  Forum,  Madrid, 
25 February 2003.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure and an honour to be with you today, on the occasion of 
the  “Financial  Forum  2003”,  organised  by  the  New  Economy  Forum  and  the  Wall  Street  Journal 
Europe. 
I would like to present my views on the successful set-up of the euro, on the economic and financial 
integration of Europe and on the challenges that the euro-zone will confront going forward. 
The Euro: built on a successful set up 
Set-up of the Eurosystem 
The single monetary policy is formulated and implemented within a sound institutional framework, the 
Eurosystem, comprising the European Central Bank and the twelve national central banks of the euro 
area. Three principles underpin the Eurosystem: independence, transparency and decentralisation. 
The independence of both the European Central Bank and national central banks is enshrined in the 
Treaty. When exercising their powers and carrying out their tasks and duties, neither the central banks 
of the Eurosystem nor any member of its decision making bodies shall seek or take instructions from 
Community  institutions,  from  any  government  of  a  Member  State  or  from  any  other  body. 
Independence  refers  to  institutional,  operational  and  financial  independence.  We  consider  that 
independance  as  defined  above  contributes  to  the  clarity  and  the  credibility  of  the  single  monetary 
policy. 
Transparency and accountability: elected authorities, key economic players, as well as all European 
citizens must be fully informed on the conduct of the single monetary policy. At the European level, the 
ECB maintains a permanent dialogue with the European Council and the European Parliament, as do 
national  central  banks  with  national  institutions.  The  ECB  is  the  only  central  bank  in  the  world  to 
enforce the concept of regular, frequent, real-time communication in the domain of monetary policy. 
Indeed, once a month, immediately after the meeting of the Governing Council, the President of the 
ECB holds a press conference. 
The independence of a central bank and its democratic accountability are two sides of the same coin. 
In this respect, both public speeches and testimonies by the President of the European Central Bank 
and  by  the  Governors  of  national  central  banks,  to  the  attention  of  institutions  as  well  as  public 
opinion,  are  crucial.  An  important  part  of  our  collective  duty  consists  of  tirelessly  explaining  the 
rationale that underpins the Governing Council’s decisions.  
Lastly,  decentralisation:  as  the  subsidiarity  principle  underlies  the  whole  European  construction, 
decentralisation is a major principle of the architecture of the Eurosystem. The Eurosystem is a team 
whose members work in close co-operation, and the team spirit is really strong and fruitful. Monetary 
policy  decisions  are  taken,  at  the  centre,  by  the  Governing  Council,  and  are  implemented  by  the 
national central banks in a closely co-ordinated way. 
ECB governance 
On 3 February 2003, the Governing Council of the ECB unanimously approved a Recommendation for 
a  European  Council  decision,  which  is  aimed  at  adjusting  the  voting  modalities  in  the  Governing 
Council  in an enlarged euro area,  in  accordance  with article  10.6 of the  Statutes introduced by the 
Treaty of Nice. This adjustment became necessary so as to maintain the efficiency and timeliness of 
the Governing Council’s decision-making process. The Recommendation has been submitted to the 
EU Council. We hope that it will eventually be endorsed by the Heads of State and Government after 
both the European Parliament and the European Commission, which has already delivered its opinion, 
have been consulted.  
BIS Review 11/2003 
 1
 As soon as the number of members of the Governing Council will reach 22, the total number of voting 
rights will be limited to 21. The six executive board members will have a permanent voting right and 
the NCB Governors will share the remaining 15 voting rights which will rotate among them according 
to  pre-established  rules.  To  ensure  that  all  decisions  taken  by  the  Governing  Council  are 
representative  of  the  euro  area  economy  as  a  whole,  Governors  will  be  allocated  to  groups  which 
differ with respect to the frequency with which their members will have voting rights. The allocation of 
Governors to groups  will therefore be done in accordance  with a ranking of their respective NCB’s, 
reflecting mainly the size of economies and of financial sectors. All in all, this recent recommandation 
from the Governing Council is testimony to its ability to smoothly adapt its internal governance to the 
challenges posed by enlargement. 
Strategy of the single monetary policy 
The Maastricht Treaty clearly defines the ultimate objective of the single monetary policy, that is to say 
maintaining price stability. However, for attaining this goal, it is essential to clearly define price stability: 
we define it as a year-on-year increase in the overall Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) of 
below 2% in the whole euro area. 
Bearing in mind this objective, our monetary policy strategy is based on two “pillars”. 
We have first assigned a key role to the monetary aggregate M3. This “pillar” is based on a reference 
value  which  is  set  at  4.5%  for  the  annual  growth  rate  of  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3.  The 
concept  of  a  reference  value  does  not  mean  that  the  Eurosystem  is  committed  to  automatically 
correcting deviations in monetary growth in the short term. Naturally, we also follow the components 
and counterparts of M3 closely. In this regard, the development of loans to the private sector, as well 
as the evolution of government finance and capital flows with the rest of the world, deserve a particular 
attention. 
However, it is common sense to say that monetary developments do not account for all the risks to 
price  stability.  This  is  why  we  have  defined  a  second  “pillar”  for  our  monetary  policy  strategy, 
consisting  of  a  broad  range  of  variables  that  are  referred  to  as  indicators  for  the  euro  area  price 
outlook.  
The relatively  low  yields on long-term euro-denominated bonds confirm investors’ confidence  in  the 
new  currency.  This  was  not  the  case  four  or  five  years  ago.  At  that  time,  financial  markets  were 
convinced that the euro would be the weighted arithmetic mean of its legacy currencies and would not 
inherit  the  level  of  confidence  and  credibility  of  the  strongest  of  these.  The  euro  has  actually  been 
founded on a benchmarking principle, not on a convergence towards an average. This may explain 
why the interest rates of the euro were the lowest in Europe from the outset.  
To  sum  up,  we  consider  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  to  be  the 
Eurosystem’s  greatest  contribution  to  fostering  an  environment  which  is  conducive  to  sustainable 
growth  and  employment.  And,  it  is  also  its  greatest  contribution  to  limiting  unnecessary  volatility  of 
output and employment in the short run.  
The  success,  thus  far,  of  our  strategy  does  not  mean  that  our  current  monetary  policy  strategy  is 
engraved in the marble. With the benefit of hindsight, 2003 seems the appropriate point in time to take 
stock of our experience thus far and to reflect on the various elements of the strategy. This issue is 
actively dealt with our Eurosystem’s staff and we plan to complete this evaluation in the course of the 
spring and to publish it. Needless to say that the decision to undertake an in-depth assessment of our 
experience does not necessarily imply that substantial changes are contemplated. 
Successful technical framework 
The launch of the euro on the financial markets, on 1 January 1999, has been an indisputable success 
from  a  technical  point  of  view.  This  is  a  great  achievement  since  many  observers  doubted  of  the 
immediate success of a technical challenge of such a magnitude. Three orientations still shape this 
success: 
• 
the  monetary  policy  framework  includes  a  set  of  instruments  chosen  with  a  view  to 
observing the principles of market orientation, equal treatment, simplicity, and transparency. 
The decentralisation of operations has undoubtedly contributed to the smooth functioning of 
the  framework.  Maintaining  a  close  contact  between  commercial  banks  and  their  national 
central  banks  has  helped  financial  markets  to  quickly  adopt  the  harmonised  practices 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2003
   relating  to  open  market  operations,  eligible  collateral  for  credit  operations  and  minimum 
reserve systems. 
operational  efficiency  is  highlighted  by  the  precise  adjustment  of  banking  liquidity  and 
effective  steering  of  short-term  interest  rates;  the  Eurosystem  has  demonstrated  this 
efficiency, in the days after the tragic events of 11th September 2001, by acting quickly and 
by ensuring a smooth and orderly functioning of the European financial markets. Here again, 
doubts had been previously raised on the ability of the Governing Council to make decisions 
swiftly. 
security is provided by the procedures and systems implemented, both for the execution of 
inter-bank  transactions,  and  vis-à-vis  large-value  payments.  The  inter-bank  market  has 
become  highly  integrated  thanks  to  the  setting  up  of  the  Target  system  for  the  real-time 
transfer of large-value payments throughout the euro area and in other EU countries. 
Let me turn now to the introduction of euro banknotes and coins, which has been the last step of a 
now more-than-twenty-year process of monetary integration. 
Euro changeover 
On  1  January  2002,  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  were  issued  and  became  legal  tender  in  the 
countries of the euro area. This was a unique and highly symbolic milestone for Europe. 
Let me first stress that, thanks to national efforts and the co-ordination by the European Commission 
and the Eurosystem, almost 100 % of cash transactions in the euro area were being carried out in 
euro only two months after the changeover.  
Although the practical changeover to the euro might be considered as an outstanding achievement, 
we should remain vigilant on the following issues: 
• 
First, price  stability. Although some increases in prices of a certain number of consumer 
goods and services have been reported, the first evidence shows that, overall, the effect of 
the changeover on price stability has been marginal. But consumers must keep alert, while 
companies and retailers remain responsible as regards price setting. In the end, competition 
should also contribute to lowering the prices in the short-to-medium term. 
Second,  we  must  closely  monitor  the  risks  of  counterfeiting  of  notes  and  coins:  the 
information  campaign  of  the  Eurosystem  “The  Euro.  Our  money”  was  aimed  at 
familiarising all the European citizens with their new banknotes and coins (and their security 
features)  and,  by  doing  so,  it  helped  them  identify  the  obviously  fake  banknotes.  All 
institutions concerned, both national and European, are co-operating closely to prevent and 
fight counterfeiting. Right now, counterfeit banknotes are scarce and conspicuous. 
 The credibility of the Eurosystem and of the single monetary policy, and the successful changeover to 
the euro represent major achievements. They certainly contribute to the efficient functioning of EMU 
and to European economic and financial integration, as I will explain it right now.  
 EMU: a balanced concept fostering economic and financial integration 
EMU is an economically sound and well-grounded concept. 
A few years ago, it was necessary to convince a great number of sceptics that the euro would really be 
launched. The opinion that the single currency would never exist has of course been disproved by the 
facts. Nevertheless, objections are still being raised from time to time, on the alleged grounds that the 
euro area economy comprehends inconsistencies that could endanger and challenge the viability of 
EMU, all the more so since the European Union is about to welcome new members. 
Some observers thus claim that the lack of co-ordination between European economic policies, in the 
absence  of  a  political  federation,  is  likely  to  deprive  the  area  of  an  appropriate  policy-mix.  Others 
blame the lack of instruments allowing us to tackle asymmetric shocks that may arise, and underline 
the  lack  of  flexibility  or  the  absence  of mobility  of  the  European  labour  force. Others  claim  that  the 
BIS Review 11/2003 
 3
 presumed  economic  divergences  and  structural  gaps  among  euro  area  countries  are  too  large  to 
ensure a viable monetary union. 
How do we respond to these important objections? 
(1) It is not disputable that for EMU to function well, Member States, especially the major ones in terms 
of  GDP,  must  be  aware  of  the  spill-over  effects  that  national  economic  policies  may  trigger.  The 
existence of spill-over justifies the implementation of a close co-ordination between national economic 
policies.  This  is  embodied  in  the  Treaty  itself,  which  obliges  Member  States  to  consider  national 
economic policies “as a matter of common concern” and subject them to a multilateral procedure. 
Practically,  member  States  have  designed  institutions  and  mechanisms  to  promote  appropriate 
co-ordination. We can now say that EMU has in turn been beneficial to the European economic and 
financial integration as a whole. Indeed, a coherent operational framework has been provided for the 
co-ordination of economic policies through close mutual surveillance (under the responsibility of the 
“Euro Group” and the Ecofin Council) and through the implementation of the Stability and Growth 
Pact.  Moreover,  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines,  discussed  each  year  by  the  Heads  of 
States and Governments, help monitor macroeconomic and structural developments in the Member 
States. 
I would like to briefly recall why the Stability and Growth Pact plays such an important role: 
• 
By supervising the fiscal policies of the euro area Member States, the Pact together with the 
Broad Economic Policy Guidelines contributes to ensuring an appropriate policy mix within 
the euro area. It is essential for conducting a meaningful monetary policy, to counterbalance 
the fact that Europe does not have a significant federal budget. 
By  setting  up  a  penalty  system  for  excessive  deficits,  the  Pact  also  helps  prevent 
well-managed economies from having  to bear an unjustified risk premium which  would  be 
transferred  from  poorly  managed  economies  to  them  through  the  channel  of  the  single 
currency. 
 As  regards  the  second  common  criticism  against  EMU,  that  is  to  say  the  lack  of  instruments  to 
respond  to  asymmetric  shocks,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  helps 
countering this argument. Indeed, by urging countries to aim at a fiscal position “close to balance or in 
surplus” in the medium term, the Pact enables them to let fiscal deficits increase, if need be, providing 
that they do not exceed the 3% reference value. In short, it allows them to create a fiscal buffer during 
normal  economic  periods,  that  can  be  drawn  on  to  counter  economic  divergences  or  asymmetric 
shocks. 
The last set of criticisms focuses on presumed economic divergences between economies within the 
euro area. To answer this last objection, I would like to put forward a few ideas: 
• 
Firstly,  monetary  union  does  not  necessarily  imply  that,  at  any  given  point  in  time,  all 
participating countries will have the same rate of inflation or growth, even though the creation 
of the euro was based on the successful completion of a convergence process. For example, 
inflation  divergences  across  countries  or  regions  may  be  accommodated  in  a  monetary 
union as part of the process of convergence of productivity and living standards. 
Secondly,  I  would  like  to  quote  Professor Robert  Mundell,  who  made,  at  the  beginning  of 
1998, an interesting clarification of the Optimal Currency Area theory, and argued that in the 
event of a shift in demand from one member country to another, creating unemployment in 
the  first  and  inflationary  pressure  in  the  second,  flexible  exchange  rates  would  not 
necessarily be able to solve the problem. I quote: “If the argument for devaluation were valid, 
it could be applied to every state, province or sub-region in any country, with a proliferation 
of new currencies, so they could be devalued!”. 
 Even though the EMU relates to a single monetary policy, it also relates to the harmonisation of other 
markets, i.e. goods and services, as well as financial markets. In these areas, the integration process 
is well on track. 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2003
 EMU fosters economic and financial integration 
Financial Europe under construction: the reorganisation of capital markets 
In  1999,  as  soon  as  the  euro  was  launched,  one  of  the  expected  advantages  was  the  prospect  of 
deeper,  larger  and  more  integrated  capital  markets  contributing  to  reducing  the  cost  of  capital  for 
businesses  and  giving  Europeans  a  greater  range  of  saving  options.  These  expectations  have 
become reality in both the money market and longer-term capital markets. 
On the euro money market, the unsecured deposit inter-bank market is highly integrated. EONIA and 
EURIBOR have provided  the market with uniform benchmarks that are fully  accepted  by  all market 
participants.  This  is  reflected,  for  instance,  in  the  huge  development  of  the  euro  interest-rate  swap 
market.  
On the euro bond market, the integration process has registered three main developments: 
• 
a  rapid  internationalisation:  The  introduction  of  the  single  currency  has  fostered  the 
euro-denominated private bond market, by enlarging the potential pool of investors, notably 
international investors.  
increased  competition  between  issuers,  which  has  encouraged  the  standardisation  of 
sovereign  bonds, the gradual convergence towards “best practices”, the development of a 
range of attractive and actively traded benchmark issues (especially for sovereign bonds). 
Besides, competition has also enhanced liquidity as issuers have increased the average size 
of outstanding bonds. 
the modernisation of market structures: besides the rapid development of electronic trading, 
the  consolidation  of  Central  Securities  Depositories  is  also  paving  the  way  for  a  more 
efficient functioning of Delivery-versus-Payment procedures, and easier and safer channels 
of settlement of cross-border securities transactions. This last point is of particular relevance 
for 
functioning  of  European  securities  settlement 
infrastructure is key for the practical implementation of monetary policy. 
the  Eurosystem,  as 
the  smooth 
  On the equity market, the elimination of the currency risk within the euro area has led investors to 
shift from a domestic orientation to a more international, sectoral one. The creation of a wide range of 
pan-European  sectoral  indices  was,  thus,  a  direct  consequence  of  these  changes  in  investor 
strategies.  
Additionally, the  introduction of euro has been  a strong catalyst for mergers and acquisitions in the 
financial  sector.  For  instance,  in  this  respect,  we  can  stress  current  trends  in  mergers  or  close 
co-operation between banks, stock exchanges, securities settlement systems, clearing houses. Had 
the  euro  not  been  created,  would  it  have  been  thinkable  for  the  Amsterdam,  Brussels,  Lisbon  and 
Paris security exchanges to jointly create EURONEXT? 
The large European goods and services market. 
Such changes in the European financial landscape have significantly improved the efficiency of capital 
allocation.  The  euro  contributes  to  enabling  European  savers  to  easily  select  the  most  efficient 
investments. It also helps  the productive sector and  companies to achieve significant economies of 
scale, enhances the transparency of the market and boosts competition and innovation to the benefit 
of consumers.  
Moreover, the pace of internationalisation of the euro area economy has been further spurred by the 
euro. Allow me to give just one example: the level of accumulated foreign direct investment abroad by 
French residents since 1999 amounted to EUR 380 billion (i.e. four times its pre-1999 level). Indeed, 
capital flows between the Euro area and the rest of the world mirror a high degree of attractiveness: 
over  the  years  1999-2001,  the  Euro  area  has  registered  total  inward  direct  investments  worth 
719.8 billion Euros.  
At this point, one may wonder which conditions are required to ensure the success of the euro and 
EMU in the medium term. I believe that we have to tackle three main challenges: structural reforms, 
financial stability and the accession to the EU of new Member States. 
 BIS Review 11/2003 
 5
 Challenges ahead 
Structural reforms 
The first challenge is, beyond dispute, to implement structural reforms in the euro area’s economies. 
Structural reforms were crystallised at the European level in what is called the Lisbon strategy. The 
first  objective  of  this  strategy  is  to  substantially  raise  our  potential  output  growth.  The  second  is  to 
make our economies more competitive. 
Implementing the reforms: the Lisbon strategy 
The European Council meeting held in Luxembourg in December 1997 explicitly mentioned structural 
policies among the items selected to achieve enhanced co-ordination. The Lisbon European Council, 
held in March 2000, further enhanced the medium-term strategy to introduce structural reforms in the 
Union. This strategy aims to make the European Union the world’s most dynamic knowledge economy 
by 2010. It has since been amended so as to include social issues (at the Council of Nice in late 2000) 
and environmental issues (at the Council of Gothenburg in mid 2001).   
What  has  been  achieved  to  date  in  the  field  of  structural  reforms  is  quite  encouraging.  Noticeable 
successes  have  already  been  registered  with  regard 
in 
telecommunications, electricity and gas markets. The current 2002 Broad Economic Policy Guidelines 
evaluation  exercise  is  an  opportunity  to  check  on  the  progress  accomplished  in  reforms  that  were 
agreed in Lisbon and recently reasserted in Barcelona. Before reviewing the priority areas where fresh 
impetus is required, I wish to briefly make two remarks:  
First, the responsibility for structural reforms in the European Union rests with the individual Member 
States.  Consequently,  there  is  a  wide  variety  of  institutional  solutions  and  regulatory  arrangements 
across countries and sectors. I nevertheless consider that such a decentralised approach should be 
considered  as  an  opportunity,  rather  than  a  disadvantage.  It  encourages  “cross  fertilisation”  of  best 
practices through increased co-ordination of Member States’ structural policies.  
My  second  remark  relates  to  the  changeover  to  the  euro.  This  event  has  been  a  major  structural 
reform in itself, i.e. a powerful drive towards restructuring the European economy.  
to  policies,  such  as  new  rules 
An important objective consists in raising the potential output growth of the European 
economy 
If France and Europe seek to secure sustainable growth at levels that are as high as possible, the key 
variable is potential output growth. There are three ways of raising the level of potential output growth:  
First,  to  boost  investment:  the  more  we  invest  and  the  lower  inflationary  pressures,  the  stronger 
potential  output  growth.  For  example,  a  two-point  increase  in  the  productive  investment  ratio 
(productive investment / GDP, 11,4 % during the last five years in France) over the next decade would 
bring about an average acceleration of more than 0,5 point in potential output growth over the same 
period. 
The  second  way  of  raising  potential  output  growth  is  to  increase  the  quantity  of  actual  labour:  The 
European  Council  of  Lisbon  set  as  a  central  objective  the  rise  of  the  employment  rate  of  our 
populations  from  60  to  70  %  in  10  years.  The  Council  also  fixed  two  sub  objectives:  to  raise  the 
employment rate of women to 60 % and employment rate of older workers (from 55 to 64 years old) to 
50 %. As a comparison, the same overall employment rate stands at 75 % in the USA. Although some 
progress has been achieved in this area, the lack of substantive change and the tendency in some 
member states to continue to use early retirement schemes remain causes for concern. 
The  third  way  of  raising  potential  output  growth  is  to  promote  ways  to  boost  gains  in  labour 
productivity: This can be achieved by increasing competition, encouraging enterprise and innovation, 
and  improving  the  workforce’s  skills.  Indeed,  on  the  basis  of  hours  worked,  productivity  in  the  EU 
reached in 2001 83% of the level of that in the US, which points some room for improvement.  
6 
 BIS Review 11/2003
 That strategy should be pursued whilst increasing the overall competitiveness of our 
economies 
The  Euro  area  displays  sound  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  satisfying  price  competitiveness. 
Sound macroeconomic fundamentals make the Euro area an attractive place to invest in : no major 
imbalances may be observed contrary to other major areas. Indeed, the Euro area provides for a low 
and stable inflation environment, roughly balanced external accounts, abundant private savings, and 
sound financial systems. 
Then, in terms of real effective exchange rate, the Euro area has constantly gained in competitiveness 
over the past few years. In the 3rd quarter of 2002, even though the Euro real exchange rate deflated 
by unit labour costs in total economy versus the rest of industrialised countries appreciated by 5.4% 
year-on-year, it is still below its long term average (1987-2001) by 12.3%, according to the European 
Commission calculations.  
If I refer more specifically  to  what  has been observed in the past in France, an economic strategy, 
based  on  a  moderate  increase  in  unit  costs  of  production,  gave  us  an  important  edge:  the 
considerable  improvement  in  the  cost  competitiveness  of  the  French  industrial  sector  from  the 
mid-1980s  has  contributed  extensively  to  boosting  growth.  The  French  economy  grew  faster  than 
major euro area economies from 1997 to 2001 (+ 15,4 % in France compared to + 13,4 % in the euro 
area),  while  repeatedly  recording  a  large  current  account  surplus.  This  improvement  in  our  overall 
cost-competitive situation has progressively materialised into growth, job creations and solid external 
accounts.  
Competitiveness is also linked to European harmonisation in other fields, for example in the service 
industries. Most of the barriers to trade in services appear to be due to national regulations and should 
be abolished or alleviated. 
While the Eurosystem acts mainly as a stimulus in the process of structural reforms, it also plays a 
leading role in ensuring financial stability. This brings me to the second challenge that EMU will have 
to take up. 
Financial stability 
Like  any  independent  central  bank,  the  Eurosystem  has  to  fulfil  two  main  functions:  firstly, 
ensuring price stability, which is a key condition for sustained growth, and secondly, preserving 
financial stability, which has become a critical challenge in a globalized world economy. I insist on 
the highly complementary nature of these two objectives, as price stability is the foundation on which 
financial stability is built. 
The adequacy of European institutional arrangements for financial stability 
The adequacy of European institutional arrangements for financial stability has been reviewed in depth 
at the EU level. In two reports, in April 2000 and April 2001, the Economic and Financial Committee 
(EFC) took stock of the supervisory and regulatory mechanisms in the EU and examined the issue of 
financial  crisis  management.  It  concluded  that  the  current  arrangements  provided  a  coherent  and 
flexible  basis  for  safeguarding  financial  stability  and  recommended  a  further  strengthening  of 
cross-border and cross-sector co-operation. 
I fully share the assessment put forward in these reports and I would like to stress here the special 
responsibilities of central banks, due to: their position at the heart of financial systems, their role as 
liquidity  supplier  to  the  economy,  their  close  and  constant  contact  with  credit  institutions,  their 
contribution to banking supervision and to the safe and efficient functioning of payment systems, and 
at least for some of them, their contribution to the safe and efficient functioning of securities clearing 
and  settlement  systems.  To  sum  up,  an  institutional  framework  in  which  the  Eurosystem’s 
responsibilities  for  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  are  coupled  with  extensive  supervisory 
responsibilities of NCBs in domestic markets, and with reinforced co-operation at an area-wide level, 
seems appropriate to tackle the changes triggered by the current financial trends and the introduction 
of the euro. 
BIS Review 11/2003 
 7
    Two points of particular relevance for the financial regulatory framework 
Let  me  conclude  on  this  important  topic  by  stressing  two  points  of  particular  relevance  for  the 
European financial regulatory framework: 
• 
There are still some barriers to further integration of EU capital markets. In this regard, the 
Eurosystem  welcomed  the  objective  of  the  European  Council  meeting  in  Lisbon  in  March 
2000, to accelerate completion of the internal market for financial services, and to set a tight 
timetable so that the Financial Services Action Plan can be implemented by 2005. This Plan 
is regularly reviewed by European authorities, and progress is being made.  
The  Eurosystem  also  supports  the  strategic  conclusions  of  the  Committee  chaired  by 
A. Lamfalussy  on  the  integration  of  the  European  securities  markets,  ratified  by  the 
European Council meeting in Stockholm in 2001 and approved by the European Parliament 
in early 2002. We are convinced that the implementation of these broad guidelines and the 
new  cooperation  structures  at  the  European  level  will  help  make  it  possible  to  take  full 
advantage of the introduction of the euro.  
In the field of financial regulation and supervision, ECOFIN Council (December the 3rd 2002) 
approved  a  report  by  the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  which  made  proposals 
concerning  the  cooperation  structures  at  the  European  level  for  financial  regulation  and 
supervision. These new arrangements are now being implemented. In this regard, one of the 
statutory  tasks  of  the  Eurosystem  is,  according  to  the  Treaty,  to  contribute  to  the  smooth 
conduct  of  prudential  supervision  policies  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  I  am 
therefore convinced that the involvement of central banks in this issue will remain absolutely 
crucial. 
Finally,  since  the  tragic  events  of  11  September  and  their  impact  on  financial  stability, 
concerns over the potential abuse of the financial system for the financing of terrorism have 
received top priority in international and European regulatory discussions. The international 
community  and,  within  it,  the  financial  community,  should  step  up  its  efforts  to  hunt  down 
money used by organised  crime and terrorism. We shall not  be successful overnight, but, 
today, there is a strong political determination on the part of the international community to 
co-operate  on  this  issue.  As  far  as  the  fight  against  organised  crime  and  terrorism  is 
concerned,  we  can  no  longer  accept  that  certain  players  are  not  prepared  to  observe  the 
rules of international legal co-operation.  
Beyond structural reforms and financial stability, the accession of new Member States to the European 
Union and to EMU is the third challenge that I have identified. The last challenge but not the least. 
Accession of new Member States to the EU and EMU 
Twelve countries from central, eastern and southern Europe are currently negotiating accession to the 
EU, of which ten, according to the calendar endorsed by the European Council, will join the E.U. as 
early as the 1st of January 2004. This provides further evidence of the attractiveness of the European 
framework, which has provided us with both political stability and economic progress for half a century.  
The accession countries have accomplished significant progress in stabilising and strengthening their 
economies and institutions. Observing the accession countries since the beginning of the nineties, we 
see the major improvements that these countries have made on the road towards convergence with 
the EU.  
Nevertheless, there is also general agreement on the fact that the gap in terms of average GDP per 
capita  between  the  accession  countries  and  the  euro  area,  although  diminishing,  still  remains  quite 
significant. On average, GDP per capita in terms of purchasing power parity is around 44% of that of 
the euro area, while in terms of current exchange rates it is only around 22%. The size of the gap, 
combined with the limited growth differentials between the two groups of countries, suggests that the 
process  of  real  convergence  will  be  very  gradual.  Indeed,  real  convergence  is  essential  to  create 
economic cohesion within EMU and promote integration between Members States, thereby helping to 
minimise the risk and the effects of asymetric shocks. 
The Eurosystem, and notably the Banque de France, is following the enlargement process with a great 
deal  of  attention.  Let  me  stress  a  few  points  of  particular  relevance  for  the  Eurosystem  and  for 
8 
 BIS Review 11/2003
   accession  countries  themselves,  on  the  road  towards  catching  up  with  the  EU  and  achieving 
convergence. 
• 
Firstly,  nominal  convergence,  which  is  requested  in  order  to  adopt  the  euro,  must  be 
sustainable  and  therefore  constitutes  a  medium-term  objective,  rather  than  a  short-term 
priority.  Indeed,  the  EU  Treaty  calls,  as  a  prerequisite  for  adopting  the  euro,  for  a  high 
degree of sustainable convergence in the fields of price stability, government fiscal position, 
stability of the exchange rate, and long-term interest-rate levels.  Therefore, nominal and real 
convergence should be pursued in parallel, and are not antagonistic, in the interest of both 
accessing countries and the euro area. 
Secondly, I note  that many  accession countries have already expressed their intention to 
join ERM II as soon as possible after EU entry. This intention is to be welcomed. However, it 
should be clear that the ERM II is not expected to be adopted by new members immediately 
after EU accession, nor is intended to be limited to  only two  years,  which is the minimum 
period  of  time  prior  to  adopting  the  euro.  It  would  be  misleading  to  consider  ERM  II  as  a 
mere  “waiting  room”  before  euro.  On  the  very  contrary,  ERM  II  is  to  be  considered  as  a 
“training  room”.  This  mechanism  will  allow  countries  to  retain  some  limited  exchange  rate 
flexibility  during  the  catching-up  process.  ERM  II  membership  also  offers  a  meaningful, 
flexible but credible framework for : 
- 
- 
increasing convergence with the euro area,  
tackling the challenges faced by accession countries on the road towards the adoption 
of the euro,  
contributing to macroeconomic and exchange rate stability,  
helping determine the appropriate level for the eventual irrevocable fixation of parities. 
This is to be accomplished in the best interest of the candidate countries themselves. 
Thirdly, a sound and efficient banking and financial system is key. Significant progress 
has been made over the past few years in rehabilitating the banking sector and encouraging 
structural  reforms  and 
the 
enhancement of the legal and supervisory frameworks that support the banking sector are 
also  crucial.  They  are  conducive  to  achieving  the  macroeconomic  objectives  of  the 
accession countries. 
foreign  ownership.  Progress 
in  corporate  governance, 
  To conclude, let me stress two words: rapidity and stability. 
Rapidity is a key word. We have not much time to meditate, decide, implement. The structural reforms, 
that we are badly in need of, must be implemented as rapidly as possible if Europe is to be up to its 
historical challenges. The Chinese say “It is later than you think” has never been so true. In any case, 
history itself does not wait for us. And when I look back, over the last twenty years, it seems to me that 
an unfortunately well-founded criticism could be that we have constantly under-assessed the rapidity 
of the stream of history: the rapidity of the deterioration of the situation in the USSR, the rapidity of the 
collapse  itself,  the  rapidity  of  the  enlargement  process,  the  depth,  the  strength  and  intensity  of  the 
“desire of Europe”, which is spreading over in the countries in transition. 
Second word: stability. Economic and financial stability, in a period of excessive volatility and of wide 
boom-bust episode, financial and real stability  appear to be a  very  precious asset. We have built a 
new world: technology has permitted instantaneous communication and incredibly powerful real-time 
computation.  Globalization  has  created  new  cultural,  conceptual,  commercial  and  financial  links 
between  all  economies  including  previously  centrally  planned  systems;  together  technology  and 
globalization are progressively driving us to a unified planet of universal rules and regulations, code of 
conduct and practices, market procedures and market instruments, accounting standards, etc. In this 
new  world,  phenomena  which  had  traditionally  a  local  or  a  national  impact  may  be  amplified  and 
become  dangerous  at  the  global  level:  amplification  of  financial  cycles,  herd  behaviour,  global 
contagion. 
Analysing the opportunities and the risks, and understanding the functioning of our system with a view 
to making it as stable as possible is a very exciting, ambitious and urgent task. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 11/2003 
 9
