Lucas D Papademos: Challenges for monetary policy in Europe 
Address  by  Mr  Lucas  D  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
9. Internationales Finanz- und Wirtschaftsforum, Vienna, 13 November 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
When I accepted the invitation to talk about challenges for monetary policy at this distinguished forum, 
I was not aware that I would be confronted with a challenge before even starting to talk. In this panel, 
we are three speakers from the Eurosystem: Governor Klaus Liebscher, Governor Matti Vanhala and 
myself. As members of the ECB’s Governing Council, we aim to speak with one voice or to “sing from 
the same hymn sheet” when we communicate to the public the Eurosystem’s policies that we have 
jointly  decided.  Even  though  “repetition  is  the  mother  of  learning”  (“repetitio  mater  studiorum  est”), 
according  to  the  Latin  proverb,  we  thought  it  would  be  to  the  benefit  of  everyone  -  and  far  more 
interesting - if there was a certain division of labour among ourselves. I hope we have managed this 
and will not sing the same hymn three times over, but rather perform a “concerto in three movements”. 
I have selected four key challenges the ECB faces in a medium- to longer-term perspective. These 
monetary policy challenges relate to the achievement of objectives in the current circumstances, fiscal 
developments in several euro area countries, the heterogeneity of the European monetary union and 
the  forthcoming  enlargement.  I  would  now  like  to  share  some  thoughts  with  you  regarding  these 
challenges. 
Price stability in the context of a gradual economic recovery 
1. 
Our  first  and  permanent challenge  is, of  course,  the  attainment of  the  ECB’s  primary  objective:  the 
maintenance of price stability in the euro area. Over the past five years, the ECB, together with the 
NCBs in the Eurosystem, has succeeded in delivering low inflation. Indeed, the average inflation rate 
in the euro area since the launch of the single currency has been precisely 2%, in line with the ECB’s 
definition  of  price  stability.  Our  new  central  bank  has  gained  credibility  with  the  markets  and  it  has 
earned the trust of the public at large that it will secure price stability in the euro area as a whole over 
the medium term. It has also set an example of true supranational policy-making for the benefit of all 
European citizens. With a balance sheet like this, some may think that we can afford to lean back in 
contentment  and  settle,  from  now  on,  for  “business  as  usual”.  Given  the  forward-looking  nature  of 
monetary policy, however, and the degree of uncertainty surrounding the functioning of the economy 
and our ability to forecast future developments, a central banker’s job can never be considered done 
and it will never become “business as usual”. Moreover, the ECB has further objectives to attain and 
tasks to perform in a rapidly changing economic and financial environment, not least because of the 
forthcoming enlargement of the European Union. 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 1
Last Thursday, the Governing Council decided to leave the ECB’s key interest rates unchanged. Our 
judgement  on  the  appropriateness  of  the  current monetary  policy  stance  is  based  on,  among  other 
things, the expectation of a gradual economic recovery in the euro area during the second half of the 
year,  in  an  environment  of  improving  activity  in  the  world  economy  as  a  whole.  This  expectation  is 
supported  by  new  data  releases,  several  forward-looking  indicators  including  confidence  surveys, 
recently  published  forecasts  from  official  and  private  sources,  as  well  as  developments  in  financial 
markets. Even though inflation may not fall over the coming months as quickly and by as much as had 
been previously anticipated, the medium-term outlook for price stability remains favourable. The past 
appreciation  of  the  euro  should  continue  to  dampen  import  prices  and  it  is  presumed  that  wage 
increases will be moderate. Finally, the strong monetary expansion, which we have been observing for 
quite a while, is not considered a factor adversely affecting this outlook, for the time being. 
The mild recovery underway in the second half of 2003 is expected to gain momentum over the next 
two years. The pace of economic activity, however, is likely to increase only gradually. Consequently, 
average  annual  real  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  approach  its  potential  level  in  2005,  while 
unemployment  is  not  expected  to  fall  next  year.  In  the  short  run,  the  risks  to  growth  appear  to  be 
limited and balanced. In the longer run, the balance of risks is more difficult to assess: they depend, 
firstly,  on  the  sustainability  of  global  growth,  which  may  be  undermined  by  external  and  fiscal 
imbalances  in  some  parts  of  the  world  and,  secondly,  on  the  ability  of  the  euro  area  economy  to 
generate faster growth internally. 
In  my  view,  the  main  lever  for  achieving  higher  growth  in  Europe  over  the  medium  and  longer  run 
should be reforms on the supply-side of the euro area economy. Eliminating constraints and rigidities 
in  the  labour  and  product  markets  that  limit  mobility  and  competition  is  essential  for  infusing  new 
dynamism  into  the  European  economy.  Such  dynamism  should  to  help  boost  aggregate  demand. 
There is not enough time for me to address the necessary structural reforms. I should say, however, 
that, by improving the functioning and expanding the productive capacity of the euro area economy, 
greater market flexibility and higher productivity growth would also enhance the scope for monetary 
policy’s scope for supporting stronger demand without jeopardising price stability. In the United States, 
our  central  bank  colleagues  have  been  able  to  strengthen  economic  activity  while  maintaining  low 
inflation because of the American economy’s flexibility and high productivity growth.1 
Overall, the medium-term outlook for price stability is favourable and the prospects for stronger and 
broad-based  growth  are  encouraging.  Needless  to  say,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  carefully  all 
developments that might affect our assessment of the risks to price stability. This leads me straight to 
my next point. 
Fiscal developments and the single monetary policy 
2. 
At  present,  fiscal  developments  in  the  euro  area  pose  a  very  serious  challenge  to  economic  and 
monetary policy in Europe. We - and I can speak for all my colleagues on the Governing Council - 
view this matter with deep concern. Observing the manner in which the debate has evolved, and the 
public  discourse surrounding  it  in  several  Member  States,  some of  us  have  a  sense  of  déjà  vu  -  a 
feeling  that  we  have  experienced  it  all  before.  The  process  of  widening  budget  deficits  and  the 
transmission of their effects on long-term growth is usually gradual. The anticipated short-term positive 
effect  of  deficits  on  aggregate  output  is  often  supported  by  arguments  focusing  on  their  immediate 
direct  impact  while  neglecting  their  indirect  and  long-term  unfavourable  consequences.  Since  the 
process is gradual, there are often, depending on the prevailing economic situation and the initial fiscal 
position,  no  visible  strong  indications  of  the  ultimate  adverse  effects  of  persistently  high  budget 
deficits. As Paul Volcker once said: “Things continue in government unless you feel a crisis. In fact, we 
didn’t  have  a  crisis,  so  the  deficit  persisted.”  As  we  know  from  experience  in  many  countries,  the 
necessary  adjustment  for  correcting  growing  and  persistent  fiscal  imbalances  can  be  painful. 
Moreover, in situations when the initial fiscal position of a country is unsatisfactory, as reflected not 
only in the budget deficit but also in the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the size of the unfunded future 
liabilities of the social security system, an expansionary fiscal policy and the concomitant widening of 
the deficit may not have a positive effect on economic activity, even in the short run. In such situations, 
                                                      
1  See  Robert  Gordon 
the  American  Frontier” 
(http://faculty-web.at.northwestern.edu/economics/gordon/355.pdf)  for  comparisons  of  productivity  growth  rates  and  living 
standards between the European Union and the US. 
“Two  Centuries  of  Economic  Growth:  Europe  Chasing 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2003
households and investors are likely to adjust their own spending in view of the perceived inevitable 
need for the government to reverse the fiscal stance in the future. 
Sound public finances are beneficial for the economy for several reasons. In particular, because they 
sustain  consumer  and  investor  confidence  and  thus  contribute  to  growth  and  employment. 
Furthermore, a credible and respected fiscal policy framework is all the more important in a monetary 
union.  In  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  the  EU  has  given  itself  such  a  framework.  If  we  -  the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  -  are  now  insisting  that  the  rules  should  be  fully  abided  by  and 
implemented in every respect, this is not out of a mere concern for procedure. Of course, fiddling with 
procedures and timetables can harm the credibility and public acceptance of the Pact. What has not 
been sufficiently emphasised, however, in the public debate is the economic rationale behind the Pact. 
Let me elaborate: 
In  a  large  single  currency  area,  unsustainable  fiscal  policies  and  excessive  deficit  financing  in  one 
country  can  become  more  tempting,  since  the  “punishment”  in  the  form  of  higher  interest  rates  is 
spread over all member countries and might be imposed with some delay. The temptation to “free-
ride” and the associated negative externalities it implies for all other member states need to be limited 
by  a  set  of  rules  effectively  discouraging  excessive  fiscal  laxity.  The  current  debate  about  a  more 
flexible “interpretation” of the provisions of the Pact can damage the credibility of the overall economic 
policy framework in the euro area. Moreover, part of this debate is beside the point. 
The Pact already allows for considerable flexibility in the conduct of fiscal policy and in the application 
of the Pact’s rules. The Pact does take into account that national budgets also need flexibility to adapt 
to the economic situation, especially since the single monetary policy has to focus on price stability in 
the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Such  flexibility  is  best  provided  via  the  so-called  automatic  stabilisers: 
revenues and spending can vary in a proportionate and smooth way throughout the economic cycle, 
while deficits and surpluses should broadly balance each other out in the course of time. A balanced 
budget over the medium term not only contributes to the sustainability of public finances but it also 
allows fiscal policy to play an output-stabilising role. 
We  sometimes  hear  these  days  siren  songs  about  abandoning  the  Pact,  so  as  to  “give  growth  a 
chance”,  as  if  policy  makers  were  confronted  with  a  choice  between  stability  and  growth.  This  is  a 
fallacy: stability and growth are not, in general, conflicting economic objectives. Rather, they reinforce 
each  other.  A  credible  consolidation  of  public  finances,  especially  if  embedded  in  a  comprehensive 
medium-term strategy of expenditure reform, will enhance confidence and contribute to growth. The 
Pact provides a fiscal policy framework which aims to promote both stability and growth, as suggested 
by its name. 
In what way does the current state of public finances in the euro area pose a challenge to the conduct 
of monetary policy? There is no straightforward relationship in the short run between the budgetary 
situation  and  the  monetary  policy  stance,  since  several  other  factors  also  determine  economic  and 
financial  conditions  and  the  outlook  for  price  stability  and,  therefore,  influence  the  decisions  of  the 
central bank. It is also not easy to identify a simple relationship between high budget deficits and the 
level of interest rates, not least because economic agents’ expectations, including expectations about 
the future course of fiscal policy, play a crucial linking role. That said, both theory and evidence teach 
us  that  over  longer  periods  of  time,  and  “other  things  being  equal”,  imprudent  fiscal  policies  and  a 
stability-oriented  monetary  policy  will  become  incompatible  and  will  eventually  clash.  Such  a 
constellation of policies - given the commitment of monetary policy to price stability - will have adverse 
effects on growth. 
Monetary policy in a heterogeneous economic area 
3. 
The challenge posed by fiscal developments in the euro area is - hopefully - of a transitory nature. 
Other challenges may be of a more permanent nature. I am referring to the challenge of defining a 
monetary  policy  for  a  single  currency  area,  in  which  regional  inflation  rates  and  growth  dynamics 
continue to exhibit certain divergences. The forthcoming large-scale enlargement of the EU, and later 
on, of the euro area, is unlikely to diminish this challenge. Allow me to address these issues in turn. 
Differences in inflation rates across the euro area have, after a significant decline in the first year of 
monetary  union,  increased  again  in  2000  and  remained  stable  for  the  rest  of  the  period  until  now. 
Even though in terms of size the inflation differentials are not noticeably different from those observed 
across regions of the US, they are more persistent on this side of the Atlantic. 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 3
From  theory,  it  is  clear  that  participation  in  a  monetary  union  -  where  domestic  monetary  and 
exchange  rate  policies  are  no  longer  available  to  correct  for  country-specific  imbalances  -  makes 
relative  price  and  wage  flexibility  as  well  as  factor  mobility  increasingly  important  as  alternative 
adjustment mechanisms. Does that mean that we should accept inflation differentials as a “normal” 
phenomenon in a large and heterogeneous economy like the euro area? Any economist proud of his 
profession has the answer ready: “It depends.” And in this case, he is right. On the one hand, inflation 
differentials  can  be  “benign”,  for  example,  when  they  are  associated  with  the  process  of  a  gradual 
catching-up of incomes and the general price level. On the other hand, inflation in a particular country 
that  is  persistently  higher  than  the  monetary  union  average  can  be  a  reason  for  concern,  given  its 
effects on competitiveness. However, in these latter cases, policy makers often have means at their 
disposal to address at least part of this problem: for instance, by tackling existing rigidities in wages 
and prices, or the lack of openness and competition in key industries; through liberalisation measures 
and structural reforms; through measures to increase the flexibility of labour and product markets. 
As  regards  growth  differentials,  the  1990s  witnessed  a  significant  convergence  of  real  GDP  growth 
rates, as preparations for the euro got underway. National policies oriented towards price stability and 
budgetary  consolidation  as  well  as  moderate  wage  growth  led  to  a  marked  synchronisation  of 
business  cycles.  More  recently,  however,  we  have  also  observed  the  apparent  cyclical  divergence 
between a group of fast-growing, smaller countries and the larger countries at the core of the Union, 
where growth has been sluggish. Several factors can explain these phenomena: first, the “tigers at the 
fringes”  of  the  euro  area  economy  were  those  that  benefited  particularly  from  the  convergence  of 
interest rates towards historically low levels. Nevertheless, the degree of dispersion of growth rates 
during the second half of the 1990s was still lower than that observed in the 1980s and early 1990s. 
Second, over the past three years the pattern of GDP growth rates has converged again. I see the 
cyclical  downturn,  triggered  mainly  by  the  “common  shock”  of  a  large  fall  in  world  trade,  as  a 
determining  factor  during  this  period.  Third,  interest  rate  convergence  may  have  also  greatly 
contributed to the cyclical synchronisation of domestic demand in the euro area. In fact, not only short-
term interest rates have fully converged, but long-term interest rates have also been characterised by 
a sizeable convergence, while disparities in real interest rates have narrowed. In that sense, we have 
evidence that the dynamics of convergence that can be expected to be inherent in a monetary union 
appear to be at work. These developments have contributed to making the transmission of the effects 
of the single monetary policy across euro area countries more symmetric. 
The challenge of enlargement 
4. 
These conclusions should reassure all those who are concerned about the increasing heterogeneity of 
the EU economy as a result of the forthcoming enlargement of the Union - and, later on, of the euro 
area.  Given  that  all  acceding  countries  are  committed  to  the  eventual  adoption  of  the  euro,  and  a 
number of them are eager to do so sooner rather than later, many observers had raised questions 
whether this would put intolerable strain on the cohesion of the euro area and whether it would impair 
the proper functioning of the single monetary policy? 
These  are  serious  questions,  which  require  thoughtful  answers,  not  least  in  order  to  properly 
communicate the impact of enlargement and foster public support. Let me point - briefly and inevitably 
somewhat sketchily - to three main arguments in this context: first, “size matters”, in that the impact on 
euro area aggregates of future entrants into monetary union should not be overstated: the combined 
GDP of the new Member States amounts to around 6% of euro area GDP. Second, the ten acceding 
countries have undergone a remarkable economic transformation in the past decade, with high growth 
rates; inflation rates that are close to the euro area level; with relatively stable exchange rates; falling 
long-term interest rates and a gradual catching-up in terms of real incomes. That said, it is a fact that 
in some countries fiscal developments, persistent current account deficits as well as financial sector 
developments  and  the  employment  performance  are  not  satisfactory  and  will  need  to  be  carefully 
monitored. Third, the Treaty requires a thorough examination of convergence - and its sustainability - 
to assess whether the new Member States are ready for participation in EMU. Achieving a high degree 
of nominal convergence and a significant degree of “institutional” convergence is essential for, first, 
smooth participation in the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERMII) and, later on, successful membership 
in the euro area. Such an approach is beneficial both for the functioning of an enlarged euro area and 
for the performance of the economies of the new Member States within monetary union. The greater 
the degree of the new Member States’ nominal and institutional convergence prior to the adoption of 
the  euro,  the  smaller  the  variability  of  inflation  and  output  across  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Put 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2003
differently, adequate preparation for future expansions of the euro area will help to make the challenge 
of heterogeneity more manageable. 
Let me conclude my “movement of the concerto” with a fitting quote from the American writer Joshua 
J.  Marine:  “Challenges  are  what  makes  life  interesting;  overcoming  them  is  what  makes  life 
meaningful.” In this sense, I see both a very “interesting” and “meaningful” time ahead of us, for the 
ECB and economic policy makers in the European Union. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 5
