Y V Reddy: Towards globalization in the financial sector in India 
Inaugural address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Twenty-Fifth Bank 
Economists' Conference - 2003, Mumbai, 11 December 2003. 
The references for the speech can be found on the website of the Reserve Bank of India. 
 Mr. Chairman, distinguished panelists, participants and friends, 
I am indeed very happy to be, once again, amongst friends - albeit in a slightly different capacity. All of 
you have been totally supportive to me and, I must express my deep sense of gratitude to you for the 
warm and affectionate welcome that you gave for my appointment. My address today is in the nature 
of  sharing  of  some  of  my  preliminary  thought  processes  on  the  subject  of  globalisation  and  the 
financial sector. The presentation today starts with a framework for appreciating globalization and then 
provides some insights in the context of the financial sector, with special reference to banking. In the 
Indian context I would setout some of the initiatives by Reserve Bank of India, which are relevant to 
the issue of globalisation. 
Globalisation: a framework 
The concept of globalization, in the sense in which it is used now, can be traced to the phenomenon of 
nation states. Government-imposed restrictions on movement of goods, services, people and capital 
are less than a hundred years old; in fact, passports and visas and the whole gamut of restrictions are 
a feature of the late 19th Century and the first half of the 20th Century. The nation state put restrictions 
on  its  citizens  in  their  involvement  with  other  nation  states  in  what  was  perceived  as  the  collective 
self-nterest of its citizens. In the context of public policy relating to globalization, a critical issue is the 
trade-off between individual freedom and collective self-interest as also where the burden of proof lies, 
namely, with individuals or national authorities.  
Globalisation has several dimensions arising out of what may be called the consequential enhanced 
connectivity among people across borders. While such enhanced connectivity is determined by three 
fundamental  factors,  viz.,  technology,  taste  and  public  policy,  cross-border  integration  can  have 
several aspects: cultural, social, political and economic. For purposes of this presentation, however, 
the  focus  is  on  economic  integration.  Broadly  speaking,  economic  integration  occurs  through  three 
channels,  viz.,  movement  of  people,  goods  and  services,  and  movements  in  capital  and  financial 
services. 
The most notable achievement of recent globalization is the freedom granted to some, if not all, from 
the tyranny of being rooted to a place and the opportunity to move and connect freely. For example, 
many  Indians  relatively  from  poorer  sections  have  benefited  by  developments  in  Middle  East  while 
many talented professions gained from movement to UK and USA. At the same time, in reality, there 
are several economic as well as non-economic, especially cultural or emotional reasons for people not 
globalising. 
In  regard  to  trade  in  or  movement  of  goods  and  services  across  borders,  there  are  two  types  of 
barriers,  viz.,  what  are  described  as  natural  and  artificial.  Natural  barriers  relate  to  various  costs 
involved in transportation and information over distances. Artificial barriers are those that are related to 
public policy, such as, import restrictions by way of tariff or non-tariff barriers. The pace and nature of 
globalization will depend on the combined effect of technology and public policy, both at national and 
international levels. 
In  regard  to  capital  movement  also,  the  interplay  between  technology  and  public  policy  becomes 
relevant. There are, however, some special characteristics of capital flows. These characteristics have 
highlighted the issue of what is described as contagion, namely, a country is affected by developments 
totally outside of its policy ambit though domestic policy may, to some extent, determine the degree of 
vulnerability to the contagion. In any case, cross-border flows of capital have wider macroeconomic 
implications, particularly in terms of the exchange rate that directly affects the costs and movement of 
people as well as goods and services; the conduct of monetary policy and the efficiency as well as 
stability  of  the  financial  system.  Furthermore,  capital  flows  by  definition  involve  future  liabilities  or 
assets and could involve inter-generational equity issues. 
BIS Review 57/2003 
 1
Developments  in  technology  and  innovation  in  financial  services  impact  both  domestic  and 
cross-border  transactions.  The  implications  for  public  policy  of  such  developments  in  the  domestic 
area are on a different footing in the sense that domestic financial markets are in some ways subject 
to governmental regulation by national authorities while cross-border flows are not as susceptible to 
governmental  regulation.  Finally,  in  the  context  of  cross-border  capital  flows,  in  the  absence  of 
procedures  for  dealing  with  international  bankruptcy  and  facilities  for  the  lender  of  last  resort,  the 
liabilities incurred on private account can devolve on public account. In brief, at this juncture, in respect 
of global economic integration through movement of capital, several risks devolve on domestic public 
authorities, especially in the case of developing countries.  
Globalisation  is  a  complex  phenomenon  and  a  process  that  is,  perhaps,  best  managed  by  public 
policies.  In  managing  the  process,  developing  countries  face  challenges  from  a  world  order  that  is 
particularly burdensome on them. Yet, as many developing countries have demonstrated, it is possible 
for  public  policy  to  manage  the  process  with  a  view  to  maximizing  benefits  to  its  citizens  while 
minimizing risks. The nature of optimal integration, however, is highly country specific and contextual. 
On balance, there appears to be a greater advantage in well-managed and appropriate integration into 
the  global  process,  which  would  imply  not  large-scale  but  more  effective  interventions  by 
governments.  In  fact,  markets  do  not  and  cannot  exist  in  a  vacuum,  i.e.,  without  some  externally 
imposed rules and such order is a result of public policy. 
The  poor,  the  vulnerable  and  the  underprivileged  will  continue  to  be  the  responsibility  of  national 
governments  and  hence  of  concerns  to  public  policy.  Sound  public  policies  at  the  national  level  in 
countries  like  ours  are  very  critical  in  the  current  context  of  levels  of  development  and  extent  of 
globalization. In brief, it is necessary to recognize that nation-states, as those still primarily responsible 
for  social  order  in  the  communities  in  which  people  live,  have  a  duty  to  manage  the  process  of 
globalization. This challenge is particularly complex in the area of financial services, more so in the 
case of banks in the larger emerging economies. 
Globalisation in the context of the financial sector 
At the outset, it would be useful to consider the emerging picture of financial flows as per the latest 
data released by IMF in the context of increasing globalisation. For almost all the years from 1999, the 
current  account  balance  of  advanced  economies  has  been  negative  and  it  is  estimated  to  reach 
US 225 billion in the year 2004 from a positive of US $ 41 billion in 1998. The developing countries, 
which had a current account deficit of US $ 83 billion in 1998, are estimated to have a surplus balance 
of a projected US $ 28 billion in 2004. It is interesting to note that while globalization is expected to 
result  in  flows  of  capital  from  developed  to  developing  countries,  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  turn 
arounds  in  the  current  account  deficits  is  a  temporary  phenomenon.  The  removal  or  attenuation  of 
cross-border barriers to trade and capital flows renders assessment of international financial flows that 
much more difficult to capture in the data.  
It is also interesting to consider the pattern of net capital flows to emerging market economies. While 
private net direct investment has been consistently positive and above US $ 100 billion since 1995 to 
2003, private net portfolio investment which was positive in the years 1995 to 1999 is since negative in 
the  rest  of  the  years.  The  range  during  1995-2003  has  been  from  a  positive  US  $  83  billion  to  a 
negative of US $ 53 billion. It is, thus clear that both in terms of magnitude and stability, private direct 
investment seems to have a significant edge over portfolio investment.  
On the quality of capital flows, it is interesting to note that at the end of 1997, the estimated share of 
Off-shore Financial Centres in the total of cross border assets stood at 54.2 per cent, as per a recent 
study by OECD discussed in the G-20 meeting in Mexico. The study mentions that inadequate access 
to  bank  information  in  such  centres  greatly  facilitates  money  laundering,  smuggling  of  goods, 
counterfeiting  and  financing  terrorism,  etc.  In  any  approach  to  the  policies  relating  to  the  financial 
integration, it may be useful to keep these facts in mind, particularly both quantitative and qualitative 
factors in such flows, particularly in the context of the banking sector.  
As already mentioned, there is an increasing recognition of a distinction between trade integration and 
financial integration and this distinction has been recognized forcefully in a recent study made a few 
months ago by the IMF. The summary of the study reads as follows: 
“The  empirical  evidence  has  not  established  a  definitive  proof  that  financial 
integration has enhanced growth for developing countries. Furthermore, it may be 
associated  with  higher  consumption  volatility.  Therefore,  there  may  be  value  for 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2003
developing countries to experiment with different paces and strategies in pursuing 
financial integration. Empirical evidence does suggest that improving governance, 
in addition to sound macroeconomic frameworks and the development of domestic 
financial markets, should be an important element of such strategies. 
It  might  not  be  essential  for  a  country  to  develop  a  full  set  of  sound  institutions 
matching the best practices in the world before embarking on financial integration. 
Doing  so  might  strain  the  capacity  of  the  country.  An  intermediate  and  more 
practical  approach  could  be  to  focus  on  making  progress  on  the  core  indicators 
noted above, namely transparency, control of corruption, rule of law, and financial 
supervisory capacity……..” 
Apart  from  this  interesting  research  on  the  subject,  on  a  judgemental  basis,  considering  the 
cross-country  experiences,  it  is  possible  to  discern  some  disconnects  between  impressions  and 
reality.  Though  many  developing  countries  have  adopted  significant  policy  measures  for  financial 
integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  capital  flows  both  foreign  direct  investment  and  portfolio 
investment, are predominantly accounted for by a few countries which are not very high in terms of 
financial  integration  with rest  of  the world.  In  other words, de  jure  financial  integration  seems  to  be 
distinct from de facto integration. Furthermore, the way the financial markets as well as international 
financial institutions respond to economies requiring adjustment problems appear to be asymmetrical. 
The financial markets, in fact, tend to be far more pro-cyclical in the case of the emerging economies, 
thus  making  emerging  economies subject  to  greater  volatility  in  flows  than  the  other countries.  It  is 
essential  to  recognise  that  the  capacity  of  economic  agents  in  developing  economies,  particularly 
poorer segments, to manage volatility in all prices, goods or forex are highly constrained and there is a 
legitimate role for non-volatility as a public good.  
Globalization and the banking sector 
It is in this overall scenario, the policy relating to the financial services, and in particular banking, must 
be considered. It is interesting to note that WTO negotiations on financial services have been cautious 
and the commitments of many larger economies in the banking sector are rather particularly limited. In 
other words, in the context of issue of national ownership of financial intermediaries, banks appear to 
have a unique place in public policy. There are several noteworthy features of ownership and control 
of banks in all major economies - irrespective of whether they are developed or emerging. In almost all 
cases,  banks  are  either  widely  held  or  have  substantial  State  ownership.  Furthermore,  there  are 
special  conditions  governing  the  extent  of  ownership,  the  nature  of  ownership  and  control,  and 
transfers of such ownership or control through statutory backing. These are justified since the banks 
are  admittedly  special.  The  discussions  in  WTO  on  Commitments  relating  to  opening  of  domestic 
banking sector to foreign banks/ownership reflects these concerns in most of the major economies. 
It is worth recalling what Sir Eddie George, the Governor of Bank of England had said on the subject 
banks  being  special:  “they  remain  special  in  terms  of  the  particular  functions  they  perform  -  as  the 
repository of the economy’s immediately available liquidity, as the core payments mechanism, and as 
the principal source of non-market finance to a large part of the economy. And they remain special in 
terms of the particular characteristics of their balance sheets, which are necessary to perform those 
functions - including the mismatch between their assets and liabilities which makes banks peculiarly 
vulnerable to systemic risk in the traditional sense of that term.” He is even more forthright in making it 
clear  that  treatment  of  banks  can  not  be  on  par  with  non-banks.  “On  the  other  hand,  I  am  not 
persuaded  that  the  special  public  interest  in  banking  activity  extends  to  non-banking  financial 
institutions, though different functional public interests in many cases clearly do.” 
Data  clearly  indicates  that  banks  continue  to  play  a  pre-dominant  role  in  financial  intermediation  in 
developing  countries.  This  is  understandable  for  several  reasons  viz.  the  savers’  eagerness  for 
assured  income;  inadequate  capacity  to  manage  financial  risks  and  the  fact  that  the  banking 
institutions  in  some  sense  and  in  different  degrees,  enjoy  deposit  insurance  and  either  implicit  or 
explicit guarantee of government. 
It is important to note that banking crisis invariably results in heavy costs to the Government, whether 
they are publicly owned, privately owned, domestically owned or foreign owned. The fiscal costs of 
banking crises are ownership-neutral. 
BIS Review 57/2003 
 3
An important question in this context is whether the role of banks in financial integration in developed 
countries is different from that in the emerging market economies. It is useful to assess the significant 
differences in the structure of the banking industry in emerging vis-à-vis developed markets. 
In  most  emerging  markets,  banks  assets  comprise  well  over  80  per  cent  of  total  financial  sector 
assets,  whereas  these  figures  are  significantly  lower  in  developed  economies.  In  most  emerging 
market  economies,  the  five  largest  banks  (usually  domestic)  account  for  over  two-thirds  of  bank 
assets.  These  figures  are  much  lower  in  developed  economies.  Another  difference  in  the  banking 
industry  in  developed  and  emerging  economies  is  the  degree  of  internationalisation  of  banking 
operations. Internationalisation defined as the share of foreign-owned banks as a percentage of total 
bank assets, tends to be much lower in emerging economies. This pattern is, however, not uniform 
within world regions.  
Finally, a significant feature of banking in developed versus emerging economies, especially in recent 
years, has been the process of consolidation. The most notable difference between the consolidation 
process in developed and emerging markets is the overwhelming cross-border nature of mergers and 
acquisitions  in  the  latter.  In  particular,  cross-border  merger  activity  in  continental  Europe  and  also 
between US and European institutions has been more of an exception rather than the rule. In contrast, 
there has been a sharp increase in foreign ownership of some emerging market banks due to process 
of privatisation often associated with crises.  
An  important  difference  in  this  context  has  been  the  role  played  by  the  authorities  in  the  financial 
sector consolidation process. In mature markets, consolidation has been seen as a way of eliminating 
excess  capacity  and  generating  cost  savings  to  the  institution.  In  emerging  markets,  on  the  other, 
consolidation  has  been  predominantly  a  way  of  resolving  problems  of  financial  distress,  with  the 
authorities playing a major role in the process.  
Indian context 
While there has been a significant progress towards globalisation in the recent past and policy-wise, 
there have been impressive initiatives, the extent to which India is globalised is considerably at the 
lower end of the emerging economies. This indicates enormous opportunities but also challenges in 
terms of transition from a stage of low base. More importantly, the issue of financial integration and in 
particular the integration of banking sector has to be considered in terms of overall sequencing in this 
process of integration with the rest of the world. The overriding issue is not whether to globalise or not, 
but  how  best  to  manage  the  process  of  globalization,  particularly  with  a  view  to  accelerating  the 
process at the current juncture where the global outlook on India and India’s confidence as well as 
competitiveness are strong. 
There  is  now  a  consensus  among  academicians  and  policy  makers  that  trade  liberalization  should 
take  precedence  over  financial  liberalisation.  Even  in  the  context  of  financial  liberalisation,  the 
liberalisation in regard to borrowings in foreign currency should have a lower priority compared to all 
other  capital  flows.  There  is  also  consensus  that  the  foreign  currency  exposures  of  households, 
corporate  sectors  and  financial  intermediaries  should  be  assessed  separately  and  in  a  continuous 
fashion to assess the gains as well as the vulnerabilities to the system. In particular, there is a greater 
recognition  of  the  need  to  put  in  place  appropriate  prudential  regulation  in  regard  to  the  financial 
intermediaries insofar as foreign currency transactions are concerned in all emerging countries. There 
is  virtual  unanimity  that  the  currency  mismatches  of  financial  intermediaries  is  a  major  source  of 
downside risks of financial integration which can be mitigated by monitoring and regulations. Among 
the financial intermediaries, banks no doubt have a unique place. There is also a strong consensus, 
globally,  on  the  importance  of  what  have  been  described  as  preconditions  for  capital  account 
convertibility - in particular on the fiscal front and efficiency of the financial sector.  
In  the  context  of  maximising  benefits  of  financial  integration  and  minimising  the  risks,  the  link  with 
conditions in the real sector cannot be lost sight of. In China, reforms in real sector preceded reforms 
in  the  financial  sector  and  it  was  possibly  the  reason  for  some  vulnerability  of  the  latter.  In  India, 
reforms  in  financial  sector  started  early  in  the  reform  cycle  which  imparts  significant  efficiency,  and 
stability to the financial sector. The financial sector can add competitive strength and growth if reforms 
in the financial and real sectors keep apace. In other words, flexibility in product and factor markets 
play a part not only in capturing the gains from financial sector reform but also more generally from 
globalisation.  A  major  agenda  for  reform  at  this  juncture  for  us,  given  the  impressive  all-round 
confidence in the economy, relate to the structure and functioning of institutions and in particular the 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2003
high transaction costs prevalent in our systems. There are several dimensions to the transaction costs 
- ranging from legal provisions, judicial system, procedures, etc. to attitudes. It is proposed to mention 
a few measures being contemplated by RBI in this direction.  
Some measures by RBI  
At the outset it must be recognized that the improvements in efficiency of the financial sector in India, 
in particular banking sector have won the respect and admiration of most observers, including capital 
markets.  The  banking  sector  in  India  is  poised  for  a  quantum  jump  in  productivity  and  scope  for 
expansion in view of the competitive strengths acquired in Indian industry. Public sector banks have 
shown  substantial  improvements,  though  in  view  of  their  large  presence  and  some  institutional 
constraints, further progress in reform is desirable. The analysis in the Report on Trends and Progress 
of Banking in India a few weeks ago provides an excellent overview of problems, prospects, and areas 
for  further  reforms,  and  hence  that  will  not  be  covered  here.  The  ongoing  efforts  of  RBI,  in  close 
co-ordination with Government and consultations with market participants, especially in moving up the 
policy  as  well  as  regulatory  regimes  to  global  standards,  have  been  narrated  in  successive 
announcements  on  Monetary  and  Credit  Policy  statements  by  Dr.  Rangarajan,  Dr.Bimal  Jalan,  and 
most recently in the Mid-term Review. These narrations would indicate that RBI’s effort is to open up 
the economy, maximize benefits from globalization while minimizing risks and enable as well as equip 
banks  to  face  global  competition.  This  is  an  ongoing  process  and  I  believe  we  in  India  are  better 
equipped now than ever before to globalise with a sense of confidence and pride. Having said this, it is 
useful to mention a few initiatives being considered by RBI at this juncture. 
Governor Jalan in his Inaugural address to this forum in January 2001, said - “The long term vision for 
India’s banking system to transform itself from being a domestic one to the global level may sound far 
fetched  at  present.  However,  it  is  not  beyond  our  capacity  provided  we  have  the  will  and  the 
determination”. It is interesting that this year, the subject chosen relates to globalization and perhaps I 
should  enlist  a  few  measures  taken  by  RBI  to  demonstrate  the  will  and  determination  to  make  our 
banking industry really global.  
Consolidation  
As mentioned by Governor Jalan in his address to this forum in 2002, “In financial systems worldwide, 
todays  buzzwords  are  competition,  consolidation  and  stability”.  There  has  been  impressive  stability 
and  considerable  competition  in  India  but  the  process  of  consolidation  in  banking  industry  has  just 
commenced. The issue of consolidation has been addressed by the Narasimham Committee Report 
on Banking Sector Reforms (1998) but the issue in regard to policy is yet to be pursued vigorously. 
There  are  three  aspects  to  consolidation  viz.  clear  cut  legal  and  regulatory  regime  governing 
consolidation, enabling policy framework especially where several banks are owned by Government, 
and market conditions that facilitate such consolidation, recognising that all mergers and acquisitions 
may not necessarily be in the interests of either the parties concerned or the system as a whole.  
As regards the legal framework, the Reserve Bank is not very comfortable with lack of clear statutory 
provision  regarding  takeover  of  management  of  banks.  In  1970,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  issued 
directions to the banks requiring them to seek the Reserve Bank’s permission or acknowledgement 
before effecting any transfer of shares in favour of any person which would take the holding of shares 
to more than one per cent (subsequently raised to five per cent) of the total paid up capital of such 
banking company. Since shares are acquired first and then lodged for registration, the Reserve Bank’s 
directions create a somewhat piquant situation. To plug the gap, a Bill has now been introduced in the 
Parliament relating to banking regulation. The RBI’s proposals in this regard should reasonably take 
care  of  takeover  of  the  management  by  one  from  another  and  Reserve  Bank  will  have  appropriate 
regulatory  power  to  satisfy  itself  that  persons  proposing  to  acquire  such  shares  are  fit  and  proper 
persons.  
The  procedure  for  amalgamation  of  two  banking  companies  under  Section  44A  of  the  Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (the Act) is easy to follow and cost effective. After the two banking companies 
have passed the necessary resolution in their general meetings representing not less than two third 
value of the shareholding of each of the two banking companies, proposing for the amalgamation of 
one bank with another bank, such resolution containing scheme of amalgamation is submitted to the 
Reserve Bank for its sanction and if sanctioned, by an order in writing by the Reserve Bank, is binding 
not only on the banking company concerned, but also on all shareholders thereof. While sanctioning 
BIS Review 57/2003 
 5
the  scheme  of  amalgamation,  the  Reserve  Bank  takes  into  account  the  financial  health  of  the  two 
banking companies to ensure, inter alia, that after the amalgamation, the new entity will emerge as 
much  stronger  bank.  The  experience  of  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  by  and  large  satisfactory  in 
approving several schemes of amalgamation in the recent past. 
These provisions, however, do not apply to the banks in public sector, viz., the nationalised banks, 
State Bank of India and its subsidiary banks. As regards the nationalised banks, the Act authorises the 
Central Government, after consultation with Reserve Bank, to prepare or make a scheme, inter alia, 
for  transfer  of  undertaking  of  a  corresponding  new  bank  (i.e.  a  nationalised  bank)  to  another 
corresponding new bank or transfer of whole or part of any banking institution to a corresponding new 
bank. Under this procedure, the New Bank of India was amalgamated with Punjab National Bank but 
the experience in this regard was considered to be not altogether satisfactory. Unlike the sanction of 
schemes  by  the  Reserve  Bank  under  Section  44A  of  the  Act,  the  scheme  framed  by  the  Central 
Government  is  required  under  Section  9(6)  of  the  Nationalisation  Act  to  be  placed  before  the  two 
Houses of Parliament. 
The  State  Bank  of  India  Act,  1955,  empowers  the  State  Bank  of  India  with  the  consent  of  the 
management of any banking institution (which would also include a banking company) to acquire the 
business, including the assets and liabilities of any bank. Under this provision, what is required is the 
consent  of  the  concerned  bank  and  the  approval  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  sanction  of  such 
acquisition by the Central Government. Several banks were acquired by the State Bank of India by 
invoking this section. 
Section 23A of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 (RRBs Act), empowers the Central Government, in 
consultation  with  the  NABARD,  concerned  State  Government  and  sponsored  bank,  to  amalgamate 
two RRBs, by issue of notification in the official gazette, with such liabilities, duties and obligations as 
may  be  specified  in  the  notification.  As  in  the  case  of  amalgamation  of  a  nationalised  bank  under 
Section 9(2) of the Nationalisation Act, every notification under this section is also required to be laid 
before both the Houses of Parliament.  
Of course, in the case of a banking company in financial distress and having been placed under the 
order of moratorium, on an application being made by the Reserve Bank to the Central Government 
under  sub-section  (2)  of  Section  45  of  the  Act,  the  Reserve  Bank  can  frame  a  scheme  of 
amalgamation for transferring the assets and liabilities of such distressed bank to a much better and 
stronger  bank.  Such  a  scheme  framed  by  the  Reserve  Bank  is  required  to  be  sanctioned  by  the 
Central  Government  and  has  to  be  notified  in  the  official  gazette.  As  in  case  of  amalgamation 
sanctioned by the Central Government under the Nationalisation Act and RRBs Act, the notification 
issued for compulsory amalgamation under Section 45 of the Act is also required to be placed before 
the two Houses of Parliament.  
One area of concern to the Reserve Bank is amalgamation of non-banking companies with banking 
companies as the law does not impose any obligation on the part of such non-banking company (for 
that matter, even of the concerned banking company) to seek the Reserve Bank’s regulatory approval 
before filing the scheme of amalgamation in the High Courts under Sections 391 of the Companies 
Act,  1956.  To  take  care  of  these  gaps,  Reserve  Bank  has  proposed  some  amendments  to  the 
legislation on Banking Regulation Act that amalgamation of a non-banking company with a banking 
company will be made by following the similar procedure which is applicable for amalgamation of two 
banking companies.  
Payment system 
Payment and settlement systems in India have had a long history. The current predominant mode of 
funds settlement is through the clearing process - achieved by the functioning of about 1050 clearing 
houses in the country. These clearing houses function on the basis of the ‘Uniform Regulations and 
Rules  for  Bankers’  Clearing  Houses’  (URR),  a  model  regulation  propounded  by  the  Reserve  Bank. 
Though  the  systems  are  predominantly  confined  to  cheque  clearing,  many  other  types  have  also 
gained  significance  -  such  as  electronic  payment  and  settlement,  securities  settlement,  and  foreign 
exchange settlement. All these are regulated by their respective rules and procedures, as in the case 
of  the  Rules  relating  to  Electronic  Clearing  Service  (ECS),  the  Electronic  Fund  Transfer  (EFT) 
Regulations and the bye-laws relating to the operations of the systems of the Clearing Corporation of 
India Ltd.  
6 
 BIS Review 57/2003
The  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Basel,  has  formulated  a  set  of  ‘Core  Principles  for 
Systemically Important Payment Systems’ which are the minimum requirements for a sound payment 
system.  These  requirements  were  also  highlighted  in  the  year  2000  by  the  Bhide  Advisory  Group 
which  examined  the  International  Standards  and  Codes  relating  to  payment  systems,  from  the 
perspective of conformity in the Indian context.  
With the growing importance being ascribed towards payment and settlement systems the world over, 
and in view of their significance for financial stability, most central banks have set up an appropriate 
machinery to regulate and supervise such systems to provide for an explicit legal base for payment 
and  settlement  systems.  In  this  background,  a  draft  ‘Payment  and  Settlement  Systems’  bill  was 
prepared by the Reserve Bank and forwarded to the Government of India. 
In  anticipation  of  the  statutory  changes,  certain  preliminary  steps  are  proposed  to  be  taken  by  the 
Reserve Bank to build the requisite infrastructure for having effective supervision over payment and 
settlement  systems.  A  Board  for  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (BPSS)  is  proposed  to  be 
constituted soon. The Board would function in a manner similar to the Board for Financial Supervision. 
BPSS would provide policy directions in areas relating to regulation and supervision of payment and 
settlement systems, approval of payment systems, criteria for membership, various aspects relating to 
admission,  continuation  and  denial  of  membership,  handling  of  offences  etc.  This  initiative  would 
ensure that all the payment and settlement systems in the country are subject to good and efficient 
governance and that they adopt the best practices in risk management which is a prime requirement 
relating to a safe, secure and efficient payment and settlement systems. These arrangements should 
facilitate easy transition to a more formal statutory system. 
Rating of supervision  
The  supervision  of  banks  is,  on  all  accounts,  becoming  extremely  complex.  The  supervisors  are 
required  to  acquire  technical  skills,  exhibit  considerable  judgements  on  systems  and  develop 
inter-institutional interactions on a continuing basis. While every effort is made by the Reserve Bank in 
this  regard,  there  is  considerable  benefit  in  introducing  a  system  of  feedback  from  the  supervised 
banks on the adequacy, appropriateness and quality of supervision. This would help in rating of our 
supervisory performance from time to time and obtain suggestions for improvements from a range of 
banks,  large  and  small  foreign  and  local.  In  the  light  of  discussions  in  the  RBI  earlier  this  week,  a 
decision has been taken to introduce such a system of feedback on supervision from the supervised 
on  a  regular  and  continuing  basis.  We  expect  to  seek  further  guidance  from  Board  for  Financial 
Supervision, due to hold its meeting next week and finalise an ongoing system of feedback. 
It is hoped that with these arrangements, some of the unnecessary elements will be eliminated while 
enhancing quality of supervision particularly in terms of its utility to the supervised and result in overall 
reduction of transaction costs.  
Users’ panel on regulatory instructions  
A Standing Technical Committee on Financial Regulation has been constituted recently to advise on 
regulatory regimes administered by RBI. It is recognised that in spite of existing consultative process, 
several  regulatory  instructions,  while  laudable  in  their  context  are  not  clear  or  unambiguous  in 
capturing operational issues at the implementation stage. On the basis of discussions in the RBI, it has 
been  decided  to  prepare,  in  consultation  with  self  regulatory  organsiations,  a  Users’  Consultative 
Panel consisting of those incharge of compliance in the regulated institutions. The intention is to obtain 
feedback  on regulations  at  the  formulation  stage  to avoid  ambiguities  and operational glitches.  The 
Reserve  Bank  will,  from  time  to  time,  seek  advice  from  select  members  of  the  panel  to  avoid 
burdening all officials in the regulated units. I would seek full co-operation from the banking industry in 
this regard.  
Conclusions  
In conclusion, I would like to emphasise the role of institutions and incentives in ensuring globalization 
that benefits all. The global giants in banking all over the world are manned by Indians, educated and 
trained in India. The best of technology for the most sophisticated banks in the world is provided by 
Indian companies and by Indians in foreign companies. Yet, banks in India do not as yet appear to be 
world class, though I have, no doubt, that our banks could well be on the anvil of being reckoned to be 
BIS Review 57/2003 
 7
on  par  with  international  banks.  My  submission  is  that,  to  reach  global  standards,  and  hopefully 
surpass  them,  we  need  to  focus  on  legal,  institutional  and  transactions  aspects;  and  the  RBI’s 
measures detailed today try to make a small beginning in addressing some of these issues. 
Let me thank the organizers for the opportunity and RBI looks forward to getting the benefit of your 
discussions in this Conference. 
8 
 BIS Review 57/2003
