   Toshiro Muto: Battle against deflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Toshiro  Muto,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  Japan  Society,  New  York, 
26 September 2003. 
 Thank you, Mr. Wheeler.  
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great honor to be here and address Japan Society.  
Today I focus on the Bank of Japan’s on-going battle against deflation.  
Japan’s core Consumer Price Index, which is the Consumer Price Index excluding volatile food, has 
been  going  down  for  the  past  five  years,  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  fighting  against  this 
deflation.  
The Bank of Japan adopted the so-called "zero interest rate policy" in February 1999. After reducing 
the short-term policy interest rate from 6 percent in 1990 to 0.5 percent in 1995, the Bank decided to 
push it down to virtually zero by providing ample liquidity in the market.  
This policy was unprecedented in the history of central banking. In the 20th century, the lowest official 
discount rate was 0.5 percent in the United States between 1942 and 1946, and also in Switzerland in 
1999.  
In  March  2001,  the  Bank  adopted  the  "quantitative  easing"  framework.  In  spite  of  extremely  low 
interest  rates,  "Japan’s  economy  had  failed  to  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path,  and  was  faced 
again with the threat of deterioration." In its monetary operations, the Bank shifted the operating target 
from the short-term policy interest rate to the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank.  
So far, from our experience over the last two and a half years, quantitative easing has been effective 
in  stabilizing  the  financial  markets.  It  has  worked  to  avert  a  credit  crunch,  and  facilitate  corporate 
funding. Through these channels, it has been supporting economic activity.  
The quantitative easing framework has three key pillars.  
The  first  pillar  is  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  providing  the  current  account  balances  of  financial 
institutions with ample liquidity. In fact, the amount of these current account balances is more than five 
times the required reserves. The base money, which is the sum of these current account balances and 
banknotes in circulation, has increased more than 60 percent in the past two and a half years.  
Reflecting such an increase, the balance sheet of the Bank of Japan has expanded significantly. The 
size of the Bank’s balance sheet relative to GDP had been stable around 10 percent for the past 50 
years, but now it is close to 30 percent.  
Naturally,  with the provision of such ample liquidity  in the market, short-term interest rates are held 
down virtually at zero. Despite ample liquidity we provide in the market, nominal interest rates cannot 
decline below zero. This is called the constraint of zero interest rates, which I will touch on later.  
The second pillar is that the Bank is committed to continuing with the current policy framework until the 
core Consumer Price Index shows zero percent or above on a year-on-year basis in a stable manner.  
This  commitment  tends  to  reduce  medium-term  interest  rates  along  the  yield  curve.  It  creates  the 
expectations among market participants that the current extra easy monetary policy will continue for a 
considerable  period.  It  reduces  the  level  of  expected  future  short-term  interest  rates  and  the 
uncertainty  about  the  future  path  of  these  rates.  This  effect  of  precommitment  policy  is  sometimes 
called the "policy duration effect."  
The third pillar is that the Bank is conducting the outright purchase of long-term government bonds as 
a  means  of  providing  ample  liquidity  in  the  market.  The  monthly  purchase  now  is  about  10  billion 
dollars.  
Deflation  is  not  necessarily  new.  Indeed,  we  observe  a  couple  of  deflation  periods  in  the  past.  In 
Japan, prices declined by about one third during five years in the 1880s. In the United States, prices 
fell by a quarter in three years in the 1930s during the Great Depression.  
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 For a little more than fifty years after World War Two, however, we had hardly experienced deflation. 
And, central banks had been mainly concerned with prices "going up" rather than prices "going down," 
and worked hard to put inflation under control.  
I still remember that the Federal Reserve was very concerned about inflation while I was working at 
the Japanese Embassy in Washington, D.C. for three years from 1975 through 1978.  
Around that time, the world economy was suffering from stagflation after the oil crises, and the United 
States, Germany and Japan were pressured to play the role as the "locomotive" of world growth.  
Thanks  to  the  prudent  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  such  dramatic  changes  as  the  entry  of 
emerging  countries  into  the  market  economy,  inflation  has  been  gradually  slowing  down  since  the 
1990s. And now, we have entered the period of global disinflation.  
Japan  is  currently  in  mild  deflation  after  passing  a  disinflationary  stage.  The  core  Consumer  Price 
Index is now around minus 0.1 percent on a year-on-year basis following the decline of a little less 
than 1 percent in the past two years. The extent of deflation in Japan is much smaller than that during 
the Great Depression, which was well over minus 10 percent.  
In addition, Japan is suffering from the burst of asset price bubbles in the late 1980s. Asset prices fell 
dramatically. Now, stock prices are one-third of the peak, and real estate prices are about a quarter of 
the peak during the bubble period. Although stock prices are rising recently, real estate prices are still 
falling. Asset price deflation, the decline in real estate prices in particular, is making a greater negative 
impact on the banking sector than the falling prices in goods and services.  
As  Japan  is  the  only  one  among  industrialized  countries  that  suffers  from  the  decline  in  both  the 
general price level and asset prices, the Bank of Japan is the front runner in the fight against deflation 
among central banks around the world. Under such circumstances, the Bank has been, and will be 
innovative in the conduct of monetary policy.  
One unconventional policy measure is the purchase of risk assets, such as asset-backed securities 
and corporate stocks.  
The Bank now purchases asset-backed securities, or ABS for short, with corporate obligation as the 
underlying asset. We hope the ABS market will grow with our purchase as a catalyst, and that it will 
help strengthen the weakened transmission mechanism of monetary policy.  
As  businesses  rely  heavily  on  banks  for  their  funding  in  Japan,  it  is  an  important  policy  agenda  to 
expand the channels of financial intermediation, such as the ABS market, which are not vulnerable to 
banks’ risk-taking capability.  
With a view to strengthening banks’ intermediation function, the Bank of Japan purchases corporate 
stocks held by commercial banks. This is also an unconventional measure for a central bank.  
In  Japan,  due  to  cross-shareholdings  between  banks  and  businesses,  some  large  banks  hold  a 
substantial amount of corporate stocks. Because of these holdings, banks are exposed to the impact 
of stock market volatility on their balance sheets, which may constrain their risk-taking capability.  
The sale of stocks to the Bank of Japan by commercial banks alleviates the potential negative impact 
on their financial position and enhances their risk-taking capability.  
In  the  course  of  taking  these  unconventional  measures,  we  have  learned  a  number  of  new  things. 
Among these, let me share with you two of them.  
First  is  the  side  effect  of  quantitative  easing.  Within  the  quantitative  easing  framework,  the  market 
function is weakening in the money market. Under zero interest rates, market participants with their 
cautious investment attitude feel little incentive to lend in the money market, and as a result the market 
is  shrinking.  We  firmly  believe  that  the  well  functioning  market  is  quite  important  in  the  efficient 
allocation of financial resources, and we do not in any way take such market shrinking lightly.  
This side effect, however, is unavoidable in my view. In implementing any policy measure, we need to 
weigh  their  effects  and  side  effects  against  the  economic  situation.  And,  we  judge  that  the  positive 
impact of quantitative easing outweighs the side effect of shrinking money market, given the current 
Japanese economic situation.  
Second  is  how  to  maximize  the  precommitment  policy  effect  under  quantitative  easing.  During  the 
period of zero interest rate policy from 1999 through 2000, the Bank announced in its policy statement 
that it was committed to continuing with the policy until deflationary concerns were dispelled.  
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
   Compared  with  this  rather  descriptive  announcement,  the  current  commitment  under  quantitative 
easing is far more concrete and objective. The Bank maintains that it continues with the existing policy 
until  the  published  data  of  the  core  Consumer  Price  Index  show  zero  percent  or  above  in  a  stable 
manner.  
The commitment reduces the freedom about the future course of monetary policy. Because of such 
constraint,  the  policy  impact  tends  to  become more  powerful.  Compared  with  the  zero  interest  rate 
policy, medium-term interest rates under quantitative easing are lower and their volatility is smaller on 
average.  
In fighting against deflation under zero interest rates, we have found that the constraint of zero interest 
rates  on  monetary  policy  is  an  important  issue  for  central  bankers  around  the  world.  From  our 
experience  so  far,  it  seems  that  the  extent  of  policy  constraint  depends  very  much  on  the  factors 
shaping the economic and financial situation.  
One factor, which influences the effectiveness of policy response under zero interest rates, relates to 
the banking system and the financial markets. Both the banking system and the financial markets are 
the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  They  need  to  be  sound  and  efficient  for  the 
transmission mechanism to function effectively.  
In Japan, at the moment the transmission mechanism is not functioning as is described in the standard 
textbook.  The  purchase  of  risk  assets  such  as  ABS  and  corporate  stocks  is  a  policy  measure  to 
improve this mechanism. The banking system has not yet fully restored its soundness and stability, 
and the financial markets have not developed to the degree that they can smoothly provide "multiple 
avenues of financial intermediation."  
The situation is quite different in the United States, where the banking system is sound and the capital 
markets are well developed.  
Another factor, which eases the constraint of policy response under zero interest rates, is room for the 
use of fiscal policy. Even when the effect of monetary policy is constrained, to beat deflation will be 
easier if the government can conduct fiscal policy effectively.  
In  Japan,  the  question  boils  down  to  whether  voters  can  reach  a  consensus  on  effective  further 
stimulus. The present stance of the Koizumi Cabinet is that, until fiscal 2006, the size of government 
expenditure relative to GDP should not exceed the level in fiscal 2002.  
In the United States, it is quite a contrast that people have high expectations for the stimulative effect 
of large federal tax cuts. And, these tax cuts are actually making a visible impact on economic activity.  
Although it is perhaps too  early to tell that Japan’s economy has returned  to a  solid recovery path, 
domestic demand, capital spending in particular, is showing signs of improvement. Toward the end of 
this  year,  we expect Japan’s economy  will gradually recover as the  very pessimistic outlook for the 
world economy subsides. The Bank of Japan will continue with the current extra easy monetary policy 
to give maximum support to the recovery, which appears to be in progress.  
Let me briefly mention our thinking on the exchange rate. As was stated in the G7 Statement in Dubai, 
it is desirable that the exchange rate should reflect economic fundamentals. In the case of Japan, the 
exchange rate stability is important as it strives to escape from deflation.  
The current cyclical recovery in demand may not be enough to conquer deflation. Neither will it alone 
ensure  sustainable  growth.  In  this  regard,  the  importance  of  structural  reforms  can  never  be  over-
emphasized.  
We  are  making  steady  progress  in  structural  reforms.  For  example,  a  national  consensus  is  being 
formed  on  the  fiscal  reform,  and  serious  discussion  is  under  way  about  the  reform  on  the  social 
security system. The government takes initiatives to accelerate the resolution of non-performing loans 
with the target to halve the non-performing loan ratio of major banks by the end of March 2005. The 
Industrial Revitalization Corporation of Japan, which was established in April this year, is vigorously 
dealing with corporate restructuring, which helps banks to resolve the non-performing loan problem.  
On September 22, Prime Minister Koizumi reshuffled his cabinet after he won the party election. Under 
the new Cabinet, he reiterated the commitment that he would continue promoting structural reforms 
aggressively, based on his credo of "no growth without reforms."  
The Bank of Japan, for its part, will continue striving to beat deflation and put the economy back on a 
sustainable growth path by employing all the possible policy measures. Thank you for listening.  
BIS Review 42/2003 
 3
