Matti Vanhala: Challenges for Finnish economic policy in an unstable 
international environment 
Abstract  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Matti  Vanhala,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  conference 
“Monetary policy in 2004”, Helsinki, 9 October 2003. 
 Global economy  
It would appear that global economic recovery is under way at last. The latest economic data from the 
United  States  is  more  convincing,  and  economic  activity  in  Asia  is  relatively  brisk.  Economic 
developments in Russia also deserve a mention, and there is a sense of improved optimism both in 
Europe and the euro area as a whole. It therefore seems likely that we will obtain robust growth figures 
on  a  global  level  in  the  near  future.  Why,  then,  do  I  then  refer  to  an  ”unstable  international 
environment” in the title of my speech?  
The reason is that despite the favourable short-term outlook, sustainable recovery is being affected by 
a  number  of  uncertainties.  Global  economic  expansion  is  starting  to  gather  speed  in  exceptionally 
unstable circumstances. Extremely strong expansionary fiscal and monetary policies are the lifeline of 
industrial  countries.  Although  such  strong  expansionary  measures  can  set  recovery  in  motion,  they 
alone do not create sustainable growth. 
Euro area monetary policy  
Confidence  indicators  show  that  euro  area  companies’  expectations  on  economic  activity  have 
improved  significantly.  Concerns  over  deflation  have  receded,  and  inflation  expectations  have 
stabilised.  In  light  of  this,  the  stance  taken  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  is  lax.  Euro  area  central 
banks  are  now  offering  money  at  the  lowest  rate  ever  in  the  history  of  open  financial  markets. 
Furthermore, banks’ real lending rates are also extremely low. There is no evidence, nor are there any 
indications, to suggest that the price of financing would prevent investments in any of the euro area 
countries.  
Expansionary fiscal policy measures are not the answer to euro area problems  
The failure of one or several euro area countries to pursue sustained fiscal policies that have been 
accommodated to given cyclical conditions is a very serious matter. Although adverse effects will be 
felt throughout the monetary union, the most severe consequences arising from a strong deterioration 
of public finances will be caused to the countries themselves.  
Public finances, within the problematic countries, should be stabilised within a reasonable time span 
by  introducing  a  fiscal  policy  geared  to  restrict  the  growth  of  public  spending.  Where  this  can  be 
achieved, the Stability and Growth Pact has worked the way it was intended. 
However,  it  has  also  been  suggested  that  the  present  uncertain  economic  situation  requires  fiscal 
policy measures in euro area countries that are expansionary in nature. References have been made 
to the United States and the question has been asked as to why Europe us unable to effect as strong 
expansionary measures. Many reasons exist that make comparisons with the United States infeasible. 
Firstly, the expansion of the US public deficit is largely due to an increase in military expenses, which 
can  hardly  be  regarded  as  counter-cyclical  expansionary  economic  policy.  Furthermore,  there  was, 
and  still  is,  substantially  more  genuine  room  for  manoeuvre  in  the  US  economy  in  this  respect. 
Contrary to the euro area, US public finances were clearly in surplus when the country entered into 
recession. For demographic reasons alone the outlook for US public finances clearly outweighs that 
for the euro area. Furthermore, the tax rate is markedly lower in the US in comparison to the euro 
area, which also gives the United States substantially latitude in taxation. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
Finnish economy  
If the expected recovery of the world economy begins, the Finnish economy will, without doubt, follow 
suit. However, forecasts suggest that the growth rate would only return to a 2–3% level.  
One trend in which Finland has taken the lead in international comparisons is population ageing. The 
problem of ageing is not exclusive to Finland, but it has started to manifest itself here exceptionally 
early. In effect, the increase in labour growth in Finland has virtually come to a halt and is expected to 
make a downwards turn in the near future. This will inevitably be reflected in all sectors of the Finnish 
economic policy decision-making.  
In the next few decades, population ageing will pressure Finland into increasing spending on its public 
sector, amounting altogether to some 6% of the GDP. The funds accumulated in the pension scheme 
cover only one third of these upward pressures. Can the remainder be met with increases in taxation? 
I doubt it. In fact, there is increased pressure to reduce taxes further in the future.  
Another  easily  distinguishable  future  trend  is  tightening competition  over  the  location  of companies. 
Finnish  companies  are  increasingly  a  part  of  a  global  business  world  with  operations  in  Finland.  In 
such a world the relocation of operations to places where costs can be kept to a minimum becomes 
the norm. A small, expensive, rapidly ageing and remote country is hardly in the best possible position 
when an international company is contemplating where to locate operations. 
Labour mobility is gradually changing from a theoretical possibility into a reality that shapes economic 
policy. What kind of prospects does Finland have for succeeding in international competition? Political 
stability and security, a reliable legal system, a still solid infrastructure and well-educated population 
are  some  of  the  more  obvious  advantages.  A  highly  educated  labour  force  is  able  to  attract  high 
technology businesses to Finland. However, well-educated Finns may also be tempted to seek jobs 
outside Finland. 
The logic underlying the development of a welfare state is changing. We can no longer presume that 
we first define the service goals and then adjust taxation accordingly to meet the resulting expenses. It 
is becoming increasingly clear that the logic is leading us in the opposite direction. The boundaries 
within  which  the  services  of  a  welfare  state  have  to  be  accommodated  are  progressively  more 
determined in two ways: externally on the basis of international competition among companies, and 
internally  on  the  basis  of  employment,  and  through  it,  the  financial  base  for  public  sector  services. 
Within these constantly narrowing boundaries the expenses caused by population ageing account for 
an ever-increasing share.  
Finland must be able to compensate for the adverse impact of ageing on the labour force by making 
more efficient use of labour reserves. According to forecasts, Finland’s employment rate seems to be 
settling at 68% for a prolonged period. This is far from adequate. If employment remains at such a low 
rate,  the  entire  financial  base  for  the  welfare  state  is  certain  to  disintegrate.  It  is  essential  that  the 
employment rate be raised significantly, and 75% can only be regarded as the minimum objective.  
On the other hand, we need to take active measures to safeguard Finland’s position in the competition 
over  the  location  of  companies.  Delayed  action  in  this  matter  is  but  a  waste  of  both  time  and 
opportunities.  We  need  to  respond  to  the  threats  affecting  the  competitive  situation  of  companies 
before these threats cause permanent damage to our economy. A number of measures have been put 
forward  to  achieve  these  goals,  including  reforms  in  taxation,  labour  markets,  social  security, 
education and entrepreneurship.  
But, above all, what we also need is consensus on the implementation of these measures. Maybe, 
over time, that too can be found. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2003
