 T T Mboweni: Review of the South African Reserve Bank and its activities - 
1998-2003, a preliminary assessment 
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Cape Town Press 
Club, Cape Town, 29 September 2003.  
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen. I thank you for this invitation to interact with you once again. We certainly live 
in interesting times and much has changed in the world over the past five years. These changes have 
also affected the South African Reserve Bank as much as any other institution which has a domestic 
and  international  focus.  We  constantly  face  new  challenges  and  new  circumstances  in  which  to 
conduct our work. The fact that the SARB has risen to meet these challenges says much about the 
fact that it is an international institution par excellence.  
International developments  
2. 
There  has  been  two  key  developments  over  the  last  five  years  that  have  brought  wide-ranging 
changes to the global social, economic and financial order. The first was the introduction of a single 
European currency.  After decades  of preparation, the Euro  was introduced as  a single currency on 
1 January  1999  and  Euro  banknotes  and  coin  were  introduced  on  1  January  2002.  This  currency 
change-over in Europe firmly established the European Central Bank (ECB) as the single monetary 
policy authority for participating countries of the European Union. 
The  introduction  of  the  Euro  was  an  eventful  episode  in  the  history  of  Europe.  Firstly,  the  United 
Kingdom, Sweden and Denmark elected not to adopt the Euro as their national currency on 1 January 
2002,  although  they  are  member  countries  of  the  European  Union.  Secondly,  the  Euro/US  dollar 
exchange rate has shown large swings since January 1999. After reaching a high of just over (cid:128)1 = 
US$1,18  some  four  days  after  its  introduction  in  January  1999,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Euro 
subsequently dropped by nearly 30 per cent to just below (cid:128)1 = US$0,83 by October 2000. 
The second major event was the attacks on the United States on 11 September 2001. These attacks 
highlighted  a  potential  systemic  risk  to  financial  institutions  worldwide  in  the  event  of  a  prolonged 
disruption of their operations. Multi-lateral co-ordination to ensure business continuity in the financial 
industry has received considerable attention since these attacks, and South Africa and the SARB are 
glad to be involved in these initiatives. The Bank has played an active role in the establishment of a 
Financial Sector Contingency Forum, which  is responsible for the  identification  and management of 
potential crisis events that might threaten the stability of the South African financial sector. 
The Bank has also made satisfactory progress with its own business continuity planning to ensure that 
the head office and branch activities would continue functioning in the event of any disruption. 
The  attacks  of  11  September  2001  have  also  contributed  to  increased  international  economic 
uncertainty,  which  has  in  turn  resulted  in  lower  economic  growth  in  developed  economies.  The 
monetary  policy  focus  in  developed  economies  shifted  from  containing  inflation  to  avoiding 
unnecessarily  and  undesirably  low  inflation.  This  has  brought  new  terminology  to  the  vocabulary  of 
central bankers and economists. 
Domestic developments 
3. 
Although 1998 is a mere five years ago, so much has changed in South Africa in the interim that a 
brief reflection on that year is called for. By 1998, our democracy was only four years old and South 
Africa was still re-integrating into the international arena. However, it was already obvious then that the 
country(cid:146)s sound macro-economic policies were delivering the desired results. 
After a period of double-digit inflation covering the largest part of the 1970s and 1980s, inflation was in 
single-digits  in  1995.  It  has  averaged  around  7,8  per  cent  per  annum  over  the  last  decade.  The 
national government was also achieving success with its sound approach to fiscal policy. While the 
deficit  before  borrowing  reached  a  high  turning  point  of  7,3  per  cent  of  the  gross  domestic  product 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 1
 (GDP)  in  the  1992/93  fiscal  year,  it  equaled  3,7  per  cent  of  GDP  for  the  1997/98  fiscal  year  and 
declined further to 2,8 per cent of GDP in the 1998/99 fiscal year. Owing to the reduction in its deficit 
before borrowing, it was clear by 1998 that the national government had managed to slow down the 
growth  in  government  debt  to  sustainable  levels.  Not  only  had  government  proven  by  1998  that  it 
could  avoid  a  debt  trap,  but  it  had  also  successfully  reprioritised  expenditure  and  consolidated  the 
fiscus. 
The introduction on 9 March 1998 of the repurchase system of accommodation and liquidity provision 
to  banks  marked  a  significant  change  in  the  country(cid:146)s  accommodation  system  with  the  repo  rate 
replacing the previous Bank rate. In the five years since its introduction, changes have been made to 
the repo system to improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. The most important of 
these  changes  was  introduced  with  effect  from  5  September  2001,  the  date  from  which  the  SARB 
introduced a fixed repo rate to eliminate any ambiguity from monetary policy signals, which might have 
arisen under the previous flexible repurchase rate system. 
In  1998  we  also  experienced  the  downside  of  international  economic  and  financial  integration: 
financial  turbulence  in  a  number  of  south-east  Asian  economies.  Although  South  Africa  could  not 
escape at the time the negative consequences of such financial turmoil, it became obvious during that 
period that sound policies, rather than crisis management, yield the best results in the long run. This 
has been a guiding principle for the SARB in the implementation of policy over the past five years. 
South Africa barely managed to record an average growth rate of 2,0 per cent per annum during the 
1980s, but this has since accelerated to around 3 per cent per annum since 1994. Despite the recent 
slowdown  in  the  international  economy  and  the  short-lived  global  recovery,  South  Africa(cid:146)s  growth 
performance of 3 per cent in 2002 was relatively sound. After peaking in the first half of 2002, South 
Africa(cid:146)s real GDP then slowed down to an annualised 1,5 percent in the first half of 2003.  
Policy issues 
4. 
A number of policy issues have occupied the attention of the SARB over the past five years in dealing 
with these economic and financial developments. The most important of these are the adoption of an 
inflation target as the anchor for monetary policy; the reconsideration of the Bank(cid:146)s role in the foreign 
exchange market; the elimination of the oversold net open foreign currency position (NOFP); and the 
handling of distressed banks by our bank supervision department. 
Although  the  functions  of  the  SARB  have  changed  and  expanded  over  time,  the  formulation  and 
implementation of monetary policy has remained the centrepiece of our activities. The Bank has used 
different monetary policy frameworks over time, such as credit ceilings and credit controls in the 1960s 
and  1970s,  money  supply  growth  targets  from  the  middle  of  the  1980s,  money  supply  growth 
guidelines  by  the  early  1990s,  an  eclectic  monetary  policy  from  the  middle  1990s  and  inflation 
targeting since 2000. 
Successive mission statements of the Bank confirm a fundamental commitment to low inflation. The 
initial mission statement, published in 1990, entrusted the protection of the internal and external value 
of the rand to the Bank. This was changed by the middle 1990s to the protection of the value of the 
rand. In 1999 the mission was reformulated as the achievement and maintenance of financial stability.  
In February 2000, an inflation target set by the government was introduced as the anchor of monetary 
policy.  This  entrusted  a  single  ultimate  monetary  policy  objective  to  the  Bank:  price  stability.  For 
targeting purposes inflation is measured as CPIX (CPI excluding interest on mortgages) and the first 
target range (for 2002) was set at 3 to 6 per cent. The same target range applies to now. 
Achieving an inflation target through the use of monetary policy became the overriding objective. The 
objective is clearly set as low inflation, and the short-term interest rate (the repo rate), the instrument 
used for monetary policy, is adjusted exclusively for the achievement of this objective. It follows that 
interest rates should and will be adjusted once it becomes clear that inflation will be outside the target 
range in the period ahead if left unchanged. 
Movements in interest rates over the period under review confirms this approach. In 1998 the prime 
overdraft rate of the banks started the year at 19,25 per cent. In March it was lowered to 18,25 per 
cent. However, as the emerging-markets crisis made itself felt, prime rose to a maximum of 25,5 per 
cent in August and September 1998 as one of the policy measures used to contain the decline in the 
exchange rate of the rand during that period, before starting to decline during October. For the year as 
a whole it averaged 21,8 per cent. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2003
 The  exchange  rate  also  depreciated  strongly  in  the  second  half  of  2001.  Interest  rates  were  also 
increased  early  in  2002,  but  with  a  different  objective.  This  increase  was  caused  by  the  need  to 
contain the negative inflationary side effects of the lower rand, rather than to support the exchange 
rate at any given level. 
The  medicine  worked,  bringing  inflation  and  expected  inflation  down.  This  made  policy  relaxation 
possible.  At  the  beginning  of  2003  the  prime  overdraft  rate  was  17  per  cent,  before  being  lowered 
gradually to 13,5 per cent at present, giving an average rate of 16,3 per cent for the first eight months 
of the year. 
An  important  development  since  1998,  coinciding  with  the  adoption  of  inflation  targeting,  was  the 
establishment of a Monetary Policy Committee with responsibility for deciding on the monetary policy 
stance. The establishment of this Committee has contributed significantly to the removal of the myth 
that monetary policy  decisions and reasons for such decisions are clouded in secrecy, taken by  an 
invisible decision-maker not accountable to anybody. The Committee deliberates on recent economic 
and  financial  developments  and  members  reach  consensus  on  the  appropriate  policy  stance  to  be 
adopted.  The  Committee(cid:146)s  consensus  decision  is  communicated  by  means  of  a  detailed  policy 
statement delivered at a media conference. This approach should enhance the public understanding 
of  and  transparency  in  the  monetary  policy  process.  The  media  has  an  important  role  in 
communicating  with  the  general  public.  If  the  public  does  not  understand  that  interest  rates  are 
adjusted with the achievement of the inflation target (and, therefore, price stability) in mind, the actions 
of the central bank will be clouded in mystery and the public is unlikely to support the Central Bank. 
Since 1998 the SARB has also played its part in the improvement of the communication of monetary 
policy decisions and progress towards the successful achievement of the inflation target. The Bank(cid:146)s 
Monetary Policy Forums in the nine provinces are now well-established and facilitate open discussions 
on monetary policy and general economic developments. The Bank(cid:146)s regular reporting to Parliament 
on recent economic and financial developments is also a well-established part of its accountability to 
the citizens of South Africa. In addition, since March 2001 the Bank publishes a bi-annual Monetary 
Policy Review, which includes a fan chart of the Bank(cid:146)s inflation forecast. 
Since  1998  the  Bank  has  been  remarkably  successful  in  containing  inflation  despite  exchange  rate 
instability  and  the  international  financial  turmoil  of  1998  referred  to  earlier.  CPIX  inflation  averaged 
7,1 per cent for 1998 and only rose from a twelve-month rate of 6,5 per cent in February to 7,6 per 
cent  in  October  1998  before  starting  to  decelerate  again.  During  that  period,  tight  monetary  policy 
helped to contain inflation. 
The  gradual  waning  of  inflation  in  2000  and  2001  was  interrupted  when  inflationary  pressures 
mounted in the wake of the sharp depreciation of the rand towards the end of 2001. Essentially driven 
higher by the cost-raising effects of the depreciated exchange value of the rand, CPIX inflation rose 
from year-on-year rates of approximately 6 per cent during the second half of 2001 to 11,3 per cent in 
October  and  November  2002.  Initially,  CPIX  inflation  accelerated  mainly  on  account  of  the  sharp 
increases in the prices of food products which were largely related to the depreciation of the rand. In 
subsequent months, the rise in CPIX inflation became more broadly based. The rise in non-food CPIX 
inflation  resulted  from  higher  rates  of  increase  in  the  prices  of  housing  services,  furniture  and 
equipment, medical care and health expenses, new and used vehicles, and transport running costs. 
The  inflationary  momentum  which  had  built  up  in  the  course  of  2002,  was  moderated  by  a  more 
conservative monetary policy stance and the recovery of the exchange value of the rand since about 
the middle of 2002. 
Inflationary  pressures  therefore  waned  in  the  final  months  of  2002  and  the  first  half  of  2003.  By 
January  2003  CPIX  inflation  has  already  declined  to  10,0  per  cent  and  receded  to  6,3  per  cent  in 
August  2003.  CPIX  is  expected  to  recede  to  within  the  target  range  in  the  immediate  (before 
December 2003) future. 
The exchange rate of the rand has shown large swings over the past five years. In 1998 the exchange 
rate of the rand averaged R5,53 to the US dollar. On 28 August 1998 (with the Russian default on 
their debt signalling what was probably one of the worst moments in the emerging-markets crisis) it 
reached its weakest point during that year of R6,67 per dollar. After a period of relative stability in 1999 
and 2000, a sharp depreciation in the exchange rate of the rand occurred during the second half of 
2001.  During  that  period  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  rand  depreciated  by  34  per  cent, 
before recovering early in 2002. Subsequently the rand has been remarkably steady, and for the eight 
months  January  to  August  2003  the  average  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  amounts  to  R7,90  per  US 
dollar. 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 3
 The elimination of the oversold NOFP was the Bank(cid:146)s third major policy challenge over the past five 
years. The Bank(cid:146)s latest Annual Economic Report mentions that (cid:147)a milestone was reached on 16 May 
2003 when the NOFP of the Reserve Bank recorded its first-ever positive balance, having been in an 
oversold dollar position of more than US$23 billion as recently as 1998(cid:148). This remarkable achievement 
has received surprising little media coverage, but allows the Bank a shift in focus to the reduction of its 
oversold forward book and increasing the official foreign exchange reserves position. 
The fourth policy issue, namely the responsibility for banking supervision, has also seen a number of 
developments. With the performance of this function come also a number of responsibilities. This was 
evidenced  by  events  early  in  2002,  when  satisfactory  solutions  had  to  be  found  for  the  financial 
difficulties experienced by a number of smaller banks and two relatively large ones (Saambou Bank 
and  BoE  Bank).  In  the  event  the  SARB  acted  in  accordance  with  international  best  practice  and 
successfully  avoided  systemic  risk  and  panic  about  the  soundness  of  the  South  African  banking 
sector. 
Commercial  banks  have  an  extremely  important  role  to  play  in  maintaining  financial  stability  in  any 
economy. Financial stability is extremely fickle, and unfortunately often more easily lost than restored. 
No  central  bank  can  maintain  or  restore  the  public(cid:146)s  trust  in  the  financial  system  without  the 
cooperation of commercial banks and the public. 
It should always be remembered that the central bank has at heart the best interests of the financial 
system as a whole. No country, bank or financial system can afford a systemic banking crisis. 
Internal management issues 
5. 
The  SARB  has  had  a  clear  commitment  to  the  transformation  of  its  staff  complement  and  work 
processes  over  the  past  five  years.  I  announced  in  my  first  address  as  Governor  at  the  ordinary 
general meeting of the Bank held on 24 August 1999 that (cid:147)(cid:133) a beginning has been made in drawing 
up a human resources plan which will deal with progressive employment equity in the workplace by 
promoting  equal  opportunities  and  fair  treatment(cid:148).  A  year  later  shareholders  were  informed  that  the 
Bank(cid:146)s  transformation  plan  (cid:147)endeavours  to  achieve  a  staff  complement  comprising  a  minimum  of 
50 per cent Black people and 33 per cent females by 2005(cid:148). Last year shareholders were informed 
that  (cid:147)in  keeping  with  the  objective  of  transforming  the  composition  of  the  Bank(cid:146)s  staff  to  reflect  the 
demographics of the country, an important milestone was reached in the past financial year when the 
total black staff complement exceeded the white staff complement for the first time since the inception 
of the Bank in 1921(cid:148). As in many other areas of responsibility, the Bank is also proud of the progress 
made with the transformation of its staff complement over the past five years. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Indeed  over  the  past  five  years,  many  challenges  were  faced  head-on  by  the  Bank.  Important 
milestones  were  achieved  and  the  stage  is  now  set  for  further  improvements  in  our  work.  Of 
immediate  importance  is  the  achievement  of  the  inflation  target,  maintaining  banking  stability  and 
transforming our staff complement further. 
There are many more challenges ahead. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2003
