Toshihiko Fukui: Toward the further enhancement of financial services in 
Japan  
Speech given by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting of the Council for 
Financial Innovation, Tokyo, 4 November 2003. 
 Today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  Japan’s  financial  system  and  share  with  you  my  thoughts  on  the 
future of financial services.  
Current State of Japan’s Financial System and the Challenges It Faces  
I.  
The Bank of Japan has sought to maintain financial system stability and promote economic recovery, 
by providing ample liquidity under the quantitative easing policy, to overcome deflation. The Bank has 
also  supported  efforts  by  the  financial  services  industry,  using  various  means,  to  strengthen  the 
soundness  and  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  Our  strategy  is  two-pronged,  aiming  both  to 
overcome deflation and to solve the financial system problem at the same time.  
As I have just noted, we face two problems simultaneously. While deflation hampers the resolution of 
the  nonperforming-loan  (NPL)  problem  and  delays  the  revitalization  of  the  financial  system,  the 
malfunctioning  of  the  financial  system  exacerbated  by  the  NPL  problem  weakens  momentum  for 
economic  recovery.  Both  at  home  and  abroad,  there  are  some  who  argue  that  we  should  focus 
exclusively  on  one  of  these  two  problems.  I  believe,  however,  that  most  people  with  a  deep 
understanding of the issue would agree with us that these two problems are inseparable. In short, we 
consider  it  important  to  work  steadily  and  continuously  toward  both  economic  recovery  and  the 
revitalization of the financial system.  
Japan’s financial system has faced several critical moments over the past ten years or so. The failure 
of a number of large banks and securities companies is still fresh in our memories. Many complicated 
issues  remain  to  be  resolved.  For  example,  in  addition  to  the  NPLs  that  may  be  more  directly 
attributed to the bursting of the asset price bubbles, there has been a constant stream of new NPLs 
stemming from structural problems in the Japanese economy, which has made the NPL problem more 
difficult  to  resolve.  Furthermore,  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  financial  services  industry  seem  to  have 
been largely negated by the continued decline of real estate and other asset prices, as the persistent 
economic stagnation has lowered the expected economic growth rate.  
It is true, however, that progress has been made in reform related to financial services and markets. 
Frameworks have been established for the resolution of failed banks and for injections of public funds 
into  troubled  banks.  Necessary  revisions  have  been  made  to  tax  and  accounting  systems,  and 
bankruptcy  laws.  In  addition,  inefficient and  outdated  trade  practices  that  existed  in  the  relationship 
between  banks  and  their  corporate  clients  are  being  reviewed,  as  evidenced  by  the  accelerated 
unwinding of cross-shareholdings.  
Consequently,  it  seems  that  gradual  but  concrete  and  visible  progress,  particularly  among  major 
banks, has been made in resolving the NPL problem that has shackled banks’ business performance.  
NPL Problem  
A. 
The  following  three  points  are  fundamental  to  overcoming  the  NPL  problem:  first,  appropriate 
measurement of the economic value of loans and the subsequent provisioning of sufficient reserves; 
second, removal of NPLs from banks’ balance sheets; and third, accurate determination of the viability 
of  troubled  firms,  followed  by  appropriate  and  prompt  measures  to  reconstruct  or  reorganize  these 
firms  with  close  cooperation  between  the  firms  themselves  and  banks.  The  Bank  proposed  these 
measures in its report titled “Japan’s Nonperforming Loan Problem,” released in October 2002.  
Adoption of the discounted cash flow (DCF) method, a measure recommended by the Bank, led to a 
general  increase  in  banks’  loan-loss  provision  ratios  in  their  financial  statements  for  fiscal  2002. 
Furthermore,  in  fiscal  2002,  major  banks’  NPLs  to  borrowers  classified  as  “bankrupt,”  “effectively 
bankrupt,” or “in danger of bankruptcy” declined by more than 11 trillion yen on a gross basis. Their 
NPLs as disclosed under the Financial Reconstruction Law amounted to 21 trillion yen as of the end of 
BIS Review 48/2003 
 1
March 2003, down by more than 30 percent from a year ago. Some banks recorded the ratio of NPLs 
to total loans below 4 percent.  
Various initiatives are also being made in the area of corporate turnarounds. Private-sector corporate 
restructuring funds, both Japanese and foreign, have become more active. The government-backed 
Industrial Revitalization Corporation of Japan has announced restructuring plans for eight firms as of 
the end of October.  
Japan’s financial system is expected to enter a virtuous circle in which the monitoring function of the 
market  and  more  intensified  competition  will  effectively  encourage  banks  to  take  further  actions  to 
reduce their outstanding NPLs. Resona Group substantially increased its loan-loss provisioning in an 
attempt  to  drastically  shorten  the  time  required  to  regain  financial  soundness,  and  this  attracted 
considerable attention in the market. The new management seems to have decided to take actions 
that put the highest priority on the prompt recovery of its credibility in the market after receiving public 
funds. We commend its actions as representing a bold step toward dealing with its problems.  
Reduction of Exposure to Stock Price Volatility  
B. 
Progress is also being made in banks’ efforts to unwind their shareholdings, which, together with the 
NPL problem, pose a major threat to their financial condition.  
This  is  of  course  not  to  say  that  banks  should  not  hold  stocks  for  any  purpose  whatsoever. 
Considering the potentially high price volatility of stocks as well as the fact that cross-shareholdings 
are  not  held  for  portfolio  investment  purposes  and  cannot  be  sold  in  a  timely  manner,  these 
shareholdings  may  have  a  serious  and  unpredictable  impact  on  banks’  business  given  their  limited 
capital  base.  Banks  can  protect  their  business  from  stock  price  fluctuations  by  reducing  cross-
shareholdings. Moreover, by reducing the allocation of capital to stock price volatility, banks can free 
up some of their capital to support firms. It is worth noting that banks have made steady progress in 
reducing  their  exposure  to  stock  price  fluctuations.  In  fact,  the  total  shareholdings  of  banks  fell  by 
48 percent to 21 trillion yen over the past two years.  
To support the efforts of banks, the Bank started purchasing stocks held by them in November 2002. 
The total value of stocks purchased by the Bank amounts to 1.8 trillion yen to date, and in September, 
the  Bank  decided  to  extend  the  stock  purchasing  period  by  one  year.  Needless  to  say,  the  market 
should be the place in which stocks are traded. Fortunately, trading volumes on the stock market have 
been high since May, and the market seems to be recovering its function. In September, the Banks’ 
Shareholdings Purchase Corporation was reformed so that it could function more effectively. Banks 
are expected to make further steady progress in reducing their shareholdings now that there are three 
outlets in place to absorb their stock sales-the stock market, the Bank, and the government-backed 
organization.  
Implications and Conditions regarding the Removal of Blanket Deposit Insurance  
C. 
Let me now turn to the removal of blanket deposit insurance in April 2005. What conditions should be 
satisfied before the removal? In identifying these conditions, we need to envision what the financial 
system will be like after the removal of blanket deposit insurance. I would like to call attention to two 
points.  
First,  Japanese  firms  will  have  to  survive  severe  competition  and  drastic  changes  in  the  global 
economy. Participants in the market will be subject to constant replacement, as burgeoning firms and 
new firms enter while some existing firms are restructured and nonviable ones exit. The corollary is 
that it is impossible to avoid the emergence of new NPLs and losses arising from defaults at banks.  
This leads to the second point. Banks will also be subject to frequent new entry, exit, and mergers and 
acquisitions,  under  the  strict  governance  of  shareholders  and  depositors.  We  cannot  return  to  the 
period of high economic growth where, de facto, there were no bank failures.  
In  this  sense,  the  removal  of  blanket  deposit  insurance  may  represent  the  last  hurdle  for  banks  to 
overcome before they enter the next stage of competition. In doing so, it is desirable that banks be 
perceived as having passed over the hurdle on their own, not under the government’s initiative as in 
the  past.  I  believe,  therefore,  that  the  following  conditions  are  necessary  when  removing  blanket 
deposit insurance.  
2 
 BIS Review 48/2003
Japanese  banks,  particularly  large  banks  and  core  regional  banks,  must  regain  credibility  among 
financial  market  participants  both  at  home  and  abroad  by  proving  that  they  have  stable  earnings 
power.  To  that  end,  they  must  establish  schemes  for  prompt  disposal  of  NPLs  and  improve  risk 
management techniques, including those for dealing with stock price volatility.  
Banks’ stock prices have recently been recovering rapidly, although these rises reflect the revision of 
overly  pessimistic  views  about  banks’  business  performance.  Banks  must  work  to  reinforce  this 
positive assessment in the market, and this will require a wide range of effective measures to improve 
their profitability. In resolving the NPL problem, for example, it is important to avoid increases in credit 
costs arising from further deterioration in the quality of existing NPLs, by strengthening the measures 
for revitalizing troubled firms and removing NPLs unlikely to be collected. If banks can contain credit 
costs to roughly the level necessary to cover newly emerging NPLs, we can assume that they should 
at least be able to post stable net income.  
If banks find themselves short of capital for dealing with NPLs, they should first raise additional capital 
in the market. We cannot, however, rule out cases where, within a limited time frame until the blanket 
deposit insurance is removed, banks prove unable to strengthen their capital base by themselves. The 
current  scheme  for  public  funds  injection  pursuant  to  Article  102  of  the  Deposit  Insurance  Law  is 
designed to be permanent and functions as the last resort to prevent systemic risk from materializing. I 
believe that, as a comprehensive measure in the face of the removal of blanket deposit insurance, a 
new  scheme  should  be  established  whereby  injections  of  public  funds  are  available  to  banks  in 
difficulties, even in cases where the materialization of systemic risk is not imminent.  
What, then, should the bank supervisory authorities, including the Bank, do to prepare for the removal 
of  blanket  deposit  insurance?  They  need  to  prove  that  they  have  developed  a  sufficient  crisis 
management  system  to  prevent  the  materialization  of  systemic  risk  and  ensure  financial  system 
stability. To prepare for cases where banks’ financial conditions deteriorate significantly, the safety net 
comprises several measures for maintaining financial system stability. Two primary examples are the 
Deposit Insurance System and the Bank’s function as the lender of last resort, including its readiness 
to extend emergency loans when necessary. The crucial issue from now on is to further devise ways 
to apply these safety-net measures in practice.  
The  government  and  the  Bank  have  accumulated  a  great  deal  of  knowledge  and  experience  by 
working together closely in the resolution of failed banks, both large and small. As I mentioned earlier, 
we cannot rule out the possibility of bank failures after the removal of blanket deposit insurance. It has 
become all the more important that the bank supervisory authorities obtain from the market and the 
public the strong trust in their ability to ensure financial system stability, while further improving the 
environment  for  free  and  open  competition.  This  can  be  achieved  if  they  avoid  any  large,  negative 
impact  on  the  economy,  without  causing  significant  moral-hazard  effect,  by  taking  appropriate  and 
swift action whenever the resolution of troubled banks becomes necessary.  
The injection of public funds into Resona Bank was the first case pursuant to Article 102 of the Deposit 
Insurance  Law,  and  it  confirmed  the  effective  functioning  of  the  system.  The  bank  supervisory 
authorities need to further enhance their practical skills for dealing appropriately with other potential 
cases.  
Future Agenda for Japan’s Financial System  
II. 
Next, I would like to share with you my thoughts on several issues that are significant for the future 
enhancement of Japan’s financial services.  
What  are  the  key  issues  ahead?  Answers  may  vary  depending  on  whether  one  is  a  depositor,  an 
investor, a firm, or the manager of an entity that provides financial services. Many of the questions that 
come up in such a discussion should be left to the ingenuity of the private sector to solve. Therefore, 
today  I  would  like  to  focus  on  one  issue.  Even  if  we  assume  that  the  NPL  problem  is  successfully 
overcome, will Japan’s system for credit intermediation prove adequate to the task of offering firm and 
effective support to the economy?  
Problems in Credit Provision  
A. 
The Bank has been providing ample liquidity to financial markets under the quantitative easing policy, 
and this has definitely helped to relieve various concerns as well as maintain financial market stability 
and underpin the economy. However, this liquidity provision by the Bank has not necessarily led to 
BIS Review 48/2003 
 3
increased  efficiency  in  the  provision  of  credit  by  private  banks.  It  is  true  that  the  NPL  problem  has 
been one of the obstacles for the system of credit provision, but there are other factors. For example, 
in spite of the fact that banks are not reluctant to make loans to eligible firms, firms still perceive that it 
is  difficult  to receive sufficient  credit  from  banks.  Such miscommunication makes  the  problem  more 
complex. This implies that the problem lies not only in a lack of efforts among the agents involved, but 
also in structural flaws of the financial system that need to be corrected.  
I would like to give some examples that illustrate this point. I will start by looking at the segmentation of 
the  loan  market.  For  instance,  the  ratio  of  bank  loans  without  collateral  or  guarantees  to  the 
outstanding amount of loans is around 40 to 50 percent for major banks, due partly to the contribution 
of loans to large firms. On the contrary, for regional banks and shinkin banks, the ratio is only about 10 
to  20  percent.  This  suggests  that  small  to  medium-sized  firms’  demand  for  loans,  especially  firms 
without sufficient collateral but with a high potential to increase cash flow, is not being fully met. In 
addition, given the fact that the secondary market for loan assets is still in its infancy and the relatively 
low liquidity in the corporate bond and CP markets, it appears that investors willing to take on credit 
risk are not being given adequate investment opportunities.  
Meanwhile, we observe cases of insufficient segmentation of the functions related to credit provision. 
When  bank  loans  to  firms  are  provided  based  on  short-term  contracts,  they  are  in  fact  refinanced 
many times, and so they function partly as quasi-capital. Banks are exposed to complex combinations 
of risks from sources that differ in nature, such as debt and equity, and this hinders the process of 
reallocating these risks appropriately among suitable investors.  
Thus, I believe that the overwhelming priority is to review the current system of credit provision within 
which deposit-taking and lending business of banks play a dominant role. The system has long been 
in place and can be called an entrenched custom. The current system tends to concentrate various 
risks on banks’ balance sheets. Therefore, to achieve more efficient credit provision, we need to not 
only identify the factors causing this concentration of credit risks at banks but also seek persistently to 
reduce them.  
Toward Seamless Provision of Credit  
B. 
The  current  system  of  credit  provision  needs  to  be  changed  so  that  credit  risk  is  no  longer 
concentrated too heavily at banks but is allocated to a wide range of investors. It is not simply a matter 
of choosing the best type of financing, whether it is traditional bank lending, securitization, or financing 
through capital markets. Rather, it is a matter of designing a system for credit provision that covers all 
types of financing and achieves the seamless provision of credit. I believe that there is a significant 
role to be played here by financial innovation, by which I refer to the progress in IT, enhanced financial 
engineering technology, and the financial theory that supports it. Seamless provision of credit enables 
the efficient use of capital necessary for taking on credit risks. It also aids the process of matching 
interest rates to borrowers’ credit risks. The result is that funds are allocated more efficiently, and this 
contributes to economic growth.  
In relation to this point, I would like to briefly touch upon government financial institutions. The principal 
function of government financial institutions is to complement the role of private banks, extend credit to 
borrowers  that  are  selected  in  accordance  with  policy  objectives  at  the  time,  and  provide  credit 
enhancement. However, due to the increase in postal savings and the resulting rise in funds under the 
government’s fiscal investment and loan program (FILP), Japan Post and other government financial 
institutions seem to have expanded their business activity beyond complementing the role of private 
banks. People point out that the expansion most likely distorts the efficient allocation of credit in the 
economy. For this reason, the government has been reforming FILP and has started discussions on 
the  privatization  of  Japan  Post,  which  was  established  as  a  public  corporation  earlier  this  year. 
Discussion on the privatization should proceed based on the recognition that it is important to build a 
nationwide financial system better suited to the efficient allocation of credit.  
Shift to a Financial System Capable of Seamless Provision of Credit  
C.  
When  banks  and  investors  provide  credit  to  borrowers,  they  measure  the  value  and  risk  of  credit 
based on borrowers’ expected future cash flow. On this basis, they decide whether to take on the risk 
themselves  or  reallocate  it.  Therefore,  the  key  to  successfully  achieving  the  seamless  provision  of 
credit is to ensure that a wide range of agents, including investors, banks, and other financial services 
providers,  fully  perform  their  respective  functions,  such  as  evaluating  and  taking  on  credit  risks. 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2003
Hereafter, I use the term “credit risk” to represent the value and risk of credit. In what follows, I will 
elaborate  on  the  three  credit  risk-related  functions:  the  appropriate  assessment  of  risks;  the 
unbundling and repackaging of risks; and the effective reallocation of risks.  
Appropriate Assessment of Credit Risks  
D. 
First,  credit  risks  should  be  assessed  appropriately.  To  facilitate  the  smooth  provision  of  credit, 
information  regarding  borrowers’  profitability  and  their  financial  condition  should  be  analyzed 
thoroughly and the results of the analysis should be reported to potential lenders accurately. Financial 
data on borrowers are useful for this purpose, but the information publicly available on small or newly 
established firms is limited compared to that on large firms that have access to the capital market and 
disclose data on their financial condition. Banks, with their broad in-house networks of branches and 
sales  staff,  have  an  advantage  over  other  financial  services  providers  in  originating  credits  through 
their ability to obtain and analyze information on borrowers.  
Having said this, however, banks’ available capital is limited, as mentioned earlier, and this can be a 
constraint on their ability to not only originate credit but also bear credit  risks on their own balance 
sheets. Banks must therefore use their capital efficiently by extending credit only when it matches their 
strategies  and  reallocating  the  remaining  credit  risk  to  other  investors.  Such  a  reallocation  of  risks 
should be beneficial to both banks and investors.  
To  this  end,  banks  are  expected  to  enhance  their  ability  to  assess  borrowers’  creditworthiness 
appropriately and to reflect these assessments in their pricing of credit. Thanks to recent progress in 
financial engineering, various new methods to measure and control risks have been made available. 
These  include  quantitative  evaluation  of  credit  risks  based  on  such  data  as  credit  ratings  and 
bankruptcy ratios, as well as the portfolio approach that makes use of the law of large numbers. New 
financial products utilizing these methods have also been developed. Examples include loans with a 
non-recourse arrangement, standardized loans to small firms requiring no collateral and making use of 
scoring models, as well as consumer loans that require only simple loan screening procedures. Banks 
should be able to further expand the practical use of such methods throughout their in-house networks 
to expand their business activities.  
For  smoother  reallocation of  credit  risks,  the  crucial  factor  is  that  the  credit  originator  assesses  the 
initial risk appropriately and sets the interest rate accordingly.  
Unbundling and Repackaging of Credit Risk  
E. 
Second,  we  need  to  enhance  techniques  for  unbundling  and  repackaging  credit  risks.  Instead  of 
simply  selling  loan  assets,  originators  can  unbundle  and  repackage  the  credit  risk  inherent  in  loan 
assets  using  financial  engineering  techniques,  thus  satisfying  the  demand  of  a  wider  range  of  fund 
providers and investors. For example, when creating asset-backed securities (ABSs), cash flows from 
pooled  assets  are  often  classified  into  tranches,  such  as  senior,  mezzanine,  and  equity,  reflecting 
different degrees of risks, and these tranches are sold to investors. This is because the value of pools 
of the original assets is likely to fluctuate considerably. Through the unbundling of risks, the differing 
risk preferences of various institutional investors, at home or abroad, can be satisfied.  
As I mentioned earlier, bank loans to firms in Japan are provided in the form of short-term contracts, 
although  they  are  in  fact  rolled  over  many  times,  so  they  function  in  effect  as  quasi-capital.  By 
separating credit risks inherent in these loans into equity and debt portions, risks for each portion can 
be efficiently reallocated to investors willing to bear them. An example of repackaging risks is a bank 
loan to a small but promising firm in which banks retain a right to purchase new stock when issued. In 
this way, banks may benefit from a rise in the firm’s value if its business succeeds, and banks and 
other shareholders can participate in the governance of the firm if necessary, while at the same time 
keeping interest rates on loans lower than otherwise.  
Financial services providers ranging from banks, securities companies, and nonbanks to credit-rating 
agencies  and  auditing  companies  can  contribute  to  the  process  of  enhancing  techniques  for 
unbundling and repackaging credit risks.  
Reallocation of Credit Risk  
F. 
Third, the market function of reallocating credit risks needs to be strengthened. In this regard, we need 
to improve the infrastructure of credit markets, by which we refer to the markets for liquidating loan 
BIS Review 48/2003 
 5
assets,  syndicating  loans,  and  trading  ABSs.  This  would  enable  credit  risks  initially  borne  by  credit 
originators,  typically  banks,  to  be  reallocated  among  a  wider  range  of  investors,  allowing  additional 
capital resources both inside and outside Japan to be utilized more efficiently. It would also be useful 
to  utilize  the  price  discovery  and  verification  functions  of  credit  markets.  For  risk-based  pricing 
mechanisms  to  work  properly,  the  accuracy  of  prices  must  be  constantly  subject  to  review.  Credit 
markets will provide information useful to confirm the accuracy of prices.  
Concrete measures to improve the functioning of credit markets need to be taken by both the private 
and  public  sectors:  for  example,  the  establishment  of  uniform  loan  contracts,  and  a  wider  use  of 
covenants covering cases of deterioration in credit quality.  
Improving the functioning of the Japanese government securities (JGS) market would also help secure 
the  sound  development  of  credit  markets.  The  JGS  market  provides  rates  that  are  free  from  credit 
risks and which become a benchmark for interest rates in other markets, including credit markets. The 
JGS market should be constantly improved to ensure that it becomes highly liquid and robust enough 
to consistently offer reliable risk-free rates under various circumstances. The Bank, in cooperation with 
both market participants and the fiscal authority, will continue to work to enhance the functioning of 
this market.  
In Japan, however, a major issue is how to control the risk inherent in an expansion of the amount 
outstanding of JGSs issued. There is an immediate need to show to the public the blueprint of a new 
fiscal structure for the country.  
Role of the Bank of Japan  
III. 
By ensuring permeation of monetary easing effects throughout the economy, the Bank will continue to 
secure financial market stability and economic recovery, as well as improve the overall functioning of 
the  financial  system  in  the  long  run  with  regard  to  the  efficient  allocation  of  credit.  We  believe  that 
these are prerequisites for achieving a vigorous economy suitable for the new era.  
To  achieve  this  goal,  the  Bank  decided  to  provide  ample  liquidity  more  flexibly,  and  confirmed  its 
commitment to maintaining the quantitative easing policy at the Monetary Policy Meeting on October 
10, 2003.  
In  addition,  the  Bank  will  continue  its  wholehearted  support  of  efforts  being  made  in  the  financial 
services industry to improve the overall functioning of the financial system with regard to the efficient 
allocation of credit.  
Since  last  year,  the  Bank  has  announced  a  number  of  measures  in  this  regard.  These  include  the 
release of a proposal for an early resolution of the NPL problem, including suggestions for introducing 
the  DCF  method  for  evaluating  loans;  the  purchase  of  stocks  held  by  banks;  and  the  inclusion  of 
asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP)  on  the  Bank’s  list  of  eligible  collateral,  and  the  launch  of 
asset-backed  securities  (ABS)  purchases,  aimed  at  nurturing  these  markets.  In  addition,  the  Bank 
decided to hold a forum, starting this month, to discuss with a wide range of market participants how 
together we can improve the ABS market and other financial markets.  
Furthermore, through our on-site examinations and off-site monitoring, we wish to deepen discussions 
with banks and other financial services providers on ways to better manage their business in line with 
the enhancement of the market functions.  
The Bank will enhance the effect of monetary policy by continuing to review market operations, as well 
as contribute to strengthening the functioning of the financial and capital markets.  
Let me conclude by saying that, as our efforts to enhance financial services in Japan bear fruit, I am 
confident that there will gradually emerge a completely new financial system, one which is innovative 
and provides the strong support to the country’s economy that it deserves.  
Thank you for your kind attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 48/2003
