Jean-Pierre Roth: Economic activity and monetary policy in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 12 December 2003. 
 The National Bank has decided to leave the target range for the three-month Libor rate unchanged at 
0.0%-0.75%. For the time being, the three-month Libor is to be kept around 0.25%. In the past two 
years,  we  reacted  to  the  decline  in  economic  activity  and  the  upward  trend  of  the  Swiss  franc  by 
considerably relaxing our monetary policy. Now the signs of an economic recovery in Switzerland are 
intensifying. The upswing is not yet assured, though. At the same time, the inflation potential is small. 
For  this  reason,  we  are  adhering  to  our  expansionary  monetary  policy  and  are  keeping  down  the 
attractiveness  of  Swiss  franc  investments.  We  estimate  that  the  economy  will  grow  by  slightly  over 
1.5%  in  2004,  while  a  moderate  decline  in  economic  activity  is  expected  for  the  current  year.  If 
monetary policy remains unchanged, average annual inflation is likely to amount to 0.4% in the coming 
year, to 1.0% in 2005 and to 2.3% in 2006. We are of the opinion that price stability can be maintained 
by tightening monetary policy at a later point in time.  
In the following, I shall first focus on economic activity in Switzerland and our new inflation forecast. 
This will be followed by a discussion of monetary policy. Finally, I shall elaborate on the new National 
Bank Law. 
Economic activity 
In  Switzerland,  a  turnaround  in  economic  development  emerged  in  the  third  quarter  of  2003.  Real 
GDP exceeded the previous quarter’s level for the first time since the third quarter 2002. Nevertheless, 
it  still  fell  short  of  its  year-earlier  level.  The  Swiss  economy  recovered  largely  in  line  with  our 
expectations  as  communicated  in  our  September  assessment  of  the  situation.  The  recovery  is 
attributable to the pickup in global economic activity, low interest rates and generally more favourable 
exchange rate conditions. This benefited primarily exports, which rose markedly in the third quarter. 
Equipment  investment,  too,  picked  up  slightly  following  a  long  phase  of  decline.  Private  and 
government consumption continued to have a stabilising effect. 
The  economic  situation  in  Switzerland  should  improve  further  in  the  next  few  months.  We  are 
expecting  exports  to  continue  developing  favourably,  coupled  with  a  robust  increase  in  equipment 
investment. In this way, the economic upswing in Switzerland will become increasingly broad-based 
and strengthened. In the course of 2004, unemployment should also fall, leading to a pickup in private 
consumption. On average, a moderate decline in economic activity will be recorded in the current year, 
while  for  2004,  as  already  stated,  we  expect  the  economy  to  grow  by  slightly  over  1.5%.  This  will, 
however, not yet suffice to close the production gap. Production capacities will therefore still not be 
fully utilised in the coming year. 
Even  though  the  overall  prospects  have  clearly  improved,  the  situation  in  a  number  of  industries 
remains difficult. There is still a risk that the economic upswing in our country may be short-lived. A 
delay in the global economic recovery in the next few quarters, an unfavourable development in the 
financial  markets  or  growing  geopolitical  tensions  could  jeopardise  the  economic  pickup  in 
Switzerland. Overall, however, the cyclical risks today are significantly more balanced than even a few 
months ago. It can thus not be ruled out that the recovery will set in faster than we expect. 
Inflation forecast 
I shall now turn to the latest development in inflation and our new inflation forecast. Annual inflation 
(inflation  rate  compared  with  previous  year)  measured  by  the  national  consumer  price  index  has 
shown  extremely  stable  development  for  some  time.  In  August,  it  rose  by  0.2  percentage  points  to 
0.5%,  where  it  remained  until  November.  This  stability  is  attributable  to  the  evenly  spread  price 
increases  for  domestic  goods.  Inflation  on  imported  goods  has  been  distinctly  more  volatile  in  the 
wake of fluctuating oil prices. The core inflation rate calculated by the National Bank currently amounts 
to 0.6%. 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 1
The graph shows our inflation forecast of September 2003 (the dash-dotted green curve in the graph) 
as well as the new forecast of December 2003 (dashed red curve). The assumptions on which the new 
forecast rests differ in various respects from those in September. For one thing, growth in the United 
States will be markedly higher in the current year than anticipated three months ago. With the present 
fiscal stimulus no longer a factor, however, economic growth is likely to slow down distinctly again next 
year  but  should  remain  robust.  We  still  anticipate  an  upswing  in  the  EU  in  the  coming  year.  It  is 
probable, however, that it will take slightly longer to close the output gap than we assumed as recently 
as September. Inflationary pressure from abroad will thus remain moderate although inflation in other 
countries  will  not  recede as  markedly either  in  the coming  year as we  expected  three  months  ago. 
Furthermore,  we  anticipate  a  decline  in  the  price  of  oil  to  approximately  USD  25  per  barrel  in  the 
course of 2004. 
On the assumption that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 0.25% during the next three 
years,  inflation  should  average  0.4%  in  2004,  1.0%  in  2005  and  2.3%  in  2006.  The  inflation  trend 
according  to  the  new  forecast  will  exceed  the  September  forecast  until  mid-2005.  Until  the  end  of 
2004, inflation is likely to remain fairly stable at around 0.5% and to fluctuate only slightly due to basis 
effects. The new forecast shows that the threat of negative inflation rates has diminished. This is the 
result of an improvement in the global economy and of the less marked decline in inflation abroad, as 
also of the weaker Swiss franc vis-à-vis the euro. As from the beginning of 2005, inflation will show a 
rising trend due to the expansionary monetary policy we took as an assumption. In mid-2005, it will 
reach 1%, in mid-2006 2% and near the end of 2006 a rate of 3%. This increase is a little flatter than 
forecast  in  September.  It  rests  on  the  notion  that  in  the  next  few  years  the  output  gap  will  narrow 
somewhat  more  slowly  than  predicted  in  September  due  to  the  productivity  gains  the  upswing  is 
expected to bring. 
From mid-2006 onwards, forecast inflation will no longer lie within the range that the National Bank 
equates with price stability. It must, however, be noted that, as always, our forecast is based on an 
unchanged  three-month  Libor  rate,  i.e.  on  the  assumption  that  monetary  policy  will  remain  as 
expansive as now during the next three years. It is also important to understand that the uncertainty of 
the forecast increases with the length of the forecasting horizon. 
Continuation of expansionary monetary policy 
In the past two years, we have changed over to a strongly expansionary monetary policy. In so doing, 
we  have  reacted  rapidly  and  unequivocally  to  the  deterioration  in  the  economic  situation  and  the 
upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss  franc.  The  favourable  development  of  inflation  provided  us  with  the 
necessary leeway for the interest rate cuts we implemented. Between March and July, the Swiss franc 
weakened considerably vis-à-vis the euro, and the economy is gradually beginning to gain momentum 
again. 
The  expansionary  monetary  policy  was  accompanied  by  growing  monetary  aggregates.  The  strong 
increase  in  the  money  stocks,  does  not,  however, present  a  significant risk  for  price  stability  at  the 
present time. For one thing, credit creation by the banks is continuing to be slow-moving. For another, 
the  growth of  the  money  stocks  is  considerably  influenced  by  portfolio  shifts, which  are  likely  to  be 
reversed  once  economic  activity  accelerates  and  interest  rates  begin  to  rise.  We  shall,  however, 
continue to keep a careful eye on this development. 
As already stated, there are still certain risks that the economic development will not be sustained. The 
upswing  in  Switzerland should  not  be  jeopardised  by  a  premature  changeover  to  a more  restrictive 
monetary policy. We shall therefore continue our expansionary monetary policy and in this way further 
bolster the economic recovery. We are convinced that we shall have sufficient time to keep inflation 
within  the  bounds  of  price  stability  by  tightening  monetary  policy  at  a  later  point  in  time.  Should  a 
possible marked appreciation of the Swiss franc vis-à-vis the euro threaten to cause an undesirable 
tightening of monetary conditions, we would again take decisive action. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2003
Inflation Forecast December 2003 with Libor at 0.25% 
Annual average inflation in % 
2003 
0.6 
2004 
0.4 
2005 
1.0 
2006 
2.3 
   Inflation forecast of December 2003 
New National Bank Law in the making 
On 3 October, the two Federal Chambers passed the new National Bank Law. We are very happy with 
the course of the parliamentary debate: only minor amendments were made to the draft of the Federal 
Council. The deadline for a referendum is 22 January 2004. If no referendum is sought, we assume 
that the Federal Council will put the new Law into force on 30 April 2004, i.e. the date of our Annual 
General Meeting. 
The new Law will modernise the legal framework of the National Bank. It lays down the mandate of the 
Swiss National Bank in detail, guarantees the SNB independence in its decision-making, regulates its 
accountability vis-à-vis the Federal Council and Parliament and strengthens the supervisory powers of 
the Bank Council. The latter will no longer consist of 40 members as at present; it will comprise only 
11 members, six of whom are elected by the Federal Council and five by the SNB’s Annual General 
Meeting. The new Bank Council will be constituted on the day of our Annual General Meeting. 
The new Law extends the National Bank’s room for manoeuvre on the operational level. Until now, the 
Law  laid  down  exactly  what  assets  the  SNB  was  permitted  to  invest  in  and  what  securities  were 
eligible as collateral in Lombard business. In future, the National Bank will be responsible for making 
these decisions itself. At the time when the new Law enters into force, we shall publish two directives. 
One will spell out the technical preconditions for our monetary operations; the other will set out how we 
shall use our extended investment policy scope. My colleague, Philipp Hildebrand, in his address will 
present our first ideas on this subject. 
The new Law vests specific responsibilities in the SNB with respect to the oversight of payment and 
securities  settlement  systems.  Up  to  now,  our  oversight  of  the  SIC  interbank  payment  system  was 
based on a contractual relationship. As from next year, our responsibilities in this domain will be based 
on  the  Law  and  will  extend  to  the  oversight  of  all  major  payment  and  settlement  systems.  My 
colleague, Niklaus Blattner, will discuss this subject in more detail in his remarks. 
The new Law also provides that the SNB shall issue implementing regulations in the area of minimum 
reserves, statistics and the oversight of payment and settlement systems. The draft of an ordinance 
has already been submitted to the interested parties for consultation. In the field of minimum reserves 
and statistics we intend in principle to take up the provisions already existing in the Federal Law on 
Banks  and  Savings  Banks  and  the  Federal  Law  on  Investment  Funds.  As  regards  the  oversight  of 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 3
payment and settlement systems, we are advancing into totally new territory, where for the time being 
only the main principles have been defined. This implies pioneering work in the implementation. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2003
