   Birgir ˝sleifur Gunnarsson: Improving the world economy 
Statement by the Hon Birgir ˝sleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central 
Bank of Iceland and Governor of the Fund for Iceland on behalf of Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, 
Latvia,  Lithuania,  Norway  and  Sweden,  at  the  2003  IMF/World  Bank  Annual  Meeting,  Dubai, 
24 September 2003. 
 Mr. Chairman, I am honored to address the 2003 Joint Annual Meetings on behalf of the Nordic-Baltic 
Constituency consisting of Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, and Sweden as well 
as my own country, Iceland. Let me begin by thanking the authorities of the United Arab Emirates for 
hosting the Annual Meetings in this vibrant city of Dubai. 
Prospects in the World Economy 
The  world  economy  has  been  showing  signs  of  a  modest  recovery  and  further  strengthening  is 
projected for 2004. Economic growth, however, remains unbalanced. Restoring sustainable growth is 
one of the most important economic policy challenges that lie ahead. Current accommodative policies 
are appropriate until a global recovery has been consolidated. Some economies have, however, now 
reached  the  point  where  little  scope  remains  for  traditional  fiscal  and  monetary  initiatives. 
Consequently,  it  is  necessary  to  press  forward  in  other  areas  such  as  by  accelerating  structural 
reforms, promoting good governance, increasing transparency, and harmonizing standards. Another 
important  task  involves  enabling  low-income  countries  to  enjoy  the  full  benefits  of  a  globalized 
economy. An orderly unwinding of external imbalances also poses a major challenge. To resolve this, 
fair-burden sharing will be necessary among leading economies and different regions. 
Structural Reforms  
Economic  recovery  will  continue  to  be  restrained  unless  countries  speed  up  structural  reforms.  An 
effective  way  to  improve  long-term  economic  prospects  is  to  address  structural  rigidities  that  weigh 
down the efficiency of labor markets. It must be recognized that demographic challenges such as the 
aging of the population add pressure on the labor market and public finances. Increased labor market 
participation and restructuring of benefit schemes are therefore needed. Authorities and labor market 
participants  have  to  work  together  in  this  effort.  Other  structural  rigidities  in  financial  and  product 
markets are of no less importance, and removing such obstacles is conducive to growth.  
Many  economies  are  burdened  with  government  deficits  in  the  midst  of  the  global  economic 
slowdown. Automatic stabilizers have been allowed to operate in order to support growth. This may be 
prudent  and  appropriate;  however,  care  should  be  taken  that  public  finances  do  not  become 
unsustainable. Policy makers are responsible for planning both for the short and the longer term and 
we  encourage  governments  to  consolidate  their  fiscal  positions  in  order  to  enhance  their  nations(cid:146) 
competitiveness.  The  Fund  should  continue  to  monitor  closely  structural  deficiencies  and  advise 
accordingly.  
Good Governance 
Economic  integration  has  brought  increased  prosperity  to  those  who  have  been  part  of  the 
globalization process. Increased globalization also implies intensified competition in most areas. Good 
governance  is,  therefore,  more  important  now  than  ever  because  it  fosters  confidence  and  growth, 
without entailing much additional economic cost. All empirical studies confirm that much can be gained 
by embracing good governance and it is an essential component of crisis prevention efforts. 
Good governance is equally vital in both the public sector and the corporate world, and its merits are 
relevant  in  all  countries.  Recently,  corporate  governance  issues  have  been  prominent  on  the  world 
economic  agenda  as  financial  markets  have  been  recovering  from  scandals  that  came  to  the  fore 
following a period of excesses in equity markets. In order to increase confidence in the markets, it is 
imperative that the corporate world adhere to the principles of good governance. Good governance in 
the public sector is also an essential tool for strengthening institutional capacity, which is fundamental 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 for  economic  and  social  development.  The  Fund  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  this  field  and  we 
welcome the increased emphasis it has given to the issue of governance.  
Transparency and International Standards  
With  the  world  economy  having  suffered  a  confidence  crisis,  it  is  important  to  continue  to  promote 
greater  transparency  and  accountability.  Various  studies  have  demonstrated  that  transparency  and 
adherence to international standards lead to easier market access and lower borrowing costs. There is 
much to gain by applying these simple principles. 
It  is  also  important  to  continue  developing  international  standards  and  codes  that  enhance 
transparency  and  facilitate  comparison  between  countries  and  regions.  The  Fund  has  invested 
considerable  efforts  in  promoting  transparency  and  developing  standards  and  codes  in  cooperation 
with  the  World  Bank,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  other  organizations.  Remarkable 
progress has been made in this area but we realize that broad implementation of these standards will 
take time, although this is time well spent as improved practices and comparability will increase the 
stability of the international financial system. 
We  believe  that  the  next  steps  should  be  to  harmonize  accounting  standards  at  world  level.  The 
Nordic-Baltic Constituency encourages all member countries to support the efforts of the International 
Accounting Standards Board to reach a consensus on accounting standards and principles.  
Furthermore,  we  welcome  the  new  steps  taken  to  increase  the  Fund(cid:146)s  transparency,  especially  the 
policy  of  moving  to  presumptive  publication  of  all  Article  IV  reports  and  the  required  publication  of 
documents in exceptional access cases. 
Promoting Economic Progress among Low-Income Countries 
One of the greatest challenges of our time is to win ground in the battle against poverty. All parties 
must be fully engaged in this campaign. Many initiatives in recent years have borne fruit but there is 
still a long way to go and the international community must do better in order to achieve the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). Here, I would like to focus on trade and its importance for development.  
Greater market access will be an essential instrument for improving the economic conditions of those 
living in poverty and I welcome the recent initiative taken by the Fund and the World Bank aimed at 
supporting  the  Doha  round.  At  this  stage,  the  global  momentum  towards  trade  liberalization  must 
continue effectively, yet there is reason for concern over the way that the current international trade 
negotiations are proceeding. Progress has been slower than was previously hoped, especially in light 
of  the  disappointing  result  of  the WTO meeting  in  Cancun.  Another  worrying  aspect  is  the  trend  of 
bilateral trade agreements instead of multilateral agreements.   
To  support  low-income  countries,  the  industrialized  nations  should  reduce  their  overall  levels  of 
support for agriculture and textiles and direct the remaining subsidies away from trade-distorting price 
support  towards  income  support.  The  advantages  of  trade  liberalization  are  greater  than  the  risks 
associated with it. Reforms in these areas will benefit both the industrial and the low-income countries. 
There might, however, be temporary or transitional difficulties as increased liberalization can entail a 
reallocation  of  labor  between  sectors.  Governments  should  be  ready  to  inform  and  educate  their 
citizens and prepare safety nets to make the transformation more acceptable, both domestically and 
internationally.  High-income  countries  ought  to  be  prepared  to  assist  developing  countries  in  such 
undertakings. Low-income countries must also open up their markets in order to increase the volume 
of trade between each other as well as with industrialized countries. 
Bilateral and regional trade agreements have become increasingly common in recent years. However, 
the  multilateral  route  is  a  better  channel  for  delivering  the  dynamic  benefits  of  increased  global 
economic integration. Bilateral agreements can fragment and complicate multilateral negotiations such 
as the present WTO round. Moreover, small and underdeveloped economies are more likely to be left 
out and their ability to participate in the global economy is therefore disadvantaged. We encourage the 
Fund to continue to use surveillance in promoting open world trade. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
   Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, improving the world economy is a task that demands the participation of every 
nation.  We  must  press  forward  with  structural  reforms,  promoting  good  governance,  increasing 
transparency,  and  harmonizing  standards.  This  task  must  also  include  efforts  to  integrate  the  low-
income  countries  into  the  global  economy.  The  current  circumstances  provide  good  reasons  for 
addressing these issues. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  has  been  at  the  center  of  world  economic  cooperation  since  its 
establishment.  The  Fund  should  continue  to  play  a  crucial  role  in  strengthening  the  areas  I  have 
emphasized through its surveillance and its lending activities. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 3
