   Jaime Caruana: What next for Basel? 
Remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking Supervision,  at  the  Seventh  Annual  Supervision  Conference  of  the 
British Bankers Association, London, 9 October 2003. 
 Introduction 
Mr. Mullen, distinguished guests, and members of the British Bankers Association, it is an 
honour for me to address you this morning as the new chairman of the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision. This conference, the seventh to date, encourages a healthy exchange 
of ideas between bankers and supervisors on ways to promote safety and soundness in the 
banking sector. Today’s agenda offers a timely focus on the development of regulatory policy 
on  several  levels  –  on  a  national  level  through  the  mission  of  the  Financial  Services 
Authority, on a European level through the directives of the European Union, and, of course, 
on a global level through the standards adopted by the Basel Committee.  
It seems appropriate to think about banking and supervision on national, regional and global 
levels. Enhancements in telecommunications, continued expansion in trading relationships, 
and the increasing interdependence of markets make it difficult to view banking on a purely 
local  or  even  domestic  level.  Bankers  are  no  strangers  to  the  global  economy,  having 
underwritten letters of credit to exporters and merchants almost since the first trading vessels 
plied the rivers and seas. However, it seems fair to say that the pace of globalisation and 
innovation has accelerated dramatically in recent years. As banks enter new markets, create 
ever more complex products, and pursue customers near and far, the challenge for all of us 
is, first, to understand how our risk profiles are changing and, next, to find responsible ways 
to manage them. 
Whether  they  compete  on  a  national,  regional,  or  global  level,  banks  have  developed 
countless  new  tools  and  processes  that  promote  their  competitiveness,  strengthen  their 
returns,  and  control  their  exposures  to  credit, market,  operational,  and  other  risks.  In  turn, 
supervisors must review periodically the tools and processes at our disposal to ensure that 
our  regulations  and  practices  accommodate  changes  in  market  trends,  the  introduction  of 
innovative products and services, and advances in the art of risk management.  
The  current  efforts  to  reform  the  international  guidelines  on  capital  adequacy  represent  a 
critical review of the cornerstone of bank supervision. The members of the Basel Committee 
have devoted substantial resources to this reform because we believe that, when banks are 
adequately  capitalised  and  well  managed,  they  become  more  stable  and  better  able  to 
withstand periods of financial distress. But more importantly, when all banks have the proper 
incentives to manage their risks appropriately and hold adequate levels of capital, we believe 
that the entire financial sector becomes more resilient, less sensitive to the ups and downs of 
the business cycles, and better able to serve as a source for the sustainable growth of the 
broader economy.  
That is our motivation for proposing the adoption of a New Basel Accord, which I will discuss 
this morning. I’ll begin with a few words on the conclusion of the third consultation period and 
a short summary of the major themes we gleaned from the comments we received. Since we 
have discussed the new capital requirements themselves extensively over the past several 
months, I would next like to address some of the other equally important issues that the BBA 
and others raised in their comment letters. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
The conclusion of the third consultation period 
Allow me to begin with a report on the very busy summer we had in Basel. It’s fair to say that 
we  received  more  responses  on  the  third  consultative  paper  than  we  expected.  Over  200 
comments were submitted by the conclusion of the comment period in July though that was 
less  than  the  250  comments  we  received  on  the  second consultative  document  two  years 
ago.  
What  was  not  surprising  was  the  depth  of  interest  in  the  proposals  and  the  considerable 
degree of thought and care that respondents demonstrated in their letters. In this regard, the 
Committee owes a debt of gratitude to the many members of the industry and the public who 
have supported our work over the past several years. The considerable time and attention 
that  especially  the  BBA  and  its  members  have  devoted  to  the  development  of  the  New 
Accord are evident in the high quality of your comments and suggestions. You have offered 
constructive thoughts and creative solutions. You have shared data on technical issues, and 
you  helped  to  make  our  quantitative  impact  studies  possible.  Your  efforts  have  helped  to 
inform ours and have assisted us in strengthening the quality of our proposals. 
We will take the time needed to consider the comments with care to ensure that we meet the 
high  standards  you  expect  from  us,  which  is  to  develop  an  intellectually  sound  and  also 
pragmatic and cost-efficient proposal. The members of the Committee and I understand that 
our efforts must not be unnecessarily constrained by deadlines and timetables, although we 
all believe strongly that it is important to move forward with the New Accord and bring it to 
finalisation as soon as possible. 
Overall, the comments we received through the consultation were constructive and in many 
senses positive. Indeed, even among the most critical of respondents, one finds support for 
most  of  the  New  Accord.    There  is  support  for  its  three  pillars  and  its  intentions  to  align 
capital  more  closely  to  risk;  to  introduce  greater  consistency  in  the  supervisory  review  of 
capital adequacy; and to promote effective market discipline by enhancing transparency. It 
was,  moreover,  satisfying  for  us  that  most  commentators  acknowledged  substantial 
improvements in the proposals since the release of the second consultative paper in early 
2001.  
Not  unexpectedly,  respondents  have  raised  a  large  number  of  points  worth  closer 
consideration. Some letters addressed fundamental concepts as well as several issues that 
have been debated throughout the entire process. In addition, some member jurisdictions will 
continue  to  receive  responses  through  their  national  rule-making  processes  up  until  late 
autumn of this year, during which time we anticipate hearing additional thoughts. 
What are some of the themes emerging from the public’s reactions? Certainly the complexity 
of the proposals continues to draw your attention. This is a matter we have discussed in the 
past and is a valid concern. It is important to remember that much of the complexity in the 
proposals stems from the concerns raised by banks earlier in the process. Throughout the 
process,  various  banks  have  requested  that  the  Committee  offer  flexibility  and  a  range  of 
approaches  to  evaluate  the  particular  risks  and  profiles  of  various  businesses  and 
specialisations.  Indeed,  one  needs  only  to  read  a  handful  of  the  letters  on  our  website  to 
discover  that  some  recommendations  from  the  industry  would  tend  to  increase  further  the 
degree of complexity of the Accord. Nonetheless, the Committee is aware that it is easier to 
enforce a simpler rule than a complicated one. We have long sought ways to simplify those 
rules thought most complicated. Those efforts will continue. 
Another theme noted in the comments concerns the need to maintain a level playing field – 
or, at least, to avoid “unleveling” the playing field further. The Committee is very conscious of 
this matter, and I will say something about our efforts in this respect a little later.   
A last important theme addressed the sense that the Committee may have adopted an overly 
conservative approach to some aspects of the framework, resulting in much higher capital 
charges than banks feel are necessary. These concerns are important, as a key goal for the 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
   New Accord is to align capital more closely to risk. This means that where the original Accord 
treats  exposures  too  harshly  relative  to  the  degree  of  risk  that  they  entail,  we  expect  to 
reduce the capital requirements. But where the risk is greater, and where the existing rules 
fail to assign adequate capital, it should not be surprising that supervisors will raise capital 
requirements. 
Respondents  attribute  what  they  view  as  excessive  levels  of  conservatism  to  different 
sections of the New Accord, including, for example, the calibration of capital requirements to 
both expected and unexpected losses.  The treatment of credit losses is an issue which has 
attracted a lot of comments and which is, indeed, very important.  As you will probably be 
aware, the present proposals to calibrate on the basis of expected and unexpected losses 
represented a compromise in the face of cross-country differences in accounting practices 
and  supervisory  authority  regarding  provisioning.    But  the  Committee  will  look  into  this 
important  issue  again,  and  I  am  optimistic  that  we  can  find  a  way  to  improve  the  present 
proposal.   
We have received similar concerns about conservatism in the securitisation proposals and in 
the treatment of “double default” risk, which is the risk that both a borrower and a guarantor 
would  default  on  the  same  obligation.  Other  questions  have  been  raised  on  the  incentive 
structure and on the recognition of insurance within the operational risk proposals.   
It  is  perhaps  natural  that  the  majority  of  comments  address  the  minimum  capital 
requirements,  or  pillar  1.  This  section  of  the  New  Accord  defines  the  capital  charges  in 
monetary terms for banks’ exposures and activities. But one should not forget that the New 
Accord is premised on three pillars, not just one. So I would like now to turn to the other two 
pillars, beginning with the importance – and benefits – of the proposals for the supervisory 
review  of  capital  and  home/host  issues.    Afterwards,  I  would  like  to  spend  a  moment  on 
another  topic  which  has  been  raised  in  the  comments,  namely  the  New  Accord  and 
harmonisation of accounting standards.  Finally, I will conclude my presentation with some 
remarks about the current status of our discussions and our future work. 
Supervisory review & home/host issues 
As  you  know,  under  the  New  Accord  the  Basel  Committee  will  recognise  formally  the  role 
that  supervisors  play  in  ensuring  that  banks  manage  their  risks  and  their  capital  needs 
appropriately. In the past, supervisors in each jurisdiction found their own ways to evaluate 
capital.  This  has  sometimes  resulted  in  an  inconsistent  application  of  the  minimum 
requirements and the adoption of different expectations across countries and an increase in 
regulatory burden on banks. 
Incorporating  supervisory  review  into  the  international  guidelines  represents  a  genuine 
breakthrough  for  all  of  us.  By  developing  guidelines  for  the  supervisor’s  evaluation  of  a 
bank’s internal capital allocation process, the Committee believes that supervisors and banks 
will engage in more focused, more consistent, and less burdensome discussions of the risks 
that banks face and the responses they adopt. The Committee recognises that national laws 
and  regulations  provide  different  avenues  through  which  supervisors  may  conduct  such 
reviews,  and  consequently  Pillar  2  affords  each  jurisdiction  the  flexibility  to  accommodate 
those differences. 
The topic of supervisory review must also be considered in the context of the level playing 
field, one of the themes I mentioned earlier that came out clearly in the comment letters. As 
the members of the BBA and the London Investment Banking Association expressed in their 
joint  comment  letter,  for  example,  the  way  in  which  the  New  Accord  is  applied  and 
supervisory review is conducted across countries matters critically to the daily operations of 
internationally active banking organisations. Your letter noted the importance of consistency 
in  standards  and  consistency  in  the  interpretation  of  the  new  framework,  as  well  as  the 
challenges that even limited areas of national discretion can create.  
BIS Review 42/2003 
 3
These concerns go the very heart  of the Committee’s mission. Some thirty years ago, the 
founders of the Committee recognised the growing need for cooperation and consistency in 
the  supervision  of  internationally  active  banks.  As  we  prepare  to  adopt  a  new  capital 
framework, we know that we supervisors will need to cooperate even more in the future to 
supervise  an  internationally  active  bank’s  adoption  of  the  more  advanced  approaches  to 
credit or operational risk.  
The  Accord  Implementation  Group  was  created  under  the  leadership  of  Nick  Le  Pan,  the 
Canadian  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  precisely  to  share  experiences  and 
approaches to applying the new rules. By sharing information on practical matters, we expect 
that supervisors will apply the New Accord more consistently at home, thereby promoting a 
more level playing field across countries as well. 
Based on the AIG’s work to date, the Committee published a paper this past August on the 
“high level principles for the cross-border implementation of the New Accord.” In this paper, 
we  reiterate  our  view  that  the  traditional  allocation  of  responsibilities  to  home  and  host 
supervisors  will  continue.  Cooperation  will  be  critical  to  the  effective  supervision  of 
institutions  under  the  New  Accord,  especially  considering  the  challenges  an  internationally 
active bank will face in receiving the initial approval to adopt, and then validate, advanced 
approaches  to  credit  and  operational  risk  at  home  and  in  host  jurisdictions.  Similarly, 
supervisors  will  need  to  find  practical  ways  to  cooperate  in  the  evaluations  of  capital 
adequacy  under  pillar  2  and  ongoing  reviews  of  compliance  with  the  minimum  operational 
requirements of the New Accord. 
By promoting a more consistent approach to supervisory review, we intend to strengthen the 
quality  of  supervision  across  countries.  We  recognise  as  well  the  special  function  the 
Committee  can  offer  in  strengthening  the  ability  of  host  supervisors  –  particularly  those  in 
emerging market economies – to regulate the local operations of foreign banks. 
Harmonisation of accounting standards and the New Basel Accord 
Supervisory review helps to create very direct incentives for banks to evaluate and manage 
their risks carefully. Transparency can supplement that incentive by leveraging the power of 
financial markets to encourage prudent risk-taking, and I would like now to address the third 
pillar of the New Accord, namely market discipline.  
Even just over the past few months, the popular press has reported on several examples of 
corporations  that  failed  to  disclose  adequately  the  kinds  of  activities  in  which  they  were 
involved  and  the  degree  to  which  they  bore  risk.  Both  inside  and  outside  the  banking 
industry,  the  renewed  focus  on  sound  corporate  governance  practices  has  highlighted  the 
importance  of  appropriate  disclosure  to  the  market  –  and  the  dangers  that  ensue  when 
companies fail to disclose their risks adequately. 
These  failures  in  disclosure  have  added  fuel  to  the  drive  to  harmonise  accounting  and 
disclosure practices worldwide. With reference to the New Accord, many respondents quite 
correctly noted the need to align the supervisory framework more closely with the converging 
accounting  practices  worldwide.  A  greater  “meeting  of  the  minds”  is  warranted  especially 
now  that  the  New  Basel  Accord  includes  explicit  disclosure  requirements  intended  to 
promote greater insight into a bank’s risk profile. Likewise, the Basel Committee’s treatment 
of provisions and the valuation of financial instruments must keep pace with changes in the 
relevant  accounting  standards.  These  and  other  topics  constitute  areas  where  supervisors 
and the accounting profession must continue to work toward convergence. 
The members of the Committee believe that market discipline, and hence financial stability, 
is  strengthened  when  accounting  and  disclosure  requirements  reflect  sound  risk 
management  principles  and  are  consistent  with  the  control  practices  that  banks  adopt. 
Consequently, we recognise our responsibility to participate actively in the development of 
national  and  international  accounting  standards.  I  must  confess  that,  in  Spain,  part  of  this 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2003
   responsibility  is  perhaps  a  bit  easier  for  me  than  for  some  of  my  fellow  members  of  the 
Committee,  since  the  Bank  of  Spain  is  not  just  a  bank  regulator,  but  also  the  national 
accounting  authority  for  banks.  Where  the  development  of  international  standards  is 
concerned, the Committee and its member organisations devote considerable resources and 
our staff’s time to share our perspectives as supervisors with those who make the rules.  
But  the  discussions  between  supervisors  and  accountants  cannot  be  a  one-way  street.  In 
turn,  as  supervisors  on  the  Basel  Committee  have  been  developing  standards  for  the 
disclosure  of  components  of  capital,  for  loan  accounting,  and  for  other  topics  of  mutual 
concern, we have sought out the views of representatives of the accounting profession. This 
dialogue  will  continue.  I  should  add  that  we  are  currently  seeking  new  opportunities  for 
discussion on issues of mutual concern with accounting standards-setting bodies and private 
sector accounting professionals. 
Current status & future work for the Basel Committee 
I  know  that  you  are  eager  to  know  where  the  Committee  stands  at  the  moment.  As  I 
suggested,  the  Committee  and  its  member  organisations  are  closely  reviewing  all  of  the 
comment letters received so far. Working groups have been discussing potential refinements 
to the proposals to address the concerns raised during the consultation. The Committee itself 
will meet tomorrow. Our agenda is straightforward: we will evaluate the industry’s views and 
consider  the  solutions  proposed  by  the  Committee’s  working  groups.  No  conclusions  are 
foregone  at  this stage. The  members  of  the  Committee  are  in  agreement  that  our primary 
responsibility is to develop an agreement that is sensitive to risk, forward-looking, and fit for 
the service of twenty-first century banking.  But we are also conscious of the need to avoid 
unnecessary burden and to provide the industry with as much certainty as possible. 
As we near completion of the New Accord, I am frequently asked the same question that you 
proposed as the title of my presentation: “what next for Basel?” Rest assured that we will not 
rest once we’ve introduced the New Accord. Indeed, some hints of topics that the Committee 
may wish to tackle next emerge even in the comment letters sent by the industry.  
One  good  example  might  be  to  consider  the  incorporation  of  full  credit  risk  models  in  the 
calculation of  minimal  capital  requirements.  In  theory,  a  bank’s  capital requirements  would 
then reflect to a greater degree the economic benefits of diversification in its balance sheet. 
Some respondents have long asked the Committee to climb this mountain now in the New 
Accord.  As  you  may  know,  the  Committee  early  in  the  process  evaluated  proposals  that 
would  have  allowed  advanced  banks  to  estimate  the  degree  to  which  their  assets  might 
behave similarly or default together.  
We  know  that  some  banks  are  making  commendable  progress  in  thinking  about  ways  to 
estimate the value of diversification. Nonetheless, we remain concerned about the degree of 
confidence one might have in those estimates, given the relative lack of data available on 
which to base them. Furthermore, we are concerned that it would be difficult for third parties 
to validate any estimates at this time. Finally, we are not convinced about the consistency of 
application of these diversification effects. For example we are not certain that any leading 
bank  today  consistently  adjusts  the  value  of  all  of  its  assets  based  on  each  asset’s 
contribution to diversification. 
Consequently, for the time being we have decided instead to establish standard estimates of 
diversification  that  banks  would  apply.  I  know  that  many  members  of  the  industry  have 
accepted  that  choice  as  prudent  for  now,  but  you  have  also  stressed  the  need  to  move 
forward with an approach that is more consistent with the existing treatment of market risk 
and the emerging practices in operational risk management.  We are ready to start this work 
as soon as it is possible. 
Still, portfolio theory suggests that an obvious next step to further enhance the risk-sensitivity 
of the capital framework would be to incorporate calculations of diversification benefits into 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 5
the framework. In the coming years, and we can start very soon, we look forward to working 
with banks, with banking associations such as the BBA, and with academics and researchers 
to find ways to move Basel in the direction of full credit risk models. Likewise, the Committee 
must  continue  to  monitor  developments  in  the  industry  to  be  prepared  to  harness  other 
improvements in risk measurement and management practices. 
It is at once exciting and perhaps a bit daunting to think about the work ahead for all of us, 
whether on a national, regional, or global level. Indeed, you need only to consider the energy 
and time that supervisors and the industry have already expended to prepare for the New 
Basel Accord to recall that great benefits can be reaped only from great efforts. While many 
challenges lie ahead, even more lie behind us that we have already overcome.  
Thank you for inviting me to your conference today. 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2003
