Seung Park: The recent state of the Korean economy and the policy response 
Speech  by  Dr  Seung  Park,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Seoul  Foreign  Correspondent’s 
Club, Seoul, 16 December 2003. 
 Opening remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let  me  begin  by  expressing  my  deep  thanks  to  Ms.  Sohn,  Jie-Ae,  the  President  of  Seoul  Foreign 
Correspondent’s Club and other members for having invited me to address today’s gathering. Over the 
past half-century, correspondents of the Club have acquainted the entire world with Korea’s politics, 
economy,  society,  and  culture.  At  times  you  praised  and  encouraged  for  Korea’s  astonishing 
development. At others you criticized and advised about Korea’s outmoded practices not in keeping 
with  global  standards.  In  this  way,  you  have  contributed  to  Korea’s  growth  as  a  member  of  the 
international community.  
Today  I  would  like  to  brief  you  on  the  movements  of  the  Korean  economy  over  the  past  year,  the 
prospects  for  the  next  year,  and  what  needs  to  be  done  to  achieve  sustainable  growth.  I  intend  to 
focus especially on the desirability of North-South economic cooperation on the Korean peninsula.  
Movements of Korean economy over the past year and policy initiatives  
As  all  of  you  may  well  be  aware,  this  year  the  Korean  economy  has  been  going  through  its  most 
difficult period since overcoming the 1997 currency crisis.  
In  the  early  part  of  the  year,  geopolitical  risks  ran  high  over  the  war  in  Iraq  and  the  North  Korean 
nuclear issue while the world economic recovery was still awaited. Along with these woes, the spread 
of  SARS  greatly  undermined  consumer  and  business  confidence.  After  that,  the  situation  was 
worsened  by  production  setbacks  arising  from  labor  disputes  and  the  damage  caused  by  Typhoon 
Maemi.  Despite  the  now-evident  recovery  of  the  world  economy  and  the  matching  improvement  of 
exports, the household sector’s over-indebtedness and the inefficiency of the country’s social structure 
are  acting  to  hinder  the  recovery  of  consumer  and  business  confidence.  As  a  result,  Korea’s  GDP 
growth is considered to have fallen from 6.3 percent last year to 2.9 percent this year.  
On  the  front  of  prices  and  current  account  position,  the  picture  is  rather  more  satisfactory.  Core 
inflation has been showing stable movements at around the 3 percent mark, the midpoint of its target 
range. The current account is expected to register a surplus of around 12 billion dollars for the year 
thanks to the briskness of exports.  
In  spite  of  price  stability  and  a  current  account  surplus,  economic  activity  has  remained  in  the 
doldrums. Thus the Bank of Korea lowered its call rate target by 50 basis points in all to support a 
recovery  of  economic  activity,  bringing  it  down  in  May  and  July  from  4.25  percent  to  the  current 
3.75 percent. For its part, the government has expanded fiscal spending. It drew up supplementary 
budgets of 6.3 billion dollars(7.5 trillion won) in all during this year.  
Prospects of Korean economy for the next year  
Looking ahead,  as  the  effects of  this pump-priming policy  become  evident and  the world  economy, 
notably  that  of  the  United  States,  continues  to  show  clear  signs  of  recovery,  we  expect  a  gradual 
improvement  in  the  Korean  economy.  In  the  third  quarter,  GDP  growth  already  increased  to 
2.3 percent  from  the  1.9  percent  of  the  second  quarter.  It  is  thought  that  the  economy  has  now 
bottomed out and moved into a phase of mild recovery. Next year Korea’s GDP growth is expected to 
rise to 5.2 percent.  
For its part, core inflation for the next year is anticipated to show stable movements at 2.8 percent. We 
are looking to see a current account surplus on a scale of around 6 billion dollars.  
BIS Review 57/2003 
 1
Changes in the growth environment and tasks for sustainable growth  
If  we  judge  the  Korean  economy  only  by  the  prospects  for  next  year’s  growth,  prices  and  current 
account position, we might think that it has no serious problems.  
Seen  from  a  long-term  perspective,  however,  the  growth  environment  surrounding  the  Korean 
economy  has  been  changing  very  fast.  How  appropriately  we  respond  to  these  changes  will  be 
decisive for the future of the Korean economy.  
These changes in the growth environment can largely be summarized under three headings. The first 
is  the  Korean  economy’s  shift  from  a  low  wage  system  to  a  high  wage  system.  The  second  is  the 
dynamic rise of the neighboring Chinese economy with its unlimited resources of low wage labors. And 
the third is that the Korean economy is inevitably exposed to the worldwide revolution of openness.  
Due to the combined shock of three major changes, Korean companies and products that have grown 
up  under  the  previous  low  wage  and  protectionalist  framework  are  destined  to  lose  much  of  their 
competitiveness.  
Therefore, short-term pump-priming measurers are insufficient to sustain a solid growth path for the 
Korean  economy  in  the  long  run.  Heightening  competitiveness  through  the  structural  reform  I  am 
about to describe is of over-riding importance.  
Firstly, efforts for financial structural reform should be stepped up more than ever. It is true that Korean 
financial  markets  have  developed  greatly  in  terms  of  quality  and  quantity  thanks  to  its  drive  for 
structural  adjustment  since  the  1997  financial  crisis.  More  recently,  however,  some  new  factors 
making for instability in financial markets have emerged. They include the worsening of management 
status in some credit card companies and investment trust companies, the rise in the overdue ratio on 
household loans, and the increase in number of individuals on the bank’s credit blacklist. Worse still, 
they  act  as  a  hindrance  to  economic  growth,  causing  the  shrinkage  of  consumer  and  business 
confidence. Therefore, it is important to resolve the problems posed by these destabilizing factors at 
an  early  stage  through  more  intensive  financial  reform  so  that  the  Korean  economy  can  enjoy 
continued growth.  
Secondly, the problem of high costs, which is deeply rooted in all areas of Korean society, should be 
solved. The major high costs I would identify are the high housing cost caused by the steep rise in 
property  prices,  the  high  education  cost  caused  by  the  fevered  atmosphere  of  private  tutoring 
institutes,  and  the  high  transportation  cost  caused  by  urban  traffic  congestion.  These  high  costs 
consequently  lead  to  high  wages.  Though  the  causes  of  these  high  social  costs  are  varied  and 
complicated, we can say the main factor lies in the development imbalance between the regions. For 
this  reason,  it  is  important  to  promote  balanced  development  between  the  regions  to  solve  the 
problems of these high costs. And in particular, it is highly necessary to devise countermeasures for 
easing the concentration of the population on Seoul and notably the Kangnam area.  
Lastly, but not least, the problem of low social efficiency should be tackled. Typical examples of this 
low efficiency are immature labor-management relations, the influence of vested interest groups, the 
unproductive political structure, and the anti-globalization sentiment. These phenomena mainly arise 
from  the  underdevelopment  of  the  structure  of  popular  consciousness.  Therefore,  Korea  should 
overcome  them  by reinforcing  social  leadership and  steady  efforts  for  the  reform  of  consciousness. 
That is, Korea should shift in labor-management relations from a mind-set oriented toward conflict and 
confrontation to one focused on understanding and cooperation. And it should shift from a wearisome 
and unproductive political process to one that is constructive and productive, and from closed mental 
attitudes to outward-oriented ways of thinking.  
The Importance of North-South economic cooperation on Korean peninsula  
So far, I have outlined three paths to enhance the Korean economy’s competitiveness. However, they 
are all medium- or long-term tasks that will need a long time to bring to fruition.  
So then, what can provide a short-term breakthrough for strengthening competitiveness? The answer 
is to promote North-South economic cooperation on the Korean peninsula.  
North-South  economic  cooperation  could  open  up  a  new  path  toward  absorbing  the  impact  on  the 
Korean economy of its high wage costs, the dynamic rise of the Chinese economy, and the revolution 
of  openness.  North  Korea  offers  very  low  production  costs,  particularly  low-cost  labor,  and  there  is 
also  the  possibility  of  direct  inland  transport  between  the  North  and  the  South.  It  should  also  be 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2003
relatively unproblematic for South Korea companies to locate operations there because of the shared 
language and historical traditions. In addition, people in the two halves of Korean peninsula have the 
sense of belonging to one and the same nation.  
On  the  basis  of  these  advantageous  conditions,  the  combination  of  South  Korean  capital  and 
technology  and  North  Korean  work  force  can  lead  to  stronger  competitiveness  in  the  high-end 
information technology sector as well as, of course, the more labor intensive sectors.  
Needless to say, the setting-up of brisk economic cooperation between the North and the South is also 
very important in terms of preparations for reunification. At the present time, North Korea is in great 
need of basic necessities because of the backwardness of its industrial facilities. If reunification were 
to  take  place  without  adequate  preparations  under  these  circumstances,  huge  number  of  North 
Korean people would flow into the South looking for work. This could turn into a national disaster.  
For the timely prevention of such a situation, we need to narrow the economic gap between the two 
Koreas by stepping up investment in North Korea.  
In  this  respect,  a  great  deal  depends  on  whether  or  not  the  industrial  complex  at  Kaesong,  the 
southernmost city of North Korea, proves a success. With the ground-breaking ceremony on June 30, 
the construction of the first stage of the Kaesong industrial complex is underway with a ticket of some 
180  million  dollars(200  billion  won).  Kaesong  is a  very  important  staging post  on  the  road  between 
Seoul and Pyongyang, and it is located only some 60 km north of Seoul. And it is understood that 
within the factory complex, the minimum wage will be only 57 dollars and 50 cents per month. The rate 
of tax will be very low. There are also guarantees that firms will have autonomy and flexibility in the 
management  of  locally-hired  human  resources.  Consequently,  many  South  Korean  companies  are 
planning  to  set  up  in  the  Kaesong  industrial  complex.  Whether  they  succeed  or  not  will  provide  a 
touchstone for future investment in North Korea and for economic cooperation between the two halves 
of the peninsula.  
When we look at the overall picture of the relationship between North and South Korea, we can say 
that the thaw has now arrived, even though there remain some factors making for tension such as the 
North  Korean  nuclear  issue.  The  proportion  of  the  population  on  both  sides  who  went  through  the 
horrors  of  the  Korean  War  is  declining  rapidly  and  mutual  hostility  is  easing.  Meanwhile,  bilateral 
exchanges and cooperation are constantly expanding in the academic, cultural and sporting areas as 
well as the humanitarian dimension. It is absolutely essential to reach a peaceful solution to the North 
Korean nuclear issue in order to sustain this desirable atmosphere and foster economic cooperation 
between the two Koreas. It is indispensable also for the firmer assurance of security throughout the 
Asian-Pacific region.  
I would like to ask you as members of the fourth estate, to give your supportive cooperation so that 
progress can be made on the North Korean nuclear issue.  
Closing remarks  
As I have pointed out today, the Korean economy faces many difficult problems.  
But as you have probably observed, Koreans have a long tradition of uniting as one in their efforts to 
overcome adversity. Korea brought about the “Miracle on the Han River”. It rose from the ashes of the 
Korean  War  and  utter  destitution  to  become  a  member  of  the  so-called  rich  countries’  club  of  the 
OECD within less than half a century. Korea also offers a successful example of what can be achieved 
under  the  IMF’s  structural  adjustment  program.  Through  bold  structural  reform,  it  was  able  to 
overcome, in a prudent manner, the foreign currency crisis that broke out in 1997, again exhibiting a 
characteristic dynamism.  
For my part, I am convinced that Korea will again move on from the present difficult situation, drawing 
on the strong foundation built by such historical experiences and the sense of self-confidence that they 
have provided.  
Thank you for listening so attentively.  
BIS Review 57/2003 
 3
