Bank of Japan's October report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 14 October 2003. 
 The Bank’s View2 
The  foundation  for  a  gradual  recovery  in  Japan’s  economy  is  being  laid,  as  the  environment  for 
exports and business sentiment have improved. 
With regard to final demand, housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is declining. 
Private consumption also continues to be weak. Meanwhile, business fixed investment is recovering 
gradually and net exports have recently started to increase somewhat.  
In response to these developments in final demand, corporate profits are following a moderate uptrend 
and business sentiment is improving, although industrial production is still basically flat. Meanwhile, 
the number of employees has stopped falling and the pace of decline in wages is gradually slowing. 
However,  the  employment  and  income  situation  of  households  overall  still  remains  severe,  as  the 
unemployment rate continues to be high, albeit with some fluctuations. 
Turning  to  the  economic  outlook,  overseas  economies  are  expected  to  maintain  a  relatively  steady 
recovery  mainly  in  the  United  States  and  in  East  Asia.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  likely  that 
exports will continue to increase and industrial production will turn up gradually.  
With  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  declining  trend,  and 
private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time since the employment and income situation 
is  unlikely  to  improve  markedly.  Meanwhile,  the  recovery  trend  in  business  fixed  investment  is 
expected to become clearer, mainly in large manufacturing firms, whose investment has been thus far 
significantly restrained despite the recovery in their profits.  
Overall, with the recovery in overseas economies, exports and production will increase, which in turn 
will gradually initiate momentum for an economic recovery in Japan. However, it is expected to take 
some  more  time  before  a  self-sustaining  recovery  in  domestic  demand  gains  momentum,  given 
persisting downward pressures from structural adjustments, such as firms’ reduction of excess debt 
and  restraint  on  labor  costs.  In  addition,  uncertainty  still  exists  with  respect  to  the  outlook  for  the 
environment for exports, as the employment situation in the United States continues to be sluggish 
and the yen exchange rate has been unstable, tending toward appreciation against the U.S. dollar.  
On the price front, import prices have stopped declining due to the uptrend in international commodity 
prices, especially crude oil prices, until this summer. Under these circumstances, domestic corporate 
goods  prices  are  more  or  less  flat,  which  is  also  partly  due  to  the  rise  in  tobacco  tax.  Meanwhile, 
corporate services prices continue a year-on-year decrease of slightly over 1 percent. As for consumer 
prices, the year-on-year rate of decline diminished to 0.1 percent in August due mainly to the special 
factors, such as the increase in medical treatment costs in April and the rise in tobacco tax in July.  
As for the outlook for prices, import prices are projected to head for a decline again due to the recent 
appreciation of the yen. Meanwhile, domestic corporate goods prices are likely to remain more or less 
flat for the time being, since there is some time lag for these import price developments to have effects 
on the domestic prices and also the rate of decline in machinery prices is diminishing. As for consumer 
prices, although it is possible that the year-on-year decline may stop temporarily in the period ahead 
due  to  special  factors  such  as  a  rise  in  rice  prices,  they  are  basically  projected  to  continue  falling 
gradually, since the supply-demand condition in the macroeconomy still remains considerably loose 
despite its recent gradual improvement.  
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
October 9 and 10, 2003. 
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on October 9 and 10, 2003 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
As for the financial environment, the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank of Japan 
moved almost at the 29-30 trillion yen level in September, as the Bank provided ample liquidity, but 
rose  to  34.6 trillion  yen  on  September  30  as  a  result  of  even  more  ample  liquidity  provision  by  the 
Bank. Under these circumstances, the overnight call rate moved at around zero percent, except for the 
temporary rise on September 30. Interest rates on term instruments remained steady on the whole, 
although  TB  and  FB  rates  rose  from  mid  to  late  September.  Meanwhile,  interest  rates  on  Euroyen 
futures are declining gradually, although they were at somewhat high levels in September mainly in 
distant contracts. 
Yields on long-term government bonds fluctuated due partly to portfolio adjustments toward the fiscal 
half year end under the improved outlook for Japan’s economy. Recently, they declined slightly partly 
because investors bought government bonds on dips. The yields are moving at around 1.3 percent. 
Meanwhile, yield spreads between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government 
bonds are virtually unchanged on the whole. 
Stock  prices  rose  substantially  toward  mid-September  as  foreign  investors  continued  to  invest  in 
Japanese stocks, but declined toward the end of September due to the rapid appreciation of the yen 
and growing concern over price adjustments. However, they recovered after the rebound in U.S. stock 
prices. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average is moving at around 10,500 yen. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen rose sharply as market participants became less sensitive to 
a possible market intervention around the time of the G-7 meeting and as foreign investors continued 
to  invest  in  Japanese  stocks.  The  yen  is  currently  traded  in  the  range  of  109-111  yen  to  the  U.S. 
dollar.  
With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high 
credit risks, while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. Their 
lending  attitudes  seem  to  be  becoming  slightly  more  accommodative  in  areas  such  as  terms  and 
conditions for loans. Meanwhile, the lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms in 
general  are  improving  somewhat,  although  those  perceived  by  small  firms  remain  severe.  In  the 
corporate  bond  and  CP  markets,  the  issuance  spreads  remain  steady  and  the  favorable  issuing 
environment is virtually unchanged on the whole, especially for firms with high credit ratings, although 
some firms still seem to be taking a wait-and-see attitude in the corporate bond issuance market in 
view of the rise in long-term interest rates. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend, mainly because firms’ cash flow 
remains above business fixed investment and firms are continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline at around 2 percent on a year-
on-year basis. The amount outstanding of CP issued is above the previous year’s level. The amount 
outstanding of corporate bonds issued is around the previous year’s level.  
Meanwhile,  according  to  business  surveys,  the  financial  positions  of  firms  in  general  are  improving 
slightly, although those of small firms remain severe. 
The year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base continues to be around 20 percent. The year-on-
year growth rate of the money stock is around 2 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole, although corporate bond 
issuance rates are increasing slightly reflecting the rise in long-term interest rates. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions continue to be extremely easy. Meanwhile, long-term interest rates are at a slightly lower 
level than last month. Stock prices are basically around the same level as last month. Growth rates of 
the  money  stock  and  the  monetary  base  relative  to  economic  activity  remain  high.  In  corporate 
finance, the favorable issuing environment of corporate bonds and CP is virtually unchanged on the 
whole, especially for firms with low credit risks. However, there has been no significant change in the 
severity of the funding environment for firms, particularly for firms with high credit risks. Developments 
in the financial and capital markets, the behavior of financial institutions, and the situation of corporate 
finance continue to require close monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2003
