Urban Bäckström: The inflation targeting approach
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors and President of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 28th Economic Conference of
the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Wien, on 15 June 2000.
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to attend this conference and discuss challenges for monetary
policy together with such a distinguished panel.
In  the  last  decade  a  growing  number  of  countries  have  chosen  to  conduct  monetary  policy  with  an
explicit target  for  inflation.  One  reason  behind  this  choice  has  no  doubt  been  these  countries’  poor
experience with a fixed, but adjustable, exchange rate regime.
The first country to formally adopt a policy of targeting inflation was New Zealand, in 1990. Canada
did the same in 1991, followed by the United Kingdom, Sweden and Australia. Since the early 1990s
other countries have also introduced some variant of inflation targeting.
It is interesting to note that before the 1990s the predominant view was that a floating exchange rate
regime  was  not  suitable  for  a  small  open  economy.  Today,  I  believe  that  experience  among  those
countries that are targeting inflation has been exceptionally good. In fact, even some emerging market
countries are now building the same kind of regime.
It is not without some pride that I recall that, in a sense, Sweden was actually something of a pioneer
in explicitly focusing monetary policy, with a flexible exchange rate, on a specified target for prices.
Back in 1931, after Sweden had been obliged to abandon the gold standard, its government and the
central  bank  declared that  the  overriding  objective  of  monetary  policy  would  be the stabilisation of
prices. More specifically, the finance minister of the day described the task of the central bank as that
of, “using all means available, preserving the domestic purchasing power of the Swedish krona”. In
this way, the Riksbank became the first central bank to declare price stabilisation as its policy norm
with a floating exchange rate.
The norm was based on a proposal made much earlier, in 1898, by Knut Wicksell, often regarded as
Sweden’s greatest economist at the time. Wicksell’s rule for monetary policy, which stemmed from
his extension of the classical quantity theory of money, was simple: “The central bank is to raise the
discount rate as long as prices are rising, lower it as long as prices are falling and keep it constant
when prices are stable”.
In other words, price stability was to be achieved through interest policy. Although the rule applied to
the price level rather than to inflation and was not forward looking, it is a clear parallel to the rules of
thumb that are used today by those central banks that target inflation.
Sweden’s price stability norm in the 1930s lasted only a few years and was followed by a return to a
fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  During  those  years,  however,  it  performed  the  central  function  of
stabilising expectations as well as prices. This was important not least because to some extent it helped
shield Sweden from the global economy’s depressive impulses and thereby contributed to the recovery
being speedier than in most other countries.
Here  I  should  perhaps  add  that  although  this  Swedish  price  stability  “experiment”  attracted  a  good
deal  of  attention  at  the  time,  it  certainly  did  not  leave  any  deep  or  lasting  mark  on  the  modern
approach  to  inflation  targeting.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  depression  and  the  second  world  war,
Keynesianism  gained  ground.  The  introduction  of  inflation  targeting  in  Sweden  in  the  1930s  was
therefore  not as  pioneering  as  when this  kind  of  regime  was  introduced  in  the  early  1990s,  first  by
New Zealand and later by others.
1
BIS Review 50/2000
A great advantage with a regime that explicitly targets inflation,  is that  the  central bank  adjusts  the
interest  rate  continuously  in  the  light  of  inflation  prospects.  Compared  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate
regime,  imbalances  can  then  be  prevented  from  building  up  to  the  same  extent.  A  slight  upward
adjustment of the interest rate at an early stage, to reduce the risk of inflation picking up, is something
quite different from having to hike the short-term interest rate in order to defend a fixed exchange rate.
As a personal reflection I can say that explaining the importance of low inflation is much easier - not
least for a central bank governor - than the task of selling the advantages of a stable currency. This is
particularly  true  as  the  latter  task  becomes  increasingly  pressing  if  the  economy  has  been  hit  by
problems with costs and is facing speculative attacks. Some of you may remember that for a few days
in the autumn of 1992 the instrumental rate in Sweden was raised to as much as 500 per cent. In my
view, this is probably one important explanation why Sweden is not a member of the ERM system - at
least not at this stage.
The  challenge  during  the  1990s  for  the  inflation  targeting  countries  has  been  to  build  a  rigorous
framework  around  the  new  regime.  Answers  have  been  needed  in  particular  to  questions  like  the
following: What rate of inflation should be targeted, what index should be used, are bands around the
target necessary, the degree of transparency, etc.
It  has  also  been  important  to  formulate  a  monetary  policy  reaction  function,  that  is,  to  define  the
balance between inflation variability and output variability. The reason why central banks do not aim
for maximum short-term stability in either inflation or output is that attaining only one of the targets
would be costly.
On the one hand, the central bank’s legitimacy among the general public could be lost if short-term
interest rates have to move sharply and cause output to fluctuate widely while inflation is being held
stable and exactly on the target. Maximum stability in output could, on the other hand, result in sharp
fluctuations in the rate of inflation and erode the target’s credibility. Instead it is a matter of finding a
point somewhere midway between the two extremes.
Looking ahead, I believe there are at least two major questions that central banks have to address more
thoroughly.
First, how should monetary policy react to asset prices, such as equity and/or real estate prices? We
know from history that the development of asset prices can have a significant impact on both inflation
and real economic activity. We need to establish whether or not there are actions that central banks can
and  should  take  to  minimise  the  likelihood  of  macroeconomic  instability  arising  from  extreme
fluctuations in asset prices.
Second, how should monetary policy react to structural changes in the economy? On this issue quite a
lot  of  thinking  has  already  been  done,  both  among  academics  and  policymakers.  Nevertheless,  I
believe that more must be done in this field, especially since at least some parts of the world economy
have seen something of a productivity shock in recent years. I am carefully trying to avoid using the
buzzword “new economy” here, since history has been full of expressions like that ever since the turn
of the 19th century.
Unfortunately, I do not have the time to elaborate on the first question. Instead I will say a few words
about the second.
Although the discussion about monetary policy and a productivity shock is taking place mostly in the
United States, in the light of the impressive economic performance there and the acceleration in the
rate of productivity growth, one could certainly ask: What about Europe?
Europe is, on  the  one  hand,  now  in  a  strong  upward  economic  phase.  In  addition,  new  technology,
especially the Internet and telecommunications, is gaining ground in many European countries. On the
other hand, Europe also differs from the US. The rapid growth of US investment has not yet been seen
in Europe. One could also argue that the existence of quite a few structural obstacles in Europe makes
an acceleration of productivity growth less likely in the immediate future.
A handful of countries - including the Netherlands, Ireland, the UK and, more recently, Sweden and
Finland - have achieved strong economic growth and in some cases also low inflation. But with the
BIS Review 50/2000
2
exception of Ireland, these countries have not yet enjoyed the same strong productivity growth as the
US.
Nevertheless, the possibility of a productivity breakthrough also in Europe cannot be ruled out. It will
probably depend on how well Europe succeeds in reforming microeconomic policy.
Higher - or accelerating - productivity growth does indeed pose new challenges for monetary policy. It
could set in motion a complex of effects on aggregate supply and demand, on inflation, equity prices
and interest rates. Just to give a few examples, let me briefly mention the following effects:
First,  a  positive  productivity  shock  raises  the  economy’s  potential  growth  rate.  It  also  affects
aggregate  demand  through  new,  profitable  investment  opportunities,  higher  equity  prices  and
expectations  among  households  of  higher  permanent  income.  One  question  for  policymakers  is
whether  the  demand  effects  are  so  powerful  that  they  have  the  potential  to  outpace  the  growth  of
aggregate supply in the short and medium perspective.
Second,  there  could  be  temporary  disinflation  effects  at  work  if  the  increase  in  productivity  is
unexpected initially. If wages are slow to adjust, higher productivity growth lowers unit labour costs
and thereby reduces price inflation. Here again there are important questions for policymakers. Should
this effect be allowed to result in a temporary reduction of price inflation or unemployment?
Third, an increase in the trend rate of productivity growth could also result in a higher equilibrium real
interest rate, when the output gap is closed, in order to balance saving and investment. Fiscal policy
and the development of public financial balances could at least partly offset this effect, as could the
economy’s degree of openness.
All this implies that monetary policymakers, also in Europe, could face quite a few challenges. One of
them is to identify structural changes and distinguish these from cyclical variations. Another challenge
is to detect the magnitude of the effects. Furthermore, looking ahead in monetary policy is hard when
the economy is going through major changes that make it difficult to forecast the future path of the
economy and inflation.
It is quite clear that this demands a great deal of forecasters as well as of those who construct macro
models.  The  forecasts  concern  inflation  one  to  two  years  ahead,  which  calls,  for  instance,  for
reasonable precision in the measurement of the output gap and the relationship between the output gap
and inflation.
It  is  already  evident,  for  example,  that  in  the  1990s  inflation  forecasts  in  many  countries  were
frequently  on  the  high  side.  I  believe  that  the  best  we  can  do,  at  least  at  this  stage,  is  to  pay  close
attention to incoming data in the forecasting process, and not mechanically use the results from models
that rely too heavily on historical relationships. We have to deal more successfully with the fact that
forecasts of economic developments can never be completely accurate and still allow monetary policy
to be forward looking.
When discussing monetary policy of today, we must remember that we have come a long way. The
world economy shows strong growth coupled with low inflation and monetary policy has contributed
to this development. However, there are interesting, though somewhat difficult, challenges ahead of us
which must be met if we are to preserve this bright picture of the world economy. This conference will
contribute to a better understanding of the issues and problems involved.
3
BIS Review 50/2000
