Dr A H E M Wellink: Introduction to the press conference
on the 1999 Annual Report
Speech by Mr A H E M Wellink, President of De Nederlandsche Bank, at the press conference, held in
Amsterdam on 17 May 2000.
 The world economy is in good shape. In 1999 GDP growth came out at 3%, exceeding expectations.
Yet, this overall pattern masks a number of risks and uncertainties. The motor driving the exceptional
US economic performance - at the same time the motor driving the world economy - is in danger of
becoming  overheated.  Southeast  Asia  recorded  a  rapid  recovery  from  the  financial  crisis,  but  the
Japanese performance remains weak. The first half of 2000, however, holds out better prospects.
In  Europe,  too,  economic  performance  is  improving.  In  1999  GDP  growth  reached  2.3%.  Though
seemingly  low  compared  to  the  3%  growth  rate  of  the  world  economy,  it  should  be  noted  that
European growth accelerated considerably in the course of 1999. For the current year, a robust growth
rate of 3-3.5% is expected. Thus, prospects for Europe are bright, definitely so if the structural reform
policies  are  continued  and  the  renewal  of  the  economy,  so  evident  in  the  United  States,  progresses
further  in  Europe  as  well.  There  are  no  grounds  to  suppose  that  the  ICT  train  will  bypass  Europe,
provided, of course, that we see to it that we are well prepared. Despite the movements in the euro’s
external  value,  Europe  may  pride  itself  on  a  successful  first  year  of  monetary  union.  First  and
foremost,  prospects  for  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  remain  favourable,  thanks  not  least  to  the
success of the ECB: whoever would have thought two or three years ago that the launch of the euro
would be as smooth as it has proved to be? In addition, Europe’s vulnerability to external shocks, such
as the Asia crisis, has undeniably diminished as a consequence of monetary union.
Good, better, best: in the Netherlands, we may meanwhile be doing too well. The Dutch economy is
experiencing  its  most  prolonged  cyclical  upturn  in  fifty  years’  time,  due  in  part  to  the  consumer
spending impulse emanating from higher asset prices. For 1999 this impulse may be roughly estimated
at NLG 10 billion (1.25% of GDP). In a sense, the situation in our country is comparable with that in
the United States. We have now reached a point where caution is called for. In order to prevent the
economy  from  overheating,  it  is  first  of  all  required  that,  apart  from  those  already  decided  on,  no
further fiscal impulses should be provided; phrased differently, higher-than-expected revenues are to
be reflected in lower public debt levels. Second, moderate wage movements are to be ensured. Even
then,  the  new  tax  system  for  2001  will  boost  average  purchasing  power  by  4%  or  even  more,
representing a powerful stimulus for consumption.
Many commentators view the new millennium as the start  of a  “new economy”.  ICT  developments
will undoubtedly  have  a  major  impact  on  world  economic  performance;  still,  there  is  no  indication
whatever suggesting that economic laws have become fundamentally different. For this reason, and in
order  to be  able to  benefit  to  the  full  from  the  renewing  economy,  we  must  continue  the  structural
reform policies (further improving the operation of the labour market, especially on the supply side,
and  of  a  number  of  product  markets).  More  in  general,  policies  must  remain  geared  towards  the
achievement  of  well-balanced  global  macro-economic  conditions  (low  inflation,  more  equilibrated
balance-of-payments  positions).  We  may  well  count  our  blessings,  but  should  not  close our  eyes  to
reality.
1
BIS Review 41/2000
