Mr George paints a broadbrush picture of challenges and change for the
markets as the year unfolds
Speech  by  the  Rt Hon Eddie George,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  Euromoney
International Bond Congress at the QEII Conference Centre in London on 16 February 2000.
 It’s  a  pleasure,  as  always,  to  have  been invited  to bring  proceedings  at  this  great  annual  event  to  a
close. You seem to go from strength to strength - from what I hear your sixth Congress has been as
lively and interesting as its predecessors.
Lively  and  interesting  are  pretty  good  words  to  describe the last twelve  months  in  the  markets  too.
When we were together here last year there were still plenty of clouds around. The emerging markets
in Asia were still only in the early stages of patchy recovery. Russia was still fragile and there were
real fears of another round of financial upset in  Latin  America, particularly  Brazil.  In  the industrial
countries,  too,  the  prospects  were  for  slow  growth - some  were  even  still  forecasting  recession.  I
concluded that we’d all need strong nerves in the year ahead.
Well, by and large we kept our nerve, and the skies have brightened over the past year as the clouds of
financial instability and global economic slowdown dispersed. The focus now is not on how we keep
the ship afloat but how we keep her on a steadier course - which, if you’re a sailor is a comparative
luxury. That still leaves us with quite enough to worry about - and who ever met a central banker - or a
sailor - who  didn’t  worry  about  what  was  coming  next - it  would  be  a  contradiction  in  terms.  The
immediate challenge is to cope with the imbalances within and between the industrial countries, and
we have more work  to  do  to  improve  our  defences against  volatile international  capital  flows  more
generally.
But for the time being, the rate of world output growth, which had fallen to only about 2% in 1998,
about half its long-term trend rate, and which was widely expected to fall further, is now expected to
bounce back to around trend over the next couple of years. And whereas, a year ago, many industrial
countries were still in the process of easing monetary policy, to offset the impact on world demand of
the  interruption  of  the  flow  of  credit  and  investment  to  emerging  market  countries  and  transition
economies, we have recently seen a quite widespread increase in interest rates, designed to moderate
the  pace  of  domestic  demand  growth.  And  rising  interest  rates - I  need  not  remind  you - are  a
reflection of a strengthening economy.
Against this backdrop of strong economic growth and official tightening, it is not surprising that bond
markets  in  most  developed  economies  have  responded  with  higher  yields  over  the  last  12 months.
Since  this  time  last  year  10-year  government  bond  yields  in  the  major  markets - with  the  notable
exception of Japan - have all risen by over 100 basis points. And with credit spreads widening during
much of the summer, the rates that corporate borrowers have faced have shown even greater increases.
Despite this, however, it has been another very active year for you all.
Over the  past few  years  a  notable feature  of  the  international  bond  markets is that  each  subsequent
year has set a new record in terms of volume, and 1999 has certainly been no exception to this. What
is of particular note about issuance in 1999 though is the scale of this increase: up by almost a half
from the level of 1998 - a pretty remarkable performance.
I think that there are two major reasons for this increase:
First, and most obvious, is the successful introduction of the euro. I can best demonstrate this with the
fact that international issuance in the euro in 1999 was more than double that of the level that legacy
currency issuance reached in 1998. This is a clear indication that the euro has established itself as a
currency for international finance in its first year of existence. Not only did the volume of issuance
rise, but perhaps even more strikingly, the diversity of issuers increased too. This illustrates how the
1
BIS Review 15/2000
creation of the euro has opened up new funding sources for a wider range of issuers, and I have no
doubt that the euro-denominated high-yield bond market will continue to grow as confidence in the
euro bond market increases.
A  second  reason  for  the  large  increase  in  issuance  in  1999  was  the  increase  in  confidence  of  both
investors  and  issuers  as  the  effects  of  the  emerging  market  crises  subsided.  With  this  increased
confidence came increased appetite for credit, and this not only gave borrowers from further down the
credit spectrum the opportunity to access markets - which they took - but also allowed issuers who had
pulled out of the markets during those turbulent times to return.
So overall it is satisfying to note that the bond markets were not only more active than they have been
in  previous  years,  but  that  they  have  also  been  accessible  to  a  wider  range  of  borrowers  than  in
previous years.
Finally, right at the end of the year - literally - we all faced the challenge of preparing for Y2K. As we
know now, the world’s financial markets survived the dreaded Millennium Bug, thanks in large part to
the efforts of very many of you, and your IT colleagues, in making sure that we would. And we at the
Bank like to think we played our part too. Now I am not one of those who feel that all our work, yours
and ours, was unnecessary. If I had to choose a motto for a central banker, I think “better safe than
sorry”  would  be  very  high  on  the  list!  More  importantly  we  collectively  showed  that  the  London
markets were equal to the challenge - even a once-in-a-millennium challenge - and were determined to
make sure that come the first day of the new year London would be “open for business as usual”.
What of the coming year? Well, I can predict that, after two years of new year working, we will all be
able to enjoy our New Year’s Day bank holiday for a change next year! But beyond that, my crystal
ball is  no  better than  yours,  and  I  am  afraid  that if  you  are looking  for  me  to  predict  the  course  of
exchange rates or interest rates over the next 12 months I am  going to disappoint you. I  would  like
instead to pick out a few themes which I think will be of increasing importance as the year unfolds.
Firstly,  I  think  we  will  increasingly  see  a  fall  in  the  absolute  size  of  government  bond  markets,
although once again Japan remains the exception. This is already happening here in the UK and in the
US,  as  fiscal  surpluses  reduce  bond  issuance,  and  as  the  recovery  in  the  rest  of  Europe  continues
budgets  will  increasingly  move  towards  balance  there  too.  One  side  effect  of  this  is  of  course  that
outstanding government bonds can become very much sought after, and nowhere is this more true at
the moment than in our own market. But I think a much more significant change will be to encourage
corporate issuers to take up the slack, as it were, and fill the resulting hole. Europe does not yet have a
corporate bond market to compare with the US market, but I think the current situation in the markets,
with reduced government issuance, the opportunities afforded by Monetary Union and growth of the
private pension industry in continental Europe, all combine to provide a very promising environment
for the establishment of a genuine European corporate bond market.
Secondly, the electronic revolution will continue to gather pace. There are those who wonder if all the
hype about dot.com this and e-that is overdone, and certainly some of the current IT stock valuations
seem  to  build  in  expectations  not  readily  captured  by  traditional  valuation  methods.  But  in  the
financial  markets,  I  think  if  anything  the  effect  of  the  electronic  revolution  will  exceed  even  the
boldest predictions. I am told that there is at least one major securities house which is assessing the
ongoing  viability  of  each  of  their  current  functions  in  a  future  where  both  data  storage  and  data
transmission are characterised by infinite capacity and zero cost. If the function adds value even under
such a scenario, then it will be retained, but if not, then the house concerned sees no long-term future
for it. I think the challenge facing financial markets and market participants is to identify where they
can add value and which services the consumer will continue to pay for: not all will pass the test and
survive.
My  third  theme  combines  both  my  earlier  ones,  and  concerns  the  role  of  market  intermediaries.
Disintermediation is an ugly word, but it is a trend that exists today and will I  am  sure  continue to
grow  in  importance.  Electronic  secondary  trading  of  securities  is  becoming  more  common,  and  we
have also begun to see electronic primary distribution - the issuance of securities on the Internet, and,
in some cases, without the involvement of an issuing house. Now some people see in this a threat to
markets themselves: everything, they fear,  will  migrate  to  the  web  and  fragment,  with  a  loss  of  the
BIS Review 15/2000
2
transparency and regulatory framework that organised and official markets provide. I do not share this
view, nor do I think that there is no future role for markets and market intermediaries. But I do think
that the marketplace of 10 years hence will be very different from the one we have now - just as the
screen-based markets of today are very different from the physical market floors of the past.
Earlier  I  offered  you  a  possible  motto  for  central  bankers.  Let  me  complement  that  with  one  for
markets: “Adapt and survive”. But let me add the positive rider - “Those who survive will thrive”.
What is the role of the authorities in this future I have described? It is, very simply, to provide as best
we  can  the  economic  and  regulatory  environment  in  which  financial  markets  can  do  their  job - of
allocating capital to where it can be most productively deployed - more effectively. On the economic
front that means steady growth with low inflation. On the regulatory front it means a framework of
rules that provide for the transparency that is essential for the proper assessment and management of
risk  and  sets  clear  behavioural  standards  which  do  not  unnecessarily  distort  business  decisions  but
provide  clear  guidance  to  market  participants - whether  they  are  end-users  or  intermediaries - as  to
what is expected of them and what they can reasonably expect of others.
The picture I have painted is one of challenge and change. The flip-side of course is great opportunity.
In  fact  there  has  never  been  a  time  when  the  markets  here  in  London  did  not  face  change  and
uncertainty.  But  there  has  never  been  a  time  either  when  you,  we,  all  of  us,  did  not  rise  to  the
challenge. I am sure we will all do so again - and I wish you all possible success.
3
BIS Review 15/2000
