Bruno Gehrig: Monetary policy in a changing world
Speech by Prof Dr Bruno Gehrig, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank at the
3rd Conference of the Swiss Society for Financial Market Research (Schweizerische Gesellschaft für
Finanzmarktforschung, SGF), held in Zurich on 7 April 2000.
 The  title  of  my  speech  may  sound  somewhat  ambitious.  It  signals  all-encompassing  breadth  and
profound  depth.  These  are  demands  that  I  will  hardly  be  able  to  meet.  What  follows  are  a  few
reflections on  selected aspects  of  monetary  policy  by  a  practising  economist.  I  should like  to  begin
with a brief historical review leading to the 1990s, which have become known - and justly so - as the
decade  of  successful  disinflation.  Then  I  will  turn  to  the  changes  in  monetary  policy  concepts.
Following these rather retrospective remarks, I should like to deal with topics of broad general interest
in today’s discussion - under the headings “independence”, “new economy” and “asset prices”.
A brief historical review
1.
In  a  historical  dimension,  central  banks  are  comparatively  young  institutions.  While  payment
instruments  can  actually  be  traced  back  to  prehistoric  eras,  central  banks  have  emerged  only  very
gradually over the last 300 years.1 When one considers that the Bank of England was founded when
Johann  Sebastian  Bach  was  nine  years  old,  one  might  even  regard  central  banks  as  somewhat
“baroque” institutions. Indeed, the original missions of central banks must strike us as highly bizarre.
“A money-raising machine”! This is how a historian termed the Bank of England in the early days of
its existence. At that time, the Bank basically acted as banker to the state and manager of national debt,
thereby contributing to financing wars and imperial expansion.
With their roots going back to the Age of Enlightenment, early central banks stood for the economic
emancipation, ambition and power  of  the  states that  established  them.  Due  to  their  potency  as state
banks they gradually assumed functions such as the bankers’ bank, lender of last resort, regulator of
financial activity and privileged issuer of money. In the case of Switzerland, the National Bank was
founded (in 1907) in order to unify a somewhat chaotic system of banknote issues and to simplify the
payment system. All these functions have remained predominant and gained profile over large parts of
central bank history. By  contrast,  monetary  policy  as  it  is  practised today  is a  comparatively  recent
central bank discipline. It became permanently relevant only after World War II, when the gold-linked
money  standard  was  abandoned  in favour  of  a  US  dollar  standard.  In  fact,  individual  central  banks
gained control over “their” money supply only when the US dollar pegs were given up in the early
1970s.
For a long time, the policy objectives of many central banks oscillated between financing the state and
maintaining  the  (internal  and  external)  value  and  reputation  of  the  currency.  These  fundamentally
conflicting objectives provoked many currency crises and caused tremendous economic harm and, as a
result,  heightened  people’s  desire  for  monetary  stability.  Today,  the  public’s  aversion  to,  and
politicians’  awareness  of,  inflation  may  have  reached  a  peak  in  the  developed  world.  This  was
certainly a necessary condition for the global disinflation process of the 1990s.
Historically, the most effective device for keeping the price level down was the gold standard.2 In the
US, for example, accumulated inflation between the founding year (1776) and World War II was just
1
The majority of European central banks were established in the 19th century. The rise of central banking accelerated in
the 20th century.
2 However, the long-run stability of the price level was accompanied by strong and recurring fluctuations in output  and
prices.
1
BIS Review 35/2000
30%,  whereas  since  then,  the  price  level  has  multiplied  by  factor  8.  The  figures  for  Europe  look
broadly similar when the war-driven hyperinflations are left out of account. This makes central banks’
seemingly unique policy performance in the nineties look slightly more modest.
In the past decade, three main factors facilitated a return to purchasing power stability. First, a lesson
was  learned  from  the  negative  experience  with  inflation.  Price  stability  gained  considerably  in
importance in the political process. Majorities in both governments and parliaments voted in favour of
monetary discipline, which in many places amounted to priority being given to budget discipline and
pronounced  central  bank  autonomy.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  impressively  illustrates  this  changed
approach  with  respect  to  the  European  area.  This  new  political  focus  was  also  a  reaction  to  the
disillusionment with regard to the central banks’ ability to generate permanent growth effects. There
was fairly widespread agreement that price stability should be the prime  monetary  policy  objective.
Second,  it  was  of  decisive  importance  that  the  currencies  of  the  two  leading  countries,  the  US  and
Germany, achieved a high degree of price stability. Numerous countries gained credibility by pegging
their exchange rates to the US dollar and the DM, thus seizing the opportunity to successfully import
the stability policies of the Federal Reserve and the Deutsche Bundesbank. Third, the deregulation and
globalisation of financial flows have increasingly disciplined the national authorities. These days, an
excessively relaxed monetary policy is sanctioned much more severely and much more quickly than in
the  past  by  growing  inflationary  expectations,  rising  long-term  interest  rates  and  a  persistent
devaluation pressure. Correspondingly smaller are the incentives to run the higher risk of a long-term
inflationary problem for reasons of short-term opportunism.
On looking ahead, most of these factors promise to remain relevant. Such confidence, however, should
not detract from the dangers and risks involved. Fiscal discipline is facing a difficult test phase in a
number  of  countries.  It  is  foreseeable  that  the  combination  of  demographic  trends  and  non-funded
statutory  pension  claims  will lead  to  intensive  discussions  on  distribution  in  many  places  which,  in
turn, might easily trigger a rise in public indebtedness. At the very least, it is not certain whether in
such a scenario central banks will be able to remain independent and continue to concentrate on price
stability.  However,  it  should  be  clear  that  on  a  global  level  the  future  of  price  stability  depends
decisively on whether, and to what extent, the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank will
succeed in ensuring long-lasting purchasing power stability of the two major currencies.
Changes in concepts
2.
The recent past has also brought about significant changes with respect to the implementation concept
for monetary policy.
Throughout the world implementation concepts have abandoned the use of money stock growth rates
as political intermediate targets. This change of concept cannot hide the fact that monetarism was a
practical concept and one that promised success. It explicitly made the interconnection, then almost
forgotten,  between  excessive  money  supply  growth  and  inflation  the  basis  for  steering  monetary
policy,  thus  making  it  possible  to  achieve  major  stability  successes.  Two  additional  aspects  proved
favourable  in  this  respect.  Steering  the  money  supply  facilitated  communication  and  transparency.
Monetary  aggregates  show  rapidly  and  in  the  form  of  an  objective  figure  whether  the  monetary
authorities  are  actually  implementing  what  they  announced.  Due  to  exceedingly  long  and  variable
time-lags  between  measures  and  ultimate  targets,  this  applies  to  a  much  lesser  extent  to  inflation
targeting.  Finally,  money  supply  targeting  also  provides  a  measure  of  protection  for  central  banks.
Reference to excessive monetary growth made central banks relatively immune to daily political and
fiscal pressure, even in places where institutional independence had not (yet) been established.
Control  of  the  money  supply  lost  some  of  its  attractiveness  because  its  central  analytical  basis  was
subject  to  successive  erosion.  Money  demand  functions  became  increasingly  unstable.  Given  some
differences  between  countries  on  the  one  hand  and  the  aggregates  employed  on  the  other  hand
- mainly M0 to M3 - the connection between the intermediate target and the ultimate target became
more  and  more  unreliable.  That  was  also  the  case  in  Switzerland,  even  if  with  a  time-lag  and  to  a
lesser  extent  than  in  other  countries,  notably  English-speaking  ones.  We  recorded  shifts  in  cash
BIS Review 35/2000
2
holdings which we could not even explain satisfactorily ex post, much less have forecast them with
any degree of accuracy.
The central banks reacted differently to this experience. Some rapidly threw money supply targeting
overboard. Others - including the SNB - changed from annual to medium-term targets. The extended
room for manoeuvre made it possible to consider various indicators in shaping the policy course. One
could use the term pragmatically adapted targeting of the money supply. In actual fact, this step came
close to a transformation of the money stock from an intermediate target to a monetary indicator, albeit
the most important one.
The  destabilisation  of  money  demand  as  previously  set  out  has  complex  reasons  on  various  levels.
Regulatory changes, adjustments in the structure of banks, and innovations in the fields of investment
opportunities and payments undoubtedly play a major role. Moreover, with receding inflation rates the
relative  disruptive  effect  of  such  instabilities  has  increased.  Certainly,  it  cannot  be  excluded  that  at
some point in the future we will again see a phase of greater stability in the demand for money, but in
the current environment such a change is not evident.
The  policy  concept  implemented  by  the  Swiss  National  Bank  three  months  ago  is  made  up  of  the
following three elements: an explicit definition - in terms of a figure - of price stability; publication of
a three-year inflation forecast; and an operational implementation target in the form of a target range
consisting of 100 basis points for the three-month Swiss franc/Libor rate. I need not enter into this in
detail before this audience. The decisive test must be in the time path of the ultimate target variable
- the price level - which we will achieve on this basis. As regards the concept as such, I should merely
like to make two remarks pertaining to misunderstandings.
First, the interest rate target defined as a target range is not a substitute for the money supply target of
the  concept  formerly  implemented  by  us.  It  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  an  operational
implementation aid with a much shorter time reach relative to the formerly used money supply target.
It must be frequently adjusted in response to various changes and new information so as to enable the
stability  goal  to  be  reached.  Against  the  background  of  our  knowledge  of  the  monetary  policy
transmission process and its lag structure, it is obvious that it is hardly the level of money market rates
that is decisive, but rather the interest rate path optimised over time in uncertain circumstances. The
condition for success of the policy is not that the three-month Libor rate is exactly right today; rather,
it must be possible to constantly optimise the interest rate path - which leads to the set goal - in a way
that the deviations of the ideal line, which can only be defined ex post, will be as small as possible and
easy to correct. Interest rate steering will therefore often follow a fairly gradualistic pattern. This has
nothing  to  do  with  macroeconomic  activism,  quite  the  contrary.  The  macroeconomic  fine-tuning
activists have lost their case because they have assumed totally unrealistic information conditions and
underestimated the uncertainty of political decision-making. With interest rate steering, the situation is
exactly  the  opposite.  Precisely  where  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  and  false  steps  are  liable  to
occur,  there  are  good  reasons  for  implementing  a  policy  of  small  steps.  The  danger  of  slipping  is
smaller,  and  a  false  step  is  easier  to  correct.  But  there  are  also  valid  grounds  for  fairly  substantial
interest rate adjustments. For one thing, it may well happen that policymakers, in the light of new facts
and figures on ongoing developments, come to the conclusion that the interest rate pattern currently
followed  needs  to be  corrected  quite  considerably. This  would  mean  correcting  a  pattern  that,  from
today’s vantage point, was not optimal in the past. For another, it may be desirable in certain situations
to take the markets by surprise and cause expectations to be revised.
Second, it is in the nature of the concept that the information content of a pre-announced interest rate
target is much smaller with respect to the time dimension than used to be the case for money supply
targets. Under the aspects of transparency and central bank accountability, this is a drawback. We have
therefore  taken  effective  countermeasures  by  defining  price  stability  and  deciding  to  publish  our
inflation  forecast,  thus  submitting  our  decisions  to  public  discussion.  This  has  made  it  clear  -  and
equally clearly communicated - how our actions are oriented and how they are to be measured. I have
thus addressed issues that have all seen a particularly large number of changes in the past few years:
independence, transparency and accountability.
3
BIS Review 35/2000
3.
Independence - mandate - transparency
Independence
Right  into  the  1980s,  independent  central  banks  were  the  exception  -  such  as  those  of  the  US,
Germany  and  Switzerland  -  rather  than  the  rule.  This  has  changed  on  a  broad  front  in  the  past  ten
years.  The  massive  surge  of  inflation  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  and  the  reluctance  of  some  finance
ministries (and their associated central banks) to combat it made economists and the public aware that
politicians may not have the appropriate incentives to bring or to keep inflation down.
Why are independent central banks more successful when it comes to bringing down inflation rates?
The  reason  is  that  politicians  and  central  bankers  tend  to  have  somewhat  different  objectives  and
largely different time horizons. Technocrats at central banks mandated to ensure monetary stability can
easily afford to take a long-term view, while politicians feel much more constrained by the pressure to
produce  short-term  results.  This  seems  relevant  since  an  inflation-preventing  or  inflation-combating
policy is usually associated with real costs in the short run, while the benefits appear only over time. A
government might be seduced into conducting an inflationary policy in order to reap benefits in the
short  term,  while  the  costs  will  only  become  evident  years  later.  Therefore,  there  is  a  strong
probability  (but,  of  course,  no  guarantee)  that  independent  central  banks  will  do  a  better  job  than
governments with regard to the issue of inflation. This insight  -  and  perhaps the relative  success  of
most independent monetary authorities with the disinflation process in the 1970s - has paved the way
for granting more independence to monetary authorities.
Essential  preconditions  for  the  independence  of  a  central  bank  include  a  solidly  based  consensus
concerning its mandate and a commitment to transparency and accountability.
Mandate
Most economists would agree that the core task is ensuring price stability. This consensus rests on the
conviction that in the long term, when all the lag effects have come to an end, monetary policy only
determines  the  price  level,  not,  however,  output  or  employment.  Thus  the  primary  obligation  of  a
central  bank  to  maintain  price  stability  does  not  imply  that  priority  is  given  to  price  stability  in
preference to full employment. Rather, it is in the economic nature of monetary policy instruments that
they are suited for influencing price level trends, not, however, growth or employment trends. Yet in
the  short  term,  ie  within  the  monetary  policy  transmission  process,  monetary  policy  does  have  real
effects.
The problem can easily be illustrated if one tries to picture a shock, eg a massive rise in oil prices. The
immediate  consequence  will  be  an  increase  in  the  price  level  and  a  fall  in  production.  This
constellation  confronts  the  central  bank  with  a  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  growth.  If  the
bank’s sole concern is a quick restoration of price stability, it will raise interest rates and consequently
exacerbate  the  loss  of  output.  If,  on  the  contrary,  it  reacts  solely  to  the  production  effect,  it  will
strengthen  the  shock-induced  deviation  from  the  goal  of  price  stability  by  lowering  interest  rates.
Reacting to shocks may lead to a trade-off between the variability of output and the variability of the
price  level  (King  1999,  p 12).  This  trade-off  in  itself  is  an  extremely  complex  phenomenon.  It  is
determined  by  the  structure  of  the  economic  process  and  the  dynamics  of  expectations.  There  is,
realistically speaking, no chance to deduce a general policy rule and to formally embody such a rule in
the central bank mandate. Any decision to correct slowly and gradually or in a single bold effort any
deviation  from  price  stability,  whatever  its  origin, can  only  be  taken  individually.  Monetary  history
has successful examples to show for both patterns of reaction, but also unfortunate episodes in which
central  banks  actually  increased  the  variability  of  the  price  level  and  of  output  through  activist
manoeuvres. It would thus appear reasonable that an addendum, unspecified as to substance, should be
made  to  the  mandate  of  ensuring  price  stability.  For  example,  to  the  effect  that  in  fulfilling  the
mandate due attention should be paid to the development of economic activity.
Art. 99 of the Swiss Federal Constitution obliges the SNB to conduct a monetary policy which serves
the general interests of the country. Endeavours are under way to spell out this vague formulation in
BIS Review 35/2000
4
more detail in the forthcoming comprehensive revision of the National Bank Law. When revising our
monetary  policy  concept,  we  took  a  step  in  this  direction  by  quantifying  the  stability  target  (CPI  -
inflation below 2%) and undertaking to adhere to the target in the medium term.
Transparency
A further aim was to continue to improve transparency. It is a fact that the call for more transparency
has sounded far and wide. This call is more than merely a short-lived fashion. There are two especially
valid reasons for the formerly rather reserved central banks to communicate openly and in good time.
For one thing, transparency - in particular, ex post transparency - is an indispensable precondition for
accountability and thus also a necessary correlative to independence. Beyond this, transparency is an
effective means of gaining the confidence of the public and the markets. Central banks depend much
more on this confidence in fulfilling their mandate than other institutions.
For another, the increased significance attached to transparency derives from the central role played by
expectations,  also  in  macroeconomic  processes.  If  the  efficiency  of  forming  expectations  in  the
financial  markets  and  in  the  real  sector  can  be  improved  with  greater  transparency,  this  serves  to
enhance the productivity of an economy.
Transparency,  however,  should  be  optimised  rather  than  maximised.  Individual  demands  can
occasionally be quite unrealistic.
In  my  view,  this  even  applies  to  ex  post  transparency,  which  is  basically  less  problematic.
Accordingly,  I  do  not  see  any  merit  in  the  popular  practice  which  has  gained  ground  in  various
countries to publish the minutes of board meetings. Board members, too, are only human. Like anyone
else, they respond to incentives. My fear is that publication will lead to a certain amount of window
talk and probably also to critical discussions being held outside the recorded meetings. Experience has
taught me that every decision-making body needs a sheltered area away from the public where things
may  be  imperfectly  stated  and  seemingly  irrefutable  truths  may  be  called  into  question.  If  such  a
sheltered domain is abolished, this will, in my  view, have a negative effect on negotiating practices
and the quality of decisions.
Optimisation  of  ex  ante  transparency  is,  by  its  very  nature,  more  critical.  A  clear  and  open
commitment  to  a  monetary  policy  goal  is  of  central  importance.  Thus  the  central  bank  must  state
explicitly what it means by price stability, and it must also communicate how it assesses the long-term
development of the target figure. Both elements serve to enhance - or even facilitate - the predictability
of its policy and to reduce uncertainties. Conversely, it must be accepted in monetary policy that the
precise way to the goal is fraught with considerable uncertainties and that therefore too much ex ante
transparency  can  easily  become  counterproductive.  In  the  context  of  our  concept  this  applies  in
particular  to  the  interest  rate  path  to  be  followed.  If  a  target  range  for  the  money  market  rate  is
published at a particular point in time, this steering intention remains valid “for the time being”. It is
quite  understandable  that  market  participants  should  wish to  know  more:  how  long  the  interest rate
target  is  to  remain  valid,  and  what  interest  rate  steps  are  likely  to  follow.  What  they  would  prefer
above all else is information on the planned interest rate path for several quarters. Such far-reaching ex
ante transparency is, however, due to fail because of the uncertainty from which policymakers suffer
just like any other market players. As the cornerstone of policy implementation, the interest rate path
needs to  be  revised  constantly  and  optimised  conforming  to  updated  information.  When  we  fixed  a
target  range  for  the  first  time  in  December  1999  we  simply  did  not  know  that  as  soon  as  the  first
quarter  of  2000  two  interest  rate  increases  would  be  necessary.  The  commitment  to  ex  ante
transparency must take account of the knowledge and the uncertainty of decisionmakers. Thus, as a
rule, it is hardly meaningful to give information with regard to any other planned interest rate moves in
addition to the announcement of the current interest rate target. In so doing, the central bank would
lose essential room for manoeuvre, immobilise its internal decision-making process and give rise to
counterproductive changes in market expectations. For this reason, I am also sceptical with respect to
the somewhat softer practice of preparing the markets with a so-called bias statement for a probable
interest rate move. Such signals cause expectations to be revised, which is of small avail in the best
case, and ties the central bank’s hands, in the worst case. Once a concrete decision - eg to raise the
5
BIS Review 35/2000
interest rate - has been taken, it can be implemented without delay, ie without a prior announcement.
If, however, the central bank still harbours an uncertainty and - for example - still wishes to await the
disclosure of figures, it should refrain from making a prior announcement as it would then find itself
under  a  constraint.  For  if,  in  response  to  a  signal  received,  the  markets  anticipate  the  interest  rate
move, the central bank will hesitate, out of concern for its credibility, not to implement the signalled
move. This may well result in an endogenous interest rate policy: the central bank becomes, through
its own fault, the prisoner of market  expectations  -  an  absurd  notion.  A central  bank  should inform
openly  about  its  long-term  designs.  At  the  same  time,  it  should  not  hesitate  to  make  interest  rate
decisions, if necessary, which come as a surprise to the majority of market participants.
The “new economy” - fact or fiction?
4.
The term “new economy” is certainly vague, which may be the very reason why it is popular. Coined
in  the  United  States,  it  is  used  as  a  label  for  several  hypotheses  which  strive  to  explain  the
performance  of  the  US  economy  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  Poorly  explained  by  most
conventional macroeconomic models, this economy is characterised by continued high growth rates,
unexpectedly  robust  productivity,  and  long-running  low  unemployment,  combined  with  very  little
inflationary pressure. These attempts to explain the phenomenon termed “new economy” refer to two
prominent areas of change. On the one hand, deregulation and the opening of markets for products and
factors  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  phenomenal  progress  in  information  and  communications
technology.3 On a macroeconomic level, the explanations lead to three possible conclusions.
First,  to  the  conclusion  that  the  economy  has  lost  some  of  its  cyclical  dynamic,  a  change  which  is
explained  by  the  increased  transparency  and  more  efficient  steering  of  entrepreneurial  processes  as
well as the fact that inventories have been cut or completely eliminated.
Second, that there has been a permanent reduction in the natural rate of unemployment which results
in an upward shift of the potential  output curve  and  thus to  significantly  higher  growth  rates  in  the
transition phase.
Third,  that  there  is  a  gain  in  long-term  productivity  growth,  ie  a  steeper  potential  output  curve  in
future.
Academic economists usually react with scepticism to these basically supply-side hypotheses. In fact,
they  are  assumptions  which,  plausible  as  they  may  be,  have  not  been  empirically  tested.  Monetary
policymakers cannot simply ignore them because they relate to interconnections which are important
for  the  formulation  of  policies.  It  would  be  just  as  foolish,  however,  to  accept  such  theories
uncritically and to include them in the decision-making process simply because they sound plausible.
In any case, the assertions put forward under the label “new economy” create additional uncertainties.
In  this  particular  state  of  uncertainty,  there  is  growing  interest  in  an  ongoing  analysis  and
interpretation of indicators. In this way, one searches for early evidence for the pros and cons of these
hypothetical  changes.  The  risks  for  success  inherent  in  a  bold  pre-emptive  strike  are  bigger.  The
famous  notion  of  “acting  ahead  of  the  curve”  presupposes  having  solid  confidence  in  one’s  own
forecasts. Notably the fact that the Federal Reserve has lost this confidence in the late 1990s and that it
has  refrained  from  taking  big,  bold  steps,  has  apparently  turned  out  to  be  the  right  strategy.  In  an
environment of increased uncertainty, a tendency to take small, careful steps makes sense. It is hardly
possible to chart the ideal course that way, but there is a good chance that deviations remain limited
and can be corrected within a reasonable time frame.
In Switzerland - perhaps with a time lag - we are also affected by such uncertainties. This is the case
even though the factor of a declining natural rate of unemployment cannot play a central role in this
country.  Economists  in  Switzerland  would  certainly  be  well-advised  to  critically  analyse  the
3 A useful overview can be found in Davies 2000.
BIS Review 35/2000
6
hypotheses and phenomena propagated as “new economy” - not with preconceived ideas, but with an
open mind.
How relevant are asset prices?
5.
A topic which is related to the “new economy” is the phenomenon of  extreme  price fluctuations  of
individual assets. Even previously, the bitter lessons learned on the heels of the recession in Japan had
stimulated  a  discussion  of  whether  and  how  asset  prices  are  important  for  monetary  policy.  The
question of whether they are relevant can be answered quickly. There is a broad consensus on several
interconnections.
Equity and real estate prices determine household wealth and therefore influence consumer demand.
This  aspect  must  certainly  be  taken  into  account.  Another  factor  impacting  monetary  policy  is  the
interdependence  between  equity  prices,  the  cost  of  capital,  and  the  demand  for  capital  goods.
Moreover,  asset  prices,  especially  real  estate  prices  (as  collateral in  the  credit  business)  can  change
financing conditions. This can undoubtedly have repercussions for the economy, at least if the prices
fluctuate sharply. As indicators for the development of overall demand, these effects must feed into
economic forecasts which unavoidably exert an influence on monetary policy.
Above and beyond these aspects, there is a general consensus that, in the event of an asset price crash,
central  banks  must  react  to  the  sharp  increase  in  liquidity  demand.  Such  willingness  to  react  is  the
consequence of the central banks’ responsibility for the stability of the financial system.
In  addition  to  this  accepted  premise,  however,  the  discussion  -  especially  in  the  financial  press  -
focuses  on  two  calls  for  action  that  go  even  further.  Most  central  banks,  however,  are  sceptical  or
opposed to such demands.
First, some claim that central banks should not remain passive when confronted with a bubble in the
making,  but  rather  take  a  proactive  stance  so  that  an  abrupt  or  even  dramatic  adjustment  does  not
occur at all. There are convincing counter arguments to this opinion. It is impossible to determine with
some degree of accuracy whether such a bubble, in the sense of a speculation-driven price increase,
has indeed formed. Central bankers are not more ignorant than investors and traders, nor are they more
intelligent or better informed when it comes to the valuation of companies.
One  might  argue  that  a  crash  is  not  so  much  the  result  of  exuberant  cash  flow  expectations  for
individual  companies  but  rather  the  consequence  of  a  sudden  increase  in  discount  rates,  causing  a
dramatic downward adjustment of all present values. The relevant discount factors are the combined
result  of  time  preference,  risk  preference,  and  the  prevailing  perception  of  uncertainty.  History  has
taught us convincingly that time preference is a relatively stable factor. The problem, therefore, lies
more in a sudden shift of risk preference and the perception of uncertainty. If these two determinants
could  be  stabilised,  much  would  be  achieved  already.  This  task,  however,  also  presupposes  some
“superior knowledge” and “deeper insight” on the part of central banks relative to the market. Such
assumptions are unrealistic.
Moreover, central banks, with the instruments they have at their disposal, do not have the possibility to
deflate a presumed bubble all on their own. Interest hikes would certainly be a possibility. In so doing,
however,  one  would  have  to  accept  consequences  in  the  real  sector  which  could  be  completely
counterproductive. Finally, if central banks were obligated to avoid stock market excesses, this would
have extremely disastrous moral hazard implications. To be realistic, a simple recommendation is all
that is in order: those who buy equities bear the price risk themselves. People who, out of greed and
carelessness, buy and sell in such a way that they cannot survive a brutal crash have only themselves
to blame. They must bear the consequences alone, even if it means their economic ruin.
Second, there is also an argument that price stability as the relevant goal of monetary policy should be
defined more broadly and measured in such a way as to include the development of important asset
7
BIS Review 35/2000
prices.4 The demand that monetary policy, in its use of the concept of monetary conditions, should not
only  take  account  of interest rates  and foreign  exchange  rates  but  also  of  equity  prices  does  not  go
quite  as  far.  On  a  technical  level,  such  an  expansion  of  the  price  index  would  not  be  a  trivial
undertaking,  but  certainly  doable.  There  are  some  serious  economic  concerns,  however,  which  are
mainly due to the ambivalent nature of equity price fluctuations. Equity prices may rise in anticipation
of a pick-up in total demand, which - if anything  - would indicate some restrictive monetary policy
correction. If the stock market expects business activity to pick up, the central bank will, in assessing
the  situation, hopefully  realise  this  as  well.  It  is  for  that  purpose  not  necessary  to  expand  the  price
index or the monetary conditions index as has been suggested. On the other hand, equity prices can go
up  as  a  result  of  real  changes,  eg  due  to  achieved  or  expected  productivity  improvements.  Such
supply-side  driven  equity  price  increases  signal  a  higher  productivity  potential  and  would  -  if
anything - be a reason for an expansive but certainly not a restrictive monetary policy correction. This
example  illustrates  the  central  banks’  scepticism  against  the  suggested  changes.  From  the  Swiss
vantage  point,  there  is  well-founded  additional  scepticism.  Our  stock  market  is  dominated  by
companies  whose  activities  are  concentrated  abroad  and  thus  have  little  direct  connection  with  our
economy.
It is possible that new insights will lead to different conclusions. For the time being, however, it seems
advisable to stay with the generally accepted “consensus view”, but to do that job as well as possible.
Conclusion
I am about to come to the end of my reflections, fully aware that my journey through a changing world
is far from complete. I did not mention payment transactions, for example, even though this is an area
undergoing  various  changes  with  potentially  far-reaching  consequences.  In  reflecting  on  change,
however,  we  must  not forget  that the basic  mandate  of  central  banks  remains  unchanged:  to  secure
stable monetary conditions for the economies they serve - both today and in the future.
Literature:  King,  Mervin,  Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy:  New  and  Old,  Paper  prepared  for  the
Symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  at  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,
27 August 1999. (King 1999).
Davis, Gavyn, the “New” Global Economy, Goldman Sachs, Global Economics Weekly, 2 February
2000, pp 3 (Davies 2000).
IMF World Economic Outlook, October 1999 (IMF 2000).
4 Cf IMF 1999, p 124.
BIS Review 35/2000
8
