European Central Bank: Press Conference - introductory statements
Introductory  statements  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Press  Conference  held  in
Frankfurt, on 6 July 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here to report on the outcome of today’s meeting
of the Governing Council of the ECB, which was also attended by Mr. Papademos, Governor of the
Bank of Greece, to whom the Governing Council has extended a standing invitation following the EU
Council’s decision on Greece’s adoption of the euro on 1 January 2001.
The  Governing  Council  conducted  its  regular  examination  of  recent  monetary  and  economic
developments  and  their  implications  for  the  risks  to  future  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.
Subsequently, it decided to keep the interest rates on the Eurosystem’s monetary policy instruments
unchanged. Thus the minimum bid rate in the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem was left
at  4.25%,  and  the  interest  rates  on  the  marginal  lending  facility  and  the  deposit  facility  were  kept
unchanged at 5.25% and 3.25% respectively.
Allow me to give you an overview of the main elements of our assessment of the latest information on
monetary, financial market and other economic developments.
In the context of the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, let me start with the latest monetary
developments in the euro area. The three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3, covering
the  period  from  March  to  May  2000,  stood  at  6.3%,  which  was  unchanged  from  the  period  from
February to April 2000. At 6.3%, M3 growth was substantially above the reference value of 4 1/2%.
This deviation of M3 growth from the reference value, combined with the strong growth of both M1
and credit to the private sector, indicates that liquidity conditions continued to be ample in the euro
area through May. The increase in ECB interest rates on 8 June - in conjunction with the interest rate
increases  made  since  November  1999  -  exerts  a  moderating  influence  on  both  money  and  credit
growth.
Turning  to  the  second  pillar  of  our  strategy,  considering  real  economic  developments,  recent  data
indicate that the euro area economy has continued to grow at a robust pace. The first estimate of real
GDP growth in the first quarter of this year was 0.7%. Although this was slightly below the average
observed  in  the  second  half  of  last  year,  other  indicators  all  point  towards  strong  growth  of  the
domestic  economy.  The  rate  of  growth  of  industrial  production,  for  example,  not  only  increased  in
April,  but  also  incorporated  an  upward  revision  for  the  first  quarter.  Industrial  and  consumer
confidence both remain at, or close to, record high levels. At the same time, external developments are
continuing to provide a positive stimulus to economic growth in the euro area. Reflecting favourable
domestic and external conditions for growth, the outlook for euro area growth continues to be positive.
There have not been any major changes in bond and foreign exchange markets since the decision of
the Governing Council on 8 June to raise the ECB interest rates. Current bond market yields continue
to show market expectations of a period of sustained economic growth in the euro area. At the same
time, the accumulated depreciation of the exchange rate of the euro remains a cause for concern and
has to be taken into account in the assessment of the risks to price stability.
As  regards  consumer  price  developments,  inflation  in  May  2000,  as  measured  by  the  Harmonised
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), remained at 1.9%. A lower year-on-year change in services prices
offset relatively strong rises in other prices, in particular energy and unprocessed food prices. Over the
coming months the rate of increase in consumer prices could continue to be affected by lagged effects
of the increase in import prices. For the outlook for price stability in the medium term, it is essential
that these short-term movements of inflation do not become protracted and translate into second round
effects.
1
BIS Review 56/2000
Overall,  the  outlook  for  price  stability  will  be  affected  by  several  factors,  which  will  need  to  be
monitored carefully. First, strong monetary growth and ample liquidity conditions call for continuous
monitoring. In addition, it will be important, in the current phase of strengthening economic growth,
for wages to continue, on  average, to  grow  at rates compatible  with the objective  of  price  stability.
This, together with structural reform in the labour market, will be important to sustain the process of
non-inflationary growth and to reduce unemployment in the euro area. Developments in import prices,
which are influenced by the evolution of the exchange rate of the euro and the price of raw materials,
may affect the outlook for prices in the period ahead. Finally, I should like to stress that a pro-cyclical
loosening of the fiscal policy stance could also add to upward risks to price stability. In this respect,
when looking at the euro area as a whole on a consolidated basis, current fiscal budget plans are not
sufficiently ambitious in view of the favourable economic prospects.
Let me now give the floor to the Vice-President to say a few words about other issues discussed by the
Governing Council.
First,  I  should  like  to  address  the  euro  banknote-related  issue  concerning  the  determination  of  the
number of banknotes to be printed before the launch date of 1 January 2002. The latest forecast shows
that there will be a need to put 14 billion euro banknotes into circulation, compared with last year’s
estimate  of  13  billion.  The  increase  can  be  attributed  to  three  main  factors:  a  higher  than  expected
figure for national banknotes in circulation, which forms the basis of estimates of the launch stocks; a
higher forecast for the use of low-denomination  banknotes; and a  somewhat  slower  than  previously
expected development in the use of electronic money.
Second,  the  Governing  Council  also  had  an  exchange  of  views  on  recent  developments  in  the  EU
banking  industry.  The  discussion  was  based  on  preparatory  work  by  the  Banking  Supervision
Committee. The Governing Council is well aware that the current process of consolidation is no longer
confined to small and medium-sized banks - as it was in the past - but that now it also covers the larger
banks at the national level and cross-border mergers and alliances are on the increase. The role of the
euro as a factor encouraging this process of consolidation via further integration of money and capital
markets is important. The consolidation process is welcome in general since it allows efficiency gains
to  be  achieved  in  the  banking  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  it  affects  the  competitive  environment  in
which banks operate, as well as their risk profile. Therefore, a careful monitoring on the part of the
public  authorities  responsible  for  prudential  supervision  and  financial  stability  is  required.  The
Governing  Council  decided  that  a  report  on  mergers  and  acquisitions  involving  the  EU  banking
industry be prepared for publication in the autumn.
BIS Review 56/2000
2
