Bank of Japan’s September report of recent economic and financial
developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 18 September 2000.
 The Bank’s view2
Japan’s  economy  is  recovering  gradually,  with  corporate  profits  and  business  fixed  investment
continuing to increase.
With regard to exogenous demand, public investment is about to decrease since the implementation of
the supplementary budget for fiscal 1999 has peaked out. Net exports (real exports minus real imports)
continue to follow a moderate upward trend due to steady developments in overseas economies. As
regards domestic private demand, business fixed investment is on an increasing trend. The recovery in
private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  as  a  whole  through  lack  of  notable  improvements  in
employment and income conditions, although there are somewhat positive signs in  some  indicators.
Housing investment is mostly unchanged.
Reflecting such developments in final demand, industrial production is increasing. Corporate profits
and  sentiment  continue  to  improve,  and  the  number  of  firms  that  take  positive  action,  such  as
increasing  the  amount  of  fixed  investment,  is  increasing,  especially  in  high-growth  sectors.  Income
conditions  of  households still  remain  severe but regular  and  overtime  payments  as  well  as  new  job
offers  continue  to  increase  in  line  with  the  recovery  in  corporate  activities,  and  compensation  of
employees has stopped decreasing.
As  for  the  outlook,  public  investment  will  decrease,  but  net  exports  are  expected  to  continue
increasing  gradually,  reflecting  the  expansion  in  overseas  economies.  In  the  corporate  sector,  firms
still strongly feel that they have excess equipment and that they should reduce their debts to restore
financial soundness. However, it is very likely that fixed investment in high-growth sectors, including
those  related  with  information  technology  services,  will  increase  as  corporate  profits  continue  to
recover. Moreover, an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  will  increase  household  income  and  this in
turn is expected to boost  private consumption.  However, the  pace of recovery  in household  income
will be modest for the time being, since firms’ perceptions of excess employment still persist, and thus
significant changes have not been observed in their efforts to reduce personnel expenses. Overall, the
economy is likely to recover gradually led mainly by business fixed investment, unless there are major
adverse external shocks. In addition, the favorable financial environment created partly by the Bank’s
sustaining easy monetary stance is expected to continue underpinning the economy.
With regard to prices, import prices are rising, reflecting an increase in international commodity prices
such as crude oil prices since April. Domestic wholesale prices, notwithstanding the rise in prices of
petroleum products reflecting the increase in crude oil prices, are mostly unchanged mainly due to the
decrease in prices of electric machinery. Meanwhile, consumer prices continue to be somewhat weak
owing  to  the  decline  in  prices  of  imported  products  reflecting  the  past  appreciation  of  the  yen,
although  prices  of  petroleum  products  and  electricity  increased  from  the  rise  in  crude  oil  prices.
Corporate service prices are still falling slowly.
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 14 September 2000.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 14 September as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 77/2000
As for the outlook on prices, downward pressure on prices stemming from weak demand is declining
significantly  while  an  economic  recovery  is  expected  to  continue  moderately.  Upward  pressure  on
prices is likely to arise temporarily from the increase in crude oil prices. On the other hand, in addition
to the declining trend of machinery prices due to technological innovations, the decline in prices of
consumer  goods  arising  from  the  past  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  the  streamlining  of  distribution
channels  will  exert  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Thus,  prices  overall  are  expected  to  be  stable  or
weak somewhat.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate rose in response to the decision at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 11 August to  change  the  guideline for  money  market  operations,3  and  is  generally
moving around 0.25%. The amount of funds outstanding in the call money market has increased.
Interest rates on term instruments increased towards the end of August, reflecting the termination of
the  zero  interest  rate  policy,  and  has  been  mostly  stable  thereafter.  The  Japan  premium  remains
negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds followed an upward trend from the second half of August and
rose  temporarily  to  1.95-2.0%,  but  is  recently  moving  in  the  range  of  1.8-1.9%.  The  yield  spread
between private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and government bonds remains mostly
unchanged as a whole.
Stock prices rose from mid- to end-August but started to fall from late August and are recently moving
around the level observed during mid-August.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen-dollar exchange rate rose temporarily to around 109-110 yen
in mid-August, but the yen appreciated thereafter. The yen is currently being traded in the range of
106-108 yen to the US dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans mainly
to blue-chip companies, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
On the other hand, the improvement in economic activities has not stimulated corporate demand for
external funds, since firms’ cash flow is at a high level in parallel with recovery in profits. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result,
credit demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish. Recently, however, the
expansion in the year-to-year decline seems to be ceasing. Issuance of corporate bonds and CPs has
been steady.
Money stock (M2 + CDs) grew slower in August compared with the previous month on a year-on-year
basis.
Recently, funding costs for firms are increasing, albeit gradually, due to the rise in money market rates
after the termination of the zero interest rate policy.
In  this  financial  environment,  there  seem  to  be  no  substantial  changes  in  the  lending  attitude  of
financial institutions and easing of corporate financing conditions.
3
“The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to move on average around 0.25%.”
BIS Review 77/2000
2
