Eddie George: The case for sustained macroeconomic stability
in the United Kingdom
Speech by  the  Rt  Hon  Eddie  George,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  British  Chamber  of
Commerce National Conference, held in London, on 4 April 2000.
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  they  say  that  in  the  monetary  policy  business  one  of  the  key  elements  to
success lies in getting your timing right. Well, I have to admit that the timing of my appearances at
your national conferences has been less than perfect.
Central  bankers  are  rarely  popular  with  the  business  community  when  interest  rates  go  up - even
though I explain to them that rising interest rates are a reflection of a strong economy. Savers tend to
be more understanding. They only complain when interest rates come down - even though I explain to
them that that is a reflection of lower inflation which means that the value of their savings is being
better maintained.
But, in any event, in the run-up to my first visit to your conference, in May 1995 in Aberdeen, we’d
raised interest rates in successive steps, by 1½%. In those days of course I could blame the Chancellor!
But I should point out that our next move, in December 1995, following the conference was to begin
cutting rates - though I wouldn’t suggest it was solely as a result of the conference. In the run-up to my
second visit, in June 1998 in Birmingham, we had again put up interest rates in successive steps, by
1¾% - with  no  one  else  to  blame.  But  once  more,  following  the  conference - and  again  I  imply  no
direct cause and effect - our next move, in October 1998, was to begin cutting rates. And here I am,
my third attempt, only to find we’ve done it yet again - in the run-up to this conference we have once
more raised interest rates in successive steps - by 1%. I make no prediction as to what might happen
following this conference - one way or the other!
Despite  this  unfortunate  timing  I’m  very  happy  to  be  with  you  again  this  morning.  My  earlier
experiences  mean  that  I’m  quite  used  to  entering  this  particular  lion’s  den - even  on  this  occasion
Roger Lyons’ den! Good morning, Roger.
I well understand that some of you - perhaps many of you - would like interest rates to be lower, in the
hope particularly that this would also lower sterling’s exchange rate especially against the euro. And to
be perfectly honest, if I were a farmer, or a steel maker, a motor manufacturer or even a hotel operator,
indeed  anyone  competing  primarily  with  Continental  European producers  right  now,  from  my  own,
microeconomic, standpoint, I’d find that tempting too. Although the exchange rate, still less the level
of interest rates, may not be the root cause of all our present sectoral, and related regional, pressures,
there is no doubt that the exchange rate in particular is adding to the pain that some of you are going
through.
So what then is my defence?
My first, and principal, witness, is the macroeconomic data - the data relating to the UK economy as a
whole.
For the past seven years or so - starting well before the MPC came into existence - monetary policy
has been directed specifically to achieving a low and stable rate of retail price inflation - the inflation
target set by the Government. Low inflation is not simply an end in itself. Achieving it consistently
involves  keeping  aggregate  demand  continuously  broadly  in  line  with  the  underlying  supply-side
capacity of the economy as a whole to meet that demand. So low inflation is in effect a measure of
macroeconomic  stability  in  a  much  broader  sense - it,  too,  in  fact  is  a  “policy  with  a  purpose”,  the
purpose  in  this  case  being  sustainable  growth  of  output  and  all  that  that  means  for  a  high  level  of
employment and rising living standards.
1
BIS Review 31/2000
Since that policy was adopted some seven years ago we have in fact achieved the longest period of
sustained  low  inflation  we’ve  known  for  a  generation.  Retail  price  inflation,  on  the  Government’s
target measure, has averaged 2.7%.
But alongside low inflation we’ve had the lowest nominal interest rates that most of us can remember.
Short-term  rates  have  averaged  some  6¼%  compared  with  some  11¼%  over  the  preceding  decade.
And  10-year  government  bond  yields  have  fallen,  with  inflationary  expectations,  to  around  5¼%
which apart from a brief period last year is the lowest they’ve been for nearly 40 years.
Much  more  fundamentally  we’ve  enjoyed  the  longest  period  of  uninterrupted,  quarter  by  quarter,
economic  growth  since  records  began  some  45  years  ago - with  annual  growth  averaging
2.8% - between ¼ and ½% above most estimates of our underlying trend rate. The number of people
in  employment  is  the  highest  on record.  And  unemployment  has  fallen  from  a  peak  of  10½%  on  a
claimant count basis to the present rate of 4%. That is the lowest for 20 years in the UK as a whole,
and just about the lowest in nearly every region.
This is not just past history. Having come through the global economic slowdown a year or two ago,
the economy as a whole is now again growing at well above trend, with inflation a bit below target;
and the broad prospect for the next couple of years - on most forecasts, including the MPC’s February
forecast based upon our collective best assumptions - is for continuing relatively strong growth with
relatively  high  employment  and  relatively  low  inflation.  The  policy  debate  for  the  time  being
remains - as I’ve said before - a comparatively narrow one about just how strong the growth, how high
the level of employment and how low the rate of inflation.
In terms of the economy as a whole, I’m tempted to rest my case.
Our problem - and it is a real problem, as we have recognised for some time - is the imbalance, within
the  overall  economy,  between  the  domestically-oriented  businesses  and  sectors,  and  those  that  are
most  internationally  exposed.  In  part  that  imbalance  is  a  hangover  from  the  earlier  global
slowdown - though  the  welcome  recovery  in  global  demand  means  that  this  influence  is  now
diminishing. The more important factor now is the persistent weakness of the euro - not exclusively
against sterling but equally against the dollar and the yen. The impact is particularly severe on the UK
because of the closer ties between our economy and that of the euro zone.
I’ve  not  heard  a  wholly  convincing  explanation  for  the  euro’s  persistent  weakness.  Many  analysts
relate  it  to  market  concerns  about  structural  rigidities  in  some  parts  of  the  euro  zone,  which  are
encouraging  direct  capital  outflows  attracted  elsewhere  by  higher  prospective  earnings  growth.
Whatever  the  cause, few  of  those  I  talk  to  expect  it  to  persist.  But  in  the  meantime,  given  that  the
problem  is  a  general  weakness  of  the  euro  rather  than  any  particular  strength  of  sterling,  it  is  very
difficult to see what we can do directly to resolve it.
The weak euro affects us at the macroeconomic level in two ways: it has a dampening effect on our
price level; and it reduces net external demand on our economy. To offset these influences - to prevent
overall  demand  growth  falling  short  of  underlying  capacity  growth,  causing  inflation  to  fall
significantly below our 2½% target - and I remind you it is a symmetrical target - we have had to keep
interest  rates  lower  than  would  otherwise  have  been  necessary,  in  effect  encouraging  stronger
domestic  demand  growth,  to  keep  the  economy  as  a  whole  on  track.  The  risk  in  this  approach,  of
course,  is  that  we  could  find  it  difficult  to  moderate  the  pace  of  domestic  demand  growth  to  a
sustainable rate as and when the euro recovers. But that’s a bridge we will need to cross when we get
there.
Now  some  of  you  involved  in  those  sectors  that  are  suffering  most  from  the  weakness  of  the  euro
would - from your own perspective - like us to go further and try more actively to drive the exchange
rate down. As I say, if I were in your shoes, I’d be tempted to argue that myself. Euphemistically it is
suggested that we should “pay more attention to the exchange rate” - than, as I’ve explained, we do
already. In practice what that would be likely to mean in our present situation is substantially lower
interest rates: the intended effect would be to stimulate external demand, but it would inevitably also
involve  further  stimulus  to  domestic  demand.  In  effect,  it  implies  that  we  should  acquiesce  in
increasing overall demand pressure leading inevitably to faster inflation. That might conceivably even
BIS Review 31/2000
2
provide  some  relief  to  the  suffering  sectors  in  the  short  term.  But  increasing  demand  pressure,
including labour market pressure, and accelerating inflation would - as we’ve repeatedly seen  in the
past - ultimately need to be brought back under control, involving a more abrupt tightening of policy.
That frankly would not do the suffering sectors themselves much good at least for very long - and it
would have a potentially serious destabilising effect on the economy as a whole. That is precisely what
we are trying to avoid.
And  there,  I  do  rest  the  case  for  the  defence - at  least  in  relation  to  the  principal  charge  of  malice
aforethought - or  even  malice  as  an  after  thought.  Just  as  some  of  you  would  like  to  see  the  euro
strengthen from your microeconomic standpoint, so too would I, from a macroeconomic perspective,
because it would help to restore a better, more sustainable, balance within the economy.
But  I  don’t  think  that  one  can  realistically  argue  that  we  should  consciously  put  the  economy  as  a
whole  at  risk  of  excess  demand  pressure  and  accelerating  inflation  in  order  to  try  to  bring  about  a
weakening of sterling against the euro. Yet that in substance is what the witnesses for the prosecution
would be asking us to do.
Now, even if you accept my case that macroeconomic stability, in the terms in which I’ve described it,
is the right objective, there is nevertheless a more technical - but still serious - charge to answer.
Some  of  those  who  agree  in  principle  nevertheless  argue  that  we  are  simply  exaggerating  the
macroeconomic risks. The charge in this case is that we don’t in fact need interest rates at their present
level, certainly not at any higher level, to maintain macroeconomic stability. That would be a technical
judgement on which even the best informed experts might legitimately disagree: in fact as you may
have noticed even the members of the Monetary Policy Committee themselves disagree, more often
than not, at the margin.
Now  is  not  the  moment  for  me  to  launch into  that technical  debate - just  a  day  before  our  monthly
policymaking meeting. In fact, strictly speaking according to our MPC “purdah” rules I ought not to
be here at all.
But you can find a detailed description of the technical debate, in the minutes of our policy meetings
and in the Quarterly Inflation Report, either in our printed publications or on the Bank’s website. We
are among the most transparent central banks anywhere in the world. Our debate is informed by a huge
input from our very able professional staff both in London and in our Agencies throughout the UK,
and I’d frankly be surprised if you were able to identify any relevant issue that we have not considered
in one way or another. Indeed I would very much hope that you would let me know if you did. I don’t
plead  ignorance;  I  plead  intrinsic  uncertainty.  Monetary  policy  operates  with  a  lag,  having  its  full
effects only after about a couple of years. Unlike some outside commentators apparently we know we
don’t have a crystal ball. Our judgements are necessarily based upon a very careful assessment of the
balance of risks at the time, continuously updated in the light of the constant flow of information of all
kinds relevant to that assessment. That’s the nature of the process.
Given that, I would not expect, and you would not reasonably expect me, to be able to demonstrate to
you  that  we  have  precisely  the  “right”  answer  at  any  particular  time.  But  I  can  promise  that  if  the
evidence  changes  in  either  direction  so  too  will  our  assessments.  You  can  of  course  question  our
processes,  our  interpretation  of  the  data  or  the  quality  of  our  analysis - it’s  there  for  all  to  see.  But
ultimately the proof of the pudding is in the eating, and it is only on average and over time that our
policy decisions can sensibly be judged.
I’d be surprised if those who question our technical judgement at any particular moment could offer
more than that.
In the circumstances, I do not ask that the technical charge brought against us should be dismissed.
But  I  would  encourage  you  to  suspend  judgement,  or  at  least  to  limit  our  sentence  to  an  extended
period of probation.
I’m ready now for the cross examination, before the jury begins its deliberations!
3
BIS Review 31/2000
