Alan Greenspan: Federal Reserve’s report on monetary policy
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the US Senate on 20 July
2000.
 Mr  Chairman  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  appreciate  this  opportunity  to  present  the
Federal Reserve’s report on monetary policy.
The Federal Reserve has been confronting a complex set of challenges in judging the stance of policy
that  will  best  contribute  to  sustaining  the  strong  and  long-running  expansion  of  our  economy.  The
challenges will be no less in coming months as we judge whether ongoing adjustments in supply and
demand  will be  sufficient  to  prevent  distortions  that  would  undermine  the  economy’s  extraordinary
performance.
For  some  time  now,  the  growth  of  aggregate  demand  has  exceeded  the  expansion  of  production
potential. Technological innovations have boosted the growth rate of potential, but as I noted in my
testimony last February, the effects of this process also have spurred aggregate demand. It has been
clear to us that, with labor markets already quite tight, a continuing disparity between the growth of
demand and potential supply would produce disruptive imbalances.
A  key  element  in  this  disparity  has  been  the  very  rapid  growth  of  consumption  resulting  from  the
effects  on spending  of the  remarkable  rise  in  household  wealth.  However,  the  growth  in  household
spending has slowed noticeably this spring from the unusually rapid pace observed late in 1999 and
early this year. Some  argue  that this  slowing  is  a  pause  following  the  surge  in  demand  through  the
warmer-than-normal  winter  months  and  hence  a  reacceleration  can  be  expected  later  this  year.
Certainly,  we  have  seen  slowdowns  in  spending  during  this  near-decade-long  expansion  that  have
proven temporary, with aggregate demand growth subsequently rebounding to an unsustainable pace.
But  other  analysts  point  to  a  number  of  factors  that  may  be  exerting  more  persistent  restraint  on
spending. One they cite is the flattening in equity prices, on net, this year. They attribute much of the
slowing  of  consumer  spending  to  this  diminution  of  the  wealth  effect  through  the  spring  and  early
summer. This view looks to equity markets as a key influence on the trend in consumer spending over
the rest of this year and next.
Another  factor  said  by  some  to  account  for  the  spending  slowdown  is  the  rising  debt  burden  of
households. Interest and amortization as a percent of disposable income have risen materially during
the  past  six  years,  as  consumer  and  especially  mortgage  debt  has  climbed  and,  more  recently,  as
interest rates have moved higher.
In  addition,  the  past  year’s  rise  in  the  price  of  oil  has  amounted  to  an  annual  $75  billion  levy  by
foreign producers on domestic consumers of imported oil, the equivalent of a tax of roughly 1 percent
of disposable income. This burden is another likely source of the slowed growth in real consumption
outlays in recent months, though one that may prove to be largely transitory.
Mentioned  less  prominently  have  been  the  effects  of  the  faster  increase  in  the  stock  of  consumer
durable assets - both household durable goods and houses - in the last several years, a rate of increase
that  history  tells  us  is  usually  followed  by  a  pause.  Stocks  of  household  durable  goods,  including
motor vehicles, are estimated to have increased at nearly a 6 percent annual rate over the past three
years, a marked acceleration from the growth rate of the previous ten years. The number of cars and
light trucks owned or leased by households, for example, apparently  has continued  to  rise in recent
years  despite  having  reached  nearly  1¾  vehicles  per  household  by  the  mid-1990s.  Notwithstanding
their  recent  slowing,  sales  of  new  homes  continue  at  extraordinarily  high  levels  relative  to  new
household formations. While we will not know for sure until the 2000 census is tabulated, the surge in
1
BIS Review 60/2000
new home sales is strong evidence that the growth of owner-occupied homes has accelerated during
the past five years.
Those who focus on the high and rising stocks of durable assets point out that even without the rise in
interest  rates,  an  eventual  leveling  out  or  some  tapering  off  of  purchases  of  durable  goods  and
construction  of  single-family  housing  would  be  expected.  Reflecting  both  higher  interest  rates  and
higher stocks of housing, starts of new housing units have fallen off of late. If that slowing were to
persist,  some  reduction  in  the  rapid  pace  of  accumulation  of  household  appliances  across  our  more
than  hundred  million  households  would  not  come  as  a  surprise,  nor  would  a  slowdown  in  vehicle
demand so often historically associated with declines in housing demand.
Inventories  of  durable  assets  in  households  are  just  as  formidable  a  factor  in  new  production  as
inventories  at  manufacturing  and  trade  establishments.  The  notion  that  consumer  spending  and
housing  construction  may  be  slowing  because  the  stock  of  consumer  durables  and  houses  may  be
running into upside resistance is a credible addition to the possible explanations of current consumer
trends. This effect on spending would be reinforced by the waning effects of gains in wealth.
Because the softness in outlay growth is so recent, all of the aforementioned hypotheses, of course,
must  be  provisional.  It  is  certainly  premature  to  make  a  definitive  assessment  of  either  the  recent
trends in household spending or what they mean. But it is clear that, for the time being at least, the
increase in spending on consumer goods and houses has come down several notches, albeit from very
high levels.
In one sense, the more important question for the longer-term economic outlook is the extent of any
productivity  slowdown  that  might  accompany  a  more  subdued  pace  of  production  and  consumer
spending, should it persist. The behavior of productivity under such circumstances will be a revealing
test of just  how  much  of the rapid  growth  of productivity  in recent  years  has  represented structural
change as distinct from cyclical aberrations and, hence, how truly different the developments of the
past  five  years  have  been.  At  issue  is  how  much  of  the  current  downshift  in  our  overall  economic
growth  rate  can  be  accounted  for  by  reduced  growth  in  output  per  hour  and  how  much  by  slowed
increases in hours.
So far there is little evidence to undermine the notion that most of the productivity increase of recent
years  has  been  structural  and  that  structural  productivity  may  still  be  accelerating.  New  orders  for
capital  equipment  continue  quite  strong  -  so  strong  that  the  rise  in  unfilled  orders  has  actually
steepened in recent months. Capital-deepening investment in a broad range of equipment embodying
the newer productivity-enhancing technologies remains brisk.
To be sure, if current personal consumption outlays slow significantly further than the pattern now in
train suggests, profit and sales expectations might be scaled back, possibly inducing some hesitancy in
moving forward even with capital projects that appear quite profitable over the longer run. In addition,
the  direct  negative  effects  of  the  sharp  recent  runup  in  energy  prices  on  profits  as  well  as  on  sales
expectations  may  temporarily  damp  capital  spending.  Despite  the  marked  decline  over  the  past
decades in the energy requirements per dollar of GDP, energy inputs are still a significant element in
the cost structure of many American businesses.
For the moment, the dropoff in overall economic growth to date appears about matched by reduced
growth  in  hours,  suggesting  continued  strength  in  growth  in  output  per  hour.  The  increase  of
production worker hours from March through June, for example, was at an annual rate of ½ percent
compared  with  3¼  percent  the  previous  three  months.  Of  course,  we  do  not  have  comprehensive
measures of output on a monthly basis, but available data suggest a roughly comparable deceleration.
A  lower  overall  rate  of  economic  growth  that  did  not  carry  with  it  a  significant  deterioration  in
productivity growth obviously would be a desirable outcome. It could conceivably slow or even bring
to a halt the deterioration in the balance of overall demand and potential supply in our economy.
As I testified before this committee in February, domestic demand growth, influenced importantly by
the wealth effect on consumer spending, has been running 1½ to 2 percentage points at an annual rate
in excess of even the higher, productivity-driven, growth in potential supply since late 1997. That gap
has  been  filled  both  by  a  marked  rise in imports  as  a  percent  of  GDP  and  by  a  marked  increase in
BIS Review 60/2000
2
domestic  production  resulting  both  from  significant  immigration  and  from  the  employment  of
previously unutilized labor resources.
I also pointed out in February that there are limits to how far net imports - or the broader measure, our
current  account  deficit  -  can  rise,  or  our  pool  of  unemployed  labor  resources  can  fall.  As  a
consequence,  the  excess  of  the  growth  of  domestic  demand  over  potential  supply  must  be  closed
before the resulting strains and imbalances undermine the economic expansion that now has reached
112 months, a record for peace or war.
The  current  account  deficit  is  a  proxy  for  the  increase  in  net  claims  against  US  residents  held  by
foreigners, mainly as debt, but increasingly as equities. So long as foreigners continue to seek to hold
ever-increasing quantities of dollar investments in their portfolios, as they  obviously  have  been,  the
exchange rate for the dollar will remain firm. Indeed, the same sharp rise in potential rates of return on
new American investments that has been driving capital accumulation and accelerating productivity in
the United States has also been inducing foreigners to expand their portfolios of American securities
and  direct  investment.  The  latest  data  published  by  the  Department  of  Commerce  indicate  that  the
annual  pace  of  direct  plus  portfolio  investment  by  foreigners  in  the  US  economy  during  the  first
quarter was more than two and one-half times its rate in 1995.
There has to be a limit as to how much of the world’s savings our residents can borrow at close to
prevailing  interest  and  exchange  rates.  And  a  narrowing  of  disparities  among  global  growth  rates
could induce a narrowing of rates of return here relative to those abroad that could adversely affect the
propensity of foreigners to invest in the United States. But obviously, so long as our rates of return
appear to be unusually high, if not rising, balance of payments trends are less likely to pose a threat to
our prosperity. In addition, our burgeoning budget surpluses have clearly contributed to a fending off,
if only temporarily, of some of the pressures on our balance of payments. The stresses on the global
savings pool resulting from the excess of domestic private investment demands over domestic private
saving have been mitigated by the large federal budget surpluses that have developed of late.
In addition, by substantially augmenting national saving, these budget surpluses have kept real interest
rates  at  levels  lower  than  they  would  have  been  otherwise.  This  development  has  helped  foster  the
investment boom that in recent years has contributed greatly to the strengthening of US productivity
and  economic  growth.  The  Congress  and  the  Administration  have  wisely  avoided  steps  that  would
materially  reduce  these  budget  surpluses.  Continued  fiscal  discipline  will  contribute  to  maintaining
robust expansion of the American economy in the future.
Just as there is a limit to our reliance on foreign saving, so is there a limit to the continuing drain on
our unused labor resources. Despite the  ever-tightening  labor  market,  as  yet,  gains in  compensation
per  hour  are  not  significantly  outstripping  gains  in  productivity.  But  as  I  have  argued  previously,
should  labor  markets  continue  to  tighten,  short  of  a  repeal  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand,  labor
costs  eventually  would  have  to  accelerate  to  levels  threatening  price  stability  and  our  continuing
economic expansion. The more modest pace of increase in domestic final spending in recent months
suggests  that  aggregate  demand  may  be  moving  closer  into  line  with  the  rate  of  advance  in  the
economy’s potential, given our continued impressive productivity growth. Should these trends toward
supply and demand balance persist, the ongoing need for ever-rising imports and for a further draining
of our limited labor resources should ease or perhaps even end. Should this favorable outcome prevail,
the immediate threat to our prosperity from growing imbalances in our economy would abate.
But as I indicated earlier, it is much too soon to conclude that these concerns are behind us. We cannot
yet be sure that the slower expansion of domestic final demand, at a pace more in line with potential
supply, will persist. Even if the growth rates of demand and potential supply move into better balance,
there is still uncertainty about whether the current level of labor resource utilization can be maintained
without generating increased cost and price pressures.
As I have already noted, to date costs have been held in check by productivity gains. But at the same
time,  inflation  has  picked  up  -  even  the  core  measures  that  do  not  include  energy  prices  directly.
Higher rates of core inflation may mostly reflect the indirect effects of energy prices, but the Federal
Reserve  will  need  to  be  alert  to  the  risks  that  high  levels  of  resource  utilization  may  put  upward
pressure on inflation.
3
BIS Review 60/2000
Moreover, energy prices may pose a challenge to containing inflation. Energy price changes represent
a  one-time  shift  in  a  set  of  important  prices,  but  by  themselves  generally  cannot  drive  an  ongoing
inflation process. The key to whether such a process could get under way is inflation expectations. To
date, survey evidence, as well as readings from the Treasury’s inflation-indexed securities,  suggests
that  households  and  investors  do  not  view  the  current  energy  price  surge  as  affecting  longer-term
inflation. But any deterioration in such expectations would pose a risk to the economic outlook.
As  the financing  requirements  for  our  ever-rising  capital  investment  needs  mounted  in  recent  years
- beyond forthcoming domestic saving - real long-term interest rates rose to address this gap. We at the
Federal Reserve, responding to the same economic forces, have moved the overnight federal funds rate
up 1¾ percentage points over the past year. To have held to the federal funds rate of June 1999 would
have required a massive increase in liquidity that would presumably have underwritten an acceleration
of prices and, hence, an eventual curbing of economic growth.
By  our  meeting  this  June,  the  appraisal  of  all  the  foregoing  issues  led  the  Federal  Open  Market
Committee to conclude that, while some signs of slower growth were evident and justified standing
pat at least for the time being, they were not sufficiently compelling to alter our view that the risks
remained more on the side of higher inflation.
As indicated in their forecasts, FOMC members and nonvoting presidents expect that the long period
of continuous economic expansion will be extended over the next year and one-half, but with growth
at a somewhat slower pace than over the past several years. For the current year, the central tendency
of  Board  members’  and  Reserve  Bank  presidents’  forecasts  is  for  real  GDP  to  increase  4  to
4½ percent, suggesting a noticeable deceleration over the second half of 2000 from its likely pace over
the first half. The unemployment rate is projected to remain close to 4 percent. This outlook is a little
stronger than anticipated last February, no doubt owing primarily to the unexpectedly strong jump in
output in the first quarter. Mainly reflecting higher prices of energy products than had been foreseen,
the central tendency for inflation this year in prices for personal consumption expenditures also has
been revised up somewhat, to the vicinity of 2½ to 2¾ percent.
Given  the  firmer  financial  conditions  that  have  developed  over  the  past  eighteen  months,  the
Committee expects economic growth to moderate somewhat next year. Real output is anticipated to
expand 3¼ to 3¾ percent, somewhat less rapidly than in recent years. The unemployment rate is likely
to remain close to its recent very low levels. Energy prices could ease somewhat, helping to trim PCE
inflation next year to around 2 to 2½ percent, somewhat above the average of recent years.
Conclusion
The last decade has been a remarkable period of expansion for our economy. Federal Reserve policy
through this period has been required to react to a constantly evolving set of economic forces, often at
variance with historical relationships, changing federal funds rates when events appeared to threaten
our prosperity, and refraining from action when that appeared warranted. Early in the expansion, for
example, we kept rates unusually low for an extended period, when financial sector fragility held back
the  economy.  Most  recently  we  have  needed  to  raise  rates  to  relatively  high  levels  in  real  terms  in
response to the side effects of accelerating growth and related demand-supply imbalances. Variations
in  the  stance  of  policy  -  or  keeping  it  the  same  -  in  response  to  evolving  forces  are  made  in  the
framework of an unchanging objective - to foster as best we can those financial conditions most likely
to promote sustained economic expansion at the highest rate possible. Maximum sustainable growth,
as history so amply demonstrates, requires price stability. Irrespective of the complexities of economic
change, our primary goal is to find those policies that best contribute to a noninflationary environment
and hence to growth. The Federal Reserve, I trust, will always remain vigilant in pursuit of that goal.
BIS Review 60/2000
4
