Gordon Thiessen: The economic situation in Canada
and the prospects for inflation
Opening Statement by Mr Gordon Thiessen, Governor of the Bank  of  Canada,  before  the  House  of
Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, on 16 May 2000.
 Mr  Chairman,  and  members  of  the  Committee:  it  is  always  a  pleasure  to  appear  before  you.  Since
other Parliamentary business precluded my appearance before you last fall, I especially welcome this
opportunity to discuss the economic situation in Canada and the prospects for inflation.
Last week, we released our 11th Monetary Policy Report. Since our November Report, the Canadian
economy  has  outperformed  expectations.  Bolstered  by  vigorous  external  and  domestic  demand,
Canada’s economic expansion strengthened in the second half of 1999 and into early 2000.
The buoyant US economic picture, combined with Canada’s high levels of business investment and
solid  employment  gains,  augurs  well  for  continued  strong  growth  in  Canada.  Given  the  strong
momentum of demand, the Bank of Canada has raised its projection for growth in 2000 to a range of
4 to 4.5%.
The trend of inflation in Canada over the past six months has been lower than expected and is among
the lowest in the industrial countries. Nevertheless, pressures on capacity will likely intensify through
the  year.  Consequently,  we  expect  the  trend  of  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  consumer  price  index
excluding  food,  energy,  and  indirect  taxes,  to  rise  gradually  to  close  to  the  middle  of  our  1  to  3%
inflation-control target range. To keep this core rate of inflation steady near 2%, some deceleration in
economic expansion or a more rapid increase in productivity and production capacity will be required
during 2001.
When it comes to the production capacity of the economy, there is currently even more uncertainty
than usual. The lower-than-expected rate of core inflation would suggest that conventional measures
may  be  underestimating  the  economy’s  capacity  to  produce  goods  and  services  without  adding  to
inflationary pressures. While the conditions that would permit an increase in productivity growth and
in  capacity  have  improved  substantially  in  recent  years,  there  has  so  far  been  no  significant  hard
evidence of such an increase. This makes judging the balance between aggregate demand and supply
in the economy an even greater challenge than usual for monetary policy.
The  other  main  risks  to  Canada’s  economic  outlook  include  the  possibility  that  the  momentum  of
aggregate demand from the US economy will continue to be stronger than expected and the likelihood
of a buildup of inflationary pressures in the United States spilling over into Canada. The US economy
has continued to steam ahead. There is a clear need for the pace of expansion in the United States to
slow as we progress through this year and into 2001.
Prudent monetary management dictates that we in Canada do not underestimate the upside risks for
inflation, especially given the strong growth of aggregate demand in Canada, the United States, and
elsewhere. Because of a lag of some 18 to 24 months in the effect of monetary policy on prices, the
Bank is always trying to anticipate inflationary pressures one to two years ahead.
Productivity growth is the only way to achieve long-term gains in incomes and living standards. The
technological  revolution  that  is  currently  sweeping  the  world  provides  Canada  with  a  golden
opportunity to improve its productivity. The best contribution monetary policy can make to enhancing
productivity is to provide a low-inflation environment. Low and stable inflation reduces  uncertainty
about  future  price  movements,  lowers  the  incidence  of  boom-and-bust  cycles  in  the  economy,  and
helps  keep  interest  rates  down.  All  of  this  encourages  investment  in  the  equipment  and  software
needed to take advantage of the new technology.
1
BIS Review 41/2000
Canada’s inflation-control target and the Bank’s commitment to maintaining that target, should ensure
that monetary policy fosters a climate conducive to continued improvement in the performance of our
economy.
BIS Review 41/2000
2
