Lee Hsien Loong: Post crisis Asia - the way forward
William Taylor Memorial Lecture by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and
Chairman of the Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  before  the  Eleventh  International  Conference of
Banking Supervisors, held in Basel, 20-21 September 2000.
 Introduction
Three  years  have  passed  since the  Asian  crisis  struck  in  1997.  The  crisis  showed  how  unstable  the
international financial system could be, and how vulnerable apparently strong Asian economies were
to a sudden shock. It has caused a searching reappraisal of the benefits and risks of globalisation, as
well  as  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  the  Asian  economies.  I  propose  to  discuss  how  attitudes
towards  globalisation  have  shifted,  and  what  challenges  Asian  economies  face  in  remedying  the
weaknesses uncovered.
When Mr Paul Volcker, Chairman of the G30, invited me to deliver the William Taylor Lecture to this
distinguished  gathering  of  banking  supervisors,  he  asked  me  to  share  Singapore’s  experience  in
dealing with the financial turbulence. I will  also  explain  how  we are reforming  and  liberalising  our
financial sector, to benefit from globalisation while protecting ourselves against mishaps. Not all the
lessons Singapore has drawn will apply to other economies because of differing circumstances. But I
hope  Singapore’s  case  will  illustrate  the  importance  of  basing  financial  reforms  on  a  realistic
appreciation of the risks and difficulties.
In  analysing  the  Asian  crisis,  and  in  describing  the  Singapore  experience,  I  will  be  underlining  the
importance of sound banking systems and strong supervisory oversight. I am particularly pleased to be
doing this at a Lecture held in honour of a man who dedicated his life to these goals.
Pre-crisis wisdom
For a decade before the crisis, the conventional belief was that globalisation was an unmitigated good.
The dramatic success of the Asian tigers had shown that  openness  to trade and  foreign  investments
was a key source of economic growth. A 1992 World Bank study on the “East Asian Miracle” credited
their success chiefly to market friendly and outward oriented policies.
There  was  broad  intellectual  consensus,  including  in  the  multilateral  institutions,  in  favour  of  free
markets:  put  simply,  deregulation,  privatisation,  and  trade  and  financial  liberalisation  were  always
good, and the faster the better. This was what John Williamson called the “Washington consensus”,
but the view went beyond the US Treasury, the IMF and World Bank.
One important element of this intellectual consensus was the liberalisation  of capital  accounts.  Free
trade in goods and services had enabled countries to exploit comparative advantage and international
division of labour, and produced half a century of unprecedented global prosperity. It was argued that
in  the  same  way,  free  flows  of  capital  would open  new  avenues for  deploying  savings  and  funding
investments, and promote more efficient allocation of resources. Financial markets were globalising,
driven by technology and deregulation. The faster countries plugged into the global network, the more
they would benefit.
The  pre-crisis  consensus  did  acknowledge  the  risks  associated  with  open  capital  markets.  But  it
stressed  the  virtue  of  market  discipline  more  than  the  possibility  of  market  failure.  Financial  crises
were  the  fault  of  inappropriate  policies.  The  remedy  was  more  liberalisation,  deregulation  and
privatisation. Markets would work, if only they had access to timely and accurate information. So the
emphasis  was  on  policy  transparency  and  data  disclosure,  to  enable  the  private  sector  to  make
“correct” decisions. So steadfast was the faith in open capital markets that, as late as September 1997,
after Thailand had run into trouble, the IMF and G7 countries  were  still lobbying  member  states  to
1
BIS Review 76/2000
amend  the  IMF’s  Articles  of  Agreement  to  give  the  Fund  the  mandate  to  promote  capital  account
liberalisation.
Crisis shock
Given this worldview, the Asian crisis came as a tremendous shock. Financial markets proved highly
susceptible to contagion and herd behaviour. Problems in one country triggered a loss of confidence in
its  neighbours.  Manias,  panics  and  crashes  occurred  on  a  titanic  scale,  shaking  seemingly  sound
economies to their roots.
Structural flaws in the Asian economies undoubtedly contributed to the crisis. So did policy errors by
governments  and  international  institutions  in  responding  to  the  problems  when  they  emerged.  The
most  serious  flaws  were  in  the  financial  and  corporate  sectors.  Balance  sheets  were  weakened  by
currency and maturity mismatches. Banks were lax in their credit practices. They borrowed short-term
from  abroad  and  lent  long-term  at  home,  often  to  related  companies  without  proper  assessment.
Companies  borrowed  excessively,  especially  in  foreign  currencies  without  hedging  their  exposures,
encouraged by implicitly pegged exchange rates.
But lenders in the developed economies could not escape blame either. They were only too eager to
extend  credit,  based  on  the  political  connections  of  the  borrowers,  or  on  faith  in  an  Asian  miracle.
Banks stampeded into the region. When sentiments turned, they stampeded out again, equally indiscri-
minately. The sudden massive outflow of funds, especially through banking lines, left countries in a
severe liquidity crunch, and was an immediate cause of the crisis.
The punishment meted out by the markets was out of proportion to the crime. The damage was not just
the 9% shrinkage in the GDP of the crisis countries, but the social dislocation and political turbulence
that followed.
Indonesia suffered the worst, even though the IMF made a pre-emptive house call early in the crisis,
and  pronounced  Indonesia’s  fundamentals  to  be  basically  sound.1  The  Indonesian  government  had
pursued  prudent  macro  policies  and  maintained  steady  economic  growth.  But  companies  had
borrowed large sums from abroad, and the banking sector was afflicted by related party lending, poor
credits, and weak provisioning. This, together with concerns about KKN – corruption, collusion and
nepotism – was enough to turn an initial loss of confidence into a full-blown crisis of the body politic,
forcing President Suharto to resign and pushing the country to the brink of chaos.
The origins of the Asian crisis thus lay in institutional weaknesses and inefficiencies. These grew more
serious in the 1990s, but they continued to be masked by generally sound macroeconomic conditions
and investor confidence in a sustained Asian boom. However, the sudden onset of the crisis cannot be
explained without appreciating the panic-prone and panic-inducing behaviour of international financial
markets.
Fortunately  for  most  of  Asia,  the  crisis,  though  severe,  was  short.  The  Russian  default  and  LTCM
debacle in the fall of 1998 were a turning point. The G7 countries, led  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve,
lowered  interest  rates  promptly  and  decisively.  While  this  lowering  was  motivated  by  domestic
considerations, there was also a collective sense of concern over the weak state of the global economy.
In the event, it helped restore liquidity and confidence to global financial markets. Now nearly all the
Asian countries are recovering, though in different ways and to varying degrees.
Post-crisis caution
After this near-death experience, it is not surprising that countries are re-examining their belief in the
global economic system. What lessons have countries learnt?
1
IMF News Brief 97/19, 8 October 1997.
BIS Review 76/2000
2
Firstly, unlike previous crises, the crisis was due mainly to a run on the capital accounts. Thus, there
was no reason to rethink the merits of free international trade and investments. These fuelled the last
Asian boom, and are crucial if countries are to get their economies growing again. The most open of
the Asian economies – Hong Kong and Singapore – were among the least badly affected by the crisis.
The  devastating  demonstration  of  the  downside  risk  of  globalisation  could  easily  have  triggered  a
nationalist and protectionist backlash. Such sentiments have surfaced to varying degrees. No country
likes  to  be  told  what  to  do  by  the  IMF,  or  be  forced  to  sell  off  distressed  banks  and  companies  to
foreign buyers, especially at fire sale prices.
But  no  country  is  opting  out  of  the  global  system.  All  continue  to  court  foreign  investments  and
promote exports. Most Asian governments remain convinced that despite the attendant risks, globali-
sation is still the best way to achieve progress and economic development. On this most basic article
of faith, there has been no change.
Secondly,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  problems  of  capital  account  liberalisation.  The  IMF  has
acknowledged that capital flows can be highly volatile and a potential source of crisis.2 Countries are
now acutely aware that they must sequence capital account liberalisation judiciously, and to strengthen
financial supervision  and  prudential  safeguards  as  they  liberalise.  But  there  is  still  broad  consensus
that provided countries take these precautions, they can benefit from international capital flows.  No
Asian  country  has  imposed  exchange  controls  as  a  result  of  the  crisis,  except  Malaysia.  And  even
Malaysia continues to welcome foreign portfolio investments in its asset markets.
Thirdly,  all  the  affected  countries  have  recognised  the  dangers  of  over  reliance  on  bank-based
financing. In most Asian countries, capital markets were undeveloped. Bond markets especially were
illiquid or non-existent. This led Asian firms to rely on short-term bank financing to fund longer-term
projects, thus exposing themselves to maturity mismatches. Further, when the banks got into trouble,
the  firms  were  left  with  no  alternative  avenues  to  raise  working  capital.  Thin  capital  markets
accentuated price movements when investor preferences shifted. As a result, the economies’ ability to
absorb  shocks  was  severely  impaired.  So  across  the  region,  steps  are  now  being  taken  to  develop
capital markets.
Fourthly, there is now greater recognition that effective prudential oversight and corporate govern-
ance  are  critical  to  maintaining  a  sound  financial  system.  Many  Asian  countries  fell  short  in  these
areas,  and  are  now  striving  to  remedy  the  weaknesses.  They  need  to  establish  rigorous  supervisory
regimes,  foster  a  sound  credit  culture  in  banks,  and  apply  international  standards  of  accounting,
disclosure, and loan classification.
In this respect, the Basel-based committees, BIS, OECD, and other standard setting bodies have done
valuable  work,  promulgating  standards  on  banking  supervision,  risk  management,  corporate
governance  and  public  disclosure.  Few  would  claim  that  these  standards  are  Western  cultural
impositions, and that Asian banks and companies need different norms more suited to their societies
and stage of development.
Fifthly, there have been stronger calls to improve the workings of the international financial system,
rather than adopt a hands-off approach. No plausible alternative to the existing market-based system
has  emerged.  But  the  consensus  view  is  that  the  robustness  of  the  system  can  be  improved,  in
particular through better monitoring, and greater transparency among market participants. This is work
in progress. The Financial Stability Forum and other groups and agencies have made many proposals
to this end. These proposals should help to reduce the risk and severity of future crises, though they
will not eliminate them.
2 
Joint statement by IMF and World Bank on “An Enhanced Partnership for Sustainable Growth and Poverty Reduction”,
5 September 2000.
3
BIS Review 76/2000
Managing the change
While the fundamentals for sound financial systems are universal, specific policies to attain them must
recognise the unique socio-political context of each country. To succeed, countries must change, or at
least modify, deeply embedded social structures and cultural practices. As the experience of the former
Soviet republics and the former East European economies shows, such a far-reaching change can only
be an evolutionary process; it cannot happen overnight.
The  politics  in  each  country  will  dictate  the  pace  and  texture  of  financial  and  economic  reform.  In
Malaysia, Prime Minister Dr Mahathir Mohamed has made clear that in reforming and restructuring
the  corporate  and  financial  sectors,  his  government’s  social  and  political  objectives  come  first.  In
Indonesia, monetary and banking reforms, important as they are, are subordinate to more fundamental
issues of political transition, security, and national cohesion.
The legal framework will constrain what is possible. In many Asian countries, laws are incomplete,
and  enforcement  is  weak.  For  example,  not  all  Asian  countries  have  adequate  insolvency  laws.
Without these, borrowers have an incentive to become “strategic” debtors, deliberately defaulting on
interest  and  loan  payments.  Creditors  have  no  incentive  to  accept  realistic  write-downs,  preferring
instead to reschedule loans  and  reflect  them  as  performing  loans in  their  books.  So  supply  of  fresh
credit remains weak.
After  the  crisis  some  Asian  countries  have  passed  new  bankruptcy  laws,  and  even  established  new
courts  to  administer  them.  But  enforcement  continues  to  be  difficult.  As  Acting  Governor  of  Bank
Indonesia Anwar Nasution said, in explaining the slow pace of corporate restructuring (this was when
he was the Senior Deputy Governor): “it will take a while, partly because we have a very rotten legal
and  accounting  system  …  the  most  important  thing  is  that  we  have  very  weak  bankruptcy
procedures.”3
The  social  values  of  each  country  underpin  the  formal  structure  of  laws  and  institutions.  A
relationship-based approach towards doing business is part of the culture of most Asian societies. Few
Asian societies have the “contract-based” commercial culture of the West, particularly the US, with its
robust  emphasis  on  legal  and  impersonal  obligations.  Few  have  made  a  practice  of  separating  the
ownership of firms from their management.
In some countries, there are close ties between the state, the banks and industry, e.g. the state-owned
enterprises  in  China,  and  the  chaebols  in  Korea.  All  over  the  region,  family-based  firms  and
conglomerates are the norm, especially in banking. Companies in the same group would do business
with one another, maintaining trust on the basis of family ties and shared ownership. Even in Japan,
where  ownership  of  large  corporations  is  not  in  the  hands  of  families,  long-term  corporate
relationships and cross-shareholdings have dictated business.
This was how entrepreneurship evolved in East Asian societies, and among the overseas Chinese in
South East Asia. Many of these family firms were hugely successful, driven by the business acumen
and entrepreneurial drive of the founding patriarchs, and supported by a web of networks, or guanxi.
But the world has changed. Family relationships may be an adequate basis for running a medium sized
company, but not for an MNC employing tens of thousands of people. To be world-class, companies
need to be led by the best man for the job, and this person is not likely to come from the same family,
generation after generation. And business based on relationships rather than hard-headed commercial
calculations is prone to abuse and under-performance, as was shown in the Asian crisis.
It will not be easy for the families to relinquish control. The instinct to hand an heirloom down the
generations is still strong. There are also real practical difficulties. If the families sell out, who will the
buyers be? Who will take charge of the companies? Most Asian countries lack a group of institutional
shareholders  who  can  exert  market  discipline  and  defend  minority  shareholder  interests,  like  the
3  Straits Times, 26 January 2000.
BIS Review 76/2000
4
mutual and pension funds in the US. Nor have they developed a class of professional entrepreneur-
managers, like those who drive MNCs in the West and Japan.
Changing these institutional features of Asian economies will be an arduous task. But over time the
countries  can,  and  must,  change  discredited  practices.  State-owned  or  family-run  enterprises  can  be
transformed  into  firms  run  along  meritocratic  lines  by  professional  managers.  Greater  public
ownership can strengthen market discipline and the incentive to improve returns for all shareholders.
Companies that are not profitable have to be closed or restructured.
Asian leaders understand this. For example, the governor of the Bank of Thailand Mr Chatu Mongol
Sonakul  said,  describing  efforts  to  promote  corporate  governance  in  financial  institutions  and
companies:4 “What we are doing is a very long process. We’re not talking of months or years. We are
talking in, maybe, decades or generations. We’re not changing our way of working; we actually try to
change our way of life.”
Governments play a key role in fostering and managing this process of change. They have to make the
political judgment on how fast to go, how to sell the changes to the people, and what compromises are
necessary.  Only  they  have  the  mandate  to  decide,  and  only  they  can  take  responsibility  for  the
outcomes. South Korea under President Kim Dae Jung is a good example of how this can work, as
well as of how difficult the process can be.
External  institutions  like  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  are  also  important,  providing  advice  and
applying pressure to do what is painful but necessary. This means that IMF and World Bank loans and
assistance  have  to come  with  strict  conditionality.  But  the  line  between  essential  conditionality  and
excessive intervention is a fine one.
In Indonesia, the IMF pushed the Suharto government hard, not just to deal with the immediate crisis,
but to implement sweeping structural reforms. President Suharto interpreted this as a threat to his own
position,  and  treated  the  IMF  as  an  opponent  rather  than  an  ally.  This  contributed  to  a  collapse  of
confidence,  political  turbulence,  and  finally  Suharto’s resignation  in  May  1998.  Whether  or  not  the
IMF intended this outcome, it helped to precipitate a decisive and momentous change in Indonesia, the
consequences of which are still unfolding.
Singapore’s approach
Let me now turn to Singapore’s experience in navigating through the crisis and preparing itself to meet
the challenges of globalisation, especially in the financial sector.
Singapore is not entirely typical of the region. We are a small, open economy, about half the size of
the Swiss economy, and heavily reliant on foreign trade. We are also a financial centre in Asia, and
therefore highly exposed to disturbances in the international financial system. So it is not surprising
that Singapore was affected by the Asian crisis. Our GDP growth plunged from 8.4% in 1997 to 0.4%
in 1998. Retrenchments went up sharply. Our stock market fell, in line with regional markets.
Navigating the crisis
But overall Singapore was less affected than most of the region. The banks were unshaken, and Singa-
pore companies did not keel over. Why was this the case?
Firstly our economic fundamentals were sound. We had pursued pro-business and pro-development
economic  policies  for  many  years,  and  maintained  consistently  low  inflation.5  We  had  kept  our
economy  open,  and  had  taken  a  market-oriented  approach  towards  economic  development.  So
4  Keynote Address, Meeting on Good Governance for Financial Institutions, Bangkok, 10 June 2000.
5  Singapore’s inflation averaged 2.1% between 1981 and 1999 while the average figure for the Group of Seven developed
countries over the same period was just over 4%.
5
BIS Review 76/2000
investments  did  not  go  into  industries  in  which  we  lack  competitive  advantage,  and  Singapore
companies were generally efficient.
Secondly,  the  Government  had  a  strong  financial  position.  Indeed it  continued  to  register  a  budget
surplus throughout the crisis. We had no foreign debt, much less short-term debt. Foreign exchange
reserves were comfortable.
Thirdly, our response to the crisis was to reduce business costs directly, to help businesses stay viable
and so preserve jobs. No company was bailed out by the Government; no creditor was prevailed upon
to maintain a loan to a failing borrower. Instead we granted rebates in taxes and government charges
across  the  board,  and  reduced  employers’  monthly  contributions  to  employees’  retirement  fund  –
effectively a wage cut. Fortunately union leaders understood the gravity of the crisis, and helped  to
persuade workers to accept this unpalatable prescription. Overall these measures amounted to 7% of
GDP.  The  measures,  and  the  population’s  positive  response  to  them,  instilled  confidence  among
Singaporeans and foreign investors.
Fourthly, our banks were sound. Even during the boom years, our banks had been generally prudent
and conservative in their lending policies. Also MAS had supervised the banks strictly, requiring high
capital and liquidity standards, insisting on prompt and adequate provisions for non-performing loans,
and frowning upon excessive expansion of bank loans. So when the crisis struck, the banks stayed on
an even keel,6 even as MAS required them to make large general provisions in anticipation of future
NPLs.
Fifthly, we were lucky with our timing as we had deflated a property bubble early. Like several other
Asian countries, Singapore had experienced a property boom.  It started in 1993, and in just 3 years
property  prices  had  doubled.  By  early  1996,  the  property  market  was  becoming  dangerously
overheated.  The  Government  decided  to  prick  the  bubble.  We  restricted  bank  credit  by  capping
housing loans at 80% of valuation, and imposed other anti-speculation measures. So by the time the
Asian crisis struck a year later, property prices were already declining. The froth had been skimmed
off. Had we not acted in 1996, the adjustment would have been more painful, and the banks would
have had more serious problems with their loans.
Managing financial sector reforms
Although the crisis is past, we are not back to the status quo ante. While Asia was preoccupied with its
problems,  globalisation  of  financial  markets  proceeded  apace,  spurred  on  by  deregulation  and
technology.  With  the  internet,  markets  are  becoming  borderless.  Banks,  insurance  firms,  and  now
securities  exchanges  are  facing  cut-throat  competition,  and  going  through  a  worldwide  wave  of
mergers and consolidation.
Singapore has to keep up with these global trends to remain a sound yet dynamic financial centre. For
many years, we had regulated our financial sector tightly. We insisted on high standards of integrity
and competence. We  sought  to protect  investors,  especially  retail investors,  by  circumscribing  what
they  could  be  allowed  to  invest  in.  We  protected  local  banks  and  stockbrokers  from  foreign
competition,  in  order  to  build  up  dependable  Singaporean  players.  We  sought  to  minimise  risk
wherever possible, and accepted the trade off for a less vibrant and innovative industry.
This approach had worked, and proved its worth in the crisis. But going forward, it no longer suffices.
In the new environment, we need to take a bolder, less dirigiste approach. We should regulate with a
lighter touch, accept more calculated risks, and give the industry more room to innovate. We need to
liberalise and allow greater competition.
We will not abandon the high standards of integrity and sound financial management which we have
built up. But our attitude to supervising risk must change.
6  Before the crisis, NPLs were 3% of loans. During the crisis, NPLs rose only to about 12%, most of which was on account
of lending to the region.
BIS Review 76/2000
6
We  should  focus  more  on  systemic  risk  rather  than  protecting  individual  firms,  or  preventing  risky
products from  reaching  the  market.  We  should  allow  investors  to  judge  and  take  business  risks  for
themselves.  We  should  rely  more  on  market  discipline  and  full  information  disclosure  to  protect
investors,  rather  than  extensive  formal  and  informal  regulation.  We  need  to  shift  emphasis  from
regulation to supervision, and from one-size-fits-all rules to oversight tailored to the characteristics of
individual institutions.
We decided on these fundamental changes in our policy framework for the financial sector in 1997.
We went ahead to launch it, just as the storm clouds were gathering, because we saw it as an essential
strategic shift, independent of short-term ups and downs of economic fortunes. We felt confident of
weathering the storm, although we did not know it would turn out to be a super hurricane.
We decided to make a phased transition over several years, rather than have a single big bang. We had
seen how big bangs in some other countries had led to excesses and problems later down the road. We
could not afford this risk, unlike the more established financial centres like London. Our regulators,
financial institutions, and investors all needed time to develop new expectations of one another, and
understand the new way things worked. We needed to manage the reform process in an environment
made difficult by the Asian crisis, and keep the system on an even keel.
Over  the  last  three  years,  we have  systematically  reviewed every  part of the financial  industry.  We
have freed up the use of compulsory savings in the state retirement fund scheme, demutualised and
merged the stock and futures exchanges, deregulated brokerage commissions, opened up all areas of
the financial industry to new entrants, and taken steps to develop the bond market.
I  will focus on two specific changes, to illustrate  the  trade-offs and  considerations  in designing  our
liberalisation  programme.  The  first  is  the  review  of  our  policy  of  not  encouraging  the
internationalisation of the Singapore dollar. The second is our decision to open up the domestic market
to foreign banks, while giving impetus to local banks to strengthen themselves.
Singapore dollar non-internationalisation policy
We have long maintained an explicit policy not to encourage the internationalisation of the Singapore
Dollar.  Being  small  and  vulnerable,  we  are  especially  wary  of  large  and  volatile  capital  flows
distorting our exchange rate, and thus damaging our real economy. Our international trade is 3 times
our GDP, higher than any other country in the world. If our exchange rate moved up and down like the
Japanese Yen against the US dollar, we would be in deep trouble.
Singapore  has  no  capital  or  exchange  controls.  Anyone  can  move  funds  freely  into  and  out  of
Singapore,  whether  in  S$  or  foreign  currencies.  The  non-internationalisation  policy  does  not  try  to
prevent  currency  speculation  per  se,  or  to  limit  the  flow  of  capital  into  and  out  of  Singapore.  It
imposes only one restriction: non-residents may not borrow S$ for activities unrelated to the Singapore
economy, though they may buy and sell as much S$ as they wish. This restriction on borrowing S$ is
to  make  it  harder  for  non-residents  to  accumulate  ammunition  through  borrowing  for  a  speculative
attack on the S$.
Despite the non-internationalisation policy, there is virtually complete capital mobility in Singapore.
Empirical studies have shown that domestic S$ interest rates are almost entirely determined by parity
with offshore US Dollar interest rates, adjusted for future exchange rate expectations. In economist’s
jargon, the “interest parity condition” holds.
The role of hedge funds in the Asian crisis is  controversial. There  is  evidence that  the  hedge  funds
were  active  in  a  number  of  the  regional  currencies  before  and  during  the  crisis.  Although  some
observers  are  convinced  that  hedge  funds  were  the  main  culprits  in  bringing  currencies  down,  the
evidence is not conclusive. Nevertheless, we believe that our policy of non-internationalisation helped
to protect the S$ against excessive volatility during this unstable period. Of course the policy could not
have been effective if Singapore’s economic fundamentals had not been sound, and if we had not had
a floating exchange rate which could be managed flexibly in line with these fundamentals. We had an
easier  ride  than  Hong  Kong,  which  also  had  a  sound  economy,  but  whose  currency  was,  for  good
reasons, pegged to the US dollar.
7
BIS Review 76/2000
Going forward, we intend to maintain the non-internationalisation policy, but to periodically review its
scope and implementation. In the early phase of our development as a financial centre, international
and regional business serviced out of Singapore could be conducted in US dollars. But as our financial
centre matured, and our capital markets became more comprehensive and integrated, foreign players
increasingly  wanted  to  issue  S$  debt  and  equity,  and  to  hedge  their  positions  using  S$  swaps  and
repurchase  agreements.  At  the  same  time,  the  Singapore  economy  and  our  foreign  reserves  have
grown, and so has our confidence in withstanding pressures on our exchange rate.
Our policy needed to adapt to these changed  circumstances  while  preserving  its  basic  objective.  As
part of our financial reforms, we have progressively relaxed the S$ restrictions. Notably we have made
an  exception  to  the  restriction  on  borrowing  S$,  to  allow  foreign  entities  to  issue  S$  denominated
bonds and equity, provided they swap or convert the proceeds into foreign currency for use outside
Singapore.
We will continue to evolve the non-internationalisation policy, as we gain experience and confidence
with the liberalised rules. The policy will not compensate for unsound economic fundamentals, nor is
it  a  foolproof  protection  against  exchange  volatility.  But  it  would  be  unwise  to  discard  a  useful
deterrent against would-be speculators who might otherwise be tempted to try their luck.
Banking liberalisation
The  second  example  of  our  measured  liberalisation  approach  is  the  opening  of  our  retail  banking
sector, with simultaneous steps to help strengthen local Singapore banks.
Our starting position was different from most countries. Foreign banks (mostly British) dominated the
Singapore  banking  system  when  we  gained  independence.  For  three  decades,  the  Government  has
protected the local banks, especially in the retail business, to enable them to expand their market share.
We believed that strong and well-managed local banks, with a significant share of the home market,
were  critical  to  the  resilience  and  stability  of  our  financial  system.  We  wanted  to  be  sure  that  in  a
crisis, we could count on major institutions whose long term interests were aligned with the Singapore
economy. We still hold this view.
Like banks in other Asian countries, most of our local banks started as family banks, and are still run
by  their  controlling  shareholders.  But  strict  supervision  enabled  them  to  grow  into  sound,  well-
capitalised institutions, free of the problems of improper and imprudent lending to related companies.
By  Asian  standards,  the  local  banks  were  exceptionally  well  run.  But  compared  to  the  best
international  banks,  they  lagged  in  many  areas:  size,  technology,  expertise,  range  and  quality  of
service, and shareholders’ returns.
We could not afford to let Singapore banks fall behind, or deprive the rest of our economy of world-
class  financial  services.  In  any  case,  because  of  globalisation  and  cross-border  competition,  a
protectionist policy was becoming less and less tenable.
Therefore we moved last year to open up the Singapore market further to foreign banks. We hoped
that this would spur efficiency and innovation among the local banks, and push well-run banks to seek
scale  and  expand  at  home  and  abroad.  We  were  convinced  that  unless  we  opened  up,  this
transformation would never take place. There is no substitute for real competition.
We did not want the liberalisation to weaken our banks and destabilise the financial system. So we are
not taking a big bang, laissez faire approach. Instead, we are phasing the liberalisation over five years,
and opening the market to financially strong, committed foreign players.
At  the  same  time,  we  are  motivating  the  local  banks  to  strengthen  themselves.  We  have  raised
disclosure standards to international norms, and we now require banks to publish details of their non-
performing loans and inner reserves, which were previously closely guarded secrets.
We  are  also  raising  corporate  governance  standards,  which  lie  at  the  heart  of  the  improvements
required in Asian banking systems. We instituted nominating committees on bank boards, comprising
a majority of independent directors. Their remit is to ensure that persons appointed to the boards and
BIS Review 76/2000
8
to key executive positions are selected for their expertise, and their ability to contribute to the bank
and to the interest of all shareholders.
Most important of all, we are requiring the banking groups to make a clear separation between their
financial  and  non-financial  businesses.  The  banks  will  have  to  divest  all  control  of  non-financial
activities,  and  remove  all  cross-shareholdings.  This  will  help  ensure  that  all  transactions  with  non-
financial entities remain at arms length, that the interests of the bank are not confused with the other
interests  of  the  controlling  shareholder,  and  that  management  attention  stays  focussed  on  the
increasingly complex business of banking.
If  this  programme  works,  we  hope  a  few  Singapore  banks  will  grow  to  become  strong  regional
players. Of course, success cannot be guaranteed. If the local banks lose too much ground, some of our
anchor  players  may  end  up  marginalised,  or  being  taken  over.  Still  we  have  resolved  to  proceed,
knowing that doing nothing would certainly lead us into more difficulty.
The  local  banks  are  strengthening  themselves  to  compete  in  an  open  domestic  market,  and
internationally. We have encouraged them to merge and consolidate with one another, or at least to
form alliances and consolidate some of their back-end operations, so as to derive economies of scale.
But the industry trends may be such that even this is not enough for them to hold their own against the
large global banks. After all, even Deutsche Bank was not too big to feel the need for a merger partner.
Local banks which want to be more than niche players may then need to contemplate not just foreign
acquisitions, but cross-border partnerships with partners as large as or larger than themselves.
The  smaller  European  countries  are  wrestling  with  the  same  issue.  In  Scandinavia  and  the  Benelux
countries,  the  pressing  need  for  economies  of  scale  has  forced  major  banks  to  look  beyond  their
domestic markets for partnerships, and cross-border mergers have been common.
In Singapore, the same thing is already happening in the telecommunications industry. The Govern-
ment has decided to allow, and indeed to encourage, dominant local players like Singapore Telecom to
go beyond foreign acquisitions, to seek foreign mergers. As Singapore banks increasingly confront the
same imperative, we will have to consider exactly how far we are willing to trade off retaining a few
Singaporean-controlled banks against the logic of globalisation.
Conclusion
The Asian crisis has led to a rethink of the consensus in favour of globalisation and free capital flows.
The result has been to reaffirm the logic of globalisation, and the value of free markets and free trade.
But  it  has  also  caused  a  more  sober  appreciation  of  the  risks  of  international  flows  of  capital,  and
clarified  the  necessary  preconditions  for  countries  to  minimise  the  difficulties  and  reap  the  benefits
from freer capital flows.
Singapore’s experience in bringing our financial sector up to best practices during and after the crisis
shows how complex and delicate a task it is, despite Singapore’s relatively strong starting point. It will
be even more challenging for countries in less favourable circumstances, to find their way forward in
post crisis Asia. In this quest, these countries deserve the full support of the international community.
9
BIS Review 76/2000
