Bank of Japan’s January report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 19 January 2000.
 The Bank’s View2
Japan’s economy, which had stopped deteriorating, has recently started to improve, with exports and
production  increasing.  The  economic  environment  surrounding  private  demand  is  gradually
improving,  as  seen  in  the  continuing  increase  in  corporate  profits.  However,  clear  signs  of  a  self-
sustained recovery in private demand have not been observed yet.
With  regard  to  final  demand,  housing  investment  has  recently  peaked  out,  and  public  investment
seems to have stopped rising. Recovery in private consumption continues to be weak through lack of
notable improvements in employment and income conditions. Business fixed investment, which had
been on a downward trend, shows signs of leveling off. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus
real  imports)  continue  to follow  an  upward  trend,  despite  monthly  fluctuations,  due to an  upturn  in
overseas economies.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand  and  progress  in  inventory  adjustment,  industrial
production continues to rise and an increase in corporate profits is becoming distinct. In this situation,
corporate  sentiment  continues  to  improve.  Regarding  the  employment  condition,  there  are  some
indicators  that  suggest  a  slowdown  of  decrease  in  the  number  of  employees.  The  positive
developments  in  corporate  profits and  sentiment,  however, have  not necessarily  stimulated business
activities, because firms still strongly feel that they have excess capacity and employees and that they
should  reduce  their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.  In  addition,  efforts  by  firms  to  reduce
personnel expenses have prolonged the severity of households’ income conditions.
As  for  the  outlook,  improvements  in  the  overall  financial  environment  partly  due  to  the  monetary
easing by the Bank, along with a series of economic measures taken by the government, are expected
to continue underpinning the economy. Moreover, the positive impact on domestic production of the
recovery of overseas economies, especially of Asian economies, is likely to continue for some time
and have favorable effects on corporate profits and then on household income. By contrast, it is highly
probable that housing investment will remain flat for the time being. In addition, firms are expected to
maintain a cautious stance toward business fixed investment based on their modest prospects for sales,
although corporate restructuring is improving profitability to some extent. Moreover, it seems that the
appreciation of the yen since the summer of 1999 will have an adverse effect on corporate profits in
the near term. In these circumstances, future economic developments still require careful monitoring in
spite of the gradual recovery in the environment for private demand. Furthermore, it is important to
promote structural reform in order to facilitate a recovery in private demand.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  declining  somewhat  due  to  the  appreciation  of  the  yen.
Domestic wholesale prices, notwithstanding the fall in prices of electric machinery, are flat mainly due
to  the  rise  in  prices  of  petroleum  and  chemical  products  reflecting  an  increase  in  crude  oil  prices.
Consumer prices remain unchanged fundamentally. Corporate service prices are still falling slowly. As
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on January 17, 2000.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on January 17 as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 6/2000
for the outlook, overall prices are likely to be flat for the time being despite the continued fall expected
in prices of some machinery. This is because the supply-demand balance is improving gradually, as
shown in the decline in inventories, and because the rise in crude oil prices to date will continue to be
passed  on  to  prices  of  other  products  for  a  while.  However,  attention  should  still  be  paid  to  the
downward pressure on prices, as clear signs of a self-sustained recovery in private demand have not
yet been observed and wages continue to fall.
The  financial  markets  have  been  generally  stable  reflecting  ample  funds  provision  by  the  Bank  of
Japan, despite  the  surge  in  demand  for  liquidity  including  seasonal  demand  for  year-end  funds  and
precautionary  demand  in  view  of  the  Year  2000  problem.  No  significant  disruptions  have  resulted
from the millennium date change in financial transactions.
The overnight call rate has stayed at nearly zero, and financial institutions have been confident about
the  availability  of  overnight  funds.  The  amount  outstanding  of  funds  in  the  call  money  market  has
increased slightly.
Interest rates on term instruments rose toward the end of 1999 due to market participants’ concerns
about  the  Year  2000  problem,  but  declined  around  the  turn  of  the  year  as  these  concerns  were
dispelled. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  generally  followed  a  downward  trend  from  late  November
throughout December 1999, but  then rebounded somewhat  and are  presently  ranging  between 1.75-
1.80  percent.  The  yield  spread  between  private  bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and
government  bonds  continues  narrowing,  primarily  that  between  private  bonds  with  relatively  low
credit ratings and government bonds.
Stock prices, after exceeding 19,000 yen at the beginning of 2000, weakened to around 18,000-18,500
yen  following  the correction  in  the  U.S.  stock  market.  Subsequently,  they  recovered reacting  to  the
rebound in U.S. stocks and have returned to the level of above 19,000 yen.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen once appreciated to the 101-102 yen level against  the  U.S.
dollar at the beginning of the year, but then depreciated and is currently being traded in the range of
105-107 yen.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base has eased  considerably.  Under these  circumstances,  major  banks  are  gradually  becoming  more
active in extending loans, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
However, credit demand for economic activities such as business fixed investment remains weak. In
addition,  firms  continue  to  reduce  debts  as  part  of  their  balance-sheet  restructuring  measures.  As  a
result,  credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  has  continued  to  be  basically  stagnant,  and  thus  private
banks’ lending has remained sluggish. Issuance of corporate bonds and CP has been steady at present.
The  growth  in  money  stock  (M2+CDs)  has  slowed  somewhat  reflecting  the  stagnant  private  credit
demand.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  financial  position  of  firms  is  easing,  and  the  lending  attitude  of
financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  firms  is  becoming  less  severe.  It  continues  to  warrant  careful
monitoring  how  these  favorable  developments  in  corporate  financing  environment  will  affect
economic activities.
BIS Review 6/2000
2
