David Clementi: Technological innovation and e-commerce
– the implications for derivatives markets
Speech  by  David  Clementi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  opening  reception  of
International Derivatives Week, held in London, on 19 June 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I  am  delighted  to  address  you  at  the  start  of  what,  I  am  sure,  will  be  an  informative  and
thought-provoking International Derivatives Week.
Given  the  recent  rapid  pace  of  technological  development,  it  is  fitting  that  this  year’s  conference
focuses on e-commerce and its impact on the derivatives industry. This  is  certainly  a  topic  of  great
interest to the Bank of England. Maintaining the stability of the financial system and the effectiveness
of the UK’s financial services are key objectives for us and recent developments are highly relevant to
both.
Nobody doubts that technology has rapidly changed the financial landscape, and will continue to do
so. One only needs to spend time online to realise that virtually anything - from commodities, to cars,
to Pokemon cards - can be bought and sold by someone with access to a terminal. Electronic trading
and  communication  networks  have  greatly  increased  the  “reach”  of  the  traditional  financial
marketplaces, but at the same time allowed a wide range of new trading system providers to enter the
markets at relatively low cost. It is a challenge just to stay abreast of the latest developments.
I would like this evening to say something first about the role of exchanges in this new environment,
and  then  touch  on  the  role  of  technology  in  changing  that  environment  and  the  implications  for
clearing houses in managing the resulting risks.
Role of exchanges
So far, the established derivatives exchanges retain substantial and often growing volumes although, in
recent  years,  OTC  derivatives  trading  has  expanded  much  faster  than  on-exchange  trading  in  many
areas.  On-exchange  business  continues  to  be  dominated  by  Chicago  in  the  US  and  by  London,
Frankfurt  and  Paris  in  Europe.  The  LME  remains  the  world  leader  in  its  field,  as  do  the  IPE  and
Nymex  in  theirs.  But  the  number  of  new  trading  systems  emerging  in  the  various  markets
demonstrates that the winds of change are blowing hard, and today’s market leaders are aware of the
need to innovate to survive in a rapidly evolving market place.
Exchanges are responding to these challenges in a number of different ways. Some exchanges look to
leverage  off  their  involvement  within  wider  groups  containing  a  range  of  trading,  clearing  and
settlement systems. This is not, however, our preferred  structure in  London; the different tiers  have
different characteristics and we believe it is generally in the best interests of users if trading, clearing
and settlement are kept apart.
Some exchanges have chosen to merge or ally with others to provide a larger, more liquid and more
competitive marketplace. And all are competing for business in a way unthought of a few years ago -
witness the competition between LIFFE and Eurex for the long and short ends of the euro yield curve.
The  latest  score  in  that  particular  England:Germany  match  is  one  all.  No  doubt  German  supporters
think this score-line would have been a fairer result on Saturday night, given the balance of play!
1
BIS Review 51/2000
Role of technology
But  the  common  factor  in  all  of  these  developments  is  technology.  Physical  trading  floors  for
exchanges  are  fast-disappearing,  particularly  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic,  replaced  by  virtual  floors
with trading conducted electronically. And exchanges are utilising their markets and system expertise
to become trading system providers as well as market operators: OM has been a leader in this field for
some time now, and LIFFE has announced some exciting plans - the creation of - fittingly enough -
“LIFFE.com” and its recent tie-up with Cap Gemini.
On balance, these developments must be in investors’ interests. They reduce costs, improve access and
allow exchanges to respond quickly and effectively to users’ changing needs. But they also present a
number  of  challenges.  To  move  from  a  trading  floor,  with  its  mix  of  locals,  brokers  and  market
makers, to an electronic order book, undoubtedly changes the dynamics of a market.
For  regulators,  remote  trading  also  brings  some  difficult  challenges.  Technology  does  not  respect
national boundaries; nor does it recognise different jurisdictions. In  a  world  where  a  German  trader
can  trade  on  an  exchange  in  London  with  a  counterparty  in  the  US  who  uses  a  French  technology
provider and a Belgian settlement agent, the question of how to ensure that all parts of the process are
regulated effectively is a tough one.
Some  argue  there  should  be  some  kind  of  pan-national  “super-regulator”.  Perhaps  that  is  where  we
will eventually get to although one worries about its potential for the worst sort of bureaucracy: and in
the meantime we think that an approach based on close cooperation and the exchange of regulatory
information, is a pragmatic way forward and more likely to balance the need to protect investors and
the need to encourage innovative, responsive markets.
But  let  me  turn  my  attention  back  to  the  opportunities  that  technology  offers.  The  scope  for  new
contracts on B2B and e-commerce networks is enormous. Contracts that would have taken some time
to establish themselves in a pit can be quickly listed on screen at relatively little cost. Trading is now
possible  in such diverse  commodities as  electricity,  telecoms  bandwidth  and  even  the  weather.  The
organisers of this event may, in future, be able to hedge their exposure to fluctuating wine prices using
exchange-traded futures based on the finest premier cru, I suspect this is one contract where traders
would  be  happy  to  go  to  physical  delivery.  We  central  bankers  will  have  to  stick  to  our  usual  vin
ordinaire.  In  any  event  it  will  be  fascinating  to  see  what  other  contracts  emerge  over  the  coming
months.
Of course, not all contracts that are launched will be successful, and it’s interesting to reflect on what
makes a successful derivative contract. Lessons can often be learned from looking back to the past.
Not far from this location is the home of the London Metal Exchange. Its origins can be traced back to
1571, when traders in metal and a range of other commodities began meeting at the Royal Exchange.
What was originally a domestic market in physical metal became a major global market, and by the
early 19th century traders had been forced to use nearby coffee shops. As the UK started importing
large quantities of metal from abroad during the Industrial Revolution, the need emerged for importers
to  protect  themselves  against  price  movements  during  the  long  voyage  from  places  like  Chile  and
Malaysia. The  “futures”  market  which  developed  from  those  humble  beginnings  continued  to  grow
and, in 1877, the London Metal Exchange Company was formed.
That market was successful for a number of reasons. Volatility in the price of the underlying product
made the contract attractive to hedgers and speculators alike. Technology - the telegraph would you
believe!  -  encouraged the  market’s  growth  by  making  shipment  arrival  dates  more  predictable.  The
LME had a first mover advantage that still stands. Liquidity flourished as traders followed one another
in using the new market. So there are a number of lessons for today’s exchanges, to do with the need
to respond to market needs, the need to make full use of available technology, and so on.
Role of clearing houses
It will be very little surprise to many of you that, as the central bank, the aspect of these developments
which interests us most is the management of risk.
BIS Review 50/2000
2
Clearing houses have traditionally played a central role in the derivatives markets and continue to do
so as those markets expand. They are also increasingly active in the underlying cash markets. It’s clear
to  see  why  the  markets  value  their  service  and  it  is  fortunate  that,  in  the  London  Clearing  House,
London has a first class central counterparty. But clearing houses concentrate risk at a single  point.
And,  by  serving  multiple  markets,  they  provide  a  route  for  disturbance  to  be  transmitted  between
markets. So the way they manage their risk, particularly as they expand their activities, is important -
to you, I hope, as much as to us.
Diversifying  across  products  can  provide  benefits,  particularly  if  this  simultaneously  diversifies  a
clearing house’s exposures across existing clearing members. And expansion into new markets where
existing members are already active provides clearing houses - and potentially regulators - with more
information  on  members’  overall  trading  books  which  they  can  use  to  manage  their  risk  more
effectively.
Diversifying  across  markets  does  not,  of course,  help  when, for some  reason,  the  markets  all  move
together.  And it is  vital, in  any  case, that  clearing  houses continue  to have  robust arrangements  for
monitoring  and  controlling  risk,  including  proper  margining  procedures  and  adequate  financial
resources,  and  that their procedures and  ownership structure  gives  members  the  incentive  to  ensure
that risk is adequately controlled. That suggests to us that control and ownership of the clearing house
should reside with clearing members, who are, in any case, likely to contribute  a  major part  of  any
mutual guarantee fund.
So we welcome the fact that the product of the LCH/Clearnet discussions is intended to be a non-profit
mutual  organisation  which  gives  ownership  to  its  users  and  look  forward  to  as  productive  a
relationship with the new body as we currently have with LCH.
The topic of this week’s conference -  putting  the  dot.com  into  derivatives  -  presents  challenges  but
also opportunities. If we can address both, the derivatives industry will be better placed than ever to
meet the needs of users world-wide.
I wish you all an enjoyable week.
3
BIS Review 51/2000
