Mervyn King: Balancing the economic see-saw
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Plymouth Chamber of
Commerce and Industry’s 187th Anniversary Banquet, on 14 April 2000.
 Mr Chairman, distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I was delighted to receive an invitation to speak at your 187th Anniversary Banquet.
Plymouth  people  are  brave  souls.  And  few  are  braver  than  those  who  choose  to  listen  to  a  central
banker at 10 o’clock on a Friday evening. The more so, when I tell you that our ambition at the Bank
of  England is to  be  boring.  Not,  I  hasten to add,  at  events  like  this.  But  in  our  management  of  the
economy where our belief is that boring is best.
Macroeconomic  policy  has, for  most  of  our  lifetime,  been  rather  too  exciting  for  comfort.  As  Miss
Prism  told  her  charge  in  The  Importance  of  Being  Earnest,  “Cecily  you  will  read  your  Political
Economy  in  my  absence.  The  chapter  on  the  Fall  of  the  Rupee  you  may  omit.  It  is  somewhat  too
sensational”.
If the rupee was too sensational, what words could describe the drama of sterling during the past fifty
years? Devaluations in 1949 and 1967, eight-week membership of the European “snake” in 1972, and
the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) which we joined in 1990 and left in September 1992. And now,
of course, sterling’s remarkable strength against the new currency of the euro. In short, the peripatetic
pound has caused, and continues to cause, severe headaches for economic policymakers.
But was currency instability really the cause of those headaches in the past, or was it simply the effect
of  bad  policies?  Some  of  both  is  the  answer.  Large  movements  in  sterling  can  create  problems  for
monetary policy, as we have seen very recently.
Equally, the absence of a credible monetary framework means that the currency is likely to be volatile.
Sterling crises of the past reflected an absence of monetary stability. Inflation has eroded the value of
money to the point where the purchasing power of £1 in 1950 has been reduced to less than a shilling,
or  5p,  today.  The  failure  to  control  inflation  led  to  excessive  expansions  of  the  economy,  and  the
subsequent  struggle  to  bring  inflation  back  down  resulted  in  severe  recessions.  This  country
experienced the sharpest decline in output of any G7 economy in the early  1980s.  And  in the early
1990s  only  Canada  had  a  more  severe  recession.  Eventually,  the  realisation  that  inflation  did  not
generate sustainably higher output and employment produced a determination to restore stability to the
UK economy.
Since  our  departure  from  the  ERM,  in  September  1992,  successive  governments  have  put  in  place
institutional changes that would deliver stability. First the inflation target and then independence of the
Bank of England, with the new Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), have put us firmly on course to
achieve monetary stability. And there is also now a clear fiscal policy framework to ensure that the
public finances are in a sustainable state in the long run. The success of that approach can be seen in
the remarkable  degree  of stability  that  the  UK economy  has  achieved  since the  inflation  target  was
adopted in October 1992. Over that period inflation has averaged 2.7%. And it has been more stable
than  in  any  period  since  monthly  RPI  figures  were  first  collected  in  1947.  Output  has  grown  at  an
average annual rate of 2.9%, well above the post-war average. Growth too has been more stable, and
there  have  now  been  31  consecutive  quarters  of  expansion,  the  longest  unbroken  sequence  since
official records began.
Nevertheless, while monetary stability may be a necessary condition for exchange rate stability, it is
clearly  not  sufficient. The  evidence  is the  sharp rise  in  sterling  against  the  euro  over  the  past  three
years. Sterling is now some 40% higher against the euro than in late 1996. This is not the direct result
of  UK  monetary  policy  -  changes  in  interest  rate  differentials  account  for  only  a  small  part  of  the
1
BIS Review 34/2000
appreciation  against  the  euro,  and  sterling  has  hardly  changed  against  the  dollar  over  the  past  five
years.
Sterling’s strength is largely the result of continuing weakness in the euro. That does, however, create
problems - for some of you, and for the MPC as well.
To maintain stability the MPC has an inflation target of 2½%. To meet the inflation target the MPC
sets interest rates to keep nominal demand in line with supply at the target inflation rate. In that way it
tries to maintain an overall balance in the economy. But sharp changes in either the exchange rate or
the world economy - both of which we have seen over the past three years - mean that overall balance
requires swings between external and domestic demand. The MPC can - and did - respond to external
developments  by  changing  interest  rates  so  as  to  influence  domestic  demand  to  restore  the  overall
balance.  But  in  so  doing  the  economic  see-saw  lurched  with  external  demand  falling  and  domestic
demand  rising.  While  the  MPC  can  try  to  maintain  stability  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  it  cannot
prevent movements in the see-saw reflecting swings between external and domestic demand resulting
from changes in the world economy. And lurches in this see-saw produce damage - as manufacturing
and  agricultural  businesses  know  only  too  well,  and  as  domestically-oriented  businesses  saw  in  the
early 1990s. Of course, the UK is not alone in this experience. So can we learn from others?
April is the month not just of showers; it is also the month of the Washington Spring meetings: the
meetings  of  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  from  the  one  hundred  and  eighty-two
member countries of the IMF and World Bank. Early tomorrow morning I shall leave Plymouth, rather
as  the  Pilgrim  Fathers, to  travel to the  New World to  take  part  in  those  meetings.  They  provide  an
opportunity to take stock of the world economy. This year the key word  will  be  “imbalances”.  The
very word does not bode well for our attempt to balance the economic see-saw at home.
So I want to pose three questions. First, what are these imbalances? Second, why have they arisen?
Third, do they make it more difficult to balance the UK’s economic see-saw?
My first question, then, concerns the nature of the imbalances. Over the past year, there has been a
marked recovery of the world economy as the effects on confidence and capital flows of the financial
crises in emerging markets were quickly reversed.
In the words of the IMF, the global downturn following the crises of 1997 and 1998 “now appears to
have been relatively mild and brief”. Growth in most emerging markets has been impressive. But in
the three largest economies of the industrialised world - the US, the euro area and Japan - economic
growth has been lopsided. In the US, the extraordinary strength of consumption and investment has
resulted  in  annual  growth  of  final  domestic  demand  of  over  5%  a  year  since  1996.  Output  grew
impressively, but less fast, so the current account deficit has expanded and it is now not far short of
5% of GDP, a record level. Equally remarkable is the  absence of sustained  growth in Japan,  where
output is still no higher now than it was in 1996. A lack of consumer confidence resulted in falling
domestic demand and a rising current account surplus. Less extreme is the euro zone, where, after a
period of slow growth in the area as a whole, recovery is now well established.
The internal imbalances in each country  -  differences  between  growth  of  domestic  demand  and the
supply  of  output  -  are  the  mirror  image  of  the  external  imbalances  -  current  account  surpluses  and
deficits. Widening imbalances are unlikely to be sustainable for long. But the extent to which they will
be self-correcting, or will require policy adjustment, depends in large part on why they have arisen.
This is my second question - why have the imbalances arisen? Sustained current account deficits can
reflect  profitable  investment  opportunities  that  exceed  the  supply  of  domestic  savings  so  that  it  is
necessary  to  borrow  from  abroad.  And  the  most  popular  explanation  of  the  recent  rapid  growth  in
domestic  demand,  especially  in the  US, is as the consequence  of  a rise  in  productivity  growth,  and
investment opportunities, reflecting the so-called “new economy”. It has been pointed out by several
economists,  including  Alan  Greenspan  and  my  colleague  John  Vickers,  that  an  increase  in  trend
productivity growth might increase demand by more than it raised supply initially, as firms invest in
new technology and consumers anticipate higher future incomes and spend today out of this revised
estimate  of  their  “permanent”  income.  Hence  new  information  technologies,  because  they  raise
BIS Review 34/2000
2
potential future output in the economy, would add to demand today. The immediate consequence of
such an increase in demand relative to output is a current account deficit and inflationary pressures.
This  is  not  a  new  point.  It  was  prominent  in  the  post-mortem  examination  of  the  UK  boom  and
subsequent bust in the late 1980s. Nigel Lawson wrote in his memoirs “in the mid to late 1980s, there
was  a  substantial  upward  revision  of the  permanent  element  [of  income],  particularly  if  we  include
capital  gains, notably  from  home  ownership.  In  part  this  was  wholly  justified,  given  the  undoubted
supply-side improvements that had occurred. But it clearly went too far”. (Lawson, N, The View from
No  11,  Bantam  Press,  1992,  p  632.)  And  there  is  the  rub.  Provided  the  increase  in  productivity
materialises,  families  and  firms  will  be  able  to  repay  the  debts  incurred  to  finance  the  increase  in
spending.  The  levels  of  spending  and  output  will  converge,  and  the  current  account  deficit  will
steadily subside. But if optimism has run ahead of reality, then, at some point an awkward downward
adjustment  to  spending  must  take  place.  In  such  circumstances,  the  adjustment  to  quantities  -  both
spending  and  the  trade  deficit  -  are  likely  to  follow  sharp  adjustments  in  asset  prices  -  both  stock
markets and exchange rates - when expectations come back into line with the underlying increase in
productivity.
My final question was what does this mean for the economic see-saw in the UK? At present domestic
demand is up and external demand is down. One way or another the imbalances in the world economy
will be  corrected. That is likely  to  go  hand  in hand  with changes in  exchange  rates  and  other asset
prices. Whether this will happen gradually or through a sharp adjustment is impossible to know. But
those changes will have a major influence on the speed at which the economic see-saw in the UK will
move back to balance.
The message for policy is that it is important not to let domestic demand grow too rapidly for too long.
The longer the correction is left, the sharper the required adjustment will be. The higher one end of the
see-saw,  the  greater  the  subsequent  lurch  will  be.  The  trade  deficit  cannot  continue  to  widen
indefinitely. Hence, at some point domestic demand will have to grow at below its sustainable trend
level rather than significantly above as it has done now for some time - over 4% a year on average
over the past four years.
By  acting  preemptively,  and trying  to  anticipate  developments,  the  MPC  has  been  able  to  maintain
overall stability in the economy, but the sharp rise in sterling led to a lurch in the economic see-saw. In
one of the most influential contributions to monetary policy in the post-war period, Milton Friedman
wrote that the characteristic of most central banks was that “too late and too much has been the general
practice”. Preemptive action to slow domestic demand growth to a more sustainable level is the key to
avoiding a larger and more painful adjustment at a later date. That is why the MPC has raised interest
rates by 100 basis points since September.
I  hope  you  now  understand  why  our  ambition is to  be  so  boring.  Our  aim  is  to  maintain  economic
stability. A reputation for being boring is an advantage - credibility of the policy framework helps to
dampen  the  movement  of  the  see-saw.  If  love  is  never  having  to  say  sorry,  then  stability  is  never
having to be exciting. Miss Prism should not have to tell future  Cecilies  to  omit  the  chapter  on  the
activities of the Monetary Policy Committee.
3
BIS Review 34/2000
