The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE: Britain and Europe
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir  Edward  George  GBE,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at The  British
Swiss Chamber of Commerce Lunch, held in Zürich, on 12 September 2000.
 I agreed to talk briefly about Britain and Europe - and then respond to questions. I will in fact talk
more specifically about Britain and the euro from my perspective at the Bank of England. But let me
make clear, from the outset, that monetary union is fundamentally a political rather than an economic
issue. It necessarily involves the deliberate pooling of national sovereignty over important aspects of
public  policy,  in  the  interest  not  just  of  collective  economic  advantage,  but  of  a  perceived  wider
political harmony within Europe.
As  a  central  banker,  I  have  nothing  to say  about  the  politics  of  monetary  union  -  that’s  for  elected
politicians and clearly political opinion is divided - not just in the UK - about how far and certainly
how fast to go in the sensitive matter of pooling national sovereignty. But monetary union is also an
economic issue and that is my concern.
So what are the economic pros and cons?
The  arguments  on  either  side  are  in  fact  now  reasonably  well  defined  in  the  UK  where  there  has
already been an intense and protracted debate - though different opinions inevitably attach  different
weights to them.
On the plus side, the crucial and unique economic advantage of monetary union is nominal exchange
rate  certainty  within  the  Eurozone  -  which  takes  over  half  UK  exports.  I’m  not  talking  just  about
reasonable  exchange  rate  stability  -  which  might  result  over  time  from  each  country  pursuing
disciplined macro-economic policies in parallel. I’m talking about nominal exchange rate certainty for
the indefinite future.
That very real economic advantage is well understood in the UK. It is particularly well understood by
those  businesses  in  the  UK  that  export  to,  or  compete  with,  businesses  in  the  Eurozone,  especially
given the euro’s unexpected - and puzzlingly persistent - weakness since its inception at the beginning
of  last  year.  On  that  ground  alone  many  of  them,  who  are  under  intense  competitive  pressure  as  a
result  of  sterling’s  excessive  strength  against  the  euro,  though  not  against  other  major  currencies,
would see our joining the single currency as an advantage - provided, of course, the exchange rate at
which we joined was  fixed  at an  appropriate  level,  which  most  of them  -  and  indeed  most  analysts
looking at the economic fundamentals - think should be substantially lower than at present.
At a broader macro-economic level the potential benefit of joining - as a result of greater transparency
of  costs  and  prices  and  lower  transaction  costs  -  leading  to  greater  competition  and  more  efficient
economic resource allocation is well understood.
Exchange  rate  certainty  within  Europe  -  even  though  only  within  Europe,  and  even  though  it  is
nominal  exchange  rate  certainty  rather  than  real  exchange  rate  certainty,  which  is  what  matters  in
terms  of  competitiveness  -  would  potentially  enhance  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  the  European
Single Market.
The euro’s second very powerful advantage is the possibility it opens up for much broader and more
liquid  financial  markets.  It  will  mean  a  progressive  narrowing  of  spreads  between  borrowers  and
lenders,  which  is  good  news  for  the  users  of  those  markets  -  and  that  will  be  good  news  too  for
financial intermediaries as a group, because it will lead to higher volumes of financial  activity.  Not
every individual intermediary will benefit, of course, in the more competitive environment, but those
who survive will thrive!
The  City  of  London  is  already  making  an  important  contribution  to  this  process  of  euro  financial
market integration. It is in fact the greatest contribution that the UK can make to the success of the
1
BIS Review 71/2000
euro while we remain outside. (It runs alongside the conceptually distinct, but closely related, pressure
for broader international integration of financial markets, currently reflected in a spate of initiatives to
unify trading platforms, and both clearing mechanisms and settlement systems, in which London, of
course, is also very much involved.)
These then - nominal exchange rate certainty throughout the Eurozone and integrated euro financial
markets - are potentially powerful economic arguments in favour of UK membership. What then are
the risks - the possible arguments against our joining the euro?
Essentially the potential downside can be summed up as the risk that the single monetary policy - the
“one-size-fits-all” short term interest rate within the Eurozone, which is the inevitable consequence of
a single currency - will not in the event prove to be appropriate to the domestic monetary policy needs
of all the participating countries.
Countries  may  have  divergent  cyclical  positions.  They  may  face  divergent  fiscal  positions,  which
would affect their appropriate fiscal/monetary policy mix in different directions - though this should
be contained by the Growth and Stability Pact. Or their domestic policy needs may diverge as a result
of economic shocks of some sort - a classic, but unique, example was German re-unification, but the
more recent global economic disturbance was perhaps another example.
The risks of divergent monetary policy needs within a monetary union are certainly real. They were
recognised in the Maastricht Treaty, which established the famous “convergence criteria” precisely in
order to try to limit the risks before the euro-project went ahead.
They are essentially similar to the risks of sectoral or regional divergence within a national currency
area  -  which  we in the  UK  certainly  know  something  about  -  it  is  in  fact  a  major  monetary  policy
headache for us at the present time. But in the case of the Eurozone the risks are of divergent monetary
policy needs between the different member countries - they  apply  at the  national level.  And  if  they
materialised to any very significant extent, the resulting tensions could be serious, because alternative
mechanisms - such as labour migration or fiscal redistribution through a central budget - which help to
mitigate sectoral or regional  disparities in the  national  context  -  are less  developed  at  the  Eurozone
level. Some commentators point to the present inflationary pressures in Ireland as an example of the
problems that could arise where the single monetary policy is easier than the national situation might
require  -  though  I  am  not  sure  how  far  one  can  sensibly  generalise  from  the  Irish  experience.  It  is
equally possible to envisage circumstances in which the single monetary policy is too restrictive for
some countries.
The  fact that  the  UK  did  not join in  the  first  wave  of  EMU  was  a  disappointment  to  some  people,
including to some of our European partners - but it was also a considerable relief to them - we would
certainly have complicated the task of the ECB in setting  its single  monetary  policy.  And  from  our
own perspective, if we had joined EMU from the start - and had Eurozone interest rates over the past
eighteen  months  or  so,  it  is  very  difficult  to  envisage  how  we  would  have  avoided  an  inflationary
boom in the UK. It is true that, to the extent that the present imbalance within our economy reflects
sterling’s  appreciation  against  the  euro,  we  would  have  been  protected  against  that.  But,  with
accelerating  inflation  in  the  economy  as  a  whole,  the  effect  would  have  been  tantamount  to  real
exchange rate appreciation, which would in any event have damaged their competitive position and so
provided  at  best  only  short-term  relief  even  to  them.  And  it  would  not  in  that  case  be  possible  to
reverse that effect through exchange rate adjustment. The fact is that there are no easy answers or ideal
solutions to the one-size-fits-all problem at the Eurozone level, without substantial - and sustainable -
convergence between our economies, although coping with such tensions as may emerge within the
Eurozone  -  with  or  without  the  UK  -  is  likely  to  be  easier  in  a  context  of  structural,  supply-side,
flexibility and adaptability in labour and product markets.
Now, many people in the Eurozone acknowledge these concerns. But they are inclined to argue that if
a  country  participating  in  the  monetary  union  were  to  find  itself  in  an  unsustainable  situation,  and
given  that  it  would  have  no  macro-economic  way  out  -  through  exchange  rate  adjustment,  or
independent monetary policy action, or fiscal stimulus beyond the limits of the Growth and Stability
Pact - and given limited labour migration or fiscal redistribution at the pan-European level - then it
would have an overwhelming  incentive  to  undertake  the supply-side  reforms  which  have  proved  so
BIS Review 71/2000
2
difficult to introduce up until now. One of my ECB colleagues in fact once put it to me that - “when
we have closed off every other policy option, we will finally be forced to do the things we know that
we should have been doing all along!”
There are those, I know, who find our  hesitation about  the  euro  -  in  an  economic  context  -  hard  to
understand. That’s true particularly of those who have been in effective de facto monetary union with
the Deutsche Mark for a long time already. But it is not just stubbornness or obstinacy on our part -
though we British can of course be pretty stubborn at times. In the macro-economic context it reflects
a real debate about the risks and potential costs of divergence between our own monetary policy needs
and  those  of  the  members  of  the  Eurozone  -  which  in  turn  depend  upon  the  extent  to  which  our
economies  really  have  achieved  sustainable  convergence,  and  the  extent  to  which  we  are  able  to
respond flexibly on the supply side to economic shocks or tensions between our domestic monetary
policy needs and those of our European partners.
As you know, the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced some three years ago that we  would  not
join the euro in the first wave. He made it clear that the present British Government is not opposed to
Euro membership as a matter of principle. It will make a decision on pragmatic grounds, based upon
five economic tests. These are: whether the UK economy has achieved sustainable convergence with
the  economies  of  the  single  currency;  whether  there  is  sufficient  flexibility  in  the  UK  economy  to
adapt  to  change  and  other  unexpected  economic  events;  whether  joining  the  single  currency  would
create  better  conditions  for  businesses to  make  long-term  decisions  to  invest  in  the  UK;  the  impact
membership  would  have  on  the  UK  financial  services  industry;  and  ultimately  whether  joining  the
single  currency  would  be  good  for  employment.  It  would  then  submit  a  favourable  decision  to
Parliament, and the British people in a referendum.
The Chancellor recognised that it was unrealistic to think that a decision could be reached during the
lifetime of the present Parliament, which runs to May 2002 at the latest. But he stressed that in the
meantime the UK should nevertheless prepare - not only for introduction of the euro on the Continent
on  1 January  1999  -  which  we  of  course  did  very  effectively  -  but  also  for  our  own  eventual
participation.
The Chancellor’s statement was the first by a British Government to accept the principle of monetary
union. It recognised that the single currency will affect us whether we are in fact in or out - and that it
is clearly in our own national interest to do all that we can to ensure that the euro is successful.
This policy of “prepare and decide” has subsequently been confirmed by the publication of a National
Changeover  Plan,  which sets  out  the  key  steps that  would  be involved  in  the  transition following  a
positive decision on UK entry. This remains the Government’s policy.
In  the  meantime,  we  continue  to  pursue  macro-economic  -  both  fiscal  and  monetary  -  stability  and
supply-side flexibility alongside our European partners, in our own national economic interest, which
will also help to bring about closer convergence between our economies.
Over  the  past  seven  years  or  so  we  have  in  the  UK  achieved  the  longest  period  of  sustained  low
inflation we’ve known for a generation. Retail price inflation - on the Government’s target measure -
has averaged 2.6% since the beginning of 1993 and is currently running at 2.2%, or only 1% on the
European harmonised index of consumer prices.
But alongside low inflation we’ve had the lowest nominal interest rates that most of us can remember.
Short-term rates have averaged some 6¼% since the MPC’s first decision in June 1997 compared with
some  9.25%  over  the  preceding  decade.  And  10  year  government  bond  yields  have  fallen,  with
inflationary  expectations,  to  around  5¼%,  which  apart  from  a  brief  period  last  year  is  the  lowest
they’ve been for nearly 40 years.
Much  more  fundamentally  we’ve  enjoyed  the  longest  period  of  uninterrupted,  quarter  by  quarter,
economic  growth  since  records  began  some  45  years  ago  -  with  annual  growth  since  Q3  1992
averaging 2.8% - between ¼ and ½% above most estimates of our underlying trend rate. The number
of people in employment is the highest on record. And unemployment has fallen from its most recent
peak of 10½% on a claimant count basis at the turn of 1992/93 to the present rate of 3.7%. That is the
lowest for 25 years in the UK as a whole, and just about the lowest in nearly every region.
3
BIS Review 71/2000
This is not just past history. Having come through the global economic slowdown a year or two ago,
the economy as a whole is now again growing at well above trend, with inflation a bit below target;
and the broad prospect for the next couple  of  years  -  on  most  forecasts, is for  continuing  relatively
strong growth with relatively high employment and relatively low inflation.
Our  economic  progress  -  and  the  common  approach  to  economic  management  that  underlies  it  and
which we share with our European partners - provides, in my view, a firm foundation for a continuing
positive  and  constructive  relationship  between  the  UK  and  other  members  of  the  European  Union,
whether or not they are members of the Eurozone. That of course is in the  economic  interest  of  all
sides. Just as we benefit from a stable and prosperous Europe, so too the Continental European interest
lies in a stable and prosperous UK. And that mutual self-interest above all is the thing we all need to
hold on to.
BIS Review 71/2000
4
