Kurt Hauri: Transnational commercial bribery and corruption:
a challenge for the financial industry, regulators and supervisors
Remarks by Mr Kurt Hauri, Chairman of the Swiss Federal Banking Commission, before the Eleventh
International Conference of Banking Supervisors, held in Basel, 20-21 September 2000.
 General remarks
Dear colleagues
It is a great honor for the Swiss Federal Banking Commission and for myself as its chairman to co-
host the ICBS in Switzerland and to welcome such a great number of distinguished experts in the field
of  banking  supervision.  I  know  that  already  6  heavily  digestible  topics  are  on  the  agenda  of  this
workshop  day.  Therefore,  it  is  not  without  a  certain  degree  of  unease  that  I  am  going  to  address
another rather  delicate  issue instead  of just  making  some  easygoing  hints  about  the  beautiful  Swiss
nature scenery or jokes about our common job as supervisors and regulators. I am afraid the following
remarks will not deliver this, they will not be humorous but at least, I hope, they will be within the
time limit given to me.
The Swiss Federal Banking Commission was founded 65 years ago as an answer to Switzerland and
its  banks  suffering  from  a  deep  economic  crisis.  Since  that  time  it  has  been  the  task  of  the  Swiss
Federal  Banking  Commission  to  prevent  bank  failures  and,  thereby,  to  avoid  distress  of  banks’
creditors and the Swiss economy as a whole. However, since the beginning of the 1980s an additional
target came into the focus of the Swiss Federal Banking Commission adding another dimension to the
traditional goal of protecting the public from financial losses and to prevent systemic risk. Since that
time the Commission has regularly been addressing the issue of preventing the financial industry from
being abused for criminal purposes.
During this period a proliferation of international minimum standards for ethical behavior of all kind
has  occurred. Many  different international  for  a  have  been  involved  and  the  standards  are  covering
various and sometimes overlapping areas. But if one looks at all these initiatives from a little distance,
a  common  driving  idea  can  be  identified:  the  financial  industry  (as  other  industries  as  well)  has  to
respect increasingly higher standards for ethical behavior, and more and more banks have to assume
responsibility  not  only  for  their  own  correct  business  conduct,  but  also  for  that  of  their  customers.
There has been a significant regulatory trend towards higher ethical standards and – at least this is my
assessment – this trend will persist in the 21st century. From this background I would like to address
one  particular  aspect  of  unethical  or  even  illegal  behavior,  namely  the  misuse  of  international
financial  centers  in  transnational  commercial  bribery  and  corruption.  By  using  the  term
“transnational  commercial  bribery  and  corruption”  I  intend  to  show  that  the  focus  is  not  “petty
corruption” meaning small cash payments to subordinate government officials. Our concern is “grand
corruption”  involving  substantial  international  money  flows  being  wire-transferred  across  all
international financial centers.
Key steps in the Swiss supervisory practice
Before I do what this public coming from all over the world is expecting me to do, that is to address
the  topic  with  a  more  international  view,  please  let  me  summarize  a  few  key  steps  that  the  Swiss
Federal Banking Commission has taken in developing the present supervisory framework in this field:
• 
During the 1980’s the Swiss Federal Banking Commission started to oversee more closely
the implementation of the banking industry’s self regulatory rules on customer identification,
including the duty to know the identity of beneficial owners hiding behind straw-men or off-
shore domicile companies with no commercial activity.
1
BIS Review 75/2000
         During  the  same  time,  standards  were  developed  on  a  case-by-case-basis  requiring  the
financial institutions to pay special attention to all complex or unusual transactions with no
apparent economic or visible lawful purpose.
In  1985,  the  Swiss  Federal  Supreme  Court  upheld  a  decision  of  the  Federal  Banking
Commission  formally  prohibiting  a  back-to-back  loan  with  the  only  purpose  to  deceive  a
foreign authority.
In  1991,  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking  Commission  devised  rules  requiring  the  supervised
institutions to establish the names of beneficial owners represented by financial lawyers.
In 1987, following the  decision  of  the  Swiss  government  and  the  Banking  Commission  to
freeze the assets of the Marcos Clan in spring 1986, the Swiss Federal Banking Commission
developed  a  practice  requiring  that  the  decision  to  enter  into  a  business  relationship  with
high-ranking public officials, such as heads of states or members of a government, be taken
on the financial institution’s highest management level.
In 1993, the Swiss Federal Banking Commission declared that it would no longer consider
the management of a supervised institution to be “fit and proper” if the institution accepted
corruption proceeds for deposit.
In 1998, the preceding two measures were codified in the Banking Commission’s guidelines
against money-laundering.
In 1998, the Swiss Federal Banking Commission issued an industry ban against the chairman
of the board and a director of a supervised institution on the ground that they had accepted
roughly  300  Mio  Deutschmark  to  be  paid  as  commission  (“provision”)  on  an  account
belonging to the son of the former President of Nigeria Abacha.
Finally, in September 2000, the Swiss Federal Banking Commission published the results of
an investigation at 19 banks being involved in accepting in total about 600 Mio US Dollars
on  behalf  of  the  entourage  of  Nigeria’s  former  president  Abacha.  All  funds  had  been
reported by the banks to the Swiss money laundering reporting office and frozen by Swiss
law  enforcement  authorities.  The  Swiss  Federal  Banking  Commission  publicly  blamed  6
banks for not handling the customer relationship with the necessary diligence. So far, it has
issued  no  industry  bans  since  none  of  the  responsible  individuals  are  any  longer  being
employed at a senior level in the financial industry.
This  year  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking  Commission  will  be  further  amending  its  guidelines
against money laundering to take into account the lessons drawn  from  the  Abacha-case  as
well as recent legislative changes, which declare bribery of domestic or foreign officials  a
predicate offense for money laundering in Switzerland.
The  result  of  this  long  way  is  a  policy  of  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking  Commission  which  could  be
summarized in five points:
1. 
Whenever  a  supervised  institution  is  not  observing  anti-money  laundering  provisions,
including “know your customer rules”, prohibitions of the acceptance of corruption proceeds
or  rules  on  persons  with  public  functions,  this  is  clearly  a  supervisory  issue  that  is  not
tolerated by the supervisor.
2. 
3. 
4. 
Every single case of a serious offense against an important rule is investigated independently
and  as  quickly  as  possible  by  the  supervisor,  even  if  other  law  enforcement  agencies  are
investigating at the same time.
All persons responsible for breach of rules or for organizational failures at management level
risk an industry ban issued by the supervisor.
The supervised institutions have to address deficiencies in systems and controls with regard
to  legal  and  compliance  efficiently,  thoroughly  and  speedily  and  under  tight  supervisory
control.
BIS Review 75/2000
2
5. 
Supervised  institutions  unwilling  or  unable  to  bring  their  compliance  systems  to  a
satisfactory standard take the risk of their license being withdrawn.
International context
As  promised,  let  me  come  to  the  international  context.  As  the  Abacha-investigation  of  the  Swiss
Federal  Banking  Commission  clearly  showed,  very  substantial  amounts  of  money  have  been  wire-
transferred to and from Switzerland, from and to banks in various respectable financial centers. As an
always increasing number of financial institutions are acting globally they become a global target for
abuse.  No  doubt  that  this  is  a  very  demanding  challenge  for  international  banks,  for  international
regulatory bodies as well as supervisors in all countries.
International  banks  have  to  make  sure  that  their  compliance  standards  are  on  the  highest  level
worldwide. Otherwise they may not effectively monitor and manage their reputational, operational and
legal risks. The banks are well advised if they address in these compliance standards also the issue of
proceeds from corruption even though not all jurisdictions where the international bank is carrying out
its business have identical, or even comparable, standards. To avoid regulatory arbitrage it would be
highly desirable if the major international players in private banking could agree upon a common set
of rules to be complied with on a worldwide basis
International regulators become more and more aware that they cannot limit their focus on tracing
and  chasing  proceeds  of  drug-trafficking.  Over  the  last  ten  years  the  international  regulatory
community  has  made  considerable  progress  in  developing  instruments  to  reduce  international
commercial corruption. The newly developed policies by the International Financial institutions, such
as the World Bank and the IMF, new recommendations, resolutions and conventions of international
organizations  like  the  OECD,  and  the  work  done  by  private  non  governmental  organizations  like
Transparency  International  have  put  the  issue  of  corruption  on  the  political  agendas  of  all  relevant
international  bodies.  Still,  it  seems  to  me  that  on  a  international  level,  there  is  a  need  to  address
adequately  various  issues  related  to  the  abuse  of  the  financial  sector  by  corrupt  politicians  and
government  officials.  The  “potentate  risk”  is  truly  global.  One  of  the  objectives  would  be  an
internationally coordinated understanding that banks should not accept proceeds from corruption. So
far,  rules  on  how  financial  institutions  should  handle  business  relations  with  politically  exposed
persons are lacking on the international level. “Know your customer” rules need to be harmonized to
avoid regulatory arbitrage. Difficult questions would have to be addressed, for instance: should funds
stemming  from  corruption  be  frozen?  Who  should  be  entitled  to  request  such  freezes  on  an
international level? Another question is whether and how and to whom these funds may be restituted.
All this work is extremely difficult for legal, cultural and political reasons. In spite of these difficulties
I believe that this work should be undertaken and coordinated internationally.
And although all these issues go far beyond our normal tasks as financial supervisors I believe that we
will probably be asked to contribute in this process. I am quite sure that financial supervisors will be
asked to contribute in this field, which is at best loosely connected with our primary objectives. There
is little hope that this won’t happen as supervisors are traditionally suffering from a "Christmas tree"
effect, in which government offices are gradually divesting themselves by adding new decorative tasks
to our already widespread functions.
3
BIS Review 75/2000
