Masaru Hayami: The role of monetary policy under low inflation in Japan
Opening  Speech  by  Mr Masaru  Hayami,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Japan,  at  the  Ninth  International
Conference,  held  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Bank  of  Japan,  Tokyo,  on
3 July 2000.
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to have an opportunity to meet such distinguished guests from academic circles
and various central banks on the occasion of the Ninth International Conference hosted by the Institute
for Monetary and Economic Studies. I would like to welcome all of you who have kindly found time
out of your busy schedules to participate in this Conference.
The topic of the Conference is “The Role of Monetary Policy under Low Inflation”, which is the very
problem that the Bank of Japan has faced since the 1990s and perhaps what many central banks might
face in the future.
The 1990s is often referred to as the “lost decade” for Japan’s economy. During that period, Japan’s
real GDP growth was next to last among G7 countries and also recorded the largest drop compared
with the 1980s. Inflation declined to almost zero, and at times we faced the danger of falling into a
deflationary  spiral.  In  response,  the  Bank  of  Japan  conducted  aggressive  monetary  easing.  In
particular, since February 1999, the Bank has pursued the unprecedented policy of guiding short-term
money  market  rates  down  to  virtually  zero  percent  to  prevent  the  economy  from  tumbling  into  a
deflationary spiral and also to support a recovery.
What  are  the  factors  behind  Japan’s  lost  decade  of  the  1990s?  One  basic  structural  factor  is  that  a
variety  of  systems  which  had  supported  the  post-war  development  of  Japan’s  economy  became
unsustainable. Another factor is the emergence and bursting of the bubble. While the emergence of the
bubble  led  to  many  much  needed  structural  reforms  being  postponed,  its  bursting  brought  Japan’s
economy to the verge of falling into a deflationary spiral.
Though  the  main  purpose  of  this  Conference  is  not  to  discuss  the  emergence  and  bursting  of  the
bubble,  when  we at the  Bank  of Japan  discuss  the  role  of  monetary  policy  under  low  inflation,  we
cannot but refer to the problems we experienced during the bubble period.
In  this  regard,  let  me  outline  some  lessons  from  the  bubble  period  which  I  find  important  in  an
individual study made by Bank staff relating to monetary policy in the late 1980s.
One  prominent  feature  which  characterized  the  bubble  period  in  Japan  was  the  euphoric  sentiment
which prevailed in every segment of society, and which led to extremely bullish expectations. In this
regard, we think it is not sufficient to understand the bubble solely in terms of the rise in asset prices
such  as  property  and  equity  prices.  In  the  study  I  mentioned,  the  bubble  economy  is  defined  as  a
combination  of  the  rapid  increase  in  asset  prices,  the  expansion  of  monetary  aggregates,  and  the
overheating  of  economic  activity.  And,  Japan’s  economy  did  indeed  experience  such  developments
from 1987 through 1990.
A number of factors were intertwined in the background of such euphoria, and monetary easing was
certainly one of them. Monetary easing was a necessary condition for the emergence of the bubble,
and to that extent should be held responsible. But, in our defense, I have to say that if we had tried to
prevent the emergence and expansion of a bubble by monetary policy alone, we would have had to
raise interest rates to levels which could not be justified because of the relatively stable prices at the
time. This is one of the difficulties we face in dealing with a bubble.
The  next  question  is:  In  what  respect  was  monetary  policy  responsible  for  the  emergence  and
expansion  of  the  bubble?  It  is  true  that  we  had  maintained  low  interest  rates  for  a  relatively  long
period, even after the summer of 1988 when the economy was clearly on a recovery path, and allowed
1
BIS Review 55/2000
unfounded expectations to be embedded in the market and society that such low interest rates would
continue for  a  considerable  period.  We  should take  it  seriously  that  this  was  undeniably  one  of  the
driving forces behind the expansion of the bubble.
What  should  be  done  to avoid  repeating  such  an experience?  We  hear  a  variety  of  suggestions:  for
example, “The Bank of Japan should have paid more attention to the movement of money supply or
the  rise  in  asset  prices,”  and  “It  has  made  a  mistake  by  putting  too  much  emphasis  on  the  foreign
exchange rate in the conduct of monetary policy”. Unfortunately, these are reflections and lessons with
the benefit of hindsight, and we cannot fully use them as a practical guideline for making policy on a
real time basis.
We  need  a  more  pragmatic  approach.  From  such  a  viewpoint,  the  most  significant  lesson  that  we
should keep  in  mind is  the importance  of evaluating  risks  to the  economy  at  an  early  stage,  and of
dealing  with  them  in  a  preemptive  manner.  As  I  have  said,  it  would  not  have  been  possible  for
monetary  policy  alone  to  have  prevented  the  bubble  from  emerging.  However,  if  we  conducted
monetary  policy  in  a  preemptive  manner  by  taking  into  account  future  risks  over  the  long  run,
economic fluctuation during the bubble period might have been less.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  identify  whether  it  is  a  bubble  or  not  when  we  are
actually  experiencing  bubble  expansion.  One  of  the  reasons  for  this  difficulty  is  that  we  cannot
exclude from the observed reality the impact of changes in economic structure. For example, during
the bubble period many presented a seemingly plausible argument that a rapid rise in property prices
in Tokyo could be justified in view of the increasing role of Tokyo as an international financial center,
but which could not be proved to be true at the time.
Inevitably, the central bank always faces two risks. They are similar to statistical errors. One risk is
that the Bank might mistakenly tighten monetary policy when the economy is about to benefit from a
marked improvement in productivity, and as a result suppress the  growth  potential  of the economy.
The  other  risk  is  that  it  allows  the  bubble  to  expand  by  wrongly  interpreting  the  supposed
improvement in productivity as real. When we make a policy decision, we should evaluate not only
which one of these two risks has the greater probability of emerging, but also the socioeconomic cost
of each. Our experience of the bubble period seems to indicate that we did not fully recognize that the
risk of wrongly interpreting a supposed productivity improvement could deliver such a serious blow to
the sound development of the economy over the long run.
What should have been done to calm the euphoric sentiment at that time and turn the focus of society
to  the  potential  risk  facing  the  economy  from  a  more  long-term  perspective?  The  important  lesson
from such a viewpoint is that we need to clearly state the objective of monetary policy, in other words,
we need to substantiate the abstract concept of price stability.
Looking back at Japan’s economy during the bubble period, CPI inflation had been stable until 1987,
began  to  gradually  rise  in 1988,  and  recorded  a  year-on-year  increase  of  about  1%  in  March  1989,
which was immediately before the introduction of the consumption tax. Adjusted for the impact of the
consumption tax, it continued to rise after April 1989, reached the 2% level in April and the 3% level
in November 1990, and remained at that level until August 1991.
Since  such  a  price  hike  considerably  lagged  the  rise  in  asset  prices  and  could  not  be  regarded  as
particularly  high  compared  with  the  figure  before  the  bubble  period,  the  threat  of  inflation  did  not
constitute a valid argument in convincing the public that monetary conditions needed to be tightened.
While inflation during the bubble period was relatively mild, Japan’s economy had been brought to the
verge  of  falling  into a  deflationary  spiral  in  the  1990s.  The  deflation  we  observed  at  that  time  was
largely the result of the bubble economy emerged in the late 1980s.
Such an experience suggests that we as the central bank should aim at price stability which supports
medium  to  long-term  sustainable  growth,  not  price  stability  at  a  particular  point  in  time.  In  this
context, even if measured inflation is stable, we need to promptly alter interest rates once we judge
that the risk of damaging sustainable price stability has become higher. According to this criterion, we
have not, to our regret, sufficiently succeeded in maintaining price stability in Japan since the bubble
period.
BIS Review 55/2000
2
So far, I have mainly described the lessons for monetary policy derived from our experience during the
period  when  the  bubble  emerged.  Of  course,  we  also  need  to  learn  from  the  experience  after  the
bursting of the bubble. It may be too early to summarize the experience and draw lessons, but I am
sure we will learn quite a lot from the discussion at this Conference.
It is true that there is yet another major factor behind worldwide disinflation. It is the revolutionary
progress of information technology, which we may perhaps call a new industrial revolution, and the
resulting improvement of productivity. To find answers to what is price stability and an appropriate
monetary policy in the face of rapid disinflation due to higher productivity, are difficult but positive
challenges.
In  conclusion,  I  sincerely  hope  that  through  fruitful  discussion  at  the  Conference,  both  those  from
academic  circles  and  central  banks  will  learn  more,  share  the  fruit,  and  make  use  of  the  wisdom
obtained for the future conduct of monetary policy.
3
BIS Review 55/2000
