European Central Bank: Press Conference - introductory statements
Introductory statements given by Mr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
and Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Press Conference held in
Frankfurt on 13 April 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here to report on the outcome of today’s meeting
of the Governing Council of the ECB.
The Governing Council today conducted its regular examination of the outlook for price developments
and the risks to price stability in the euro area. Following this review, the Governing Council decided
to maintain the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem at 3.5% and to keep
the  interest  rates  on  the  marginal  lending  facility  and  on  the  deposit  facility  at  4.5%  and  2.5%
respectively.
Allow me to give you an overview of the main elements of our assessment of the latest information on
monetary, financial market and other economic developments.
Let me start with information in relation to the first pillar of our  monetary  policy  strategy.  No  new
monetary data have been released since the last meeting of the Governing Council, which was held in
Madrid on 30 March 2000. The annual growth rate of M3 in February 2000 was 6.2%. This implied a
small increase in the three-month moving average of annual M3 growth, to 5.9%, from 5.8% recorded
for the three-month period from November 1999 to January 2000. M3 growth thus remained around
1½ percentage points above the reference value of 4½%. The picture of generous liquidity conditions
in the euro area is also confirmed by the continued strong annual rate of growth of loans to the private
sector, which stood at 10.5% in February.
With regard to economic developments in the euro area, following strong growth of real GDP in the
second half of 1999, most recent production and survey data suggest that the economic expansion also
remained  strong  in  early  2000.  In  particular,  both  consumer  and  industrial  confidence  have  now
reached  levels  which  are  close  to  the  highest  observed  since  the  mid-1980s.  This  picture  of  strong
growth of domestic demand supports the favourable outlook for economic growth in the euro area as
depicted in recent forecasts. The positive prospects for euro area activity also benefit from the strong
cyclical upswing in the world economy, which has become more broadly based across industrial and
emerging economies and which is expected to continue in the years to come.
The exchange rate of the euro does not reflect the ongoing improvement in domestic fundamentals in
the euro area economy. In nominal effective terms, the euro was around 4% lower in mid-April than at
the beginning of the year and approximately 14% below its level in the first quarter of last year. Until
reversed, this development will put upward pressure on import prices and will continue to affect the
risks for price stability in the euro area.
As I have already noted on previous occasions, the rise in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
(HICP)  which  we  have  observed  over  recent  months  stems,  to  a  large  extent,  from  the  combined
effects of both oil price and exchange rate developments. The annual rate of change in the HICP rose
to 2.0% in February 2000, from 1.9% in the previous month. The rate of inflation on producer prices
also rose further in February 2000, mainly in connection with rising prices for intermediate goods.
In the course of the past few weeks oil prices have declined. This has been in line with the assumption
underlying  currently  available  economic  forecasts,  namely  that  the  oil  price  increases  which  we
observed until March will partially unwind in the course of the year. At the same time, it is most likely
that the complete upward impact on consumer prices via import and producer prices of the oil price
and exchange rate developments in recent months has not yet materialised. Against this background,
the possibility cannot be ruled out that the figure for annual HICP inflation will slightly exceed 2% in
the spring of this year, before falling back to lower levels.
1
BIS Review 34/2000
What matters for monetary policy, however, are the trends underlying the outlook for price stability in
the medium term. In this context, the Governing Council again stressed the need for the continuation
of wage moderation in the euro area. As noted earlier, monetary and credit developments confirm that
liquidity in the euro area is ample. Developments in the exchange rate of the euro also remain a cause
for  concern  with  regard  to  future  price  stability.  In  the  light  of  the  favourable  prospects  for  strong
economic  growth,  the  impact  of  these  developments  on  inflationary  pressures  will  need  to  be
monitored closely.
The  Eurosystem  will  remain  vigilant  in  assessing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  and  will  take
appropriate action if and when required. A forward-looking monetary policy which responds to risks
to price stability before they materialise will avoid the need for a costly stabilisation of inflation at a
later stage. Such a forward-looking approach is clearly also the best contribution monetary policy can
make to ensuring the sustainability of the process of economic growth.
This phase of economic growth in the euro area will offer a great opportunity to make further progress
in bringing down the high level of unemployment in the euro area. An important means of achieving
this will be continued wage moderation, which, in turn, will also help to contain inflationary pressure.
This  notwithstanding,  as  I  have  stressed  repeatedly  in  the  past,  the  key  to  achieving  a  sustainable
reduction  in  the  level  of  unemployment  will  be  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area,  including  a
lowering of the tax burden and an improvement in the fiscal expenditure structure. Only when labour
markets are more flexible and competitive pressures are high will it be possible to prevent bottlenecks
from triggering upward pressures on prices at a relatively early stage of an economic recovery.
Fiscal policy has to play its part in this context. The favourable economic prospects will lead to higher
tax revenues. In line with the Stability and Growth Pact, it is not opportune to use these extra revenues
for higher spending. Now is the time to speed up fiscal consolidation in order to help to reduce further
the debt-to-GDP ratios in the Community and to approach more quickly fiscal budgetary positions in
surplus or balance.
Let  me  now  give  the  floor  to  the  Vice-President  to  present  some  of  the  additional  topics  discussed
today by the Governing Council.
I  should  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  two  items:  the  first  reflects  the  Eurosystem’s  growing
involvement in the EU accession process and relates to the Governing Council’s position with regard
to the appropriateness of euro-based currency board arrangements (CBAs) as a strategy to be used by
accession countries with regard to adopting the euro; the second relates to a further enhancement of
the ECB’s transparency policy.
Let  me  start  with  the  Governing  Council’s  deliberations  on  CBAs.  We  concluded  that  the
appropriateness of CBAs will be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Therefore, the Governing Council
neither encourages nor discourages the adoption of euro-based CBAs. In any event, such arrangements
cannot be regarded as a substitute for two years’ participation in ERM II. Accession countries which
have  operated  a  euro-based  CBA  deemed  to  be  sustainable  might  not  be  required  to  go  through  a
double regime shift in their strategies to adopt the euro. Thus such countries may participate in ERM II
with a CBA as a unilateral commitment augmenting the discipline within ERM II. However, it should
be clearly understood that a common accord would have to be reached on the central parity against the
euro.
With  a  view to  further enhancing  the  ECB’s  transparency  policy,  the  Governing  Council  has  today
decided to publish all non-confidential legal instruments governing the relationship between the ECB
and  the  euro  area  national  central  banks  in  the  Official  Journal  of  the  European  Communities.  The
release of these legal instruments in all 11 official Community languages will give interested members
of  the  public  an  opportunity  to  gain  first-hand  knowledge  about  the  internal  operation  of  the
Eurosystem. The members of the Governing Council regard the transparency of the decision-making
process as an appropriate means by which to strengthen the democratic nature of the institution and to
increase the public’s confidence in its administration. This decision is in line with the general policy
towards  increased  transparency  in  the  decision-making  process  currently  being  pursued  at  the
Community level.
BIS Review 34/2000
2
