The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE: Towards a safer banking system
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Association
of Professional Bankers Sri Lanka 12th Anniversary Convention, on 27 August 2000.
 Mr Governor, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It  is  an  immense  pleasure,  and  a  very  great  honour,  to  have  been  invited  to  address  this  Annual
Convention.
The theme of the convention is “Towards a safer banking system”. It is a theme which gladdens my
heart. The safety of the banking system is fundamental to financial stability in a broader sense. It is
vitally important, of course, to you - as professional commercial bankers. But it is vitally important,
too, to us, central bankers, because you simply cannot have monetary or broader economic stability,
which is a key part of our responsibilities, without stability of the financial system - they go together
like love and marriage! And monetary and financial stability are vitally important, too, to our societies
at  large  and  to  the  individuals  that  make  up  our  societies  -  they  are  absolutely  necessary,  if  not  in
themselves sufficient, conditions for the economic prosperity to which we all aspire.
The question is what can we do - working together - to improve the safety of our banking systems.
And you will notice that I emphasise “working together”, because while we all clearly have a common
interest  in  that  objective,  we  all  -  commercial  bankers,  banking  supervisors,  central  banks  and
governments  -  have  distinct  responsibilities  and  distinct  contributions  to  make  towards  bringing  it
about. And we will not succeed unless we all play our respective parts.
From  the  programme  for  your  convention  I  see  that  most  of  your  working  sessions  have  been
concerned with the steps that commercial banks can take to protect themselves against risk in a rapidly
changing  financial  environment  and  the  role  of  banking  supervisors.  I  should  like  to  start  from  the
other end, as it were, and talk about the role of the authorities more broadly.
I suppose that the most frequent cause of financial instability is macro-economic shocks of one kind or
another.  Certainly  major  disturbances  can  originate  within  the  financial  system  itself  -  and  that  of
course in turn can generate macro-economic instability. But my observation is that the causality more
often  than  not  runs  the  other  way.  From  our  own  experience  in  the  UK,  the  exaggerated  economic
boom and bust cycles of the past - at least I hope they are in the past - and fed in some instances by
abrupt  financial  deregulation  -  have  led  to  a  sharp  expansion  of  bank  lending  in  the  upswings,  the
value  of  which  became  impaired,  amidst  a  great  deal  of  social  as  well  as  economic  distress,  in  the
downturns.  Consistent  macro-economic  stability  is  perhaps  the  greatest  contribution  that  the
authorities everywhere can make to financial stability.
Of course that is easier said than done. While it is true that sharp changes in economic conditions, and
asset  prices,  may  be  home-grown  -  often  as  a  result  of  allowing  domestic  demand  to  outstrip  the
supply-side capacity of the economy to meet that demand, it is also true as we saw very dramatically
two or three years ago that instability can be internationally contagious - especially in today’s world of
financial globalisation.
A great deal of work has gone on internationally over the past few years to improve our understanding
of  how  national  authorities  can  better  protect  their  economies  against  shocks  of  this  kind.  It  has
resulted  in  a  plethora  of  internationally  agreed  standards  and  codes  of  best  practice  ranging  from
transparency in the conduct of monetary, financial and fiscal policies, through financial regulation and
the  collection  and  dissemination  of  statistics,  to  various  aspects  of  the  financial  infrastructure,
including the legal and accounting framework, corporate governance arrangements, payments systems
and  so  on.  The  emphasis  now  is  on  implementation  and  the  IMF  has  the  task  of  encouraging  and
assisting  all  of  its  members  to  step  up  their  efforts,  as  best  they  can  given  their  particular
1
BIS Review 66/2000
circumstances, in all of these respects. This is in the member countries’ own individual interests, but it
is equally in the interest of greater stability of the global economy.
In relation to international capital flows in particular, the answer is not at all to encourage countries to
cut  themselves  off  from  international  finance  through  the  maintenance  or  imposition  of  capital
controls  -  though  that  is  not  totally  excluded.  On  the  contrary  the  very  positive  contribution  that
private capital has made in recent years to the development of many of the emerging market countries
is  clearly  acknowledged,  and  the  objective  of  orderly  and  properly  sequenced  dismantlement  of
remaining  capital  controls  is  generally  maintained. The  purpose is  rather  to  help  to  ensure,  through
greater transparency and improvements to the financial infrastructure, that capital flows to where it can
be most productively invested. That should, in turn, help to reduce capital account volatility. At the
same  time  much  more  attention  is  being  paid  to  the  importance  of  the  maturity  and  currency
composition of national balance sheets, including particularly the maturity and currency composition
of  the  assets  and  explicit  or  implied  liabilities  of  the  public  sector,  and  also  of  the  banking  sector,
which  can  be  relatively  easily  monitored  through  the  supervisory  process.  I  recognise  that  this
emphasis  on  balance sheet  management  -  which  is  especially  important  where  a  country  is  seeking
actively to manage its exchange rate - may raise the cost of short-term capital inflows; but that seems
to me to be a price worth paying for greater protection against sudden capital outflows if confidence
declines. Finally borrowing countries are being increasingly encouraged to develop, in the current less
febrile  environment,  an  ongoing  dialogue  with their  major  external  creditors  in  the  expectation  that
this  would  help  to  identify  emerging  concerns  and  possible  responses  at  an  earlier  stage  and  to
promote a more constructive reaction on the part of those creditors when storms begin to gather.
Now, all of these steps are steps which countries themselves can take to reduce the risks of domestic
or external macro-economic shocks leading to financial instability, which in turn would be likely to
amplify the effects of the initial shock. But with the best will in the world such shocks will no doubt
continue to occur. And alongside all this work on what countries can do to help protect themselves, a
major review of the terms and conditions of the IMF facilities is taking place, designed to increase the
effectiveness of the financial help that the IMF can give to its member countries when they do run into
difficulties. This is not an easy issue on which, I know, people hold strong views. We have to try to
strike a sensible balance between excessively onerous and excessively liberal conditions attaching to
IMF support. On the one hand, if IMF conditions - whether preconditions attaching to quasi-automatic
support in the event of sudden capital outflows or adjustment conditions attaching to the Fund’s more
traditional facilities - if in either case the conditions were too demanding, countries may be deterred
from  seeking  the  Fund’s  help.  That  in  turn  could  result  in  unnecessary  economic  and  financial
instability.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  IMF  assistance  were  too  readily  forthcoming,  both  the  member
countries, and their creditors, might be encouraged to take excessive risks in the belief that the IMF
would in the end bail them out. This is a particular form of the familiar problem of moral hazard. It,
too, could result in unnecessary economic and financial instability.
What does seem clear is that, given the scale of private international capital flows today, the IMF’s
resources  are  certain  to  be  limited  in  relation  to  the  problems  that  could  emerge.  At  some  point
therefore - depending on just where the balance is struck - the onus for resolving the situation has to
fall  back  on  the  borrowing  country  and  on  its  creditors,  who  cannot  avoid  taking  ultimate
responsibility for their own lending decisions.
So there is a link between the review of the IMF’s facilities and what has come to be called - in the
jargon - PSI, or private sector involvement in crisis resolution. And that link remains to be clarified.
Just how these issues are resolved will have an important bearing upon global economic and financial
stability, and in turn, upon the safety of our national banking systems.
Somewhat similar considerations apply in the narrower national context. Where, for whatever reason
- which may be a result of macro-economic mismanagement by the authorities themselves or a result
of  mismanagement  by  banks  or  other  financial  institutions  -  there  is  a  threat  to  the  stability  of  a
sizeable part of the financial system as a whole, it is the national authorities ultimately that have to
deal with it.
BIS Review 66/2000
2
They can seek to reduce the risks of systemic problems originating in the financial sector in particular
in a number of ways.
Firstly, there is regulation or supervision of individual financial intermediaries which may, as here in
Sri Lanka  be  undertaken  by  the  central  bank  itself or  by  a  separate  financial  supervisory  agency  as
now in the UK. Financial supervision - including banking supervision - is a powerful instrument for
preventing  systemic  financial  disturbance,  even  when  -  as  in  the  UK  -  the  primary  objective  is  to
provide  a  degree  of  protection  to  the  investors  or  depositors  in  individual  financial  intermediaries
rather  than  to  protect  the  system  as  a  whole.  But  it  necessarily  has  its  limitations.  The  job  of  the
supervisor in this context is essentially to set appropriate minimum standards for the authorisation and
prudential conduct of financial institutions and to satisfy himself (or herself!) as far as possible that
these standards are being observed.  It  is  not the job of the  supervisor actually  to  micro-manage  the
institution  or  the  particular  risks  that  it  takes.  That  has  to  be  the  job  of  the  management  of  the
institution - indeed the taking and management of financial risk is the essence of their contribution to
society; it’s what they are paid for! Nor is it the job of the supervisor to prevent each and every bank
failure. Indeed, if the supervisor were to attempt to do so, it would inevitably involve such rigorous
prudential standards and enforcement that it would effectively stifle innovation and competition, at the
cost of reducing the efficiency of the financial system in meeting the needs of the wider economy, but
ultimately also of weakening its structure - reducing rather than increasing the safety of the system. So
effective supervision is a vitally important part of the answer to improving the safety of the banking
system but it is not a complete answer.
Secondly,  national  authorities  can  introduce  deposit  protection  arrangements  which  can  reduce  the
risks  of  the  panic  withdrawal  of  deposits  or  some  other  forms  of  investments  -  though  here  too  a
balance needs to be struck. Overly generous deposit protection carries the danger that it will damage
market discipline, by making the depositor indifferent to where he places his deposit, encouraging him
simply to look for the marginally higher return.
Thirdly,  as  I  noted  earlier,  national  authorities  can  do  a  good  deal  to  strengthen  the  legal  and
accounting  as  well  as  the  corporate  governance  infrastructure  as  it  applies  to  the  financial  system.
They can insist upon higher standards of financial reporting and transparency, facilitating better risk
assessment of the counterparties and borrowers. And, on the more technical level, they can also ensure
that  the  risks  arising  from  the  payments  system  infrastructure  -  especially  the  wholesale  payments
system  -  are  minimised,  reducing  the  danger  that  a  failure  of  one  institution  will  set  off  a  chain
reaction among other financial institutions that are its direct creditors.
The  importance  of  strengthening  our  defences  in  all  these  various  ways  against  systemic  financial
disturbances can hardly be over-emphasised. Over the past 15 years something like 150 of the 180 or
so member countries of the IMF have experienced significant banking sector distress, in many cases
amounting to full-blown crises. Some Bank of England estimates of the costs of financial instability
suggest that banking crises have over the past 25 years caused a cumulative loss of output of as much
as 15-20% of GDP in the countries concerned.
But finance is, as I say, inherently  a risk  business.  And  however  much  effort  we  put  in  to accident
prevention - however vigilant we are - we have to recognise that accidents will occur. So we have to
be prepared to limit the damage that they may cause. While it may be possible for the authorities in
many instances to bring about stabilisation by catalysing action within the private sector - and the way
in which the Federal Reserve handled the problems in Long Term Capital Management a couple of
years  ago  is  an  outstanding  example  of  that  -  the  monetary  authorities’  ultimate  instrument  is  their
capacity,  typically  exercised  by  the  central  bank,  to  intervene  directly  -  within  limits  agreed  by
government since public money is involved - themselves.
As in the case of IMF lending to member countries in difficulties, this “safety net” or Lender of Last
Resort (LOLR) capacity needs to be used with great discretion if it is not to give rise to a similar kind
of moral hazard - encouraging banks and their creditors to take excessive risks. It is only to be used
where there is a genuine risk  of  systemic  financial  disturbance  -  where  other  banks  are liable  to  be
affected by contagion either as a result of their direct exposure to a failing institution or because they
are likely to be seen themselves to be exposed to the same sort of pressures that affected the failing
3
BIS Review 66/2000
institution, and therefore likely to be similarly vulnerable and subject to loss of confidence. It is only
in those circumstances - which I agree are difficult to recognise with total confidence - that official
intervention can be justified. The safety net is not there to protect every individual institution that gets
into trouble as a result of its own failings.
Even  where  it  is  judged  that  there  is  a  systemic  threat  -  and  a  public  interest  in  containing  it  -  a
judgement that will properly need to be openly justified at the appropriate time - last resort assistance -
like IMF assistance to its member countries - has to come with conditions. The purpose of last resort
assistance  is  not  to  protect  either  the  shareholders  or  the  management  of  an  illiquid,  even  less  an
insolvent  institution,  and  the  appropriate  outcome  may  well  be  an  orderly  run-down  or  sale  of  the
business. That may sound severe - even threatening to commercial bankers. But it is necessary both to
ensure that moral hazard does not undermine the safety and soundness of the banking system and to
maintain its competitive efficiency.
Pulling  all  this  together  the  “authorities”  -  governments,  financial  supervisors  and  regulators,  and
central banks - have a vital role in creating and sustaining a safer, sounder, banking system. But in the
end it depends critically on you - the professional, commercial, bankers. Yours is a tough job at the
best of times. It is especially challenging in today’s environment of rapid financial change as a result
in particular of the inter-action between deregulation and increasing competition, globalisation and the
revolution  in  information  technology,  which  are  constantly  bringing  new  dimensions  to  your
unenviable task of risk management. Your own survival and prosperity - and that of the institutions
that you manage - depend ultimately upon your abilities as risk managers. But to the extent that each
of you individually succeeds in your own business, you also make a vital contribution to the safety and
soundness of the banking system as a whole. As a central banker, I can only wish you well!
BIS Review 66/2000
4
