Mr Bäckström reports on the Swedish economy and monetary policy
Speech given by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board
of Directors and President of the Bank for International Settlements, to the FöreningsSparbanken, in
Malmö on 16 February 2000.
 The repo rate increases
In  order  to  understand  why  the  Riksbank  has  raised  the  repo  rate  in  two  steps  from  2.90%  last
November to 3.75% less  than  a fortnight  ago,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  situation in  1998. The
mood at that time, in the global economy as well as in Sweden, was coloured by the Asian crisis, the
suspension of Russian payments, the problems with the hedge fund Long Term Capital Management
and falling stock-market prices.
It was considered that in addition to direct problems, the financial crisis in the autumn of 1998 would
have negative effects on real economic activity. Forecasters altered their assessments and the prospects
for global output and inflation were revised downwards. Central banks around the world did likewise
and the Riksbank was no exception. Instrumental rates were reduced in many countries. Between the
early summer of 1998 and the spring of 1999 the Riksbank cut the repo rate by a total of 150 basis
points, bringing it down from 4.40 to 2.90%.
The actions of central banks probably mitigated effects of the various shocks. They helped to check
the signs of panicky behaviour in the market and then to restore a more optimistic assessment of the
future. At the same time, the process displayed some ability to heal itself. All this has contributed to a
rapid recovery in the global economy as well as in Sweden.
The current picture of many economies is thus very different from the uneasy situation that prevailed
during 1998 and the early part of 1999. Global growth prospects are appreciably better and the risks
connected with inflation have changed. That is also why instrumental rates were adjusted upwards by
many central banks last autumn and early this year.
In principle it can be said that inflationary pressure follows a cyclical pattern. When economic activity
is strong, demand growth tends to exceed the expansion of capacity and this normally leads in time to
an accelerating rate of price and wage increases. Conversely, weak demand may lead to the prospect
of inflation being below the target one to two years ahead. As a rule, the repo rate should be raised in
the former case and lowered in the latter. In this way, the repo rate varies with the business cycle so
that the rate of inflation remains more or less continuously in line with the target.
So, as rising economic activity successively reduces the degree of unutilised resources in the economy,
the repo rate has to be increased. That is the process the Riksbank has initiated with the increases since
last autumn.
From  what  I  have  said it follows  that  there  should  be  a  repo  rate  that  is  commensurate  with  stable
inflation  and  a  demand  growth  that  matches  the  expansion  of  capacity  while  the  economy  is  also
balanced in other respects. It is around this level of interest rates that the actual repo rate ought to be
varied as activity moves up and down. So what is the Swedish economy’s sustainable growth rate and
what is the commensurate repo rate?
The Swedish economy’s sustainable growth rate
A simple way of estimating the potential growth rate is to add the figure for the trend rate of increase
in labour supply to the growth rate for labour productivity.
1
BIS Review 13/2000
The latest figures, based among other things on demographic changes and labour force participation,
point to an annual increase in labour supply up to 2008 of 0.5%.1 As regards labour productivity, most
of the evidence suggests that the trend in the 1990s was higher than in the 1970s and 1980s. In the
period 1974-93, for example, the annual increase in labour productivity averaged approximately 1.4%,
while the average since 1994 is about 1.9%. It is admittedly true that as the economy has been in an
upward phase since the summer of 1993, it is hardly surprising that productivity growth is above the
trend;  but  a  comparison  with  the  corresponding  upward  phase  in  the  1980s  leads  to  the  same
conclusion: the rate of increase in labour productivity appears to be approximately half of a percentage
point higher than before. This accordingly means that the Swedish economy’s potential annual growth
rate is between 2 and 2.5%. It may be asked, however, whether one can simply project productivity’s
historical path.
This is where the discussion of what is known as the New Economy comes in. Productivity growth in
the United States has risen appreciably in recent years. The investment boom in the 1990s has been
one factor here; corporate investment has almost doubled since 1990 and a very large share has gone
into  new  information  technology.  This  has  led  to  what  the  economic  jargon  refers  to  as  capital
deepening, which amounts to a higher capital input per employee. A notable feature of the picture is
thus that the new information technology seems to be having knock-on effects in the form of enhanced
productivity  in  other  segments  of  the  US  economy.  Many  observers  therefore  consider  that  the
American economy is now capable of expanding at a rate of 3-3.5% without encountering shortages
and an acceleration of inflation.
A  similar  change  could  well  occur  in  other  countries  that  reap  the  new  information  technology’s
potential  benefits.  But  it  cannot  yet  be  said  that  productivity  growth  in  the  Swedish  economy  has
improved to the same extent. Neither have we registered a similar growth of investment, which could
then be a leading indicator that the new technology is being introduced on a wide front. In the 1990s
the stock of corporate capital, for example, grew twice as fast in the United States as it did in Sweden.
It is certainly conceivable that the high level of the Stockholm stock exchange represents expectations
that productivity growth will also move up in Sweden. The sum of the values of individual companies
can  serve  as  a  yardstick  of  what  is  expected  of  the  stock  market  as  a  whole  and  this  presumably
reflects expectations of how the total economy will develop. And if current share prices are regarded
as reasonable, there will clearly have to be an appreciable increase in future profits. This can then be
interpreted  as  expectations  of  an  overall  improvement  in  productivity  growth  and  thus  of  a  higher
potential  output.  An  alternative  interpretation  could  be  that  the  stock  market  is  at  least  partially
over-valued. A third possibility is, of course, that the development of share prices is explained by a
combination of these two factors.
It  still  seems  too  hazardous,  however,  to  assume  that  potential  growth  in  Sweden  has  moved  up
towards  the  level  in  the  United  States.  It  is  possible  -  perhaps  even  probable  -  that  similar  supply
factors will emerge in the future and the Riksbank must be alert to this. But it seems safest at present
to count on a potential annual GDP growth rate of between 2 and 2.5%.
Growth can be temporarily higher
When the labour force is not being fully utilised, the increase in employment can exceed the trend rate
of about 0.5%. In a transitional period the economy can then grow faster than its potential rate in the
longer run.
Unemployment  in  Sweden  is  still  historically  high.  That  might  suggest  that  the  labour  market  has
plenty  of  unutilised  resources  at  its  disposal.  Some  bottleneck  problems  are  already  showing  up,
1
See  LU  1999/2000  Bilaga  1  (Medium  Term  Survey  1999/2000,  Annex  1,  Population,  labour  force  and  employment),
Ministry of Finance.
BIS Review 13/2000
2
however,  and  are  an  indication  that  there  is  only  a  limited  number  of  persons  with  the  appropriate
training and occupational experience for the jobs that are available.
Moreover,  statistics  from  the  National  Labour  Market  Board  show  that  the  number  of  unfilled
vacancies at employment offices has risen to the highest level since 1990 and business tendency data
from the National Institute of Economic Research reveal that certain sectors are now finding it difficult
to recruit labour with the required training and occupational experience. The problems are accentuated
by  the  fact that  a large  part  of the increased production  and  hence the expansion  of  employment  is
concentrated  to  the  metropolitan  regions  and  other  university  cities.  This  means  that  bottleneck
problems  are  starting  to  impede  the  growth  of  production  and  employment.  The  infrastructure  in  a
wide  sense  in  the  metropolitan  areas,  perhaps  in  the  Stockholm  area  in  particular,  may  affect  the
possibilities  of  continuing  to benefit from  the  existing  demand.  The  rapid  price  rise  for  houses  and
tenant-owned  flats  in  the  Stockholm  area  is  a  clear  illustration  of  certain  supply-side  problems.
Another sign is the shortage of rented dwellings, or rather the lack of mobility in this market.
Thus  it  is  not  only  labour  demand  that  will  determine the  future  development  of  unemployment.  A
growing  part  will  be  played  by  supply-side  factors  in  the  form  of  occupational  and  geographical
mobility.
So  while  it  can  be  concluded  that  in  the  near  future  the  Swedish  economy’s  growth  rate  may  be
capable of topping the potential level of - as I just indicated - between 2 and 2.5%, this applies only for
as long as there is a supply of labour with the appropriate training and occupational experience and the
possibility of being geographically available.
According to the most recent national accounts, published just before Christmas, GDP growth in the
first  three  quarters  of  1999  was  over  3.5%.  The  fourth  quarter  outcome  is  still  difficult  to  estimate
precisely but demand growth seems, if anything, to have accelerated.  An  unusually  good  Christmas
season appears to have resulted in a strong trend for private consumption, for example. A continuation
of the strong development is suggested, moreover, by such leading indicators as household confidence,
a high increase in the money supply and rapidly rising asset prices.
This  implies  that  sooner  or  later,  if  nothing  were  done,  the  rapid  growth  at  present  would  lead  to
overheating and an acceleration of inflation. One factor behind the current trend has been monetary
policy’s stimulatory direction ever since the repo rate cuts that were initiated in 1998. This illustrates
that over a complete business cycle, the repo rate of 2.90% that applied up to last November is too
low. GDP growth at the current rate of 3.5-4% implies an expansion of demand that clearly exceeds
the rate of 2-2.5% that the economy can cope with in the longer run. It is only feasible in a limited,
transitional period, that is, for as long as there is a supply of labour for the available jobs.
The repo rate hike may not suffice; inflation prospects set the pace
As monetary policy works rather like the helm of an oil tanker - it takes rather a long time to shift the
economy  onto  a  new  course  -  it  was  necessary  to  make  the  adjustment  to  a  more  neutral  monetary
stance. Thus, GDP growth will continue at a higher rate for some time to come and then, after perhaps
one to two years, successively slacken towards the economy’s long-term potential.
The task the Riksbank is endeavouring to perform is to achieve an economic transition from a fairly
normal  upward  phase  to  a  growth  trend  that  is  more  sustainable.  This  task,  which  is  not  simple,
follows implicitly from our statutory function of “maintaining price stability”. As I mentioned earlier,
a  low  and  stable  rate  of  inflation  normally  means  that  the  economy  is  continuing  to  expand  in
accordance with its long-term potential.
One cannot  be  certain, however,  that  the  repo  rate  hike  since  November  will  suffice  to  bring  about
such an adjustment of the path for economic growth. The impact on demand from monetary policy is
probably  still  stimulatory.  But  the  repo  rate  that  represents  a  more  neutral  monetary  policy  impact
cannot  be  specified  exactly.  We  simply  do  not  know  enough  about  this.  Besides  which,  the  level
probably varies over time.
3
BIS Review 13/2000
Empirical guidance can be derived from countries that are ahead of Sweden in the business cycle. The
action  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  for  example,  illustrates  the  economic  advantage  of  a
forward-looking approach that raises the interest rate for a gradual reduction of monetary stimulation.
The Fed began a series of increases in the instrumental rate in February 1994, from a level of 3%, and
then adjusted the rate within a more normal range of 4.5-6%. This served to prevent an acceleration of
inflation  without  plunging  the  economy  into  a  recession.  On  the  contrary,  the  US  economy  is  now
experiencing  the  post-war  era’s  longest  upward  phase.  While  other  factors  besides  monetary  policy
have,  of  course,  contributed  to  this,  the  American  example  does  show  that  a  judicious  upward
adjustment  of  the  interest  rate  definitely  can  contribute  to  good  economic  effects  provided  the
sustainability of growth is also taken into account.
I  do  not  cite  the  case  of  the  United  States  to  imply  that  the  Riksbank  has  already  decided  to  make
further rapid interest rate increases in the near  future. That is  not  how  we  work.  Those  who follow
what we do know that the foundation for monetary policy measures is our inflation forecast.
At  the time  of  the  latest  repo  rate  increase  the  Riksbank’s  Executive  Board  judged  that  inflation  is
rising only moderately and will be approximately in line with the target in one to two years’ time. It
must be borne in mind, of course, that new information may alter our assessment and that our time
horizon in the upward phase is moving ahead. In the short perspective, however, things look a little
different. The rate  of  inflation  may  actually  tend  to  slacken  this  spring,  partly  due  to  effects  of  the
deregulation  of  telecommunications.  But  as  I  said,  the  perspective  for  monetary  policy  lies  further
ahead.
Forecasting is difficult
The difficulty for the Riksbank lies in constructing forecasts for the period - usually one to two years
ahead - that is generally regarded as the time lag before an interest rate adjustment has its full effect.
Anyone  with  some  experience  of  forecasting  knows  how  difficult  this  can  be  and  is  aware  that
forecasts not infrequently miss the mark. We could in fact attach more importance to the current as
opposed to the forecast future rate of inflation but that would probably call for rather large repo rate
adjustments in order to keep inflation stable around the target. Such an approach would result in sharp
fluctuations in real economic activity, which would naturally not be desirable.
Are  there  any  developments  which  suggest  that  the  time  lag  for  effects  of  interest  rate  adjustments
may be becoming shorter? More and more home owners are switching from fixed to variable mortgage
rates, which may indeed tend to speed up the impact of monetary measures. But there are other factors
which may be working in the opposite direction, towards a longer time lag. One example is the costs
involved in altering prices. One of the benefits of low and stable inflation is precisely that it facilitates
contracts with a longer duration. Insofar as the establishment of a low-inflation regime has led to price
movements being more restrained for this reason, it follows that it will take longer for monetary policy
measures to impinge on prices. For monetary policy’s time horizon, there are therefore arguments in
both directions.
The  problem  of  faulty  forecasts  is  limited,  however,  in  that  monetary  policy  is  implemented
continuously. Moreover, current information about economic tendencies can be accorded more weight
than events that lie further ahead and the forecasts can be revised as time passes. And when the repo
rate  is  comparatively  far  from  a  more  neutral  monetary  stance,  monetary  policy  can  be  adjusted  in
larger steps than when the rate is closer.
Thus, there are various ways of making up for the fact that economic forecasts beyond the short term
not infrequently miss the mark and still allow for the circumstance that it takes a comparatively long
time for the full effect of monetary measures to materialise.
Conclusion
I should like to conclude by saying that while we all know that the Riksbank’s main concern is the
future  path of inflation  in the  Swedish  economy,  our  deliberations  about  how  to  hold  inflation  at  a
BIS Review 13/2000
4
stable level around the 2% target can just as well be seen as the Riksbank’s endeavour, by means of
the  repo  rate,  to  contribute  to  a  continuation  of  the  Swedish  economy’s  favourable  trend.  In  many
situations  our  statutory  duty  -  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  -  is  fully  commensurate  with  the
requirement that the Riksbank helps to make the development of production and employment in the
Swedish economy as stable as possible.
5
BIS Review 13/2000
