Donald T Brash: The pros and cons of currency union - a Reserve Bank
perspective
Address  by  Dr  Donald  T  Brash,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Auckland
Rotary Club, Auckland, on 22 May 2000.
 Introduction
In recent years, there has been a huge increase in interest in exchange rate regimes, both within New
Zealand and internationally. Should countries maintain their own currencies, or adopt the currency of
some  other  country  or  group  of  countries?  If  countries  maintain  their  own  currencies,  should  they
“float”, or attempt to “peg” to the currency of some other country?
As you know, New Zealand has had its own currency for many decades, and since March 1985 that
currency  has  been  floating  against  other  currencies,  with  its  value  determined  day  to  day  in  the
financial market. But through the mid-nineties as our exchange rate appreciated strongly, many people
became concerned about whether this was the best arrangement for New Zealand (between early 1993
and early 1997, an inflation-adjusted trade-weighted measure of the New Zealand dollar appreciated
by some 29 per cent, putting considerable pressure on exporters and those competing with imports).
Interest in the subject has become even more widespread in the last couple of years, with 11 of the
countries  of  Europe  abandoning  their  own  currencies  and  forming  a  currency  union,  and  with  the
growing interest in several Latin American countries in adopting the United States dollar. Last month,
Sir Frank Holmes and Dr Arthur Grimes, two highly-regarded economists, released a study they had
undertaken for the Australia New Zealand Business Council entitled An ANZAC dollar?, and this has
further intensified public and political interest in the matter. It is clear that there is strong interest in
the subject on the part of the business community.
So today I want to make some comments from a Reserve Bank perspective.
But  at  the  very  outset  I  want  to  make  it  clear  that  any  decision  to  abandon  our  own  currency  is
fundamentally a political issue. Currency unions are generally formed as part of a larger strategic push
to integrate the countries entering the currency union, often in combination with free trade agreements,
harmonisation  of  legal  standards,  and  liberalised  migration  laws.  Viewed  in  this  way,  entering  a
currency union is a major foreign policy decision, and thus a matter for elected politicians. It is not a
matter on which a central banker should express an overall opinion, and I will not be doing so.
But  the  choice  of  currency  regime  does  have  important  economic  implications  which  need  to  be
carefully assessed, and I believe it is appropriate for me to comment on those.
One other point should be clarified at the outset. There are some differences between “currency union”
(implying a new central bank and a new currency to cover a range of countries and currencies, as in
the case of the European Monetary Union) and “dollarisation” (implying the simple adoption of the
currency of another country, whether in New Zealand’s case that be the Australian dollar or the United
States dollar). And the most important of those differences for us is whether New Zealand would have
any  part  in  making  the  decisions  about  the  monetary  policy  which  would  affect  us.  In  a  currency
union, all the countries included in the union in principle have a say in forming monetary policy for
the area covered by the union. All countries have a voice at the table, even if that is only a single voice
among many. In the case of dollarisation, however, only the country whose currency is adopted makes
the decisions about monetary policy.
The  study  by  Sir  Frank  Holmes  and  Arthur  Grimes  suggested  that  a  currency  union  with  Australia
(involving a new central bank for both countries, and a new currency) could have some useful benefits
for New Zealand. And they suggested a currency union, rather than New Zealand’s adoption  of  the
Australian dollar, largely for reasons of political acceptability in New Zealand.
1
BIS Review 42/2000
Whether such an approach would meet the political acceptability test in Australia, of course, is a bit
debatable.  Preliminary  comments  from  Australia  suggest  no  interest  whatsoever  in  abandoning  the
Australian  dollar  in  favour  of  a  new  trans-Tasman  currency.  But  whether  currency  union  with
Australia,  or  the  simple  adoption  of  the  Australian  dollar  by  New  Zealand,  the  outcome  would  in
substance  be  very  similar.  With  the  exception  of  who  gets  the  seigniorage  income,  on  which  I  will
comment in a moment, both options would involve New Zealand’s relinquishing any effective control
over monetary policy in New Zealand.
In the case of the United States dollar, currency union is not even being raised as a possible option.
The only possibility in that case would involve New Zealand’s adopting the United States dollar. And
that too, of course, would mean relinquishing  any  control  over  our  own  monetary  policy.  Since  the
term  “currency  union”  has  been  widely  used  in  New  Zealand  to  include  both  currency  union  as
properly understood and the simple process of adopting another country’s currency, I will for the most
part  use  the  term  “currency  union”  in  the  balance  of  my  comments,  while  recognising  that  for  all
practical  purposes  we  are  talking  about  “dollarisation”,  be  it  “Australian  dollarisation”  or  “US
dollarisation”.
Some myths about currency union
Before I comment on some of the economic advantages and disadvantages of currency union, it might
be helpful to dispose of a few of the myths that have become rather prevalent.
The first myth is that the Reserve Bank is opposed to currency union, perhaps because  “Don Brash
would lose his job”. Certainly, if we “dollarised”, using either the Australian dollar or the US dollar,
there would be no need for anybody to be employed by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and those
now employed by the Bank would lose their jobs. If we went into a currency union, presumably with
Australia, it is also likely that many existing Reserve Bank staff would lose their jobs (though I must
admit  that  the  European  precedent  perhaps  suggests  that  job  losses  would  not  be  great  in  that
situation!). But I can assure you that neither the Reserve Bank nor Don Brash is opposed to currency
union. Nor are we promoting currency union. As indicated a moment ago, the Bank’s responsibility is
to advise Ministers about the economic implications of currency union, both the pros and the cons, and
to foster informed public discussion on the issue.
The  second  myth  is  that  small  countries  are  in  some  ways  just  too  vulnerable  to  have  their  own
currencies in the modern world. This is sometimes expressed in terms of the metaphor of a tiny rowing
boat,  tossed  around  in  a  turbulent  ocean,  with  the  turbulence  arising  from  the  vast  flows  of  capital
which every day wash backwards and forwards at the click of a mouse. But there are some extremely
successful small countries with their own currencies - Singapore and Switzerland spring immediately
to mind -  and,  contrary  to  popular  mythology,  the  New  Zealand  dollar is  not  a particularly  volatile
currency.
Not a particularly volatile currency? No. The Reserve Bank has looked at this issue both in terms of
short-term volatility and in terms of the big exchange rate swings which are, I suspect, of rather greater
concern.
Looking at short-term volatility (measured as 30 day volatility against the United States dollar), the
New Zealand dollar was more volatile than the Australian dollar, the British pound, the Japanese yen,
and the German mark between the time of the float in March 1985 and August 1988. But for most of
the  period  since  September  1988,  and  indeed  on  average  over  that  whole  12  year  period,  the  New
Zealand dollar has been somewhat less volatile than any of those currencies.
Looking at the big exchange rate swings which made life difficult for exporters and those competing
with  imports  at  some  stages  during  the  last  decade,  we  compared  the  size  of  the  exchange  rate
appreciation  from  trough  to  peak  for  each  of  the  same  currencies.  We  found  that  the  maximum
appreciation  which  the  New  Zealand  dollar  experienced  during  the  decade  (measured  on  an
inflation-adjusted,  trade-weighted,  basis)  was,  to  be  sure,  at  29  per  cent  rather  greater  than  that
experienced  by  the  Australian  dollar  (at  20  per  cent),  but  was  closely  similar  to  the  maximum
trough-to-peak appreciation experienced by the German mark (27 per cent), the United States dollar
BIS Review 42/2000
2
(also  27  per  cent)  and  the  British  pound  (31  per  cent),  and  very  substantially  smaller  than  that
experienced by the Japanese yen (62 per cent). In other words, as I have indicated on other occasions
and  contrary  to  much  current  mythology,  the  big  exchange  rate  swings  experienced  by  the  New
Zealand dollar during the nineties were not in the least unusual by the standards of other currencies.
This suggests rather unambiguously that, while currency union would eliminate nominal exchange rate
uncertainty for New Zealand traders trading within the currency union, there is no currency which we
could adopt which would eliminate big exchange rate swings against countries outside the  currency
union. And since New Zealand’s trade with Australia amounts to little more than 20 per cent of the
total,  a  currency  union  with  Australia  would  still  leave  most  of  our  exporters  facing  currency
uncertainty. In other words, currency union with Australia would buy nominal exchange rate certainty
for  those  handling  little  more  than  20  per  cent  of  our  trade  (perhaps  especially  those  in  the
manufacturing sector), while leaving those handling the other 80 per cent of our trade still facing such
uncertainty.
And I say currency union would buy some traders “nominal exchange rate certainty” to make it clear
that currency union would not buy anybody real exchange rate certainty, or in other words, certainty
of a constant exchange rate after inflation has been taken into account. This is something which Hong
Kong has discovered over the years. Although it has had a currency which has been tightly tied to the
US dollar since the early eighties, its real, or inflation-adjusted, exchange rate has appreciated quite
strongly, both because the US dollar has appreciated against most other currencies and because Hong
Kong’s  inflation  rate  has  been  markedly  higher  than  that  in  the  United  States.  This  has  led  to  the
steady erosion of the competitive position of Hong Kong’s manufacturing sector, and indeed has been
one of the factors leading to a move of manufacturing out of Hong Kong into southern China.
The third myth is that a currency union with Australia would greatly increase competition in the New
Zealand banking sector, to everybody’s benefit. I find it very hard to see why this might be the case
given that all of the large Australian banks are already actively involved in the New Zealand market.
Moreover, New Zealand already has an open and contestable banking sector. There are few regulatory
obstacles to foreign banks entering New Zealand, provided that they meet certain minimum qualitative
criteria. It is clearly not necessary to enter a currency union in order to derive the benefits of foreign
competition in the banking sector. In this regard, I was struck by the figures released by KPMG earlier
this month, which suggested that the net interest margin earned by the major banks in New Zealand
has  been  falling  steadily  in  recent  years,  and  is  now  markedly  lower  than  the  net  interest  margin
earned by Australian and US banks.1
The  fourth  myth  is  that  currency  union  with  Australia  would  somehow  suddenly  enable  the  New
Zealand  economy  to  grow  as  quickly  as  the  Australian  economy,  or  enable  New  Zealanders  to  be
instantly richer. That perception appears to drive quite a lot of the public comment on this matter. But
of course that is nonsense. The fundamental driver of living standards in New Zealand is the rate at
which we can improve productivity. Currency union may have a modest bearing on our productivity
performance, as I will argue in a moment, but fundamentally productivity is about the quality of our
education  system,  the  quality  of  New  Zealand  management,  the  incentives  provided  by  the  tax  and
benefit system to work and acquire skills, attitudes to work and leisure, the pace of innovation, and so
on. Currency union would have little effect on these matters. Currency union within Australia itself
has certainly not guaranteed that economic growth in Tasmania and South Australia will match that in
Queensland - any more than currency union within New Zealand has guaranteed that Southland will
enjoy  Auckland  growth  rates.  And  Panama’s  adoption  of  the  US  dollar  in  1904  has  not  enabled
Panama to perform as well as the US economy. Other factors, and other policies, are very much more
important for our long-term growth than whether we are part of a currency union.
And  my  final  myth  is  the  argument  that,  because  other  countries  are  forming  currency  unions,  or
dollarising,  New  Zealand  should  do  the  same.  But  the  reasons  why  other  countries  are  forming
1
Financial Institutions Performance Survey 2000, KPMG.
3
BIS Review 42/2000
currency  unions  or  dollarising  have  very  little  relevance  to  New  Zealand.  The  countries  of  the
European Monetary Union formed a currency union, involving a new central bank and a new currency,
in a situation where intra-union trade flows were a high proportion of the trade of most of the member
countries (certainly a much higher proportion than is the New Zealand/Australia situation), and where
currency  union  was  simply  one  part  of  a  very  much  wider  agenda  of  political,  economic,  and
regulatory integration. The countries of Latin America have, in some cases, locked themselves to the
US  dollar, and  in  some  cases  are thinking  of  full  US  dollarisation,  after  decades  of  extremely  poor
money management and hyper-inflation. Neither of these situations has any relevance to New Zealand.
Moreover, in the last few years a large number of countries, particularly but not exclusively in Asia,
have moved away from tying their currencies tightly to some other currency, in favour of a floating
exchange rate. Certainly there has not been a generalised international move towards currency union
or dollarisation.
The real economic pros and cons of currency union
But there are some valid arguments why a currency union might have economic advantages.
To begin with, a currency union seems certain to reduce the transaction costs incurred now by traders
and travellers exchanging New Zealand dollars for other currencies. This would probably not produce
a huge saving in a currency union with Australia - although there would be worthwhile benefits for
tourists in both directions - but, because so much international trade is conducted in US dollars, the
savings would be rather greater if we were to adopt the US dollar as our own currency.
Second, a currency union with Australia might reduce average New Zealand interest rates a little. Over
the  last  decade  or  so,  Australian  long-term  interest  rates  have  been  pretty  similar  to  those  in  New
Zealand, but for much of that period (though not currently) Australia’s short-term interest rates were
appreciably lower than those in New Zealand. Adopting the US dollar would currently reduce interest
rates in New Zealand by rather more. Although the differences are much less now than they were a
decade ago, US interest rates  are  currently  lower across the entire  range  of  maturities  than  those in
New Zealand. By adopting either the Australian dollar or the US dollar, we would avoid the need to
pay the currency risk premium which savers currently demand for holding New Zealand dollar assets.
(There could well be on-going differences in interest rates between New Zealand on the one hand and
Australia or the United States on the other, of course, arising from credit and liquidity risks, but the
differences would be smaller than currently.)
But it is also the case that a currency union would remove any chance of New Zealand interest rates
falling below those in Australia (or the United States, if it was the US dollar we adopted). While it
might seem unlikely that New Zealand interest rates would ever fall below those in Australia and the
United States, it is worth recalling that New Zealand’s long-term interest rates were somewhat lower
than those in Australia through the first half of the nineties and slightly lower than those in the United
States  for  a  time  in  1994;  and  that  most  interest  rates  in  Canada,  Singapore,  Switzerland  and  the
European Monetary Union are below those in the United States today.
The main reason why New Zealand interest rates have been so high in the last decade is that through
much  of  that  period  we  have  been  coping  with  the  hang-over  of  high  inflationary  expectations,
especially in the property market, the result of two or three decades of high inflation bingeing. The
United States had very high interest rates in the early eighties, as it grappled with  high inflationary
expectations. If New Zealand continues to keep inflation well under control, and continues to maintain
the confidence of financial markets by following a prudent fiscal policy, it seems entirely reasonable
to  expect  that  in  time  New  Zealand  interest  rates  could  fall  below  those  in  both  Australia  and  the
United States. In forming a currency union, we would in effect be betting that, no matter with whom
we  formed  that  currency  union,  their  policy  performance  would  be  better  than  our  own  could  have
been for the indefinite future.
Third,  while  currency  union,  with  Australia  or  any  other  single  country,  would  not  eliminate  the
exchange rate uncertainty which New Zealand exporters face, it would clearly eliminate the nominal
exchange rate uncertainty for trade with the country or countries forming part of the currency union
BIS Review 42/2000
4
(and probably reduce the real exchange rate uncertainty also). As indicated earlier, a currency union
with Australia would eliminate nominal exchange rate uncertainty on only a relatively small part of
our total trade, but it is quite an important part of our trade in a qualitative sense. A much larger part of
our  manufactured  exports  go  to  Australia  than  to  any  other  single  destination,  and  the  Australian
market  is  particularly  important  as  a  “testing  ground”  for  small  companies  just  getting  into  the
business of exporting.
As  a  result  of  this  reduction  in  exchange  rate  uncertainty  within  the  currency  union,  it  seems  very
likely  that  currency  union  would  stimulate  trade  with  other  parts  of  the  currency  union.  Empirical
research  on the effects  of  currency  uncertainty  on  trade  is,  unfortunately,  not  very  conclusive,  with
some studies suggesting that the effects of currency uncertainty are actually  pretty  small  and  others
suggesting  that  they  are  quite  significant.  My  own  rather  subjective  view  is  that  a  currency  union
would indeed increase trade between New Zealand and other parts of the union, and that seems to be
the view of the business community also. If that is correct, then a currency union, with Australia or the
United States, would stimulate trade within the currency union, and to that extent could produce some
worthwhile productivity gains, as New Zealand producers moved into areas of greatest  comparative
advantage.  This  is  probably  particularly  true  of  a  currency  union  with  the  United  States.  There  is
already  substantial  trans-Tasman  trade,  and  for  that  reason  arguably  less  scope  for  increasing  it
through the creation of a currency union.
On the other side of the ledger, there would be one potentially major and one more minor disadvantage
of a currency union.
The potentially major disadvantage would be the loss of an independent monetary policy, and hence
loss of a very important way of moderating demand shocks and of any ability to influence our own
inflation rate. And this loss would seem to apply whether the currency union was with Australia or the
United  States,  and  whether  it  involved  the  creation  of  a  new  central  bank  (possible  in  the  case  of
Australia) or simply dollarisation. (Clearly, in the event of New Zealand’s entering a formal currency
union with Australia, involving a new central bank with representatives from both countries and a new
currency, New Zealand would have some say in the formulation of monetary policy, but realistically
that say could only ever be a small voice alongside the much larger voice of the Australian economy.)
Views  will  differ  on  how  important  that  loss  would  be.  But  we  can  see  from  recent  international
experience that the loss can have very substantial and sometimes very adverse implications. And those
implications  would  potentially  be  more  significant  if  we  were  to  form  a  currency  union  with  the
United  States  than  if  we  were  to  form  a  currency  union  with  Australia,  given  the  broad  similarity
between the New Zealand and Australian economies.
There seems little doubt that the fact that Argentina has had a more prolonged recession over the last
few years than have some of the other major countries of Latin America has been largely a result of
the  fact  that  Argentina  has  been  tightly  tied  to  the  United  States  dollar  through  its  currency  board
arrangement. As a consequence, the Argentine currency has been pushed upwards, along with the US
dollar, against the currencies of many of Argentina’s trading partners. Similarly, Hong Kong seems to
have had a more prolonged recession than many other Asian economies for the same sort of reason.
(Interestingly, during the nineties the trade-weighted real appreciation of the Hong Kong dollar, tied
tightly to the US dollar, was much greater than the maximum appreciation of the New Zealand dollar
during the nineties.) Conversely, it seems clear that within the European Monetary Union some of the
smaller economies such as Ireland have been over-heating rather dramatically recently, with monetary
policy  determined  by  the  new  European  Central  Bank  in  the  interests  of  the  whole  currency  union
almost  certainly  too  easy  for  those  smaller  economies.  While  that  may  create  prosperity  in  the
short-term, it may create considerable difficulties down the road.
I well recall the mid-nineties, when the most common complaint I encountered speaking to audiences
outside Auckland was that they were suffering from high real interest rates and a rising real exchange
rate even though there was no inflation (so at least it was claimed!) in those areas, the only inflation
being confined to Auckland. Even had  these claims  been true,  the  reality  was  that  all  parts of  New
Zealand  formed  then,  and  still  form,  a  currency  union,  and  there  is  only  room  for  one  interest  rate
structure  and  one  exchange  rate  within  a  currency  union.  Were  we  to  join  Australia  in  a  currency
5
BIS Review 42/2000
union, our interest rates and the exchange rate we faced would be influenced by the common central
bank (in the case of a genuine currency union), or by the Reserve Bank of Australia (in the case of
Australian dollarisation). In practice, it would be the needs of the Australian economy which would
dominate the monetary policy decisions in either case. And of course, adopting the US dollar would
mean accepting whatever monetary policy seemed appropriate for the US economy.
This  would  probably  tend  to  increase  the  magnitude  of  New  Zealand  business  cycles,  and  the
variability of New Zealand’s inflation rate. With  no  ability  to  use  New  Zealand  monetary  policy  to
deal with these cycles, it would be necessary to use fiscal policy more actively, and to encourage more
flexibility, both up and down, in prices and wages, to moderate these cycles.
The  minor  disadvantage  of  dollarising,  and  at  this  point  I  need  to  make  a  distinction  between
dollarising  and  forming  a  currency  union  where  a  new  currency  is  established  for  the  countries
forming part of the union, would be the loss of what central bankers call seigniorage income. This is
the income which a central bank generates by issuing little pieces of paper, or in our case little pieces
of  plastic,  and  calling  them  money.  What  happens  is  that  we  issue  these  little  pieces  of  plastic  in
exchange  for  good  value,  and  we  invest  that  value  in  government  securities  at  the  going  market
interest rate. The interest income earned is called seigniorage income, and in New Zealand it amounts
to about $130 million each year (a currency on issue of a little over $2 billion, invested in government
securities to yield somewhat over 6 per cent per annum). If we were to join a currency union modelled
on the European Monetary Union, we would retain a share of the seigniorage income appropriate to
our relative size in the new currency union. But if we were simply to adopt the Australian dollar or the
US dollar, it is very likely that we would lose the benefit of that income to the country whose currency
we adopted. Not a huge loss perhaps, but $130 million each year, growing gradually, should not be
given away without some thought!
How to weight the pros and cons?
As  I  indicated  at  the  commencement  of  my  comments,  joining  a  currency  union,  or  adopting  the
currency of another country, has potentially important implications which go well beyond economic
issues. But even focusing on the economic issues, weighting the various pros and cons is not easy.
It  is  sobering  to  note  that  Canada,  a  country  doing  almost  80  per  cent  of  its  trade  with  the  United
States, has nevertheless chosen to retain its own currency. And a recent article by a senior economist at
the Bank of Canada argued that, given the way in which Canada’s terms of trade behave relative to
those of the United States, having a separate Canadian currency was very much in Canada’s national
interest.2
It seems clear from the survey conducted for the Holmes/Grimes study by the National Bank of New
Zealand  that  a  substantial  majority  of  the  New  Zealand  business  community  -  or  at  very  least  a
substantial  majority  of those  who  responded  to the  survey  -  are  in favour  of  a  currency  union  with
Australia.
But  I  am  not  myself  entirely  sure  what  to  make  of  this  strong  support  for  currency  union  with
Australia.  Of course  businesses  are in  favour  of  less  currency  uncertainty.  I  suspect  if  the  business
community were  asked  if  they  were in  favour  of lower  taxation  they  would  also register a  strongly
favourable reaction. The real question is not whether less currency uncertainty would be helpful but
whether  less  currency  uncertainty  would  compensate  for  the  costs  of  a  currency  union,  such  as  the
risks of greater variability in output and domestic inflation. And the answer to that question is much
less clear.
To illustrate, let’s suppose there is a sharp fall in New Zealand export prices. With our own currency,
this is quite likely to lead to a fall in the New Zealand dollar, as it did in the second half of 1997 and
2 Murray, John (1999), “Why Canada needs a flexible exchange rate”, Bank of Canada working paper 99-12.
BIS Review 42/2000
6
1998.  This  fall  in  the  currency  cushions  New  Zealand  exporters  to  some  extent  from  the  adverse
impact of the fall in world commodity prices, effectively by spreading the “pain” of that fall across the
rest of us, who find that our New Zealand dollars can now buy fewer imports than before. Without our
own currency, on the other hand, there is an increased risk that a fall in New Zealand export prices
leads  to  no  fall  in  our  (new)  currency,  our  exporters  have  to  suffer  the  full  pain  of  the  fall  in
international prices, and may well be forced to lay off staff and reduce output. That has an indirect
effect, of course, on the rest of the country, but those who are not closely associated with the export
industries may be relatively little affected.
In the final analysis, the choice of exchange rate regime is mainly a choice about the nature of the
pain  we  prefer  to  experience  as  a  consequence  of  international  shocks.  It  does  not  provide  an
opportunity to escape the pain inevitably caused by those shocks.
Conclusion
It would be nice to conclude my comments today with a clear conclusion, or an on-balance judgement.
I don’t propose to do that, partly because the decision about currency regime is, as I have indicated,
finally a matter for elected politicians not for central bankers, and partly because even the economic
pros and cons do not point to a clear conclusion.
Moreover,  it  may  well  be  appropriate  to  widen  the  range  of  options  somewhat,  and  to  think  more
laterally  before  we  reach  any  conclusions  at  all.  For  example,  might  it  be  possible  to  negotiate  a
comprehensive free trade agreement with the United States as part of a package involving our adoption
of  the  US  dollar  and  surrender  of  the  relevant  seigniorage  income?  Losing  the  seigniorage  income
might well be a worthwhile concession in return for a free trade agreement with the US.
Clearly, there are lots of potential options. There can be little doubt that this issue will be a matter for
public discussion and debate for a considerable time to come. I believe the Reserve Bank has already
made  a  constructive  contribution  to  that  discussion,  through  the  publication  of  a  number  of  papers
relevant to the issue.
But  it  is  crystal  clear  that  currency  union  is  not  a  magic  path  to  substantially  faster  New  Zealand
growth. It is no substitute for domestic policies that promote stronger productivity growth. It is not an
issue  which  should  be  decided  in  haste.  And  it  is  not  an  issue  on  which  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be
taking sides. Anybody who accuses me of promoting a currency union, or for that matter of opposing a
currency union, has not read this speech!
7
BIS Review 42/2000
