Mike Moore: Financial services and the WTO
Remarks by Mr Mike Moore, Director-General of the World Trade Organization, at a Working Dinner
of  Central  Bank  Governors  held  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  in  Basel  on
11 September 2000 (prepared speech; not a verbatim transcription).
 I am grateful for the opportunity to talk to you today. The timing is good because we have started new
negotiations on trade in services in the WTO that will certainly include talks on the liberalization of
trade in financial services, an area of great importance to you and to all WTO Members.
Financial services has always been seen, from the start of the discussions  about  whether the  GATT
should  deal  with  services  at  all,  as  a  special  and  controversial  sector  in  terms  of  its  strategic
importance and political sensitivity: not only is it the largest of all internationally traded services, and
the  backbone  of  all  other  economic  activity,  but  it  is  also  a  key  tool  for  the  control  of  national
economies. For some governments the achievement of greater freedom and security to offer banking,
securities  and  insurance  services  in  foreign  markets  was  the  pre-eminent  objective  of  the  Uruguay
Round. Without the insistence of the banking and insurance industries of the US and other countries
on  bringing  trade  in services, and financial  services especially,  under  the  framework  of  multilateral
law, there would have been no services agreement in the WTO.
In the early stages of services negotiations, many developing countries were hesitant. They feared that
competition and increased participation and influence of foreign financial institutions would threaten
their control of the key levers of the national economy, as well as their national financial institutions.
But even in the developed world there were some underlying systemic doubts: finance ministries in a
number  of  countries  were  initially  doubtful  about  the  value  of  a  multilateral  approach  to  financial
services. They had been comfortable with bilateral negotiation of banking licenses and other rights -
based  mostly  on  reciprocity  -  and  were  not  convinced  of  the  virtues  of  granting  most  favoured
treatment,  nor  comfortable  with the  prospect  of  decisions  being  subject  to  dispute  settlement  in  the
multilateral  framework.  The  relative  openness  of  financial  markets  at  the  time,  at  least  in  the
developed  world,  made  the  need  for  change  less  obvious.  It  seemed  worthwhile  to  embark  on
multilateral  negotiations only  if  the  results  promised  something  better  than  what  was  already  there.
And a key element in the calculus was how far developing countries would join in the negotiations.
Two conflicting approaches - the high ambitions of some developed countries and the nervous caution
of developing countries - are reflected in the long history of the negotiations and in the GATS itself.
The  Agreement’s  design  -  a  framework  of  rules  coupled  with  national  schedules  of  commitments  -
allows governments to decide which sectors they will open to competition by guaranteeing the rights
of  foreign  suppliers  and  also  the  extent  of  those  rights.  The  GATS  commitments  of  many  WTO
Members do not offer unrestricted access to their markets. But significant progress has been made, and
the groundwork completed for moving ahead with liberalization in future negotiations.
Despite the tension and sensitivities surrounding the early discussions, today 106 WTO Members have
commitments  in  the  sector  -  more  than  in  any  other  sector  except  tourism.  Not  all  of  those
commitments  involve  liberalization  -  often  they  are  bindings  of  the  existing  level  of  access  and
regulation. Let us not forget that in trade negotiations liberalization is always incremental; in the case
of  services  this  is  more  so  since  the  principle  of  progressive  liberalization  has  been  expressly
recognized.
We sometimes forget that the financial services negotiations that successfully concluded in December
1997 coincided with the financial crisis in Asia. Contrary to what some might have feared, the crisis
had  no  impact  on  the  negotiations:  no  country  withdrew  or  wrote  down  the  commitments  it  had
negotiated. Even the Asian countries most seriously affected made commitments to improve access to
1
BIS Review 73/2000
their markets for foreign financial institutions. They did so in the belief that stronger competition and
greater openness would make their national financial infrastructure stronger, not weaker. In fact, the
crisis  seems  to  have  strengthened  the  conviction  that  competitive  financial  markets  are  essential  to
restore confidence and induce the long-term investment needed for growth and development.
Several factors made it easier for crisis-ridden countries to embrace the WTO negotiations. First, the
negotiations  were  not  concerned  with  the  liberalization  of  the  capital  account,  but  purely  with  the
terms on which foreign suppliers would be allowed to do business, subject to whatever capital controls
were in force. While it is true that a government is required to allow capital flows when the country
has  a  commitment  liberalizing  the  supply  of  a  service  requiring  such  capital  movement,  the  capital
account liberalization involved is limited in extent.
Second,  the  liberalization  of  financial  services  trade  takes  place  inside  a  system  of  rules  and
procedures  with  the  necessary  flexibility  and  safeguard  clauses  to  address  prudential  concerns.
Governments are free to take any measure necessary to preserve the stability of the financial system
and  also  temporary,  non-discriminatory  restrictions  on  trade  in  services  in  the  event  of  serious
balance-of-payments  and  external  financial  difficulties.  In  fact,  nothing  in  the  services  agreement
curtails governments’ ability to pursue sound macroeconomic and regulatory policies.
Third, these particular negotiations were mostly about allowing foreign institutions to establish in the
market  -  entailing  foreign  direct  investment  -  to  provide  services  and  bring  technology,  capital  and
expertise with them. This was seen not as an additional threat, but as part of the answer to the crisis.
Commitments  in  the  WTO  provide  a  guarantee  that  the  terms  and  conditions  on  which  investment
decisions are made, and trade is carried on, are not  going  to  change  overnight.  Since  nothing  chills
investment  more  than  uncertainty  about  the  direction  of  government  policy,  such  guarantees  are
valuable to traders and investors, as well as to governments wanting to attract foreign investment.
The financial industry in the US, Europe and Japan has been active in formulating positions for the
negotiations that began this  year. The  liberalization  of  the  rights  of  establishment  and  operation for
suppliers  remains  essential  for  the  provision  of  most  financial  services,  and  there  will  be  calls  for
further liberalization on this front.  At  the  same  time,  technological  advances  in  telecommunications
and  informatics  are  radically  changing  the  manner  in  which  financial  services  are  traded,  making
cross-border  trade  increasingly  important. The  negotiations  will  certainly  seek  improved  access  and
greater  security  for  this type  of trade. This issue is  also  relevant to the  ongoing  work  on  electronic
commerce.
Now, what can we do to ensure successful conclusion of these negotiations? There is much that can be
done,  especially  in  creating  conditions  favourable  to  further  liberalization.  Many  countries,
particularly  developing  countries,  lack  the  necessary  institutions,  regulatory  structures  and  legal
frameworks  needed  to  support  a  fast-changing,  modern  economy.  In  a  sense  we  find  ourselves
between two worlds - between an economic system which is increasingly global and a patchwork of
institutions and structures which remains largely national in scope.
More generally, there is a continuing need for vigorous international dialogue and cooperation.  The
efforts being made by the BIS and other international fora are critical for confidence and stability in
the financial systems of the world, which in turn is a key requirement for keeping the trading system
open.
We  need  to  make  the  markets  work.  Adequate  prudential  regulation  and  supervision,  enhanced
transparency and corporate governance, strengthened competition policy, provision of safety nets and
proper legal and accounting systems are all preconditions for countries to be able to take advantage of
the sizeable benefits of liberalization. Your contribution on these fronts is crucial to our efforts.
Thank you.
BIS Review 73/2000
2
