Mr Noyer: Monetary policymaking in the euro area
Speech  delivered  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  Pareto
Fonds’ 2000 Economic Forum, Oslo, on 23 March 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It is  a  pleasure  and  an honour  for  me  to  speak  here at the  Pareto  Fonds’ 2000  Economic  Forum  in
Oslo.  The  economic  conferences  organised  by  the  Pareto  Fonds  have  an  outstanding  reputation  for
presenting  a  unique  opportunity  for  investors,  economists  and  policymakers  to  conduct  an  in-depth
exchange of views on current issues of monetary policy.
In  January  1999  the  euro  was  successfully  launched  as  the  single  currency  for  the  11  countries
comprising the euro area. For more than a year, the Eurosystem, which includes the European Central
Bank  (ECB)  and  the  11  national  central  banks  (NCBs)  of  the  countries  which  have  introduced  the
euro, has been in charge of the single monetary policy for the euro area. Of course, it is much too early
to make a detailed assessment of the  achievements  of the  single  monetary  policy.  Nevertheless,  the
first 15 months of the euro have been encouraging and there are good reasons  to look  to the future
with  optimism.  Owing  to  very  careful  technical  and  conceptual  preparations,  both  the  monetary
policymaking  process  and  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  decisions  have  functioned
efficiently from the very outset. At the same time, there can be no doubt that there is room for further
improvement and that important challenges still lie ahead.
In my remarks today, I shall describe the main features of monetary policymaking in the euro area,
focusing  in  particular  on  the  monetary  policy  objectives  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  stability-oriented
monetary policy strategy and on some of the communication issues raised by the strategy. Moreover, I
shall briefly highlight the current economic outlook for the euro area.
Price stability as the primary objective of the single monetary policy of the Eurosystem
The Treaty establishing the European Community clearly states that the primary objective of the single
monetary  policy  shall  be  to  maintain  price  stability.  Furthermore,  the  Treaty  requires  that,  without
prejudice to the objective of price stability, the Eurosystem shall support the general economic policies
in the European Community with a view to contributing to the objectives of the Community. The latter
include, inter alia, sustainable and non-inflationary growth and a high level of employment.
The  Treaty  therefore  establishes  a  clear  sequence  of  objectives  for  the  monetary  policy  of  the
Eurosystem, with price stability unambiguously being the sine qua non. Such an assignment of tasks to
a central bank is nothing extraordinary. On the contrary, it reflects the consensus which has emerged
over the last two decades to the effect that maintaining price stability is the best contribution monetary
policy can make to sustainable and non-inflationary output growth and employment perspectives.
The belief that monetary policy should be geared towards price stability is firmly rooted in economic
theory which clearly demonstrates the costs of inflation, both in terms of allocative inefficiencies and
arbitrary  redistribution  effects.  At  the  same  time,  these  arguments  suggest  that  maintaining  price
stability  in  itself  contributes  to  higher  growth  and  employment.  Several  empirical  studies  have
concluded that, across a large number of countries, it is on average those with lower inflation which
appear to grow more rapidly.
While there is a widespread agreement on the benefits of price stability, it is less clear exactly what
price stability means. In the context of its stability-oriented monetary policy strategy, the Governing
Council  of  the  ECB  defined  price  stability  as  “a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of
Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%”. According to this definition, price stability
“is to be maintained over the medium term”.
1
BIS Review 28/2000
The phrase “below 2%” clearly delineates the upper bound for the rate of measured inflation in the
HICP, which is consistent with price stability. At the same time, the use of the word “increase” in the
definition clearly signals that deflation, i.e. prolonged declines in the level of the HICP, would not be
deemed consistent with price stability.
The  main  reason  for  not  aiming  at  a  measured  inflation  rate  of  zero  is  what  is  known  as  the
“measurement  bias”,  which  can  exist  in  consumer  price  indices.  These  biases  arise  mainly  from
changing spending patterns and quality improvements in those goods and services which are included
in the basket used to define a specific price index. Such biases cannot always be fully corrected in the
construction of price indices. The measurement bias typically causes consumer price indices (CPIs) to
overstate slightly the “true” rate of inflation. While the measurement bias of the HICP is likely to be
lower than  that  observed  in  the  national  CPIs  of  the  countries  comprising  the  euro  area,  we  cannot
completely  neglect  it.  Nevertheless,  there  are  as  yet  no  conclusive  studies  on  the  size  of  the
measurement bias of the HICP for the euro area. This is the main reason why the Governing Council
of the ECB did not announce an explicit lower bound for its definition of price stability.
In  the  literature  there  are  also  some  economic  arguments  in  favour  of  a  slightly  positive  rate  of
inflation. First, it has been argued that the existence of downward nominal rigidity in wages implies
that inflation is required to ensure downward flexibility of real wages, thereby allowing resources to
be  allocated  efficiently  across  different  economic  sectors  in  response  to  changes  in  technology  and
consumer  preferences.  Second,  it  has  been  put  forward  that  a  modestly  positive  rate  of  inflation  is
required to ensure that monetary policy can always engineer negative real interest rates, should this be
required. There are good and well-known reasons not to overstate these arguments. At the same time,
the  definition  of  price  stability  chosen  by  the  Governing  Council  allows  for  moderately  positive
inflation below 2%.
The Governing Council underlined the fact that price stability is to be maintained over  the  medium
term. In the short term, the inflation rate can be influenced by one-off factors outside the control of the
central  bank,  such  as  changes  in  indirect  taxes  or  movements  in  commodity  prices.  Moreover,
monetary  policy  impulses  exert  their  influence  on  the  overall  price  level  only  with  considerable
time-lags. Hence, monetary policy cannot avoid short-term deviations from inflation rates consistent
with price stability.
The two pillars of the monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem
The intrinsic challenge for central banking is the need to look ahead. Were monetary policy only to
react  when  inflationary  pressures  are  already  visible,  it  would  always  be  too  late,  as  interest  rate
changes show their full impact on prices only after around six to eight quarters. Moreover, it would
have  to  react  much  more  strongly  than  in  the  event  of  a  timely  action.  The  past  experience  with
stop-go  policies,  widespread  in  the  1960s  and  1970s,  clearly  illustrates  the  negative  side  effects  in
terms of a high volatility of inflation and output.
A forward-looking monetary policy requires a structured approach in order to interpret and synthesise
all the information relevant for an assessment of the outlook for price developments; in other words, it
requires  a  well-founded  monetary  policy  strategy.  The  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  is  based  on  two
pillars, the first being a prominent role for money and the second a broadly based assessment of the
outlook for price developments.
To give money a prominent role in its monetary policy analysis is quite a natural thing for a central
bank geared towards price stability to do, because inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon. The
important role assigned to money is reflected in the announcement of a reference value of 4½% for the
annual growth of the broad monetary aggregate M3. Current M3 growth is analysed and interpreted in
relation  to  this  reference  value.  Under  normal  conditions,  substantial  or  prolonged  deviations  of
monetary growth from the reference value would signal risks to price stability over the medium term.
For the euro area, this relationship is empirically well-founded. The available econometric evidence
suggests  the  existence  of  a  stable  relationship  between  M3,  the  euro  area  price  level  and  a  small
BIS Review 28/2000
2
number of other area-wide macroeconomic variables. Moreover, there is good evidence with regard to
leading indicator properties of M3 for future price developments.
While there can be no doubt about the relevance of monetary growth for inflation in the medium term,
short-term changes in the stock of money may be influenced by factors unrelated to future spending
and  future  inflation.  Thus,  the  Eurosystem  does  not  react  mechanically  to  short-term  deviations  of
monetary  growth  from  the  reference  value.  Instead,  monetary  developments  are  analysed  very
carefully in order to extract their information content for future inflation. If this analysis clearly were
to  suggest  that  monetary  developments  indicate  a  threat  to  future  price  stability,  monetary  policy
would respond in a manner appropriate to counter the risk.
Although  the  monetary  data  contain  information  vital  to  informed  monetary  policymaking,  on  their
own they will not normally constitute a complete summary of all the economic information required to
set an  appropriate  monetary  policy  for the  maintenance  of  price  stability. Thus,  in parallel  with  the
analysis  of  monetary  growth  in  relation  to  the  reference  value,  a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the
outlook for price developments and the risks to price stability in the euro area play a major role in the
Eurosystem’s strategy. This assessment is made on the basis of a wide range of variables which have
leading  indicator  properties  for  future  price  developments,  including,  inter  alia,  wages,  unit  labour
costs, bond prices, the yield curve, fiscal policy indicators, various measures of real activity, price and
cost indices.
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  stress  that  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  considers  the  euro
exchange rate an important indicator within the second pillar of the Eurosystem’s strategy. It is closely
monitored and influences monetary policy decisions, as it can  have  implications  for  the  outlook  for
price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Changes  in  the  exchange  rate  can  influence  the  outlook  for  price
developments both directly, through their impact on import prices, and indirectly, through their effects
on trade. Against this background, the prolonged depreciation of the exchange rate of the euro since
the beginning of 1999 is indeed a cause for concern and is being carefully taken into account in our
discussion on the appropriate monetary policy stance.
Another element of the second pillar is macroeconomic forecasts. Given the forward-looking nature of
the stability-oriented strategy, the Eurosystem follows closely the forecasts prepared by international
organisations, market participants and others. In addition, it also produces its own forecasts. Forecasts
are an indispensable tool for efficient information processing. They help to summarise and synthesise
a large quantity of information which may otherwise become too unwieldy to form a sensible basis for
policy discussion. At the same time, however, it should be recognised that the role of forecasts in the
Eurosystem’s monetary strategy is clearly limited. It certainly cannot be compared with that played in
the context of inflation targeting. An inflation forecast can never be a sufficient statistical summary of
all the information which policymakers require in order to take appropriate monetary policy decisions.
To  give  only  one  example,  it  is  extremely  hard  to  integrate  the  information  relating  to  monetary
developments  in  a  meaningful  way  in  macroeconomic  forecasts.  Furthermore,  it  is  often  crucial  to
understand the nature of the factors which affect future price developments in order to assess the risks
to price stability in the medium term. Thus, one can certainly not expect the Eurosystem to react to
inflation forecasts in a mechanical way.
One criticism which is frequently raised by external observers refers to the complexity of the strategy
just  described.  I  agree  that  our  strategy  is  complex  but  this  honestly  reflects  the  complexity  of  the
monetary  policy  environment  of  the  Eurosystem.  While  a  forward-looking  monetary  policy  is  by
definition complicated, its complexity is reinforced by the fact that the Governing Council of the ECB
has to assess the monetary policy situation for a large and diverse single currency area consisting of
11 different countries. Moreover, owing to the impact of the introduction of the euro on the behaviour
of  economic  agents  and  on  the  evolution  of  the  institutional  environment,  we  are  faced  with  a
relatively high degree of uncertainty with regard to the economic relationships which are relevant for
monetary policy. Finally, the database for area-wide statistics is still relatively narrow by comparison
with  what  central  banks  are  accustomed  to,  at  least  in  the  industrialised  world.  Against  this
background, the two-pillar strategy of the Eurosystem has the advantage of being relatively resilient to
these different forms of uncertainty.
3
BIS Review 28/2000
Issues of communication policy
It is widely acknowledged today that communication policies belong to the core tasks of any central
bank. For some years now, transparency has been one of the catchwords of central banking. This is
closely related to the fact that, with more and more central banks becoming independent, the issue of
accountability has gained equal importance. Accountability is in turn facilitated by a high degree of
transparency.  Not  only  those  institutions  to  which  a  central  bank  is  formally  accountable,  but  also
market participants and the public at large can make an assessment of the situation more easily if a
central bank pursues its primary objective in an appropriate way. Hence, a high degree of transparency
also  facilitates  the  creation  of  credibility  and,  via  its  impact  on  the  expectation-forming  process,
increases the efficiency of monetary policy.
Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  committed  itself  to  being  open,
transparent and accountable for its decisions and its performance vis-à-vis the European public and the
European Parliament, the public’s elected representative. We are well aware of the fact that, because
of both the complexity of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy and the plurality of the audiences - which
are accustomed to different communication forms - to which it is addressed, extraordinary efforts are
required to explain the monetary policy considerations of the Governing Council on a regular basis in
the  most  transparent  way  possible.  While  trying  hard,  we  have  certainly  not  yet  overcome  all  the
teething  problems  in  this  regard.  All  of  us,  however,  are  determined  to  continue  to  strive  for
improvement and I am convinced that we will make further progress in speaking with only one voice.
Often,  however,  the  critics  of  the  Eurosystem’s  communication  policy  do  not  refer  to  concrete
situations, but claim that the Eurosystem’s general approach to communication is inherently lacking in
transparency.  In  this  context  I  have  the  impression  that  the  whole  discussion  regarding  the
transparency of monetary policy has become rather narrowly focused, associating transparency only
with very specific communication tools, namely the publication of minutes and of inflation forecasts.
It is sometimes forgotten that central banks have various instruments at their disposal for informing
the  public  in  an  honest,  clear  and  understandable  way  of  the  considerations  and  motivations
underlying their monetary policy decisions.
One  major  tool  of  the  communication  policy  of  the  Eurosystem  is  the  press  conference  which  the
President  of  the  ECB  and  I  hold  regularly  following  the  first  Governing  Council  meeting  of  each
month. On these occasions, the President makes an introductory statement, in which he explains the
decisions  of  the  Governing  Council  on  the  basis  of  its  assessment  of  the  latest  information  on
monetary, financial market and other economic developments. In my view, the introductory statement
is  very  similar  to  what  other  central  banks  call  summary  minutes.  This  statement  is  followed  by  a
questions and answer session, giving the journalists the opportunity to question the President or myself
on any issue. This press conference provides a forum for presenting policy decisions as promptly as
possible.  The  fact  that  some  academics  also  recommend  this  procedure  to  other  central  banks  can
certainly be regarded as a positive assessment of our approach.
Another  key  instrument  of  our  communication  policy  is  the  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin.  The  Monthly
Bulletin is intended to provide the public with a thorough assessment of the economic situation as well
as with articles covering topical issues important for the single monetary policy. Moreover, speeches
such as this one today and other public appearances of members of the Executive Board, for example
at hearings of the European Parliament, are an important channel of communication with the public.
The ECB also participates actively in academic debate. Finally, a lot of information is accessible on
the ECB’s website.
All  in  all,  the  information  supplied  by  the  ECB  goes  beyond  the  requirements  of  the  Treaty
establishing the European Community. Against this background, it is not clear to me which additional
relevant information academics and financial market participants hope to obtain from the publications
of minutes and voting records. On the contrary, there is a non-negligible risk that focusing too much
on individual words and deeds, i.e. the voting behaviour, is likely to obscure the clarity and coherence
of  the  Council’s  policy  signals.  Moreover,  the  publication  of  voting  records  could  lead  to  pressure
being brought to bear on the governors of the NCBs by national politicians and interest groups. This,
BIS Review 28/2000
4
in turn, could endanger the euro area focus which all members of the Governing Council committed
themselves to right from the outset, as well as the open and productive character of our discussions.
With regard to the calls for a publication of inflation forecasts, I should like to stress that, in order to
be a helpful communication tool, the publication of forecasts requires extremely careful preparation.
Not only must it be guaranteed that  the  forecasts  are  of  sufficient  quality,  the  public also  has  to  be
educated on how to read a forecast. A misunderstanding of the fundamental assumptions underlying a
forecast  or  a  misinterpretation  of  the  role  of  the  forecast  in  the  context  of  the  overall  strategy  can
easily  lead  to  a  situation  where  the  interpretation  of  the  Governing  Council’s  monetary  policy
decisions  is  not  facilitated,  but  complicated.  This  is  why  the  Eurosystem  decided  not  to  begin
publishing forecasts from the very beginning of Stage Three.
Monetary and economic developments in the euro area
Let me now turn to the monetary and economic developments in the euro area. Exactly one week ago,
on 16 March 2000, the Governing Council decided to raise the ECB interest rates by 25 basis points.
This decision addressed the upside risks to price stability as signalled by both pillars of the monetary
policy strategy. Last week’s increase in ECB interest rates followed the interest rate decisions taken on
4 November 1999 and 3 February 2000 and continued the policy of countering these emerging upside
risks  to  price  stability  in  a  timely  manner.  Thereby,  it  contributed  to  maintaining  the  favourable
outlook for the euro area economy.
The following factors contributed to the latest interest rate decision. With regard to the first pillar, the
three-month  average  of  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3  exceeded  the  reference  value  of
4½% throughout 1999 and in January 2000. The prolonged deviation of M3 growth from the reference
value signalled the existence of ample liquidity in the euro area. This is especially true when seen in
conjunction with the continued strong growth of credit granted to the private sector, at an annual rate
of around 10%.
With regard to the second pillar, most indicators and forecasts pointed to increasing upward pressures
on  consumer  price  inflation over  the  medium  term.  The  strong  rise  in  oil  prices  and  the  downward
movement  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  in  the  past  put  upward  pressure  on  import  costs  and
producer  prices.  In  the  context  of  a  strong  cyclical  upswing,  these  developments  could,  via
second-round effects, have lasting effects on consumer price inflation.
As expected, consumer price inflation saw a further increase in the first two months of this year, with
annual HICP inflation reaching 2.0% in February, after 1.9% in January and 1.7% in December 1999.
The rise this year is largely accounted for by a further increase in oil prices and its effect on energy
prices in  the  HICP.  It  is  reinforced  by  base effects from  declining  oil prices  at the  turn  of  the  year
1998/99. Oil prices increased further in early March, and in so doing will continue to place upward
pressure on consumer prices in the short term.
The past movements of the exchange rate of the euro have increasingly become a cause for concern for
price stability through their effect on import prices and producer prices. In the first half of March, the
nominal effective exchange rate was 12.2% below the level recorded for the first quarter of 1999.
Overall, the upward pressures on consumer price inflation were regarded to have become greater and
more protracted than previously foreseen. Against this background, the interest rate steps taken can be
understood as pre-emptive measures aimed at maintaining price stability in the medium term.
Currently,  the  prospects  for  strong  economic  growth  are  very  favourable.  The  strengthening  of
economic activity in the euro area in the second half of 1999 was confirmed by a first estimate of euro
area  real  GDP  growth  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  1999.  Real  GDP  is  estimated  to  have  increased  by
0.9% quarter-on-quarter, following an increase of 1.0% in the previous quarter. In addition, the latest
survey data indicate a continued improvement in economic activity. Area-wide industrial confidence
increased  further  in  the  first  two  months  of  this  year;  it  has  now  recovered  from  the  effect  of  the
slowdown in 1998-99 and stands again at the previous peak of April 1998. Moreover, the Purchasing
Managers’  Index  signals  improved  business  conditions  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  The  cyclical
5
BIS Review 28/2000
upswing should extend well into 2000 and continue thereafter. This is also confirmed by the available
forecasts,  which  indicate  a  real  GDP  growth  of  slightly  over  3%  in  2000,  reflecting  both  the
favourable external environment and buoyant domestic demand. As for 2001, the economic expansion
in the euro area is generally expected to continue at a similar pace.
In  this  environment,  employment  is  expected  to  increase  further  and  the  still  very  high  level  of
unemployment should continue to fall. Thus far, recent wage growth has been moderate and the same
applies  for  actual  wage  settlements  to  date.  It  remains  important  not  to  jeopardise  the  expected
improvements  in  economic  conditions  and  labour  market  prospects  through  inappropriate  wage
settlements. In fact, wage moderation would help both to contain inflation in the euro area and lead to
further progress in employment creation.
With  regard  to  fiscal  policies,  the  current  upswing  provides  a  good  opportunity  to  comply  more
quickly with the objectives of the Stability and Growth Pact, and thereby to add substantively to the
favourable economic conditions.
Let me conclude by stressing that economic conditions and prospects for the euro area appear to be
better  at  present  than  at  any  time  in  the  past  decade.  Growth  is  strong,  employment  is  expected  to
increase further and the still  high  level  of  unemployment  should continue  to fall. Maintaining  price
stability  and pursuing  structural  reform  is the foundation for a  sustained  period  of  strong  economic
expansion and a lasting process of job creation.
BIS Review 28/2000
6
