The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE: Central bank independence
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE, Governor of the Bank of England, to the SEANZA
Governors’ Symposium in Colombo, Sri Lanka, on 26 August 2000.
 Governor Jayawardena, fellow central bankers, I am honoured, personally and on behalf of the Bank
of England to participate in your celebrations.
On behalf of the Bank of England, and, I am sure, of all your guests here this morning, I congratulate
you,  Mr  Governor,  on  the  great  contribution  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  has  made  to  the
development of your beautiful country in your first fifty years and I wish you continuing success in
your task in the years to come.
You  invite  me  to  speak  about  Central  Bank  Independence,  which  of  course  I  am  happy  to  do
- although I should perhaps make clear at the outset that it is a concept which I find somewhat elusive.
Like  so  many  other  debates,  the  debate  about  central  bank  independence  often  seems  to  become
unduly polarised.
At one extreme it seems that some of those who resist central bank independence as undemocratic - or
even some central bankers who favour it - assume that it involves an elite body of individuals, who,
once  appointed  are,  by  virtue  of  statute,  beyond  political  influence,  with  extensive  but  only
generally-defined powers to affect the financial environment - and hence the lives of individuals and
businesses throughout their currency area. At the opposite extreme it sometimes seems that the only
alternative  is  for  the  central  bank  to  be  simply  another  arm  of  government,  subservient  to  finance
ministers and their officials.
Now  I  don’t  know  how  many  of  you  would  recognise  yourselves  under  either  of  these  extreme
categorisations. I guess not very many.
I have to confess that - however attractive this definition of independence might appear as a central
banking career option - if this really were the choice to be made, then, as a citizen of a democratic
society I would have to choose the non-independent alternative. But, of course, the real debate is much
more subtle and extends across a much narrower part of the spectrum between these polar extremes.
The  real  debate  is  in  fact  well  described  by  John  Exter,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  official,  who
advised on the establishment of the Central Bank of Ceylon, as it then was, and stayed on to become
its first Governor.
In  his  Report  -  published  in  November  1949  -  Exter  presented  a  draft  bill  accompanied  by  a
commentary. It is still well worth reading. In that commentary Exter first outlines the case for the new
central bank being “non-political” and having “a considerable amount of independence” - essentially
on  the  grounds  that  central  banking  “puts  the  government  into  the  business  life  of  a  country  at
especially critical points, namely banking and other credit activities, capital markets, foreign exchange
markets  and  the  supply  of  currency”,  and  that  it  “embraces  problems  which  are  of  an  unusually
technical nature”!
But Exter goes on to recognise that “there are many important problems of monetary policy, especially
those relating to fiscal policy, on which a central bank must necessarily work in close harmony with
the  government”.  Noting  that  many  governments  had  learned  to  value  the  sort  of  independent  and
objective, detached, advice that central banks are able to give, Exter nevertheless acknowledges that
“on matters of vital interest to the state it would be impossible for  a  central  bank  to  adopt  a  policy
contrary to the policy of the Government of the day”. His killer argument is that no central banker can
help  but  be  “acutely  conscious  of  the  fact  that,  since  no  Parliament  can  bind  its  successors,  their
independence is limited by the ultimate power of the Government to change the law”.
1
BIS Review 66/2000
He concludes that the exact degree of independence of the central bank is likely to vary from time to
time (giving the example of a peacetime and wartime economy) and he describes the ideal as one in
which  there  will  be  continuous  and  constructive  cooperation  between  the  central  bank  and  the
Government.  The  effectiveness  of  this  cooperation  -  he  says  -  will  depend  more  upon  the  men
occupying the key positions at particular times than upon any legal formula, no matter how carefully
or elaborately it might be worked out.
I  have  quoted  from  Exter’s  Report  at  some  length  because  of  its  particular  relevance  to  this
anniversary occasion, but also because, although he was writing in the particular context of Sri Lanka
at the end of the 1940’s, contemplating a move from a currency board to a central bank, much of his
comment is timeless. I should like to elaborate upon - or supplement - some of his themes drawing
upon our own experience in the United Kingdom.
For just over 50 years - from 1946 to 1998 - the Bank of England operated under legislation which,
remarkably, did not attempt to define our objectives or functions - they were simply assumed to carry
over from our earlier long history. The 1946 Bank of England Act conferred upon us powers, subject
to the agreement of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, to issue directions to bankers - though the term
“bankers” was not defined; and it provided for the Treasury to give such directions  to  the  Bank  as,
after  consultation  with  the  Governor,  they  thought  necessary  in  the  public  interest.  Such  directions
would  necessarily  have  been  made  public:  none  were  in  fact  ever  given.  In  any  event  the  Bank  of
England was in a formal, statutory, sense throughout this period well along the spectrum towards the
subservient  polar  extreme  which  I  described  earlier,  in  relation  to  policy  making,  although  we  did
enjoy elements of independence, for example, in relation to security of tenure for the duration of fixed
term appointments for Governors and Directors, and in some degree in relation to our finances.
I  am  bound  to  say  though  that this  was not at all  how  it  felt  in  practice.  Even  within  this  statutory
framework independence is rather like age - you are as independent as you feel!
The question really came down to how far we were able to influence the Government, which in turn
depended upon how far they themselves valued our advice and how far they felt a need to take account
of it in the light of possible public - including importantly financial market - reactions in the event of
disagreement. Clearly this put the ball very much in our own court in the sense that we needed to do
all that  we  could  to  persuade  successive  Governments,  but  also  financial  markets  and  the  public  at
large, of our integrity and objectivity on the one hand and of our technical and analytical competence
on the other. Without that our input to policy would not have been worth very much, and would not
have carried conviction. In fact integrity and objectivity together with professional competence are in
my  view  the  essential  foundations  of  effective  independence  whatever  the  statutory  framework.
Fundamentally it is up to us!
For much of the period after 1946 two contextual factors served in any event to limit the degree of
independence we could realistically expect to achieve.
The first was the post-war context of direct intervention and controls, including initially the physical
allocation of scarce materials and consumer rationing but extended to the financial system for example
through credit ceilings and directional guidance as well as exchange controls, which were only finally
removed  in  1979.  Direct  resource  allocation  rather  than  allocation  through  market  mechanisms
involves intrinsically political judgements - choices between the social value of some forms of activity
against  others  -  which  cannot  easily  be  devolved  to  appointed  officials.  It  would  put  the  officials
dangerously in the political firing line - calling their impartiality and objectivity into question - if they
were.  While  central  banks  may  legitimately  advise  on  the  technical  implementation  of  such
intervention, and be the agency through which it is carried out, it is far better all round in my view that
responsibility for the choices implicit in such policies remains clearly with the Government.
Secondly, for a long time after the war in the UK - until well into the 1970’s, majority opinion did not
identify a specific role for monetary policy within  overall economic  policy;  nor  was  there  any  very
clear understanding of the central bank’s role in maintaining systemic financial stability.
Economic policy was widely seen as requiring the use of all available policy instruments - monetary
policy, overall fiscal policy, direct controls, as I say, even prices and incomes policies - in concert to
BIS Review 66/2000
2
achieve  an  appropriate  balance  at  any  particular  time  between  what  were  seen  as  the  conflicting
objectives  of  growth  and  employment,  on  the  one  hand,  and  controlling  inflation  and  maintaining
reasonable  balance  of  payments  equilibrium,  on  the  other.  Economic  policy  overall  was  in  fact
directed at managing what was seen as the trade-off between these social objectives. And this again
involved  intrinsically  political  rather  than  technical  judgements,  though  in  this  context,  too,  there
clearly  was  a  role  for  the  central  bank  in  proffering  detached  technical  and  analytical  advice.  Also
during this period, while it was accepted that the  Bank  of  England exercised prudential  supervision
over the mainstream banking system, there was no effective oversight of the deposit-taking institutions
that grew up outside the area of controls. It was only in 1979, after the fringe banking crisis  of the
early  1970’s,  that  the  Bank  was  given  formal  supervisory  authority,  extending  to  all  deposit-taking
institutions, but even then with the specific purpose of providing greater protection to depositors.
Our world changed, gradually but very markedly,  from  the  1970’s  onwards in all  of these respects.
Direct methods of monetary control gave way to fully-fledged market-based techniques, encouraging
but  also  encouraged  by  intensified  financial  competition,  increasingly  driven  by  the  IT  revolution.
Crucially, a consensus gradually developed - with the Bank’s strong encouragement - across a broad
political spectrum in the UK (as it had earlier elsewhere) which recognised that there is in reality no
trade-off  between  growth  and  stability  except  possibly  in  the  short  term.  It  recognised  in  fact  the
nowadays near-universal central bankers’ mantra that stability is a necessary condition for sustainable
growth. The consensus recognised, too, that,  while  overall fiscal  policy  had significant implications
for  macro-economic  stability  over  the  medium  and  longer-term  it  was  not  sufficiently  flexible  or
adaptable to play the primary stabilising role in the shorter term. That task was specifically allocated
to monetary policy. Finally, there was an emerging recognition of the potential for conflict between
the  central  bank’s  necessary  concern  with  systemic  financial  stability  (you  cannot  hope  to  deliver
monetary stability if the financial system is crashing about your ears, while monetary stability is itself
a primary condition for financial stability) and consumer or depositor protection, which if carried too
far can itself undermine the strength of the financial system.
These  profound  changes  in  underlying  philosophy  -  which,  as  I  say,  spread  across  much  of  the
political spectrum - were in our case fundamentally important in opening the way to a more clearly
defined and distinctive role for the Bank of England and a necessary condition, in my  view, for the
delegation by the Government to the Bank of greater independent, technical, responsibility.
Even so, although those changes were a necessary condition, they were not in themselves sufficient,
and greater independence did not come all at once.
As often happens, sadly, a big step forward came after a major  setback.  In  1992  after  we  had been
driven unceremoniously out of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (following the boom and bust
of the late 1980s / early 1990s), the Government of the day adopted an explicit inflation target as the
nominal anchor for monetary policy. Interest rate decisions in pursuit of that target remained with the
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  after  consultation  with  myself  as  Governor  and  my  senior  monetary
policy  experts  at  the  Bank.  But  the  really  novel  feature  of  the  new  arrangements  was  their
transparency.  The  Bank  was  required  by  the  Government  to  publish  a  quarterly  Inflation  Report
setting  out  the  background  to  the  monetary  policy  decisions  and  the  prognosis,  and,  going  further,
Chancellor Kenneth Clarke, subsequently decided that minutes of our policymaking meetings should
be published six weeks or so after the event.
This degree of transparency was a bold and far-reaching step. Before that - apart from the dozen or so
people directly involved in the decision-making process - no one knew with any certainty whether the
mistakes  that  were  made  were  a  result  of  intervention  by  the  Prime  Minister,  bad  decisions  by  the
Chancellor, with or without advice from Treasury officials, or bad advice from the Governor and/or
his colleagues at the Bank. We all kept our heads down when things went badly, only putting them
above the parapet when things went well. The Bank was, it is true, able within limits to  explain its
thinking  publicly  when  summoned  to  appear  before  the  relevant  House  of  Commons  Select
Committee, or through Governor’s speeches, and this possibility may have  acted  as some  kind  of  a
constraint on the Government, but such opportunities needed to be used with discretion or they could
have caused a breakdown in the “continuous and constructive cooperation between the central bank
3
BIS Review 66/2000
and  the  Government”  which  Exter  rightly  identified  as  the  ideal  -  I  would  say  even  essential  -
relationship.
I think successive Chancellors came to recognise that the opaqueness of the existing decision-making
process was inappropriate in principle in an effective democracy, which requires that we should each
be  accountable  for  the  decisions  that  we  take  or  for  the  advice  that  we  give.  They  may  also  have
thought that the public generally and Parliament in particular would not put up with it for much longer
anyway. Or they may simply have felt that they were no longer prepared to carry the can for the bad
advice they received. Whatever the motivation it is to their great credit that they were prepared to put
their own reputations - as well as that of the Bank - on the line in this way! It not only allowed the
Bank to express its own analysis and judgements about monetary policy publicly, it actually required
us to do so. That really concentrated the mind I can tell you; and it provided us with added stimulus to
sharpen up our act. But for it to have this effect it was crucial that the intended integrity of the process
was respected. What you saw in the minutes of “the Ken and Eddie show” was verbatim the advice
which I gave to the Chancellor and which I had discussed with senior colleagues beforehand.
This new transparency was a big step towards greater independence for the Bank. But it was carried
much  further  by  Chancellor  Gordon  Brown,  as  literally  the  new  Labour  Government’s  first  act  of
policy  -  just  four  days  after  coming  into  office  in  1997  -  when  he  announced  that  the  Bank  would
henceforth be independently responsible for the operation of monetary policy. This commitment was
subsequently embodied in a new Bank of England Act that came into effect in 1998.
The key characteristics of the new legislation were clarity of definition of the Bank’s responsibilities,
and  transparency  and  elaborate  provision  for  public  accountability  for  the  manner  in  which  those
responsibilities are carried out.
In relation to monetary policy in particular the new Act defines our responsibility as “to maintain price
stability  and,  subject  to  that,  to  support  the  economic  policy  of  the  Government  including  its
objectives for growth and employment”. It is the Chancellor who defines what, more precisely, is to be
understood  by  “price  stability”  which  he  has  done  in  the  form  of  a  symmetrical  2½%  target  for  a
particular  statistical  measure  of  retail  prices.  So  we  have  “instrument”  rather  than  “goal”
independence.
It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  this  is  a  second  best  arrangement.  In  our  national  context  at  least  I
disagree with that view. The precise objective of policy - even within the confines of the concept of
price  stability  -  remains  a  political  decision:  there  will  always  be  those  who  argue  for  a  somewhat
higher or somewhat lower target, and the fact that the Government endorses a precise target rather than
just the vaguer goal of “stability” certainly strengthens our hand by allowing us to concentrate upon
our essentially technical task. I am bound to say that in practice it seems to me to be rather a second
order  issue anyway  given  the  narrowness of the  range  of  definitions  of  “stability”  that  would  carry
conviction with the public, including financial markets.
The  Act  confers  the  responsibility  for  meeting  the  Government’s  inflation  target  specifically  on  a
newly  created  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  comprising  myself  as  Chairman,  the  two  Deputy
Governors, two Executive Directors appointed by the Governor after consultation with the Chancellor
and four members appointed from outside the Bank by the Chancellor. The Governors are appointed
as members of the Committee for their full five year (renewable) terms; the remaining members are
appointed for three year terms which are also renewable. The Committee’s policy meetings are also
attended  by  a  senior  Treasury  Official  in  the  capacity  of  an  observer,  who  may  participate  in  the
discussion - essentially to inform the Committee of any relevant aspects of the Government’s wider
economic policies and explain the Committee’s thinking to the Chancellor - but he may not express a
view on the monetary policy decision or, of course, vote on that decision.
One can argue endlessly about the precise composition of the Committee, their term of appointment
and so on. The key consideration for me is that all nine members need to be genuinely independent,
technical experts in the field of monetary policy or a closely related field, not representatives of any
particular  social  or  industrial  grouping.  The  objective  of  policy  is  appropriately  determined  by  a
democratic process; the Committee’s job is, as I say, a technical one, which requires relevant technical
expertise.
BIS Review 66/2000
4
The  transparency  of  the  Committee’s  decision-making  process  is  assured  by  continuation  of  the
requirements  that  we  should  produce  our  quarterly  Inflation  Report  and  publish  minutes  of  our
monthly  meetings,  which  we  have  now  chosen  to  do  with  just  a  two  week  delay.  Transparency  is
further enhanced by a requirement that the minutes should record how each individual member of the
Committee voted on the interest rate decision.
As  before,  it  is  vital  for  public  confidence  in  these  new  arrangements  that  their  intention  is  not
subverted by the evolution of informal conventions - that the integrity of the procedures is respected.
In this context we take great pains to ensure that the true nature of the policy debate is reflected in the
minutes and that the range of views around our inflation forecast is properly reflected in the Inflation
Report. In fact I think we probably tend to err on the side of drawing too much, rather than too little,
attention to differences of opinion within the Committee which are often largely a question of nuance.
But it is better in my view to err on that side rather than to attempt to submerge the differences. We do
not,  however,  attribute  particular  views  to  particular  individuals.  To  do  so  would  invite  prepared
statements and militate against the inter-active debate which is an outstanding and immensely valuable
characteristic of our meetings. It would suppress the kind of “what if” discussion in which the same
individual  may  explore  alternative  views.  No  attempt  is  made  to  concert  the  outcome  of  the  policy
decision; in fact I go out of my way to discourage any kind of collusion, whether between the internal
or  external  members  of  the  Committee  -  we  are,  and  must  remain,  nine  independent  members,
individually accountable for our decisions as to how we vote.
This, of course, means that the Committee is divided as often as not; but although this initially led to
public comment to the effect that the Committee did not know what it was doing and could not make
up its mind, it is now generally accepted as the natural order of things and helps to underline to the
public at large that monetary policy making cannot be a precise science - however much it needs to be
informed  by  all  the  science  available  to  us.  That,  in  our  context,  is  I  think  now  much  easier  to
understand than a more consensual approach would be, but there was certainly a learning period.
It has been suggested to me that the arrangements I have described somehow diminish the position of
the Governor. Well if that’s true this Governor at least welcomes it! I am sure that all of you are well
aware of how finely balanced monetary policy decisions are at the margin, and that all of you have
agonised, just as I have, over the right thing to do and the right time to do it. I find the cross-bearings
on those decisions provided by the other Committee members - and they are I remind you all highly
qualified  experts  in  their  own  right  -  immensely  reassuring.  If  a  majority  of  them  argued  for  a
particular  decision,  that  would  certainly  weigh  heavily  with  me,  although  -  as  a  matter  of  personal
integrity - I always reserve the right to take a different point of view from that of the majority on those
occasions when I am particularly confident of my own judgement. That has not so far happened but it
almost certainly will; people should not be unduly surprised.
Finally, in relation to monetary policy, let me say a few words about accountability. In the terms of the
new Act the Monetary Policy Committee - apart from its public accountability through the Inflation
Report  and  the  minutes  of  its  meetings  -  is  accountable  for  the  adequacy  of  its  procedure  to  the
Non-Executive  Members  on  the  Bank  of  England’s  Board  of  Directors,  who  in  turn  report  to
Parliament through the medium of the Bank’s Annual Report. We are all accountable to Parliament in
the  sense  that  we  may  be  -  and  regularly  are  -  summoned  to  appear  before  the  relevant  Select
Committees of both Upper and Lower Houses. And we are accountable to the Chancellor in that the
Chairman of the MPC is required to write him an open letter if the rate of inflation diverges by more
than one percent either side of the 2½% target explaining why and what steps we propose to take to
bring inflation back within that range and over what time period. Finally, the Treasury has the power
to give the Bank directions in respect of monetary policy if they are satisfied that the directions are
required in the public interest and by extreme economic circumstances.
Again, some observers have suggested that these elaborate accountability provisions are onerous and
constrain the Bank’s independence. I take the contrary view, that they are essential to the legitimacy of
the arrangements as a whole and so actually reinforce our independence - provided of course we are
able to provide convincing explanations of our conduct!  And  the  likely  public and  financial  market
5
BIS Review 66/2000
reaction  is,  in  my  view,  the  most  effective  protection  against  abuse  of  the  Treasury’s  emergency
powers.
What  I  have  described  up  to  this  point  relates  solely  to  monetary  policy.  But  the  new  legislation
similarly deals with the Bank’s other key responsibility  -  maintaining  financial  stability.  And  at  the
risk of trying your patience let me say a few words about that. Less than a fortnight after announcing
the Bank’s new independent responsibility for the operation of monetary policy, Chancellor Gordon
Brown  announced  that  the  Bank’s  responsibility  for  banking  supervision  would  pass  to  a  new
institution  -  the  Financial  Services  Authority,  or  FSA  -  which  would  assume  responsibility  for  the
regulation and supervision of all financial institutions in the UK. This was widely seen as the price we
had to pay for our enhanced monetary policy role. But at the same time the Chancellor confirmed the
Bank’s  continuing  responsibility  for  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  so  that  in  fact
what this has done - as in relation to monetary policy - is to distinguish and clarify the respective roles:
of the Bank, which now focuses upon systemic risk - and retains its lender of last resort role within
parameters that are broadly defined by the legislation; of the FSA which oversees both the prudential
and business conduct of all individual financial institutions, including the banks, with the emphasis on
consumer protection; and the Treasury, which has ultimate responsibility for both these dimensions.
The  new  arrangements  make  a  good  deal  of  sense  in  the  UK  context  where  traditional  distinctions
between banks and other types of financial institution have progressively eroded and where there has
been a general movement towards greater consumer protection across a much broader front. But at the
same time as clarifying our respective responsibilities, and providing in each case for transparency and
separate accountability for the way in which they are carried out, the new legislation recognises the
vital importance of close coordination between them and establishes a framework for that. It is early
days  to  assess  the  effectiveness  of  these  arrangements,  but  my  impression  is  that  so  far  they  are
working well.
Governor  Jayawardena,  there  are  many  aspects  of  our  new  regime  that  I  have  not  touched  upon
- including  questions  relating  to  our capital,  our  revenues,  expenditure  and  allocation  of  profits  and
how they are reported and accounted for - which can also affect the degree of independence we enjoy.
Perhaps we might explore these together with the other issues in our discussion. But I hope I have said
enough to draw a few conclusions.
My starting point had been that central bank independence in the extreme sense  of  exemption  from
democratic control is unrealistic and inappropriate. Yet wise governments in many countries around
the world have recognised that they can gain advantage - in terms of public and market credibility -
from detached and unbiased advice in its field of competence from the central bank. The value that
they put on the central bank’s role depends very much on the quality of that advice - the central bank’s
objectivity and its technical expertise and professional competence. That is largely down to us. But the
benefit  a  government  derives  from  it  depends  too  upon  the  advice  being  seen  to  be  detached  and
unbiased, as well as technically expert and professionally competent. And that depends also upon the
government. It can discourage the central bank from expressing views in public but gain little in terms
of credibility from doing so; it can to varying  degrees encourage  greater independence on  the  basis
that  this  would  strengthen public confidence  but accepting  that  it  could  involve  a  greater  degree  of
constraint  on  its  policies;  or,  where  there  exists  a  sufficient  consensus  on  the  particular  role  of
monetary and financial policy, it can devolve operational responsibilities to the central bank, holding it
publicly  accountable  for  the  way  in  which  it  exercises  those  responsibilities  but  accepting  the
limitation that such arrangements place on the government’s own operational discretion.
There is no single model to fit all situations. The appropriate arrangements for a particular country at
any  particular  time  depend  upon  the  economic  and  financial  environment  and  upon  political
perceptions relating to the approach to monetary and financial policy. I believe that we are now well
served in the case of the UK by the present arrangements involving operational independence, based
upon the principles of clearly defined responsibilities, transparency and accountability, which I have
described.  But  I  am  very  conscious  that,  whatever  the  formal  arrangements  applying  to  the  central
bank, the political and public confidence on which our position depends is something that we, all of
us, need continuously to earn through personal and professional integrity, objectivity and competence.
It is in the end, as I say, up to us.
BIS Review 66/2000
6
