Yutaka Yamaguchi: Thinking behind current monetary policy
Speech by Mr Yutaka Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan National Press
Club, Tokyo, on 4 August 2000.
 I am honored to be invited today to the Japan National Press Club. I once heard a joke that a central
banker can deliver a speech to members of this esteemed Club, who are well known for their barrage
of sharp questions, only when the economy is performing satisfactorily and he is confident enough to
answer any questions. I am here today, not because this is the case, but because I think it is a good
opportunity to elaborate on our thinking behind current monetary policy and ask for your comments.
The main purpose of my remarks today is to present an overview of the zero interest rate policy by
reviewing various discussions at past monetary policy meetings with respect to the termination of the
zero interest rate policy.
Economic developments after the zero interest rate policy was adopted
I.
Let me begin by briefly explaining what the zero interest rate policy is. It was in February 1999 that
the Bank of Japan effected the zero interest rate policy. At the time, Japan’s economy was on the verge
of falling into a deflationary spiral which was a vicious circle combining price declines and economic
recession. In response, the Bank of Japan decided to guide the short-term interest rate, specifically the
uncollateralized overnight call rate, down to virtually zero by flexibly providing ample funds to the
money market. Then, in April 1999, the Bank decided to continue the zero interest rate policy until
such  time  it  could  be  ascertained  deflationary  concern  had  been  dispelled.  Chart  1  shows  the
development of market interest rates since April 1999. To the best of my knowledge, I cannot think of
any  precedents  in  financial  history,  either  at  home  or  abroad,  where  a  central  bank  has  guided
short-term interest rates down to virtually zero and maintained that level for a long period. Short-term
interest rates are the key variable in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy and a central bank
influences them by controlling reserves in the money market, thereby affecting various aspects of the
overall economy. Thus, guiding short-term interest rates down to virtually zero means that the central
bank has used its traditional policy tool to the maximum extent possible.
A variety of economic indicators suggest that Japan’s economy is on a recovery path, albeit moderate.
Chart  2  compares  recent  economic  conditions  with  those  in  February  1999.  For  example,  the
year-on-year growth rate of real GDP increased from minus 0.4% in the first quarter of 1999 to plus
0.7% in the same quarter of 2000, and industrial production growth rose from minus 3.8% in the first
quarter of 1999 to plus 7% in the second quarter of 2000. Business sentiment in terms of the Tankan
diffusion index for all industries and sizes of firms has substantially improved from minus 44 in March
1999 to minus 18 in June 2000. And, the consensus forecast of the private sector for real GDP growth
for this fiscal year has been revised upward from 0.8% at the beginning of this year to 1.5% recently.
Moreover, June’s Tankan survey showed that corporate profits were expected to mark a double-digit
increase for two consecutive years in fiscal 1999 and 2000. While inflation in terms of WPI is slightly
above the previous year’s level, that in terms of CPI is slightly below.
There are a number of factors responsible for the moderate economic recovery. First and foremost is
the implementation of several important policy measures to restore financial system stability. Public
funds  were  injected  into  major  banks  to  strengthen  their  capital  base  and  a  legal  framework  was
established  to  speed  up  the  bankruptcy  process.  Under  such  circumstances,  financial  institutions
themselves  are  striving  to  reconstruct  their  management.  The  second  factor  is  support  from
macroeconomic policy, which includes both fiscal policy of the government and the zero interest rate
policy of the Bank of Japan. The third factor is the upturn of overseas economies. In addition to the
expansion  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  Asian  economies  have  been  recovering  rapidly  after
overcoming currency and financial crises. The fourth factor is the boom in the high-tech and IT-related
1
BIS Review 63/2000
business  areas.  Whether  trends  like  the  IT  revolution  witnessed  in  the  United  States  will  spread  to
Japan  depends  on  how  firms  and  individuals  as  users  take  advantage  of  information  technology.
Japanese  producers  related  to  high-tech  business  have  swiftly  responded  to  the  rapid  increase  in
demand both at home and abroad, and an increasing number of them have been expanding investment
reflecting the tightening supply and demand conditions.
It is natural that economic recovery leads to the question of whether the zero interest rate policy should
be terminated. As I mentioned, the Bank of Japan announced in April 1999 that it would continue the
zero  interest  rate  policy  until  deflationary  concern  had  been  dispelled.  Discussions  at  subsequent
monetary  policy  meetings  have  disclosed  that  such  deflationary  concern  would  be  dispelled  if  we
became confident that economic recovery was led by private demand. As has been described in the
minutes  of  these  meetings,  members  of  the  Policy  Board  have  closely  examined  economic  and
financial  conditions  to  determine  whether  deflationary  concern  has  been  dispelled.  Though  the
minutes  of  the  17  July  meeting  are  yet  to  be  released,  the  statement  issued  immediately  after  the
meeting in Chart 3 said that the majority of the Policy Board considered that Japan’s economy was
approaching a stage where deflationary concern might be dispelled. However, it also said that some
views were expressed that before reaching a final decision to lift the zero interest rate policy, it was
desirable to ensure the firmness of economic conditions including employment and household income.
Moreover,  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  Board  needed  to  ascertain  how  the  so-called  Sogo  problem
would affect market sentiment.
Points at issue relating to the termination of the zero interest rate policy
II.
As you know, there are arguments for and against the termination of the zero interest rate policy as
evidenced  in  newspaper  editorials  of  recent  months  as  well  as  the  opinions  of  business  leaders,
economists,  and  market  participants.  Such  a  division  of  opinions  is  usually  the  case  every  time  the
question of raising interest rates is brought up after a period of prolonged monetary easing. In May
1989  when  interest  rates  were  last  raised  in  the  midst  of  the  bubble  economy,  very  few  articles  in
newspapers and magazines had supported it before the raise. Needless to say, at past monetary policy
meetings, we have carefully examined various points related to the pros and cons of lifting the zero
interest rate policy. Let me now discuss some of the important points at issue.
Is private consumption recovering?
The first point is whether or not we can  conclude that  the  economy  as  a  whole  has fully  recovered
while  a  recovery  of  private  consumption  has  yet  to  be  confirmed.  Indeed,  the  current  economic
recovery  has  been  driven  mainly  by  an  improvement  in  the  corporate  sector.  While  June’s  Tankan
survey shows that the ratio of current profits to sales in the manufacturing industry for fiscal 2000 is
expected to recover to 4.01%, which is slightly higher than the average of 3.84% since fiscal 1980, the
recovery  of the  household sector  has  been  delayed. The  underlying  trend  of  private  consumption  is
determined  by  consumer  sentiment  and  employee  income.  While  consumer  sentiment  has  been
improving against such a background as receding concerns over financial system stability and stock
prices,  employee  income  has  only  very  recently  stopped  declining.  Thus,  we  cannot  yet  confirm  a
recovery of private consumption as a whole.
Nevertheless,  if  we  look  more  broadly  at  the  situation  Japan’s  economy  faces  including  such  big
challenges as the balance sheet adjustment of the corporate sector and the transformation of industrial
structure,  in  the  current  recovery  process  we  consider  it  quite  logical  that  an  improvement  in  the
corporate sector precedes that in the household sector. In Chart 4, labor’s share of income has shown a
significant increase, which on the other hand means a substantial decrease in return on capital since the
bursting  of  the  bubble.  Needless  to  say,  capital  is  an  important  factor  of  production  supporting
economic development. If capital cannot generate sufficient returns for a long period, it will become
difficult for firms to raise capital. In such a case, firms cannot help but improve return on capital by
reducing various costs including labor. The need to improve return on capital has become especially
pressing  for  firms  directly  exposed  to  pressure  from  the  global  financial  market.  In  other  words,
BIS Review 63/2000
2
restructuring of the corporate sector  is  a  prerequisite for sustainable  growth  of the overall  economy
including the household sector.
In  view  of  the  need  to  improve  return  on  capital,  it  is  unlikely  that  household  income  and  private
consumption  will  significantly  increase  for  the  time  being.  Of  course,  if  labor’s  share  of  income
declines substantially, the resultant stagnation of private consumption will hamper the recovery of the
overall  economy.  Therefore,  a  delicate  balancing  of income  distribution  is  the  key  to  a  full-fledged
economic recovery. In this regard, though the number of employees is still below that of a year ago,
supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  somewhat  tightened  as  evidenced  by  the
increase in job offers. Wages, which had been decreasing for the past two to three years, have this year
increased on a year-on-year basis.
We  sometimes  discuss  the  relation  between  corporate  profits  and  household  income  metaphorically
likening it to the relation between the water level in a dam and the release of water from it. If we can
clearly observe the rise in the water level, which signifies increasing corporate profits, the probability
that water will be released from the dam rises, leading to an increase in household income and then an
increase in private consumption. However, since it is not easy and takes time for firms to raise return
on  capital  and  improve  their  balance  sheets,  the  release  of  water  from  the  dam  cannot  increase
significantly.  Yet  I  think  that  if  household  income  recovers  even  moderately,  there  is  a  higher
probability that the economy will return to a growth path led by business fixed investment. If I may
interpret the thinking of members of the Policy Board behind the statement of 17 July, the majority
would like to confirm with more confidence that such a mechanism is at work.
Are prices declining?
The  second  point  is  whether or  not it can  be  maintained that  deflationary  concerns  have  been  truly
dispelled when CPI and the GDP deflator are still falling. As Chart 5 shows, these price indexes are
declining while WPI has recently begun to exceed the prior-year level. Such movements in CPI and
the GDP deflator may provoke an argument that not only has deflationary concern not been dispelled,
but that the economy is actually in a deflationary state. The reason we are afraid of deflation is because
once the economy falls into a deflationary spiral, which is a vicious circle where price declines depress
economic activity in turn leading to downward pressure on prices, it is very difficult to escape from it.
To avoid such a situation, in February 1999 the Bank adopted the zero interest rate policy, which was
a  drastic  monetary  easing  measure.  All  this  shows  that  how  to  interpret  the  decline  in  CPI  and  the
GDP deflator is an important issue and we have been carefully examining it.
A close look at the movement of price statistics may not always lead to a full understanding of what
price  changes  indicate.  This  is  because  various  price  indexes  often  move  in  different  directions  or
temporarily  their  movement  does  not  appear  consistent  with  the  movement  of  other  economic
indicators. For example, take the latter half of 1988, which is the peak of the bubble period. While the
economy was strong, measured prices were extremely stable. Another example is 1991, immediately
after the bursting of the bubble. Notwithstanding the fact that the economy entered a serious recession,
inflation marked a peak. Furthermore, in 1996 while the GDP deflator traced its largest decline of the
1990s, GDP growth recorded its highest figure in the post-bubble period. These examples underscore
the  importance  of  assessing  the  movement  of  price  indexes  in  relation  to  the  overall  economic
situation. The current decline in CPI is partly attributable to  such  structural  changes  as those  in the
distribution system in addition to the past appreciation of the yen and the falling prices of consumer
durables. It is also due to the decrease in unit labor cost, which is often observed in the early stage of
economic recovery. In the early stage of recovery, productivity rises as idle resources are brought back
into use, unit labor cost declines, and then downward pressure on prices is seen. The phenomenon of
the decline in labor costs and prices coupled with higher growth was observed in 1987 and 1996. It
appears that the factors behind this phenomenon have been partly responsible for the recent decline in
prices, particularly in the GDP deflator.
On the other hand, it may be possible to argue that any price declines would eventually lead to  the
danger  of the economy  falling  into  a  deflationary  spiral.  However,  if  the  recent  decline  in  CPI  had
entailed danger of a deflationary spiral, corporate profits would have declined leading to a decrease in
3
BIS Review 63/2000
business  fixed  investment  and  employment,  whereas,  in  fact,  we  have  observed  increases  in  both
corporate  profits  and  business  fixed  investment.  Moreover,  such  a  danger  would  have  adversely
influenced the labor market through the supply and demand of goods and services, but, as a matter of
fact, wages have stopped declining. To sum up, I do not think it appropriate to judge whether or not
the economy might fall into a deflationary spiral simply by looking at the decline in CPI and the GDP
deflator alone.
Based on such argument, the Policy Board has closely monitored and examined the deterioration in the
supply  and  demand  balance,  and  the  risk  of  price  declines  stemming  from  weak  demand.
Conceptually, the supply and demand balance in Japan’s economy as a whole could be described by
such indicators as the output gap. The problem is that it is difficult to accurately estimate the output
gap. The difficulty is common to many industrial countries, and the main reason is that the speed of
technological  innovation  has  become  so  fast  that  it  is  not  easy  to  measure  the  economic  value  of
capital. As a result, we face a situation where the estimated output gap cannot explain the fluctuation
in  prices.  For  example,  in  1998  and  1999,  calculations  based  on  traditional  models  produced  large
output gap estimates, and not a few economists thus forecast considerable price declines. The actual
price decline, however, was not so large as the forecast. On the other hand, the supply and demand
balance perceived by firms reported in the Tankan survey has greatly improved during the past year.
These observations suggest that in order to grasp the change in the supply and demand balance, we
should  not  only  apply  the  estimated  output  gap  deduced  from  conventional  methodology  but  also
make full use of the information regarding the supply and demand balance for individual goods and
services.
Let me summarize my view. First, it is very difficult to accurately estimate the output gap, which is
the degree of excess supply in macroeconomic terms. Second, it is likely that the potential growth rate
has  recently  declined  substantially  as  a  result  of  stagnant  investment  over  the  past  ten  years.  Thus,
even if aggregate demand only grows moderately for one to two years, the supply and demand balance
should improve, which is indeed evidenced by economic developments since last year. Third, whether
the  output  gap  continues  to  narrow  depends  on  prospects  for  economic  recovery  led  by  private
demand. If we become confident of such a recovery, moderate declines in some price indexes should
not  necessarily  be  interpreted  as  a  supply  and  demand  imbalance  or  manifestation  of  the  risk  of  a
deflationary spiral.
Excessive corporate debt and the financial system problem
The third point is whether or not the economy will exhibit a robust recovery in a situation where firms
are  burdened  with  excessive  debt  and  banks  still  hold  a  large  amount  of  non-performing  assets.
Indeed, one of the major factors behind the sluggishness of Japan’s economy  during  the  1990s  was
balance sheet adjustment at firms and banks. We fully recognize the gravity of the excessive debt held
by firms, especially those in the construction, real estate, and distribution industries, not to mention the
non-performing assets held by banks. In fact, we experienced a serious financial system crisis in 1997
and  1998  characterized  by  a  large-scale  credit  crunch  and  the  financial  sector  exerting  strong
downward  pressure  on  economic  activity.  Thus,  it  is  extremely  important  to  incorporate  the
assessment  of  financial  system  into  economic  outlooks.  This  is  one  reason  we  believe  that  the
economic recovery is more likely to be moderate rather than robust.
It is also true that financial system stability has been significantly restored as a result of the injection
of capital into major banks in March 1999. With improved creditworthiness and receding concern over
liquidity, banks are once again competing to win good customers. According to the Tankan  survey,
firms have reported a gradual relaxation in the lending attitude of banks. While we may be far from a
situation where many banks aggressively assume credit risk with appropriate risk control systems in
place and strongly support economic growth, we are not in a situation where the lending attitude of
banks is so cautious that it would hamper economic recovery. Therefore, while there remain industries
and firms burdened with excessive debt, I think it possible to expect a recovery, though not as speedy
as in previous recoveries, of the overall economy as momentum for new growth intensifies reflecting
the progress of technological innovation.
BIS Review 63/2000
4
Another reason we care about the debt problem is that when large firms like Sogo collapse, the market
sometimes becomes extremely nervous. It should be noted that the impact of a shock differs from case
to case. For example, the case of Sogo is special in that its reconstruction framework was suddenly
changed. In any event, if there are no problems in the financial system, the collapse of an individual
firm is likely to be perceived as an isolated case. At the moment, we need to closely monitor whether
there is the risk that the market may suddenly turn nervous, and this is, in my view, one of the factors
that should be rightly taken into account in the conduct of monetary policy.
The relationship between structural adjustment and monetary policy
Since the release of the statement on 17 July, there have been various comments to the effect that the
Bank of Japan should continue the zero interest rate policy until concern of large-scale bankruptcies
disappears  and  structural  adjustment  is  completed.  There  have  also  been  comments  to  the  contrary,
namely,  that  the  continuation  of  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  is  delaying  the  progress  of  structural
adjustment.  This  brings  me  to  my  fourth  point  relating  to  the  termination  of  the  zero  interest  rate
policy, the relationship between it and structural adjustment.
Regarding  the  view  that  the  Bank  should  continue  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  until  structural
adjustment  is  completed,  we  do  not  think  this  necessary.  In  discussing  this,  we  need  to  distinguish
between the potential growth rate and the cyclical and short-term growth rate of Japan’s economy. In
recent years, it is often said that the potential growth rate of the US economy has been boosted by the
IT revolution. But it should be pointed out that it took a long time before IT was applied to business
and  resulted  in  improved  productivity.  Similarly,  it  will  take  a  long  time  before  structural  reform
promoted  by  Japanese  firms  leads  to  improved  productivity  and  higher  potential  growth.  Here,  it
should  be  noted  that  various  forces  other  than  structural  adjustment  influence  the  economy.  And
hence, even if the potential growth rate is low, the economy will be able to  grow  strongly  with the
cyclical growth rate exceeding the potential growth rate. This, I think, is the business cycle.
To  deal  with  the  decline  in  potential  growth  stemming  from  structural  factors,  a  policy  targeted  to
solve structural problems and firms’ own efforts for restructuring are indispensable. There is no other
way. In short, monetary policy cannot replace structural policy.
Let  me  now  turn  to the contrary  comments  that the  zero interest  rate  policy  has  been  holding  back
structural  adjustment.  We  also  hear  related  comments  that  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  has  been
generating  various  kinds  of  moral  hazard,  both  socially  and  economically.  It  is  true  that  the  zero
interest  rate  policy,  which  provides  the  market  with  ample  funds  to  guide  the  overnight  rate  to
virtually zero, could create a situation where banks and firms have become less sensitive to borrowing
costs and liquidity risks. Indeed, it is through this effect that the policy supports economic recovery
and promotes structural reform. At the same time, it cannot be denied that the policy may tend to delay
structural reform by making economic agents with a large amount of debt less conscious of borrowing
costs and liquidity risks. Of course, I do not think it appropriate to lift the zero interest rate policy to
prevent moral hazard. Let me make it clear that the termination of the zero interest rate policy depends
on whether we can be confident that the economic recovery is being primarily led by private demand.
Is the termination of the zero interest rate policy consistent with fiscal policy?
The  fifth  point  is  the  relation  between  the  termination  of  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  and  the
government’s  fiscal  policy  stance.  Some  argue  that  a  stimulus  from  the  monetary  policy  side  is
essential and it is premature to terminate the zero interest rate policy because no further stimulus from
fiscal  policy  can  be  expected  considering  the  significant  deterioration  in  the  government’s  fiscal
position. Others argue that, when the government formulates a supplementary budget to stimulate the
economy,  fiscal  policy  aimed  at  achieving  an  economic  recovery  led  by  private  demand  and  the
Bank’s monetary policy should be harmonized.
Of  course, the  Bank  of Japan  never ignores  the  government’s  fiscal policy  stance  when  conducting
monetary policy. As I have reiterated many times, we will not terminate the zero interest rate policy
unless  we  feel  confident  that  the  economic  recovery  is  led  by  private  demand.  Chart  6  shows  the
5
BIS Review 63/2000
contribution of private demand and government expenditure to the year-on-year growth of real GDP,
which  indicates  that  the  driving  force  behind  the  economy  has  steadily  shifted  from  government
expenditure to private demand, and the GDP growth rate has been gradually rising. The Bank of Japan
will terminate the zero interest rate policy only when it feels confident that an economic recovery led
by private demand is in prospect, and I believe this is consistent with what the government is aiming
at.
Impairing the proper functioning of the market mechanism
The sixth point relates to the functioning of the market mechanism. There is a view that the proper
functioning of the financial market has been impaired by the zero interest rate policy and that it should
be restored by terminating the policy. In fact, we too were worried about the impairment of market
functions when adopting the unprecedented zero interest rate policy in February 1999. Therefore, we
took  a  cautious  approach  in  guiding  the  overnight  call  rate  to  zero  by  confirming  the  proper
functioning of the market mechanism on the way. In retrospect, it is my tentative assessment at this
point in time that the impairment of market functions turned out to be smaller than anticipated. The
overnight call rate is not exactly zero percent, though as close to zero as can be, and long-term interest
rates  are  above  zero.  Under  such  a  configuration  of  interest  rates,  the  market  mechanism  is
functioning.
The contraction of the call market is often cited as an example to evidence impairment of the market
mechanism. This reflects the fact that, as the interest rate on ordinary deposits has been higher than the
call  rate,  investors  have  transferred  funds  from  the  call  market  to  ordinary  deposits.  Under  such
circumstances,  a  sudden  withdrawal  of  funds  by  investors  from  ordinary  deposits  would  cause
instability in the liquidity position of banks which have received these deposits, and might eventually
influence the formation of the overnight call rate. However, this problem cannot be a decisive factor in
determining whether to terminate the zero interest rate policy.
Interest income of pensioners
The seventh and last point is the fact that the zero interest rate policy is having a negative effect on
economic  agents  who  largely  depend  on  interest  income,  such  as  pensioners.  Obviously  interest
income  from  financial  assets  has  fallen  significantly  under  the  zero  interest  rate  policy,  and  we  are
well aware of the fact that the policy is adversely affecting households that depend heavily on interest
income.  The  elderly  hold  a  relatively  large  amount  of  financial  assets  as  evidenced  by  the  fact  that
about half  of  the  total  financial assets  of individuals  is  held  by  those  aged  60 and  over, and  whose
earned  income  is  not  much.  As  a  result,  the  elderly  are  most  affected  as  low  interest  rates  have
continued for a long period, and we sympathize with their situation.
However, let me emphasize that raising interest rates would not solve the problem. Households can
earn interest income from their deposits because banks obtain interest income on their loans. In other
words,  the  source  of  interest  income  received  is  economic  growth,  and  interest  income  will  not  be
generated  if  the  economy  does  not  grow.  Viewed  from  a  different  angle,  economic  growth  and
increased  employment  opportunities  would  ensure  the  stability  of  household  income.  Household
income primarily consists of employee income, which accounts for more than 70% of national income.
By  reviewing  these  facts,  I  hope  you  will  understand  the  imminent  need  to  achieve  a  sustainable
economic recovery led by private demand.
Monetary policy under uncertainty
III.
So far I have presented the majority view of the Policy Board on issues related to the termination of
the zero interest rate policy. The Bank of Japan has recently stated that Japan’s economy is coming to
a stage where the condition for lifting the zero interest rate policy is being met. However, since there
are no inflationary risks, some argue that termination of the zero interest rate policy is unnecessary,
besides which the risks involved in termination are unknown. We have been discussing the conduct of
monetary policy,  always  bearing  in  mind the risks  of  both  termination and  continuation  of  the  zero
BIS Review 63/2000
6
interest rate policy. The difficulty inherent in the conduct of monetary policy stems from the fact that a
clear  decision,  whether  or  not  to  change  interest  rates,  has  to  be  made  under  uncertainty  with
inherently limited information on the outlook and the mechanism of the economy.
Among various metaphors about the central bank, I remember one that says a central bank is like a
driver  on  a  winding  road  with  a  misted  up  windshield  and  rearview  mirrors  and  an  inaccurate
speedometer. I think this well describes the essence of some of the difficulties that central banks face
in conducting monetary policy. The economic outlook corresponds to the misted up windshield, and
the  limitation  of  economic  statistics  to  the  rearview  mirrors  and  inaccurate  speedometer.  And  the
various  risks  that  the  economy  faces  correspond  to  the  winding  road.  A  central  bank  driving  a  car
under such conditions has to stay alert to anticipated risks while making use of the lessons obtained
from past experiences. With this comment as an introduction, let me present my personal view on the
meaning of discussing the termination of the zero interest rate policy at a time when we do not observe
any imminent risk of inflation.
We often hear the argument that monetary policy should be changed only when the risk of inflation
becomes evident. At first glance this argument appears reasonable since the target for monetary policy
is price stability. As a matter of fact, in the bubble period of the late 1980s, the conduct of monetary
policy was based on this argument. From 1986 through 1988, the economy grew at an annual rate of
5%, asset prices soared, and the general price level was extremely stable. Under such circumstances,
the Bank of Japan could not find an opportunity to preemptively correct the low interest rate policy at
the time. It was only in May 1989 when inflationary pressure became obvious to everybody that the
Bank could raise the official discount rate. Since history never exactly repeats itself, we cannot claim
that we have fully experienced all the various situations when monetary policy might be changed once
inflationary  pressure  becomes  evident.  It  should also  be pointed out that today’s situation,  which  is
heavily burdened with the aftermath of the bursting of the bubble, is vastly different from the situation
during the bubble period. With these caveats, we should ask  ourselves  what  are  the  lessons learned
from the experience of the late 1980s in today’s context? Let me mention two points.
First,  the  policy  change  in  response  to  a  clear  and  present  risk  of  inflation  would  inevitably  be
monetary tightening, and, moreover, cumulative interest rate hikes would probably be needed as was
the  case in  1989  and  1990.  In  view  of  the  very  high  amount  of  government  bonds  outstanding,  for
example compared with the late 1980s, the capital loss on these government bonds caused by higher
interest rates would, other things being equal, pose much larger problems for the economy. We must
thus avoid, to the extent possible, monetary policy that forces the central bank to raise interest rates
rapidly  and  substantially  at  a later stage  because it  could  destabilize  the  economy  and  the  financial
system.
Second,  if  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  continues  for  a  long  period  even  after  the  economy  clearly
recovers, more economic agents will tend to conduct activities based on the expectation that current
extremely low interest rates will be sustained indefinitely. This is what happened in the bubble period,
leading to an enormous waste of resources which continues to inflict pain on us today. I do not at all
advocate a higher probability that a similar situation would occur on a similar scale. What I would like
to mention is that the current situation of financial markets, where, for example, the premium on credit
risk is suppressed by the liquidity effect of the zero interest rate policy, could include the potential risk
of creating the misallocation of resources.
Then, when is appropriate timing for adjusting interest rates before inflation risk becomes a matter of
concern? If we can come up with a perfectly accurate economic outlook as well as the time needed for
the policy effect to permeate the economy, we should conduct farsighted and preemptive policy at the
right time on an appropriate scale. This is always an ideal vision for central banks. In fact, the Bank of
Japan has been making efforts to accurately analyze the past, present, and future economy. Though we
make policy judgments based on these analyses, admittedly we conduct monetary policy under great
uncertainty with limited second sight as well as imperfect data and information just like the metaphor
of the car driver. This is a brutal fact that central banks all over the world, including the Bank of Japan,
must face.
7
BIS Review 63/2000
There  are  central  banks  that  visibly  incorporate  this  uncertainty  into  the  modus  operandi  of  the
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  For  example,  the  Bank  of  England  forecasts  inflation,  not  by  a  single
figure,  but  by  a  probability  distribution.  We  can  thus  easily  understand  how  great  uncertainty  is  in
predicting,  for  example,  the  growth  rate  and  inflation  for  2002.  If  we  have  to  humbly  accept  such
uncertainty even after  we try  our  utmost  to  make  accurate  economic  forecasts,  one  useful  approach
might be to confirm the degree of economic improvement and adjust monetary easing accordingly in
order to realize sustainable growth. As a digression, the Taylor Rule, the most well known of policy
rule theories, attracts attention internationally and is actively studied. This Rule advocates the smooth
adjustment of interest rates while paying attention to the output gap and fluctuation in prices, which
seems to be based on a similar policy philosophy to what I have just described.
A hundred and eighteen years have passed since the Bank of Japan was established. And, yet, it is also
a “young” central bank as it was reborn two years ago under the new Bank of Japan Law, and thus no
track record has yet been established. I believe a good track record will be won by calmly evaluating
economic and financial conditions, fully explaining decisions and implementing them, and giving due
consideration to constructive criticism from those who know the importance of having a central bank
which can be trusted.
BIS Review 63/2000
8
       (1) Short-Term
Chart 1
Interest rates
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
CY
 Monthly
Daily
               Call rates(overnight, uncollateralized)
               Euro-yen futures(3-month)
               CD rates(3-month)
Official discount rate
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
00
11 12 1
CY99
2
3
4
5
8
6
7
00
      August 3
Euro-yen
futures      0.360%
CD rates   0.11%
Call rates  0.02%
      (2) Long-Term
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
CY
 Monthly
Daily
Government bond yield
(10-year)
August 3
1.675%
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
00
11 12 1
2
3
4
5
6
CY99
8
7
00
Sources: Bank of Japan; Tokyo International Financial Futures Exchange;
               Japan Bond Trading Co., Ltd.
9
BIS Review 63/2000
Chart 2
Economic developments
Around Feb. 1999
(cid:127)  Real GDP
   (changes from a year earlier)
(cid:127)  Domestic  Private Demand
   (changes from a year earlier)
(cid:127)  Industrial Production
  (changes from a year earlier)
(cid:127)  Business Conditions (Tankan)
  (DI; “favorable”-“unfavorable”)
(cid:127)  Domestic Wholesale Price Index
   (changes from a year earlier)
(cid:127)  Consumer Price Index
   (excluding  perishables,  changes  from  a  year
earlier)
-0.4%
(1999/Q1)
-2.0%
(1999/Q1)
-3.8%
(1999/Q1)
-44
(1999/Mar.)
-2.1%
(1999/Q1)
-0.1%
(1999/Q1)
      <Ref.1>  Forecasted Real GDP Growth Rate for FY 2000
December, 1999      →  June, 2000
    +1.0%                 →    +1.6%
   (average of 39 institutions)            (average of 25 institutions)
Recent
+0.7%
(2000/Q1)
+2.1%
(2000/Q1)
+7.0%
(2000/Q2)
-18
(2000/Jun.)
+0.3%
(2000/Q2)
-0.3%
(2000/Q2)
<Ref.  2>  Growth  Rate  of  Current  Profits  (Tankan,  All  Enterprises,  All
Industries)
FY 1999 (Actual)  →  FY 2000 (Forecast)
    +24.2%            →    +13.1%
BIS Review 63/2000
10
Chart 3
On the current monetary policy
17 July 2000, Bank of Japan
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided to maintain its “zero
interest rate policy”.
The Policy Board views that Japan’s economy is recovering gradually, with corporate profits
and business fixed investment continuing to increase.  The Policy Board also judges that the
economy is likely to recover gradually led mainly by business fixed investment, unless there
are major adverse external shocks.
With  regard  to  the  prices,  the  Policy  Board  views  that  the  downward  pressure  on  prices
stemming  from  weak  demand  is  declining  significantly  while  an  economic  recovery  is
expected to continue moderately.
Given  the  above  considerations,  the  majority  of  the  Policy  Board  views  that  Japan’s
economy is coming to a stage where deflationary  concerns  are  dispelled,  which the  Board
have clearly stated as the condition for lifting the zero interest rate policy.
At the Meeting, however, some views were expressed that before reaching a final decision to
lift the zero interest rate policy, it was desirable to ensure the judgment on the firmness of
economic conditions including employment and household income.  Besides, it was pointed
out that the Board needed to see how the commencement of reconstruction proceedings of
Sogo Co. could affect market developments and business sentiments.
Taking  account  of  these  factors,  the  Policy  Board  decided,  by  majority  vote,  on  the
maintenance of the zero interest rate policy.
11
BIS Review 63/2000
Chart 4
Labor’s share of income
90
85
80
75
70
65
 80
FY
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
Notes: 1. Labor’s share of income = personnel expenses / (personnel expenses + operating profits).
2. Data are taken from the Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly (total).
3. Shaded areas represent recession periods.
BIS Review 63/2000
12
Chart 5
Price developments
(1) Consumer price index & domestic wholesale price index
Consumer price index
(nationwide, excluding perishables)
Changes from a year earlier, %
Domestic wholesale price
index
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
CY
9 1
9 2
9 3
9 4
9 5
9 6
9 7
9 8
9 9
00
Notes: Excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike in April 1997 on the assumption that prices
of all taxable goods fully reflect the rise of  the tax rate.
(2) GDP deflator
Changes from a year earlier, %
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
CY
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
00
(3) Nominal wage per person
Changes from a year earlier, %
6-month moving average
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
CY
9 1
9 2
9 3
9 4
9 5
9 6
9 7
9 8
9 9
00
13
BIS Review 63/2000
Contribution of private and public demand to real GDP
Chart 6
year on year contribution rate for each item, %
1.4
1.2
Domestic private demand
Public expenditure
1.0
0.7
0.1
1.6
-0.1
-0.5
-1.6
-1.6
1999/Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2000/Q1
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
BIS Review 63/2000
14
