Mr Reddy looks at some issues in
developing the government securities market in India
Inaugural address by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Seminar
on  Government  Securities  Market  organised  by  Primary  Dealers  Association  of  India,  Calcutta,  on
4 January 2000.
 Mr Ramesh and friends,
I am happy to be here with you today at the Second in the series of seminars conducted by the Primary
Dealers Association of India. Since I delivered the inaugural address at the first seminar in Chennai
last year, the number of Primary Dealers (PDs) has increased from six to fourteen. So, let me welcome
the new additions to the family at this Seminar.
I participated in a Bank for International Settlements meeting last month in which one of the subjects
related to debt markets. During the discussions, it became evident that after the recent Asian crises, the
issue of development of domestic bond market has gained credence. Many central banks of emerging
markets have recently shown interest in developing their debt markets. They were appreciative of the
fact  that  we  in  India  concentrated  on  financial  sector  reform  early  in  the  reform  cycle,  and  we  are
focussing  not  merely  on  development  of  equity  markets  but  also  on  debt  markets,  especially
Government Securities market.
Among the initiatives taken by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in developing the Government Securities
market, undoubtedly the institution of PDs is very significant. The RBI initially promoted and owned a
primary  dealership;  and  within  a  few  years,  divested  itself  of  controlling  interest.  Soon,  domestic
financial  institutions  promoted  some  Primary  Dealerships.  More  recently,  we  have  PDs  with  the
benefit  of  international  experience.  The  RBI  believes  that  this  is  an  appropriate  path  and  pace  for
bringing about gradual but speedy and sustainable reform in the financial sector.
The RBI has been closely coordinating with Primary Dealers on a number of policy and operational
issues,  both  through  continuous  consultations  with  the  Primary  Dealers  and  through  Mr  Ramesh’s
membership in the Technical Advisory Committee on Financial markets. And, I must place on record
that  we  are  appreciative  of  the  contributions.  Together,  we  are  ahead  on  the  learning  curve  in  this
regard, and we will continue to learn from the experience gained from our own reform process and
from the international experience.
Developments in government securities market
Let us briefly recall the objectives of reforms relating to the Government Securities market in India
since 1991-92. First, reform has aimed at increasing the operational autonomy of the RBI by measures
such  as  abolition  of  automatic  monetisation  through  Ad  Hoc  Treasury  Bills  and  introduction  of  a
system  of  Ways  and  Means  Advances  for  the  Central  Government.  Second,  improvements  in
institutional infrastructure were sought to be achieved through the system of PDs. Third, the breadth
and  depth  of  markets  were  sought  to  be  improved  by  introduction  of  a  variety  of  new  instruments
(fixed  coupon,  floating  rate,  capital  indexed  bonds,  14/91/182/364-day  T-Bills,  Zero  Coupon)  and
improvements  to  market  microstructure  (yield  based  and  price  based  auctions,  tap  loans,  pre-
announcing  notified  amounts,  non-competitive  bids  outside  notified  amounts,  reissue  of  dated
securities,  announcing  calendar  of  T-Bills,  DVP  system,  underwriting  by  PDs,  liquidity  support).
Fourth,  progress  in  enabling  sound  legal  and  regulatory  framework  has  been  demonstrated  by  the
Amendment  to  Securities  Contracts  (Regulation)  Act and  proposals  for introduction  of  Government
Securities  Act.  Fifth,  technology  related  developments  include  initiation  of  computerisation  of  all
Public  Debt  Offices  of  RBI  and  of  real-time  gross  settlement  systems.  Finally,  in  RBI  and  in  its
1
BIS Review 19/2000
relations  with  market  participants,  high  on  the  agenda  are  improvements  in  transparency  and
introduction  of  standardised  codes  for  market  practices,  for  example,  through  dissemination  of
information by RBI, monitoring of market activities and encouraging standardised accounting norms.
Before I dwell on reviewing progress in reforms, I would like to spend a few moments on reviewing
the management of the market borrowing programme during the current year, in which both the RBI
and PDs are closely involved.
The  market  borrowing  programme  during  the  current  year has been  large  and  there  were  occasions
when the RBI had accepted private placements that were later released to the market when interest rate
expectations  became  favourable.  Some  PDs  have  expressed  that  this  strategy  has  deprived  them  of
business, but such a decision has always been taken by us after assessment of the market situation and
in my view it has minimised the risk on PDs. During the year, we prolonged the maturity structure and
thanks also to the role played by PDs, it has been possible to elongate the maturity to 20 years. Over
60% of the dated Government Securities issued during 1999-00 had a maturity of 10 years or above.
As a result, the weighted average maturity during the current fiscal year so far increased to 13.03 years
as  compared  with  7.07  years  during  the  corresponding  period  of  the  previous  year.  Another
noteworthy  aspect  of  the  internal  debt  management  operations  has  been  the  shift  from  yield  based
auctions to price based auctions. This has resulted in a number of beneficial impacts. First, with larger
amount of outstanding stock in each security, the liquidity in these securities has improved. Second, it
has led to a more efficient price discovery process in primary auctions as reflected by the considerable
narrowing in the range of bids in yield terms. Third, the opportunity of reopening existing issues has
been used to undertake passive consolidation of debt, which has resulted in evolution of benchmark
securities and also improved the liquidity in the market.
For  the  record,  let  me  narrate  the  specific  reform  measures  relating  to  the  market  that  have  been
implemented  during  the  current  year.  These  are:  apart  from  price  based  auctions,  reintroduction  of
auction  of  182-day  Treasury  Bills,  issuing  a  calendar  of  T-Bills  issuance,  a  system  of  minimum
bidding commitment of PDs to cover 100% of notified amounts in T-Bills auction, underwriting by
PDs  of  100%  of  notified  amounts  in  respect  of  dated  Government  Securities,  permission  to
non-banking entities to borrow and lend money in the repo market and availment of special ways and
means advances by State Governments against collateral of T-Bills in addition to dated securities.
Progress in reforms
A number of other reform measures are in different stages of implementation and the Primary Dealers
Association is actively involved in most of  them.  It  is  useful  to recall  the  status and  flag  issues  for
further consideration.
Widening the repo market
A sub-group of the Technical Advisory Committee on Government Securities Market had prepared a
Technical  Paper  on  Repos,  which  had  been  circulated  among  major  players  in  the  market  for
comments. Three of the recommendations of the sub-group were announced for implementation in the
monetary  and  credit  policy  of  April  1999.  These  related  to  permitting  non-bank  entities  who  were
hitherto  permitted  to  undertake  only  reverse  repos  to  borrow  money  through  repos;  issuing
clarifications  regarding  maximum  period  for  repos  and  allowing  repos  to  be  undertaken  in  all  PSU
bonds  and  bonds  issued  by  corporate  and  financial  institutions  held  in  dematerialised  form  in
recognised stock exchanges.
In order to operationalise the recommendation relating to widening the repo market, another sub-group
was constituted to go into the legal and regulatory aspects of setting up a Clearing Corporation. The
sub-group is in the final stages of submitting its Report. Once the Clearing Corporation is established,
it will pave the way for introduction of over-the-counter and tripartite repos. I would appreciate your
views on the scope and modalities for such a Clearing Corporation.
BIS Review 19/2000
2
Incidentally,  we  are  vigorously  pursuing  with  the  Government  the  issue  of  clarification  on
applicability of stamp duty to enable widespread dematerialisation.
Standardised practices and uniform codes
There  are  a  number  of  other  recommendations  of  the  sub-group  on  repos  that  deal  with  existing
systems  and  procedures  in  the  context  of  standardised  practices  and  uniform  codes.  These  relate  to
uniform accounting practices, master repo agreement, code of conduct for repos, etc.
I  would  urge  the  Primary  Dealers  Association  and  FIMMDAI  to  coordinate  and  implement  these
recommendations  as  quickly  as  possible,  since  as  I  understand,  these  are  issues  where  participants
themselves can work out the modalities for implementation.
Legal and regulatory issues
A  landmark  development  in  the  regulatory  framework  in  the  financial  sector  relates  to  recent
amendments  to  Securities  Contracts  (Regulation)  Act  1956.  With  the  amendment,  it  is  possible  by
Government to delegate some responsibilities to the RBI.
These  amendments  would  help  RBI  put  in  place,  from  time  to  time,  appropriate  regulatory
frameworks,  keeping  in  view  rapid  changes  in  financial  institutions,  instruments  and  practices
governing  money,  Government  Securities  and  forex  markets,  apart  from  gold-related  financial
products. With the delegation of powers by Government to RBI in these matters, the procedural delays
and constraints can be eliminated.
There are two major issues in regard to regulation in the financial sector which need  attention. The
first  relates  to  regulation  of  private  placements  in  debt  markets.  There  are  several  possibilities  and
these are being explored by a Technical Committee. I hope these would be resolved soon. Recognising
the urgency, RBI has been highlighting this issue in the last couple of years and more  recently,  the
unregulated nature of the private placement market has come in for adverse notice among international
financial analysts. The second relates to regulatory gaps and overlaps in financial sector, which could
be resolved by formalising, with some changes through a statute, the Informal High Level Committee
on Capital Markets. If you are interested in details, you may seek them during technical discussions
and oblige us with your comments.
On the repeal of the Public Debt Act 1944, and the introduction of the Government Securities Act, the
draft  Bill  has  been  circulated  to  state  Governments  for  concurrence.  The  RBI  is  following  up
vigorously with the Central/State Governments to obtain their approval.
I am sure you would also be interested in early passage of this Bill. We have been assured of early
action  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Government  of  India  and  Finance  Secretaries  of  State
Governments.
Technology issues
The  RBI  has  just  commenced  a  project  for  complete  automation  of  the  operations  of  RBI’s  Public
Debt  Office.  It  will  provide  for  connectivity  between  different  PDOs,  and  facilitate  on-line  screen
based  execution  for  trade  settlement  in  Government  Securities  transactions.  The  project  will  be
implemented in phases. The first phase will cover the PDO computerisation at Mumbai and facilitate
screen based negotiated dealings in Government securities and money market instruments, tendering
of  screen  based  applications  in  auctions,  full-fledged  audit  trail,  debt  servicing,  information
dissemination,  price  list  for  open  market  operations,  central  information  system  for  access  by
monitoring  and regulatory  authorities,  etc.  It  is  expected  that  the  first  phase  will  be  operationalised
well within a year. In the second phase, other regional PDOs would be linked with the central PDO
system.  This  phase  will facilitate  active  open  market  operations  of  RBI  through  all  regional  PDOs.
The entire project is expected to be operationalised in about a year. The RBI is also separately putting
in place a real-time gross settlement system, which is scheduled to be operational within the same time
frame.
3
BIS Review 19/2000
Do let us know if you have any suggestions to make in this regard and we will consider them seriously
- since close interaction between the Public Debt Offices and PDs is very critical.
Current issues
Now, I will turn to some other issues that are currently engaging our attention.
Retailing of government securities
The  growth  in  the  Government  Securities  market  has  perhaps  not  been  adequately  reflected  in  the
depth of the market as the main investors continue to be commercial banks, insurance companies and
provident funds. Consequently, the retail segment of the market has not developed. While alluding to
this  issue  in  my  earlier  speeches,  I  had  noted  that  there  is  an  inherent  potential  for  households  to
diversify  their  investment  portfolio  encompassing  Government  Securities.  With  this  in  view,
commercial  banks  were  given  the  facility  of  a  second  SGL  account  to  enable  them  to  hold
Government Securities on behalf of customers in safe custody in demat form. The feedback received is
that  many  large  banks  with  country-wide  networks  have  yet  to  make  this  facility  available  to  their
branch  customers.  Similarly,  not  much  headway  has  been  made  in  retailing  Government  stock  by
NSE, NSDL and NSCCL, which were also given the facility of a second SGL account.
We  in  RBI  are  totally  convinced that  there  is  need  to  promote  and  publicise  gilts  as  an  investment
instrument  and  we  would  greatly  appreciate  your  cooperation  in  this  endeavour.  There  is  scope  to
reduce the cost of borrowing to Government by retailing and the investors, especially small investors,
will benefit by access to safe gilt edged securities. I am sure there is good business potential for PDs
also.
Currently, the counterparties to PDs in the secondary market are predominantly PDs themselves and
commercial banks. But, we understand that many urban and other cooperative banks are maintaining
deposits with eligible institutions to comply with SLR stipulations merely because they are not easily
able to find Government Securities. NBFCs also seem to be facing a similar problem. RBI would urge
that PDs take special efforts to satisfactorily meet the demand of this segment.
In a competitive environment, considerations of safety, liquidity and reasonable return appeal to retail
investors  and  Primary  Dealers  should  take  up  the  task  of  building  up  awareness  regarding  these
characteristics  in  Government  Securities  among  retail  investors.  We  hope  that  the  Primary  Dealers
Association would be more proactive in publicising the advantages of holding Government Securities.
Despite  my  repeated  requests,  I  have  not  seen  brochures  or  advertisements  issued  by  the  Primary
Dealers  Association  on  the  Government  Securities  market.  Permit  me  to  reiterate  that  the  RBI  is
willing to extend full cooperation to you in this endeavour.
It  is  recognised  that  there  are  a  few  structural  and  tax  issues  that  render  Government  Securities
somewhat  unfavourable  as  compared  with  other  financial  instruments  available  to  savers.  First,  the
rates  of  interest  paid  on  small  savings  and  tax  exemptions  available  to  such  instruments  cause  a
dampening impact on retailing of Government Securities, and also increase the cost to Government.
Secondly, interest income from Government Securities is subject to tax beyond a certain level, while
for  some  other  instruments,  such  a  ceiling  does  not  exist.  It  can  be  argued  that  exemption  from
dividend tax for Gilt Funds is justifiable on the same lines of equity mutual funds. Of specific interest
to  PDs  is  the  matter  relating  to  tax  deduction  at  source  on  the  interest  income  earned  on
call/term/notice money transactions. Let us hope that these matters will be resolved soon.
Auction based market borrowings of state governments
Consistent with developments in financial sector reform, the RBI has taken a few important initiatives
with respect to state finances. First, the RBI has been holding periodic meetings with State Finance
Secretaries, where important policy issues are discussed. Second, in order to reflect market realities,
currently the coupon rate for State Government Securities is being pre-determined at about 25 basis
BIS Review 19/2000
4
points over the coupon rate for Central Government Securities of similar maturity. However, financial
markets are becoming conscious of the levels of fiscal management of different states. Further, under
the current system, there is no scope for better managed States to access funds at competitive rates of
interest. Third, an option was given to the State Governments to enter the market through a flexible
approach on their own to the extent of 5 to 35% of their gross borrowings. Some States have already
exercised this option. The ultimate aim is to make all the States raise the entire market borrowings in a
flexible manner.
Some State Governments have indicated that they would like PDs to play a larger role and PDs may
also find substantive business opportunities in this process. I would urge PDs to discuss this subject in
today’s meeting. It may be of interest to note that in the deliberations with State Finance Secretaries,
two  options  on  the  role  of  PDs  were  flagged,  viz.,  underwriting  of  State  loans  by  PDs  and  issuing
loans through bookbuilding exercises undertaken by PDs.
Separation of monetary management from debt management
Recently,  there  has  been  renewed  articulation  of  a  view  that  Government  debt  management  be
separated  from  monetary  management  by  RBI.  Let  me  share  with  you  our  position.  An  Informal
Working Group was set up within RBI to examine the issue internally. The Group was of the view that
the  RBI  needed  to  exit  its  role  as  a  debt  manager  in  the  interest  of  price  stability  and  favoured
separation  of  debt  management  from  monetary  management.  The  Group  suggested  taking  out  all
issuance  and  debt  management  related  activities  from  the  RBI  and  assigning  them  to  a  separate
institution  to  be  set  up  for  this  purpose.  The  RBI  would  then  retain  only  core  activities  related  to
monetary policy operations such as undertaking open market operations including repos, carrying out
Bank’s  own  investment  activities,  undertaking  market  making  functions  and  regulating  the
Government Securities market.
The  recommendations  were  examined  within the  RBI.  There  seems  to  be  little  evidence  that  in  the
current  stage  of  market  development,  and  given  the  large  market  borrowing  programme  of
Government, separation of the two functions would result in a more advantageous situation than is the
case  now.  While  it  can  be  argued  that  separation  of  the  two  functions  may  put  pressure  on  the
Government to reduce its borrowing requirements, on balance it may be better to coordinate the two
functions  for  the  present,  while  vigorously  pursuing  with  Government  a  reduction  in  Government
borrowings to more sustainable levels and developing the Government Securities market further.
It has been concluded by us that while status quo could continue, the issue will have to be reviewed
from time to time. Perhaps, after some more progress in fiscal consolidation and after the adoption of
Fiscal Responsibility Act, the issue could be revisited appropriately.
Revitalising the Treasury Bills market
There  has  been  some  concern  about  lower  primary  market  response  and  reduced  secondary  market
activity in Treasury Bills during the current year. Market interest rate in T-Bills is seen to be generated
only when call money rates fall below the refinance rate of 8%. In the primary auctions, the number of
bids and the aggregate volume of bids have been very low. Most of the bids are from PDs, perhaps
because they have bidding commitments to fulfill. There is little trading in the secondary market in the
T-Bills segment and market participants have been complaining about lack of liquidity in T-Bills.
These issues were addressed in the Technical Advisory Committee on Financial Markets based on a
Report of an Internal Group constituted to look into related  issues.  Basically,  the  issues  flagged  for
further debate are: (i) whether there is a case for cutting down the number of T-Bills that are currently
being  auctioned;  (ii) whether  there  is  a  case  for  increasing  the  notified  amounts  in  the  auctions;
(iii) whether the PDs should be allowed exclusive access to primary auctions of T-Bills; (iv) should
the RBI withdraw itself from primary auctions of T-Bills and restrict its operations to the secondary
market? If so, whether the RBI should give two-way quotes at all times or enter the market at its own
will?  (v) If  the  RBI’s  operations  are  restricted  to  the  secondary  market,  should  its  dealings  be
restricted to PDs or should it operate with all participants?
5
BIS Review 19/2000
PDs may like to discuss these and other issues and favour RBI with operationally feasible plan for its
consideration.
Valuation of banks’ investment portfolio
The  banks  have  a  large  portfolio  of  Government  Securities  and  the  method  of  their  valuation  is  of
special  interest  not  only  to  RBI  and  bankers,  but  also  to  PDs  who  deal  significantly  in  the  market.
Currently,  banks  have  been  asked  to  bifurcate  their  investments  into  Permanent  and  Current
categories. We had earlier said that our endeavour is to reduce the proportion of investments under the
permanent category in the banks’ portfolio with a view to achieving 100% marking of portfolios of
commercial banks. The policy of valuation, apart from reflecting the fair value of securities, has also
encouraged  increased  trading  in  the  secondary  market  as  many  banks  restructured  their  existing
portfolios by substituting old loans for new loans. However, on a request to review this approach, an
Informal Group was set up in RBI and the Report has been circulated as a Discussion Paper on the
RBI  website.  After  studying  the  international  experience,  the  Group  recommended  that  banks  may
classify their entire investments into three categories, viz., Held for Trading, Available for Sale and
Permanent.  The  Permanent  category  should  not  exceed  25%  of  total  investment.  The  Group
recommended that securities classified as Held for Trading should be marked to market monthly, if not
more frequently. Securities in Available for Sale was recommended for marking to market at the year
end or at more frequent intervals as decided by the Board of Directors. Securities held in Permanent
Category can be carried at cost or market value whichever is lower.
If  you do  find it  worthwhile to  vent  your  views, perhaps in consultation  with  bankers  present  here,
please do so and come back to us soon.
Active consolidation of government debt
As  mentioned earlier,  we  made  a  beginning  during  the  current  year  with  regard  to  consolidation  of
Government debt. Consolidation has improved the liquidity in the market with consequent reduction in
the  liquidity  premium.  Encouraged  by  the  results,  we  would  now  like  to  embark  on  an  active
programme  of  consolidation  consistent  with  the  market  borrowing  programme  of  Government.
Currently, there are about 98 outstanding loans with residual maturity of up to ten years, covering 78%
of  outstanding  value.  There  are  20  loans  with  maturity  over  10  years  covering  the  remaining  22%.
Over the last few years, the investor profile in these loans has changed, partly reflecting the valuation
norms introduced by the RBI. A number of banks have resorted to substitution of old loans for new
marketable loans. Keeping all these developments in view, some options can be explored. Wherever
there are a large number of fragmented issues in any year, these could be consolidated through recall
of some loans against reissue of others. Another option is to convert loans maturing, say in the next
few years into certain actively traded securities coinciding with the same maturity or with elongated
maturity. Even if this does not result in reduction in the number of outstanding loans, the objective of
improved  liquidity  in  a few  benchmark  securities  will  be  achieved.  PDs  may  like  to  examine  these
issues in greater detail.
Operationalising liquidity adjustment facility
The Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (Narasimham Committee II) had suggested that the RBI’s
support to market should be through a Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF). Under this facility, the
management of liquidity by the RBI will have to be through repos and reverse repos at rates reset by
the RBI periodically, if not daily. Pending upgradation in technology and legal/procedural changes to
facilitate electronic transfer and settlement, the RBI operationalised an Interim Liquidity Adjustment
Facility  (ILAF).  Under  this  facility,  injection  of  liquidity  to  banks/PDs  is  by  way  of  collateralised
lending at predetermined interest rates and absorption of liquidity is by way of fixed rate repos.
An  Internal  Group  in  the  RBI  has  been  set  up  very  recently  to  consider  further  steps  towards  a
Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  by  considering  interrelated  aspects  of  making  the  Bank  Rate  a  true
signalling  rate,  delinking  Bank  Rate  from  repo  operations  and  substituting  ILAF  with  LAF.  This
BIS Review 19/2000
6
would also imply that liquidity support to PDs will need to be reviewed. Regarding PDs, the view is to
move over from the system of liquidity support at a fixed interest rate in phases. In the first phase, the
Additional  Collateralised  Lending  Facility  could  be  at  a  variable  interest  rate.  In  the  second  phase,
both Level I and Level II liquidity support could be at a variable interest rate and in the final phase
only  a  minimum  level  of  support  could  be  assured  without  any  assurance  regarding  the  rate.  The
timing, phasing and sequencing are all issues that need to be worked out.
While the PDs may prefer the comfort of assured liquidity at a fixed interest rate, the compulsions of
liquidity management and interest rate operations demand that we ensure alignment between support
to  PDs  and  other  monetary  operations  of  the  RBI.  The  real  issue  is  one  of  smooth  transition  from
assured liquidity support at pre-determined interest rates to a market determined liquidity support from
RBI.
PDs  may  discuss  this  in  the  overall  framework  of  reforms  in  the  financial  sector  and  effective
transmission of monetary policy.
Concluding remarks
Friends, I have flagged a few issues that are currently engaging our attention. I have also spelt out the
thinking in the RBI on these issues. As I have already mentioned, I would urge the PDs to deliberate
on these issues and forward their view to the RBI.
I wish the deliberations all success.
7
BIS Review 19/2000
