Eddie George: Financial stability and the City -
the evolving role of the Bank of England
Speech by The Rt Hon Eddie George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the London Chamber of
Commerce Conference, held in London, on 13 June 2000.
 Thank  you,  Chairman.  I’m  pleased  to  take  part  in  this  Conference,  and  to  share  the  platform  this
morning with Gavin, but also with Howard Davies my long-standing partner in crime - or perhaps I
should say in crime prevention.
You ask me to talk about the evolving role of the Bank of England, in relation to financial stability in
particular, which I’m happy to do. In fact it is rather easier to talk confidently about our role these days
since it is now more clearly defined.
A remarkable thing about the earlier legislation - the 1946 Bank of England Act - was that it made no
mention of the Bank’s essential “raisons d’être” - what we were there to  do.  It  seems  to  have  been
taken for granted that everyone knew what our role was. But about a decade ago we decided to define
our  core  purposes  more  precisely  for  ourselves,  primarily  for  internal  management  reasons.  We
identified three core purposes.
The first two:
  the maintenance of monetary stability; and
the maintenance of the stability of the financial system are key objectives of central banks
pretty well everywhere.
Our third core purpose - the promotion of the efficiency and effectiveness of the financial system in
serving the interests of the wider economy -  was more unusual for a central bank, but arose from a
long-standing tradition of catalytic involvement in the development of our financial system, including,
in its international dimension in particular, encouragement of the role of the City.
These  three  core  purposes  have  been  essentially  carried  over  into  the  new  statutory  framework
introduced through the Bank of England Act of 1998. There are certainly some very important changes
in the more precise nature of the Bank’s role. In relation to monetary stability, the Bank, through its
new Monetary Policy Committee, now has independent responsibility for the operation of monetary
policy and  for  achieving  consistently  low inflation  as defined  by  the  Chancellor.  And in relation to
financial stability, responsibility for banking supervision has passed from the Bank to Howard at the
FSA - which helps to explain why I have retained more of my hair ... than ... I might otherwise have
done!
But, notwithstanding these important changes, our core purposes remain.
The  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  Treasury,  the  Bank  and  the  FSA,  in  particular
defines our respective responsibilities in relation to financial stability and provides a structure for the
necessary close cooperation between us.
In the terms of the MOU the Bank is responsible for the overall stability of the financial system as a
whole. The MOU implicitly recognises the inter-relationship between monetary and broader financial
stability, which is fundamentally important: just as we could not hope to deliver monetary stability if
the financial system  was  crashing  around  our  ears,  so,  too,  monetary  stability  is  a  very  necessary  -
though in itself still insufficient - condition for stability of the financial system. Specifically the MOU
recognises  the  Bank’s  role  -  as  the  bankers’  bank  -  at  the  heart  of  the  payments  system;  and  it
recognises our capacity, in exceptional situations and subject to override by the Chancellor, to act as
lender  of  last  resort  in  order  to  limit  systemic  damage.  The  MOU  acknowledges  more  broadly  the
Bank’s  oversight  role  which  enables  us  to  advise  on  the  financial  stability  implications  of
1
BIS Review 49/2000
developments  in  domestic  and  international  markets  and  payments  systems;  and  it  acknowledges
finally  also  our  role  in  promoting  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  financial  sector,  with
particular regard to international competitiveness, but which can also contribute to the robustness of
the financial system.
In the context of the UK’s highly developed and increasingly integrated financial services industry, in
which distinctions between banks, building societies, investment intermediaries, insurance companies
and so on have been becoming increasingly blurred, the argument for moving away from a fragmented
supervisory and regulatory structure, in which banks were separately regulated, was compelling - and
Howard  and  his  team  have  done  a  tremendous  job  in  bringing  all  the  different  strands  of  financial
services regulation together under the FSA umbrella seamlessly and in a relatively short space of time.
A  potential  downside  from  the  Bank  of  England’s  perspective  was  the  possible  loss  of  information
from,  or  contact  with,  the  banking  sector  which  might  reduce  our  capacity  to  exercise  our
responsibility for the stability of the financial system as a whole.
Now of course it is early days to begin to assess the new arrangements from this perspective. It is true
that we have not had any serious threats to financial stability in this country over the past three years,
but I suppose that putting that down to the new structure would be a bit like the man who claimed that
the absence of pink elephants in Hyde Park was the direct result of his clicking his fingers there on his
regular morning walks. We really haven’t been tested.
All I can say is that I am encouraged by the close cooperation between the Bank and the FSA which I
am confident we can build upon, enabling us to withstand the strain when the first pink elephant is
sighted!
The Standing Committee of the Treasury, Bank and FSA has met each month over the past couple of
years. Cross-membership of our respective Bank and FSA boards is firmly established. Howard and I
meet regularly together. And most fundamentally our respective staff are in more or less continuous
contact at working level - it is a culture that we must continue to work together to maintain. To be
honest I have felt as closely in touch with significant developments, even in the banking sector, as I
did before and perhaps better informed about developments in the financial system more widely. In
part  this  is  because,  without  day  by  day  responsibility  for  banking  supervision,  particularly  its
consumer protection dimension, the Bank has been able to refocus on and develop its wider oversight
role, focusing particularly on strengthening the market infrastructure, intensifying our surveillance and
crisis management, both nationally and internationally.
I think perhaps you can get the flavour of our broader focus if you look at our half-yearly publication -
the Financial Stability Review. The next edition is due out in a fortnight or so, and I’m sure that my
office would be happy to make it available to you for a small commission - or you can download it
free from our website.
So, Chairman, although Howard took with him responsibility for banking supervision, and some 20%
of our staff, to the FSA, the Bank’s essential concern with, and responsibility for, the stability of the
financial system as a whole - and its role in promoting the efficiency and effectiveness of the financial
sector,  including  the  promotion  of  the  City  -  remain  much  as  they  were.  What  has  more  clearly
changed over the past few years is the external environment within which we pursue these tasks. And
in my remaining remarks I should like to comment on three particular developments - the introduction
of  the  euro,  the  impact  of  information  technology,  and  continuing  broader  financial  globalisation  -
which have increasingly preoccupied the Bank in our work in these areas.
First, the euro. Whether the UK is in or out of the euro, the Bank has a keen interest in its success as a
widely used trading and investment currency - for the contribution that can make to financial stability,
to financial sector efficiency, and to financial activity here in the City.
Well  before  its  introduction,  the  Bank  played  an  active  role  in  coordinating  the  City’s  technical
preparation  for  the  euro,  and  in  encouraging  the  City’s  professional  institutions  to  work  with  the
European Commission and the ECB in developing the necessary legal and technical framework. The
City’s  contribution  to  the  successful  introduction  of  the  euro  is  widely  acknowledged  on  the
BIS Review 49/2000
2
Continent. And the City has continued to play a very active part in developing market activity in the
new currency ever since. In many respects the City is already an integral part of the Eurozone.
There were those who argued that the City would suffer if the UK failed to join from the outset. That
clearly has not so far happened - quite the reverse. The argument now is that we will suffer if we don’t
join reasonably soon. That’s not something you can actually prove either way. It’s not a general point
about  the  City’s  competitiveness.  It’s  euro-specific,  with  the  implication  that  somehow  or  other
obstacles  will  be  put  in  our  way.  That  possibility  cannot  be  altogether  excluded,  but  it  would  be
illogical. Most of the people that I talk with recognise the positive contribution the City is making to
the  development  of  euro  financial  markets  -  it  is  in  fact  the  most  positive  contribution  that  we  can
make from the outside. Of course it represents competition with other European financial centres, but
at  the  macro-economic  level  such  competition  is  a  positive  -  not  a  zero  -  sum  game  from  which
borrowers and lenders and market intermediaries collectively all stand to gain. Certainly the City has
benefited from the euro’s introduction, but not at the expense of other centres, rather alongside them.
Against  that  background  the  Bank  is  continuing  to  work  constructively  with  the  ECB  though  its
membership of the General Council, while at the same time we are working with the Government and
the financial sector to ensure that we are technically prepared for transition to the euro if and when that
is what the Government, Parliament and the people of this country decide.
The  build-up  to  the  euro  roughly  coincided  with  the  accelerating  advance  of  information  and
communications technology that is sweeping across the global economy.
This  development,  too,  can  give  rise  to  technical  concerns  -  the  Bank  and  FSA  cooperated,  for
example,  in  helping  to  ensure  that  the  financial  sector  was  properly  prepared  to  combat  the
Millennium bug. But its ramifications go very much wider.
We  are  having  to  monitor  very  closely  the  potential  impact  of  the  “new  economy”  on  productivity
growth and what that may mean for monetary stability; and we are having to keep a very close eye on
financial  market  volatility  as  investors  struggle  to  assess  its  impact  on  relative  stock  values  for  its
effect on financial stability.
In the financial sector in particular the new technology is perhaps the main driver of innovation and
change. It makes possible the introduction of new services and products, and is radically altering the
way in which existing services are delivered - often at a fraction of the initial cost and, potentially, at
lower risk. In wholesale markets it has the capacity to change fundamentally the relationships between
end-users, intermediaries and organised exchanges by affecting the whole spectrum of activity from
trading through clearing to payment and settlement, across the whole range of financial instruments
and across national boundaries - not just within Europe which was until recently the immediate focus
of attention, but much more widely internationally.
Beyond a general evolution towards international consolidation of trading activity and parallel, though
not  necessarily  coincident,  consolidation  of  clearing  and  settlement,  it  is  not  at  all  clear  precisely
where all this is taking us - just where the end point is or what the stepping stones are that will get us
there. But it is clear that standing aside is not an option. That’s why we are seeing such a proliferation
of initiatives as the various market participants feel their way ahead. It is in that context that I welcome
the iX initiative which Gavin has described to us this morning. The process of integration will involve
a huge cooperative effort on the part of market participants, but it will also involve active cross-border
cooperation between the relevant financial regulators and central banks. Our role is not to determine
the way ahead, but to facilitate the steps that the markets themselves decide upon, consistently with
our public policy concerns. The prize - of greater market efficiency and liquidity and of more effective
international allocation of financial resources - is immense. I have no doubt at all that the City has the
professional  and  technical  capacity,  and  the  self-confidence,  to  make  a  major  contribution  to  this
process.
Let  me  touch,  finally,  Chairman,  on  financial  globalisation  more  generally.  As  we  have  seen,  the
increasingly  free  flow  of  capital  internationally  has  the  capacity  to  contribute  massively  to  the
expansion of the world economy; but it can become distorted, with the risk of destructive volatility,
which  in  turn  can  pose  a  significant  threat  to  financial  stability  on  a  world-wide  basis.  Since  the
sudden onset  of  the  Asia  crisis some  three  years ago  with its  global  repercussions  there  has  been  a
3
BIS Review 49/2000
huge international effort to reduce the risk of volatility. This has involved drawing up codes of best
practice - covering everything from fiscal and monetary prudence, external balance sheet and liquidity
management  and  greater  transparency,  to  increased  financial  regulation  as  well  as  higher  legal,
accounting and corporate governance standards -  which  national  governments  particularly  in capital
importing countries, are being encouraged to apply. It has involved extensive and ongoing reviews of
the  financial  infrastructure  and  regulatory  practice  also  in  creditor  countries.  And  it  has  involved  a
continuing  review  of  the  role  of  the  international  financial  institutions  in  preventing  and  managing
international debt crises. The Bank has been very intensively engaged in much of this work - with the
Treasury in the G7, the G10, the new G20 and the IMF, with both the Treasury and the FSA in the
new Financial Stability Forum; with the FSA also in the Basel Committee; and with our central bank
counterparts in both the BIS and the ECB.
All of this, too, points to the critical importance of coordination and cooperation, nationally between
the Treasury, the Bank and the FSA, but also to an ever increasing degree with our various interested
counterparts abroad. And in this context, given the international importance of the City, we, together
with the FSA, have a particular role to play in engaging the private sector financial community in the
consultation process: we have a common interest in the outcome.
All of these developments, Chairman, pose major challenges both for market participants and for the
authorities. But, for the markets at least, with major challenges come major opportunities. Our job is to
help  the  markets  take  advantage  of  those  opportunities  by  providing  a  stable  and  orderly  financial
environment within which markets can function more effectively. It is very much in the interests of the
City that we should succeed. We - like you - have plenty to do.
BIS Review 49/2000
4
