David Clementi: Crisis prevention and resolution -
two aspects of financial stability
Speech by Mr David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Inaugural Lecture at
the South Bank University Centre for Monetary and Financial Economics, London, on 6 September
2000.
 Introduction
Ladies and Gentlemen,
When I was invited to give the inaugural lecture at the Centre for Monetary and Financial Stability, I
was pleased to accept. It is obviously an honour to be asked to inaugurate any academic institute but
supporting the foundation of a centre dedicated to the pursuit of monetary and financial stability is, for
a central banker, a particular pleasure! After all, monetary and financial stability and the interaction of
the  financial  system  with  monetary  policy  are  at  the  heart  of  the  Bank’s  mission.  The  first  of  the
Bank’s  core  purposes  is  maintaining  the  integrity  and  value  of  the  currency  or,  in  other  words,
monetary stability; the second is maintaining the stability of the financial system.
I  intend  to  focus  my  remarks  on  this  second  core  purpose.  Financial  stability  has  always  been  an
integral concern for central banks. We have been reminded of its importance by the events of recent
years. The Asian Crisis in particular set in train a programme of international work and discussions,
looking  at  ways  to  prevent  a  recurrence  and  to  handle  one  if  it  did.  One  concrete  result  was  the
creation of the Financial Stability Forum, which meets semi-annually, bringing together central banks,
finance  ministries  and  regulators  to  discuss  issues  of  common  concern  and  to  develop  policies  for
controlling risks to the international financial system.
The work broadly falls into three categories: crisis prevention, surveillance and crisis resolution. It is
my  intention  today  to  concentrate  on  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  resolution  and  to  discuss  in  some
detail two issues currently under debate. The first relates, in the context of the revision of the Basel
Accord,  to  the  aggregate  capital  in  the  banking  system  and  the  optimal  level  of  bank  capital.  The
second  concerns  the  international  financial  architecture  and  the  respective  roles  of  the  private  and
official sector in dealing with liquidity crises.
But  before  I  turn  to  these  I  would  like  to  say  something  about  surveillance.  This  responsibility  is
shared in the UK between the Bank, FSA and HMT. Following the creation of FSA,  the  respective
roles of the three parties were set out in a Memorandum of Understanding between them. While HMT
is responsible for the structure of financial legislation and the FSA is responsible for the regulation of
individual firms, the Bank is responsible for the stability of the financial system as whole. To this end,
the Bank dedicates significant time and resources to tracking developments in the global economy and
financial markets with a view to identifying potential threats to financial stability. Major developments
are discussed each month in the Bank’s Financial Stability Committee. Within the Bank, the Financial
Stability Committee occupies a similar position in relation to financial stability as the MPC does for
monetary  stability.  Bank  staff  present  papers  to  the  Financial  Stability  Committee  evaluating  the
overall  conjunctural  position  and  reviewing  issues  of  specific  concern.  The  staff  assessment  of
financial  stability  is  shared  with  the  Treasury  and  FSA  and  discussed  with  them  in  the  Standing
Committee, set up under the MoU, that meets each month to monitor financial stability and to consider
issues of common concern. The objective is to identify sources of instability before problems emerge,
to be in a position to take preventative action or to respond quickly in the event of trouble.
The Bank sets out to articulate publicly its financial stability role and to communicate current concerns
by the publication semi-annually of the Financial Stability Review. Each edition includes an overview
of financial stability providing an assessment of current threats to the system, ranging from imbalances
1
BIS Review 70/2000
in  the  major  industrialised  economies  or  debt  structures  in  EMEs,  to  sectoral  issues  such  as  equity
market volatility or gearing in the telecoms industry. While other commentators may talk of economic
miracles, you can rely on central banks to find disaster waiting in the wings! But if surveillance feeds
off central bankers’ capacity to worry, then crisis prevention and crisis resolution, working on rules to
minimise  the  risk  or  the  cost  of  a  financial  crisis,  may  be  the  only  prospect  for  us  to  get  a  decent
night’s sleep.
Crisis prevention: bank capital requirements
I would like to discuss one particular weapon in the crisis prevention armoury, which is bank capital.
This is, of course, a very topical subject at the moment, with the revision by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision of the 1988 Capital Accord.
Importance of capital
Why does bank capital have a crucial role in crisis prevention? This question has two aspects: first, the
importance  of  capital  itself;  and  second,  the  special  role  that  banks  play  in  the  economic  system.
Capital  has  a  vital  two-fold  role.  First,  capital  -  or  rather  equity  capital  -  acts  as  a  buffer  against
insolvency. It therefore helps to protect the system and limit calls on the safety net. And second, equity
capital helps to align the objectives of the firm’s owners with the objectives of the authorities. Where
the owners of firms invest only pinpoint capital, or see their investment erode to the point where the
firm is only marginally solvent, owners have an incentive to “gamble for resurrection”, because with
limited liability, taking on extra risk has substantial potential upside but no extra downside for owners.
But with a higher cushion of capital, owners do have something to lose.
That said, we should not overstate the role of capital in ensuring the health of the banking system. If
other  fundamentals  are  shaky  -  such  as  the  macroeconomic  environment,  the  legal  system,  or  the
framework  for  asset  valuation  and  auditing  -  capital  is  likely  to  produce  only  limited  comfort.  And
capital  adequacy  is  of  course  only  one  aspect  of  prudential  regulation,  with  other  aspects  of  risk
management such as liquidity management and systems and controls also being vitally important.
The  Basel  Committee  has  now  of  course  explicitly  recognised  that  the  formal  regulatory  minimum
capital framework is only one pillar in the edifice of bank soundness. It has to be complemented by
supervisors individually reviewing the capital adequacy of banks in the light of a wide range of risk
factors - the second pillar of the proposed new Accord - and by market discipline on banks, the third
pillar.
On the question of why we focus on banks, it would be difficult to overstate the importance of a stable
banking system to economic health and growth. Banks play a crucial role in  intermediating  savings
and  credit  and  they  are at the  heart  of  the  payments  system.  Most  firms  in  most  economies  remain
heavily reliant on banks for finance, and even in economies where a significant number of firms can
turn to the capital markets for finance, banks retain important roles as providers of payment facilities,
short-term credit, and backup liquidity. In less advanced economies, their role is even more dominant,
to the extent that a number of full-blown macro-economic crises have had their roots in weak banking
systems.
Changes to the Basel Accord
As I have said, the capital framework for banks is currently under review by the Basel Committee. It is
worth reminding ourselves what this framework consists of. First, it sets out a method for measuring
the riskiness of assets. Second, it sets out a definition of capital. And third, it lays down a minimum
ratio between capital, the numerator, and risk assets, the denominator, namely that capital should be at
least 8% of risk-adjusted assets, with at least 4% of this consisting of Tier 1 capital.
What changes will the new Accord make to these elements?
BIS Review 70/2000
2
The  work  has  to  date  been  heavily  focused  on  the  first  element  of  the  framework,  the  method  for
measuring  risk.  There  will  be  substantial  changes  here,  with  the  aim  of  introducing  more  risk
sensitivity to the existing crude measures and to widen the coverage of the measures beyond just credit
risk and market risk which was addressed in the previous review of the Accord. The direction of the
changes was laid out in the Committee’s consultative paper of June last year and I do not intend to go
into a description here.
On  the  second  aspect,  the  Committee  has  stated  that  “With  respect  to  the  definition  of  regulatory
capital, the Committee will maintain at this stage the existing  rules set  out  in the 1988  Accord.”  In
other words, they will not at this stage be revising their definition of capital. Just to remind you, this
definition  of  capital  broadly  divided  capital  into  two  tiers,  of  which  Tier  1  mainly  consists  of
shareholders equity and reserves and Tier 2 of certain subordinated debt instruments and an element of
general provisions. There have been some modifications to the definition since 1988, for instance to
introduce another layer of less permanent capital to back short term trading risks, and more recently to
accommodate  some  more  innovative  types  of  issues  which  can  be  aligned  with  Tier  1  for  capital
purposes  (but  with  debt  for  tax  purposes  -  an  outcome  which  I  believe  is  technically  described  as
“having one’s cake and eating it”!).
It would of course be intellectually more satisfying to be reviewing the whole framework together, but
the Committee’s decision not to revisit this definition at this time is, I believe, a defensible pragmatic
one: modernising the denominator is proving quite difficult and contentious enough without involving
the numerator as well. That said, there is a discussion which needs to take place at some point as to
whether  the  definition  has  achieved  the  right  composition  of  elements  and  emphasis  on  those
elements.
How much capital does the system need
It is on the third aspect of the framework that I mainly wish to offer some thoughts today, that is, on
the level of capital that should come out of the framework. Here again, the Committee has signalled a
“no change” or at least a “no change in aggregate” intention, by saying that “The Committee believes
that the new framework should at least maintain the overall level of capital currently in the banking
system.”
We  should  of  course  be  under  no  illusion  that  the  ratios  chosen  in  1988  were  arrived  through  a
scientific process. If I may digress briefly into anecdote, I recall that Bill McDonough once related that
he had asked his staff why, under the market risk amendment to the capital accord, it had been decided
to apply a three-times multiplier to the outcome of VAR models. Why three times? The answer came
back that three times was selected because “two times was too low and four times was too high”. I
imagine that the process of selecting 4% minimum equity was very similar to this. The selection of a
capital ratio ought, ideally, to depend upon answers to the following questions: what is the risk we are
trying  to  limit?  What  is  a  good  measure  of  that  risk?  What  residual  level  of  risk  are  we  willing  to
tolerate? And how do we fix a capital level so as to achieve that residual level? These questions were
not explicitly  addressed back  in  1988,  although  possibly  we  can  infer  some  of the implicit  answers
from the regime that was established. However, although neither 1988’s Accord’s measure of risk nor
its  selection  of  the  minimum  capital  ratio  may  have  been  scientifically  derived,  the  Committee’s
statement that we will at least maintain the overall level of capital in the system indicates that, ex post,
they are reasonably happy with what the 1988 Accord achieved.
But what exactly do they mean by this statement? And how do we go about achieving their intended
outcome? Is it, indeed, a reasonable outcome to strive for? I will try to address these questions.
One way of thinking about the 1988  Accord is that,  aimed  principally  at internationally  active  G10
banks, and using crude measures of risk that assumed some sort of average portfolio and profile of risk
for such banks, it set a “confidence level” for the soundness of individual banks and hence the system.
Looked at in this light, the Committee’s statement means that the authorities do not intend to tolerate a
different - ie lower - level of confidence following the introduction of the new Accord. In other words,
3
BIS Review 70/2000
under the new regime, the average internationally-active G10 bank will not be more likely to fail than
it would be under the old regime.
This seems a fairly sensible way to view the relationship of the old Accord with the new version. It
leaves plenty of scope to see redistribution of required capital, from less-than-averagely risky banks to
more risky ones. It also leaves scope for overall capital to reduce over time, if better risk measurement
or other techniques lead to a reduction in the risk taken.
That said, looking at the appropriate level of capital in this way still means that we have to be able to
measure  the  current  confidence  level  for  G10  bank  insolvency  which  is  established  by  the  existing
Accord. This is not an  entirely  straightforward  task.  One  starting  point  could  be the  ratings  of  G10
banks. The median rating of banks, taking the entire rated G10 population of more than 300 banks, is
A1 on the Moody’s scale, or A+ on the Standard and Poor’s scale. This would indicate a near-invisible
insolvency  probability  for  such  banks  over  a  1  year  horizon.  However,  this  very  small  insolvency
probability does reflect two factors which ideally we would wish to discount. First, the ratings reflect
the  bank’s  actual  capital  level  which  will  in  most  cases  be  significantly  above  the  regulatory
minimum.  And  second,  in  some  cases  the  rating  also  reflects  the  agency’s  expectation  that  public
support  would  be  forthcoming  for  the  bank,  which  of  course  we  would  wish  to  strip  out.  A  more
accurate  measure  of  the  confidence  level  established  by  the  Basel  8%  would  be  the  “standalone”
ratings produced by some agencies, for those banks whose capital is at or close to the Basel minimum.
Even  on  this  basis,  nearly  all  such  banks  are  rated  above  investment  grade.  The  message  therefore
from this view of the matter is that under the new Accord we should be targeting a minimum level of
regulatory capital for our G10 internationally active banks that is at least consistent with an investment
grade rating.
An alternative way of assessing the regulatory soundness standard would be on a “bottom up” basis,
that is by modelling the probability of default arising from a typical credit portfolio if the bank held
only the Basel minimum capital. The advent of credit risk modelling techniques such as CreditMetrics
allow such an exercise to be attempted. Any results under this sort of approach need to be treated with
a fair amount of caution, given the number of assumptions involved. The work we have done at the
Bank,  experimenting  with  these  models  and  using  different  parameters,  at  least  supports  the
proposition that G10 international banks (the target constituency for the Accord) should have capital
on the basis of a one-year default probability that is consistent with an investment grade rating.
Assuming that we can somehow identify the current confidence level implicit in the existing capital
Accord,  we  may,  as  I  suggested  above,  nevertheless  want  to  debate  the  question  of  whether  the
Committee  would  be  right  in  aiming  to  replicate  this  under  the  new  Accord.  Is  this  a  reasonable
objective? Or are we being too conservative?
Clearly there are types of banking exposures for which too much capital is being demanded, such as
lending  to  very  high  quality  corporates.  This  has  led  to  some  exposures  being  moved  outside  the
banking  system,  through  disintermediation  or regulatory  arbitrage.  This  problem  is  one  of  the  main
drivers  behind  the  Basel  Committee’s  current  review  of  risk  measures.  However,  there  are  equally
transactions  for  which  the  Basel  minimum  is  severely  inadequate,  such  as  lending  to  some  OECD
countries. But the question is really whether on average the regulatory requirement produces the right
level of protection.
Given  the  Bank  of  England’s  general  concern  for  systemic  risk,  we  would  tend  to  evaluate  this
question in terms of whether the existing cushion of capital has given the right level of protection to
the system, ie have we established the right level of tolerance towards banking crises. Individual bank
failures  do  not  prove  inadequacy  of  the  framework  -  although  a  complete  absence  of  bank  failures
would suggest severe overprotectionism.
It is very difficult to answer this question definitively, given that bank failures and banking crises tend
to  have  their  roots  in a  number  of  different  causes,  not  just  inadequate  capital.  It  is  difficult  to  say
therefore how much difference extra capital would have made, or how many more crises would have
resulted had the regulatory capital demand been lower. Nevertheless the frequency of crises, even in
developed countries since the Basel Accord was implemented, is not so low as to make us feel that the
regulatory demand for capital is overstated. Using IMF data on banking crises, we find that during the
BIS Review 70/2000
4
1990s  four  out  of  11  G10  countries  have  suffered  a  banking  crisis  -  a  statistic  which  I  do  not  find
particularly  comforting.  And,  although  developed  countries  tend  to  escape  the  twin  plague  of  a
banking crisis combined with a currency crisis, we should not suppose that this rather high incidence
of crisis in developed countries is mitigated by the costs of the so called crises being noticeably low. I
hesitate to put precise numbers on costs, because they do vary quite considerably. However, as Bank
of  England  research  which  is  to  be  presented  later  to  this  conference  indicates,  both  the  fiscal  and
welfare  costs  on  all  the  measures  used  are  very  significant  indeed.  On  some  measures,  in  fact,  the
output  costs  of  banking  crises  in  developed  countries  tend  to  be  higher  than  in  emerging  markets,
largely because the length of crises is longer in developed countries. Overall, therefore, in the light of
past experience, I think we would be taking an unjustified risk if we deliberately set out to lower the
existing regulatory demand for capital.
Crisis management and payments
Standstills: I want to turn now from crisis prevention to crisis resolution and from domestic banking to
more  general  international  liquidity  crises.  While  the  banking  system  was  a  source  of  instability  in
many countries during the Asian crisis, a more immediate problem was the liquidity crisis triggered by
the sudden outflow of capital from the region. It is the free movement of capital that I would like to
discuss and, in such a regime, the need for arrangements that would deal with a liquidity crisis where
developing countries get into payment difficulties.
The international capital market
Global  capital  flows  have  exploded  since  the  1970s.  Between  1970  and  1996,  real  GDP  in  the  G7
economies more than doubled. Over the same period, world trade volumes rose by roughly twice this
amount. But since 1970, real gross private capital flows have risen by a factor of more than eight -
double the growth in world trade and four times the growth in world income.
Rising capital flows have delivered huge benefits to the developing countries. Capital liberalisation,
like trade liberalisation, has facilitated “catch-up” in the levels of income of these countries. It delivers
a permanent, and potentially huge, welfare gain. The experience of the Asian tigers from the 1970s
onwards, and before that of Germany and Japan during the 1950s and 1960s, is testimony to that.
But  large-scale  capital  flows  also  bring  risks.  Capital  flows  are  not  just  large,  but  volatile  too.  The
financial crises in Mexico in 1994, across South-East Asia in 1997, in Russia in 1998 and in Brazil last
year are the most recent and visible examples. But the incidence of financial crisis has in fact been
rising  since  the  early  1980s.  And  the  cost  of  financial  crises  are  considerable.  In  the  stricken
South-East Asian countries, capital flow reversals and output losses were anywhere between 5% and
20% of GDP. In many of these cases, there has been encouraging evidence of a V-shaped recovery in
output and asset prices following crisis. But the depth of the V is clear evidence of the potential cost of
volatile capital movements.
Capital markets have of course been prone to “panics, manias and crashes” for as long as they have
existed.  It  would  be  naïve  to  think  we  can  ever  entirely  prevent  crises  -  and  indeed  it  may  be
undesirable to attempt to do so. But it is realistic to think that the incidence and severity of crisis can
be  mitigated through  appropriate  public  policy  actions.  This is  the  grandly-titled  “new  international
financial architecture” about which you have no doubt heard.
I want to discuss some of the efforts of the official sector in redesigning the international architecture -
achievements to date and, importantly, challenges for the future. While a lot has been achieved, much
remains to be done. I will also suggest where I think the official community’s future efforts might best
be directed.
5
BIS Review 70/2000
Dealing with financial crisis
The first priority of the official community must of course be crisis prevention. And on this front good
progress has been made. For example, we now have a substantial array of codes and standards of best
practice covering public policy issues: transparency in macroeconomic policies; core principles for the
supervision  of  banks,  insurance  companies  and  securities  firms  (including  the  changes  to  the  Basel
Accord  which  I  have  just  discussed);  principles  for  corporate  governance,  insolvency  and  market
integrity;  and  standards  for  data,  auditing  and  accounting.  Implementation  of  these  codes  of  best
practice is now the key - ensuring that crisis-prevention principles are put firmly into practice, in both
developed and emerging economies. The IMF has a key role to play in this implementation process,
through their assessments of compliance with standards and transparency about these assessments.
But  even  with  preventative  measures  in  place,  liquidity  crises  will  still  occur  from  time  to  time.
Creditors  may  sometimes  choose  to flee  simply  for  fear of  other  creditors  doing  so  before  them.  A
country can face a liquidity “run” in much the same way as a bank. And these types of coordination
failure are difficult to resolve with standard macroeconomic policy tools, like monetary policy.
So what policy alternatives are available? One means of resolving this rush for the exits is for the IMF
to provide emergency liquidity support in potentially unlimited amounts - a classic international lender
of  last  resort.  But  virtually  no-one  envisages  the  IMF  (or  anyone  else)  playing  such  a  role.  As  a
practical  matter,  the  IMF  simply  lacks  the  resources.  Its  usable  resources  are  currently  less  than
$150 billion.  The  external  debt  of  the  developing  countries  is  well  over  $2 trillion.  So  the  IMF’s
ability to fill financing gaps is already heavily circumscribed and will become more so over time.
Even with the resources, it is very doubtful whether unlimited IMF lending would be desirable. More
likely,  it  would  simply  stoke-up  moral  hazard  problems  for  the  future,  potentially  increasing  the
incidence of crisis and the corresponding cost for taxpayers. So an international lender of last resort
appears both impractical and undesirable.
This recognition that it is neither practical nor desirable to see the  IMF  in a  role  of  Lender of  Last
Resort  has  prompted  considerable  thinking  about  the  nature  of  private  sector  involvement  in  crisis
resolution and the modalities of sovereign payments suspensions or standstills. Payments suspensions
are in some ways the obverse of recognising the limits on IMF lending. And, reflecting this, sovereign
standstills litter history over the last two centuries: in Latin America in the 1820s; among the US states
in the 1830s and 1840s; in Latin America again in the 1870s; among the majority of sovereign debtors
in the 1930s; and in Latin America once again in the 1980s.
All  too  often  in  the  past,  however,  sovereign  standstills  have  also  been  a  recipe  for  chaos  and
confusion. The recent sovereign defaults in Russia, Indonesia and Ecuador are good cases in point. But
looking back over history, it is clear that messy and protracted sovereign standstills are very much the
rule rather than the exception. Historical experience with sovereign standstills probably looks quite a
lot  like  corporate  experience  before  insolvency  rules  were  put  in  place,  with  the  work-out  process
inefficient and inequitable. I will return to that corporate bankruptcy analogy later on.
Against this backdrop, the key issues facing the official community seem to me to be twofold. First,
how do we establish a more coherent framework for crisis management, that recognises and reconciles
the  countervailing  forces  of  large  and  rising  capital  flows  on  the  one  hand,  and  small  and  limited
official lending on the other. Second, given these constraints, is it possible within that framework to
establish a role for standstills that are efficient, equitable and expeditious. I discuss each in turn.
A framework for crisis management
The Cologne Summit statement by G7 finance ministers and central banks in June 1999 was a step
towards  establishing  a  framework  for  international crisis  management.  It  listed  the  “principles”  and
“tools” underpinning this framework - if you like, the ingredients. It did not, however, provide a recipe
for combining these ingredients. The official community’s framework for crisis management remains
a discretionary, “case-by-case” one.
BIS Review 70/2000
6
This approach has benefits. Crises clearly differ in form and severity, which calls for flexibility in the
official  sector’s  approach  to  dealing  with  them.  But  discretion  also  carries  some  costs.  For  private
creditors, it adds to uncertainty when framing their lending plans. The IMF’s latest Capital Markets
Report  states  that  the  private  sector  is  “highly  uncertain,  if  not  outright  confused  about  the  official
community’s approach to achieving its goals”.
Discretion also has costs for the official community. It risks “gaming” by the private sector, with the
official  sector  providing  more  money  ex-post  than  would  have  been  optimal  ex-ante.  By  altering
official  and  private  sector  behaviour  in  this  way,  a  discretionary  approach  to  crisis  management
potentially increases both the cost and the incidence of crisis.
Are  there  feasible,  rules-based  alternatives?  One  simple  means  of  establishing  an  official
“line-in-the-sand” would be to place an explicit cap on IMF lending. No rule is of course inviolable.
But  publicly-stated  constraints  are  likely  to  have  greater  credibility.  This  would  reduce  uncertainty
among private creditors. And it would drive home the point that “bail in” by private creditors would
need to be greater, the larger a country’s financing needs, which provides the right set of incentives
from a moral hazard perspective.
Payments standstills as a crisis management tool
This limited pool of IMF lending would need to be complemented with other crisis management tools.
Voluntary rollover agreements with creditors - the like of which were put in place in Korea and Brazil
recently - would be an important part of that crisis management toolkit. So too would voluntary bond
restructurings,  as  have  recently  been  undertaken  in  Pakistan,  Ukraine  and  Ecuador.  An  ongoing
dialogue  between  country  debtors  and  their  private  creditors  -  what  the  Institute  for  International
Finance call “Country Clubs” - would facilitate both of these voluntary tools for crisis resolution.
Involuntary  payments  suspensions  also  deserve  consideration  as  part  of  the  official  sector’s  toolkit,
however. As a crisis management tool, they may be beneficial in certain situations. Where a country is
vulnerable  to  short-term  capital  movements,  standstills  could  serve  as  a  potentially  important
circuit-breaker.  They  might  be  an  efficient  means  of  forestalling  “runs”  on  a  country  because  they
prevent pessimistic creditor expectations becoming self-fulfilling. More generally, whether capital is
short-term or not, they could serve as an important incentive device. Having standstills as a credible
backstop might in some circumstances increase incentives for debtors and creditors to seek voluntary
resolutions to crisis sooner.
Through  both  of  these  mechanisms,  standstills  might  help  resolve  coordination  failures  among
creditors, and hence forestall liquidity crisis.
How  do  we  ensure  that  standstills  are  efficient  and  equitable?  The  decision  to  default  must  be
principally for the debtor. But the official sector can alter debtor incentives in important ways. One
incentive device would be for the IMF to support standstills by agreeing to lend through their duration
-  what  the  IMF  call  “lending-into-arrears”  -  provided  the  standstill  process,  once  entered  into,  is
orderly  and  speedy.  If  standstills  were  a  structured  part  of  the  IMF’s  ex-ante  crisis  management
framework, this would increase the chances of the standstill process itself proving ex-post  efficient.
There  is  also  encouraging  work  being  done  by  the  private  sector  on  drawing  up  best  practice
guidelines for sovereign debt work-outs.
Some have argued that articulating a clearer role for standstills may perversely alter debtor incentives,
by weakening the presumption that debtors should pay their debts in full and on time. But an orderly
standstills  process  should  support,  not  supplant,  market  forces  and  market  disciplines.  Corporate
bankruptcy law grew up as it became clear that market forces delivered losers as well as winners and
that some orderly means was needed of dealing with the losers. In this way, bankruptcy law supports
the market mechanism.
The  situation  is  no  different  in  a  sovereign  context.  A  well-articulated  framework  for  dealing  with
sovereign liquidity problems should reduce the inefficiencies and inequities of the current unstructured
approach to standstills. It would support the international capital market mechanism. It would be no
7
BIS Review 70/2000
more likely to induce debtors to default than bankruptcy law is to induce corporate debtors to default.
In neither case is default a soft option. We would of course hope and expect sovereign standstills to be
the exception rather than the rule. But it is better to plan for all contingencies, and to articulate these
plans,  than  have  international  public  policy  made  on  the  hoof.  In  this  respect,  crisis-fighting  shares
many  similarities  with  fire-fighting.  Fire-prevention  is  ideal,  but  will  never  entirely  prevent  fires
occurring. So it makes sense to have a fire-fighting plan, which everyone understands and abides by,
to minimise the damage when fires do occur.
Would standstills work?
The issue of whether standstills should form a part of the official sector’s toolkit of responses remains
under  active  debate.  A  number  of  arguments  against  the  use  of  standstills  have  been  made  by
policymakers, academics and the private sector. Let me try and articulate some of the concerns.
First, would standstills risk cutting-off capital flows to the emerging markets - if you like, killing the
goose that lays the golden egg? History offers some clues here. For example, there appears to be no
evidence  from  1930s  experience  of  defaulting  countries  having  fared  worse  than  non-defaulting
countries in terms of subsequent output growth. And looking across a broader sweep of history, some
empirical  evidence  has  failed  to  find  any  discernibly  negative  long  term  effect  of  a  country’s  prior
debt-servicing record on the terms or volume of its borrowing.
That is not to say that default is costless, certainly in the short to medium term. The loss of access to
capital  markets  and  the  time  and  effort  involved  with  restoring  credibility  with  creditors  is,  quite
correctly, a strong deterrent for any country contemplating default.
Historical evidence may in any case be uninformative about investor behaviour in the future under a
more  structured  framework  for  international  crisis  resolution.  If  this  framework  helped  resolve  the
collective action problem among creditors, it ought to benefit creditors as well as debtors. Indeed, by
reducing the risk to creditors in this way, standstills should be mutually beneficial to both parties. If
that is the case, there is no reason to believe that, in a world of structured standstills, there is much risk
of the golden-egg-laying goose being cooked.
Second,  might  the  prospect  of  standstills  prompt  a  pre-emptive  rush  for  the  exits?  In  a  world  of
structured  standstills,  there  is  perhaps  some  risk  of  skittish  investors  rushing  for  the  exits  sooner.
Indeed, these investors may choose not to enter emerging markets in the first place - standstills would
pre-empt the inflow rather than precipitating the outflow. But the behaviour of longer-term investors
needs  also  to  be  weighed.  They  would  stand  to  gain  from  country  runs  being  forestalled.  Their
incentives to flee are thereby diminished. The net effect might be some change in the composition of
the  developing  countries’  capital  stock,  with  fewer  fleet-of-foot,  skittish  investors  and  a  greater
number of longer-term, sticky investors. This change in capital stock ought to be advantageous from
the welfare perspective.
Third,  might  standstills  worsen  contagion  between  markets,  the  like  of  which  we  saw  following
Russia’s debt moratorium in 1998? Contagion appears to be a fact of life in a world of cross-border
capital flows. The question is: would articulating a role for structured standstills worsen contagion? It
is  not  clear  that  more  coherent  crisis-management  framework  would  increase  the  incidence  of
standstills;  it  might  reduce  their  cost.  And  to  the  extent  that  contagion  is  sourced  in  investor
uncertainty, it might to some extent be mitigated by the proposals I have outlined.
So,  to  summarise,  there  are  good  reasons  to  think  that  a  world  of  structured  standstills  might  alter
investor behaviour and the international flows of funds. It is difficult, however, to believe that these
changes  would  be  damaging  to  the  international  capital  market  mechanism  -  indeed,  some  would
clearly improve its functioning. Sovereign defaults will continue to occur periodically. But the official
sector could possibly mitigate their cost by establishing a coherent framework for crisis management,
with payment suspensions as one of the tools.
None of this is at all to suggest that the issue of standstills - in or outside the Bank of England - is fully
articulated  and  concluded.  It  is  a  difficult  area  requiring  contributions  from  all  sides  and  the
BIS Review 70/2000
8
intellectual argument is ongoing. Finding the right balance between rules and discretion, in this area as
in so many, remains a key issue for policymakers. There is work to be done on the modalities of how
standstills might operate in different crisis cases. What is the role of the IMF in the standstill process?
Does  the  process  need  to  be  underpinned  by  statute  or  would  non-statutory  principles  suffice?  And
when might a standstill require capital controls to guard against leakage?
The Bank is currently working on some of these issues, practical and conceptual. I would encourage
those among you with an interest in international public policy to help us in addressing them, joining
the growing number of, in particular, US academics who are exploring this topic. It is very much a live
debate and I have no doubt these issue will be discussed at length, at and around the World Bank and
IMF Annual Meetings in Prague later this month.
Conclusion
I have now talked myself - quite literally - to a standstill. I hope, in describing two current issues in the
policy debate, I have been able to convey something of the Bank’s role in financial stability and the
importance of current work in this area. I am encouraged to see how many aspects of financial and
monetary stability are included in the programme for this conference. I wish you well with it and the
future of the Centre itself and I hope the Centre and the Bank will maintain a close relationship.
9
BIS Review 70/2000
