S A Grenville: Notes on East Asian financial cooperation
Speech  by  Mr  S  A  Grenville,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the  Anu
International  Conference  on  Financial  Markets  and  Policies  in  East  Asia,  held  in  Canberra,  on
4 September 2000.
 In an increasingly globalised world, it is reasonable to ask why regional financial arrangements might
still  be  important  and  worth  striving  for.  Aren’t  we  all  going  to  be  ruled  by  Thomas  Friedman’s
Golden  Straitjacket,  under  the  gimlet-eyed  surveillance  of  the  Electronic  Herd?  What  place,  in  this
seamlessly integrated world, for regional arrangements?
The  key  point  driving  any  regional  arrangement  is  commonality  of  interests - even  in  a  globalised
world, we care more about what happens to our neighbours than we would about countries of equal
size but geographically remote. Just as there will be different levels  of  government  (local,  national)
within a country, not all international issues will be best dealt with on a one-world universal basis.
Perhaps the most positive specific element of regional arrangements is their great potential for fruitful
interaction  which  will  raise  understanding,  cooperation,  coordination  and  technical  standards  all
round. One specific economic aspect of this is the so-called “peer surveillance” which has emerged in
a number of regional arrangements. But the much more informal exchanges between technicians will
probably be more important still - someone notices that one of their regional neighbours has a good
way of doing something, so they copy it.
In large part as a consequence of this continuing interaction, another important benefit from regional
arrangements is their superior knowledge of what is happening in the region. I can recall that in July
1997,  when  East  Asian  central  bankers  met  in  Shanghai,  it  was  very  obvious  to  everyone  at  that
meeting that the Asian crisis was going to be very serious indeed. Four months later, the US President
was still talking about the crisis as “a few glitches on the road” - no reflection on his own competence
in  an  enormously  complex  world,  but  a  reflection  of  the  poor  advice  going  into  the  US
decision-making process, which was reflected elsewhere, for instance in the lack of participation in the
Thai support program in August 1997.
At  the  same  time,  it  would  have  to  be  acknowledged  that  we  were  not  able  to  use  this  better
knowledge to improve the decision-making process in the multilateral agencies (particularly the IMF).
But this just says that we have to try harder in future, and turn potential into actual. We have to look
for the opportunities to use these regional forums as a way of refining, concentrating and amplifying
our voice, so that the distilled wisdom of this interaction is heard more effectively in the multilateral
forums.  To  provide  a  specific  example:  there  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that  the  IMF  Indonesian
program would have been quite different if it had had an effective input from the region - the long-
term  desirability  (but low  priority)  of  doing  something  about  the  clove  monopoly  would  have  been
kept in better perspective against the pressingly urgent short-term crisis of massive capital outflow. In
macro policy, the overly tight budgets of the IMF’s initial prescription might have been avoided.
A strong regional representation could catalyse a better articulation of other aspects of our interests at
the multilateral level. There is a danger that, at the multilateral level, the United States will promote
the cause of those areas of principal interest to it (principally Latin America) and Europe will promote
the  interests  of  its  Eastern  European  neighbours  (including  Russia),  but  that  the  interests  of  the
countries of Asia may be without a big country champion and advocate at the multilateral debate. We
see  this  danger  in  the  Contingent  Credit  Line  program  being  devised  at  the  IMF,  where  countries
which  receive  a  prior  “seal  of  approval”  will  be  able  to  draw  on  Fund  support  more  or  less
automatically in time of need. There is a real danger that countries which get this seal of approval are
likely to be the countries of principal interest to the largest  members  of the  IMF  who  dominate  the
Board. We may be able to redress this balance if our regional voice is well coordinated.
1
BIS Review 68/2000
A  further  factor  in  favour  of  regional  arrangements  is  that,  when  it  comes  to  collecting  funds,  a
regional  group  can  mobilise  the  strong  forces  of  self-interest  and  immediate  concern  that  are  felt
within  a  small,  geographically  contiguous  group.  The  Thai  support  package - where  the  regional
contribution  was  almost  three  times  the  size  of  the  IMF’s  contribution - illustrates  that  regional
arrangements can be effective when multilateral agencies are slow across the ground or hindered by
imperfect assessments of the situation.
The form of the arrangements
What form should these regional arrangements take?
The point that should be made here is that a fair amount of overlap is inevitable, and no bad thing.
Certainly, representational resources are a constraint, but within this broad constraint, we should not
be too fretted that a particular subject is  discussed in  more  than  one  place. That  said, there  may  be
room  for  pruning  and  specialisation  in  the  quite  wide  variety  of  organisations  which  already  exist
within the region.
New developments
Perhaps  the  most  important  and  striking  new  development  is  the  embryonic  currency  arrangements
coming out of ASEAN+3. The initial suggestion is one of foreign currency swaps, but there may be
some implication that this could lead to various currency linkages, perhaps ultimately culminating in
some  form  of  currency  union.  There  is  a  good  debate  already  underway  as  to  whether  regional
currency  baskets  make  sense  (a  debate  carried  on  at  this  conference),  and  whether  Asia  seems  a
suitable case for a currency union. It is important for us, here in Australia, to make sure we do not
confuse the issue  of  evaluating  these  various  proposals  with  the  desirability  of  being  present  at  the
table  when  these  discussions  take  place.  Whatever  the  merits  of  particular  arrangements,  these
discussions  are,  in  themselves,  an  important  part  of  the  process  of  swapping  ideas  and  coming  to
understand  each  other  better.  So  the  case  for  Australia  wanting  to  be  there  is  a  clear  one,  and  we
should state this clearly (as we have done), without wishing to elbow our way into any arrangement in
which we are not wanted. The critical thing, for Australia, is to be able to establish our goodwill and
competence in such a way that the countries in this group will feel it to their own advantage to have us
present. We are some distance away from this at the moment, but the starting point is to recognise the
desirability of being at the table. We might remember, too, that the Euro took 50 years to get off the
ground, and that at the start there must have been far more scepticism than support among countries
which had so recently been in mortal combat.
The other idea, waiting offstage in the wings at the moment, is for an Asian Monetary Fund. When
this was first proposed during the Asian crisis, Australia  had  some  reservations  about the  particular
format which had been proposed. But whatever the views at the time, we need to keep an open mind.
Some of the initial opposition (particularly from the United States) may have its origins in viewing all
of this through the IMF prism, and the advantages set out above for regional arrangements apply here
also - that  smaller  groups  will  often  be  more  appropriate  to  particular  problems  and  bring  special
expertise and focus.
So a postscript can be added to these discussions. We should not see different groups as rivals: any
such arrangements should be seen as complementary, not competing with multilateral arrangements.
Leadership
One  serious  issue  for  the  future  of  regional  arrangements  in  this  region  is  the  unresolved  issues  of
leadership.  In  terms  of  GDP  and  technological  sophistication,  the  obvious  regional  leader  is  Japan.
Partly for historical reasons, and partly because of its internal focus, Japan has not exercised the sort of
leadership  which  is  commensurate  with  its  economic  clout.  In  terms  of  population  and  potential
economic size in the long run, China might claim the role. Hong Kong, Singapore and Australia have
BIS Review 68/2000
2
sophisticated financial markets, but each of these economies is relatively small. Within ASEAN, the
dominant country (Indonesia) is, unfortunately, in no position, for the moment, to be a vigorous leader
of regional arrangements. So there is a major unresolved issue here.
Where to from here?
From the Australian viewpoint, this is in some ways a low point for regional arrangements. The real
progress  which  has  been  made  in  getting  better  representation  in  the  multilateral  forums  for
non-European (and particularly Asian) voices  is  undisputed.  G20  (the lineal  successor to  G22)  now
has the potential to become a premier group for discussing the critical issues of globalisation, with a
representative audience no longer dominated by Europeans. The Financial Stability Forum has been
formed, again with good representation from the region, to hammer out the specifics of financial rules
and regulations. Membership of the Bank for International Settlements has been significantly opened
up  to  non-European  members.  So  there  has  been  real  progress  at  the  multilateral  level.  But  at  the
regional level, the Asian crisis has been an enormous distraction from the mundane task of building
regional institutions, with the officials who had got to know each other well in such forums as EMEAP
and the Manila Framework being very substantially weakened and dispersed in the aftermath of the
crisis. Peer surveillance has not taken the major role that it might have, lacking any clear functional
model or strong leadership. The current focus on the Chiang Mai swap proposals could be the basis of
some  important  ties,  but  we  should  keep  in  mind  that  ASEAN  has  had  such  swap  arrangements  in
place for quite some time, and EMEAP had in place somewhat similar repo arrangements, which did
not provide much advantage in the Asian crisis in 1997. Such arrangements are valuable in that they
get people together  and talking  about  other  issues,  but  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  see  them,  taken  by
themselves, as massive breakthroughs in regional cooperation.
As for Australia’s role and links in all of this, it would have to be said that the present moment is a
rather disappointing one. A good case can be made that Australia served a useful role during the crisis,
first of all as participant in the support packages (Japan was the only other country to contribute to all
three), but more importantly in its assessment of the crisis as it unfolded, and its attempts to point out
deficiencies in the multilateral approach, with the visit of our Foreign Minister and the RBA Governor
to the United States in early 1998. However, it would have to be said that this voice was not heard, and
very  little  was  achieved.  Australia’s  own  performance  during  the  Asian  crisis  might  be  a  positive
example and a reminder of the benefits of competent policies, but may well have been mistaken, by
our Asian neighbours, as boastful blowing of our own trumpet during a time of their misfortune. The
souring of our relationship with Indonesia over Timor has blocked off a potentially important entrée
into the ASEAN arrangements. Our best chance, now, is to build on the myriad spider-web ties which
bind all sorts of Australians - business people, academics and officials - to their counterparts in Asia,
in  the  hope  that  this  network  proves  a  strong  enough  foundation  for  us  to  take  a  vigorous  role  in
whatever regional arrangements are formed in Asia.
3
BIS Review 68/2000
