Lee Hsien Loong: Financial sector liberalisation - going global
Speech by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Chairman of the Board of Directors of The Monetary Authority of
Singapore and Deputy Prime Minister, at the Monetary Authority of Singapore Work Plan Seminar,
held in Singapore on 3 April 2000.
 Introduction
1.
Since 1997, while the Asian region was undergoing a traumatic crisis followed by a sharp recovery,
the  international  financial  scene  has  not  stood  still.  Financial  innovation  has  continued  unabated,
institutions  are  rationalising  and  consolidating,  and  transactions  and  services  are  rapidly  going
electronic and online. Singapore has been directly affected by these global trends.
It is as well that we pressed on with our financial liberalisation programme despite the crisis. MAS and
the industry have had a busy two years. It is timely now to take stock of what has been achieved, and
map out the tasks ahead.
Our objective has been to open up the financial sector, progressively but decisively. We have aimed to
allow market forces greater free play, get investors to take full responsibility for their decisions along
with  the  outcomes,  and  shift  MAS’  emphasis  to  setting  the  framework  and  upholding  standards  of
integrity and supervision. Ultimately, we aim to become a vibrant and dynamic global financial hub.
How much of this vision have we so far realised?
Financial sector reform - concrete changes
2.
We have made many concrete changes across the financial services industry.
In  banking,  we  have  increased  competition  by  introducing  Qualifying  Full  Bank  privileges,  issuing
more restricted banking licences and providing greater flexibility for offshore banks. Local banks have
greater strategic autonomy and operational flexibility now that the limit on foreign shareholdings has
been removed and several regulations revised.
We have also opened up the stock market. The Singapore Exchange was the first in the Asia-Pacific to
both demutualise and merge the cash and derivatives activities. SGX has made its listing requirements
more  flexible  to  cater  to  growth  enterprises.  We  have  loosened  up  rules  on  foreign  listings  in
Singapore  dollars,  reduced  capital  requirements  for  securities  firms,  and  eased  other  onerous
restrictions. By 1 January 2001, commissions will be completely freed up. Access to trade on SGX,
which is already being opened, will be fully liberalised a year later.
In  the  debt  market,  we  relaxed  restrictions  on  borrowing  S$,  to  enable  foreign  players  to  issue
S$ bonds. We set up the Approved Bond Intermediary scheme to encourage the origination, placement
and  management  of  debt  issues  in  Singapore.  We  also  increased  the  issuance  of  Singapore
Government  Securities  and  extended  the  maturity  profile  to  ten  years  so  as  to  create  a  more  liquid
government bond market.
The fund management industry now has access to a larger pool of CPF funds as well as government
funds  farmed  out  by  MAS  and  GIC.  New  tax  incentives  and  more  flexible  licensing  requirements
should also attract more fund managers here. As it is, fixed income funds are now being managed in
Singapore, in addition  to  the  traditional  equity  market  funds.  Fund  managers  are  expanding  beyond
regional mandates to global markets.
Most recently, we liberalised the insurance industry which has, since 1990, been closed to new direct
insurers.  Insurance  brokers  who  meet  our  requirements  can  now  enter  the  market.  We  have  also
removed the foreign shareholder limit in local insurance companies.
1
BIS Review 30/2000
Looking ahead
3.
Looking  ahead,  our  financial  sector  faces  many  more  challenges.  The  global  financial  industry
continues  to  evolve  rapidly.  The  internet  promises  to  reshape  the  industry.  Trade  liberalisation  is
steadily  opening  up  national  financial  markets,  both  through  WTO,  and  as  a  result  of  bilateral  free
trade agreements.
Global industry trends
In the developed countries, deregulation and increasing emphasis on shareholder value has contributed
to  continuing  consolidation,  both  across  financial  industries  and  within  specialised  areas.  Financial
institutions  are  continuing  to  merge,  as  players  seek  global  reach  and  economies  of  scale.  This  is
happening  not just  to  banks,  but  also to  insurance  companies  and  securities houses,  plus exchanges
which  are  being  demutualised  and  turned  into  for-profit  corporations.  Mega-mergers  used  to  be  a
largely  American  phenomenon,  but  they  are  now  happening  in  Europe  and  even  Japan,  where
rationalisation is long overdue. In the rest of Asia too, banks and supervisors are grappling with the
issue. This is true not only here in Singapore but even larger economies like Hong Kong, Malaysia and
Australia are debating the merits and demerits of the issue.
In  this  environment,  huge  universal  banks  like  Citigroup,  which  offer  a  wide  range  of  financial
products on a global scale, may not be the only viable model. Specialist players still have opportunities
to thrive, for example in investment banking, but only if they distinguish themselves through depth of
expertise and distributional reach. They need to be specialists, and not just marginal players picking up
the crumbs. Even the enlarged new Deutsche Bank has decided to consolidate and specialise, hiving
off the management of its retail business segment. Smaller players may also survive as niche players,
either with superior knowledge of particular markets or by leveraging on the distribution networks of
larger players.
Secondly,  in  pursuit  of  shareholder  value,  institutions  are  cutting  costs  to  the  bone.  Financial
institutions are increasingly farming out routine back office processing, in order to derive economies
of scale and to focus on their core competencies. They are outsourcing things like mortgage processing
and credit card billings to specialists who handle these activities in bulk, using highly automated and
streamlined processes.
The region
This  trend  towards  consolidation  means  that  in  a  geographical  region  institutions  will  increasingly
prefer  to  centralise  their  activities  in  one  single  centre,  especially  for  treasury,  debt  issuance,  and
capital  market  operations.  In  Asia,  this  will  pose  a  strong  challenge  to  Singapore,  because  it  will
strengthen the tendency for a single major hub to emerge, rather than several smaller ones.
Tokyo  will  perforce  be  the  biggest  financial  centre  in  our  time  zone,  because  of  the  sheer  size  of
Japan’s  investment  funds  and  its  economy.  But  Tokyo  has  significant  limitations  -  a  high  cost
structure, domestically oriented financial markets, consensus-based decision making, and not least, a
lack of English speakers. This creates room for at least one other major financial hub in Asia.
Singapore enjoys good economic cooperation with our Asian partners. We are well-placed to service
the region, whether it is PSA, Changi Airport, or financial services. As the region recovers and grows,
we hope to prosper together with Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand. But our relationship with them is
qualitatively  different  from  Hong  Kong’s  vis-à-vis  China.  Besides,  Southeast  Asia  is  a  smaller
hinterland than China.
Therefore for Singapore to grow as a hub, we must extend our catchment area beyond Southeast Asia.
Our orientation must be international, and not just regional. We have done this before. This is how we
became the fourth largest forex centre globally and the leading centre for global derivatives trading in
the  Asian  time  zone.  The  challenge  is  to  repeat  this  feat  in  new  areas  of  competence.  Developed
markets and global players are already our customers. Singapore can be a portal, an intermediary or a
market for them. Finding the right partners in strategic alliances will be critical.
BIS Review 30/2000
2
We  have  a  chance  to  succeed  as  a  hub,  as  Asian  countries  gradually  open  up  protected  national
markets  to  foreign  players.  It  will  not  be  easy.  It  will  take  time  for  countries  and  governments  to
accept the logic of liberalisation. Too sudden a change, however, will provoke a nationalist reaction.
This  is  happening  in  Thailand.  The  Nation  reported  that  a  group  of  nationalistic  academics  and
businessmen, calling themselves the Nation Rescue Club, has attacked the government for selling off
the  country  on  the  cheap.  Its  spokesman,  a  university  professor,  called  on  the  Thai  government  to
publicise details of the sale of Radanasin Bank to UOB, and Nakornthon Bank to Standard Chartered
Bank. The group accused the government of striking acquisition deals which allowed foreign banks to
take on virtually no risk since any future losses would be borne by Thai taxpayers’ money.
But  over  time,  if  the  globalisation  wave  persists  in  the  financial  industry,  countries  will  eventually
decide that the cost of closing themselves off is too great. They may then change their position, just as
over the last two decades they have done in manufacturing, opening up to reduce import barriers, and
promote MNC investments and exports. Malaysia’s Governor of Bank Negara has said that Malaysia
may  open  up  its  banking  sector  to  greater  foreign  participation,  though  only  after  10  years  [BT
30 Mar]. So liberalisation will happen, although to varying degrees in different countries.
The internet
The internet is having a major impact on financial services. It is not just a more efficient distribution
and marketing channel. It is opening up new financial applications and business models, and breaking
down national barriers separating financial markets. Bill McDonough, the President of the New York
Federal Reserve Bank, has described the internet as the most important strategic issue facing financial
institutions today.
The  best  way  to  package  and  deliver  financial  services  over  the  internet  is  not  yet  clear.  In  share
trading, the success of discount brokers like eTrade, and ECNs like Island, is obvious. There is also
promising potential for trading fixed income instruments and derivatives online. But for other financial
services, institutions are still experimenting with different business models and approaches. They all
know that a new generation of customers will want to do business over the internet, and banks will
have to meet this demand or lose business to new players.
The  internet  has  also  created  new  roles  in  the  financial  services  value  chain,  e.g.  infomediaries,  or
intermediaries  which  gather  and  present  information  on  financial  products  offered  by  different
financial institutions, so that consumers can compare prices and quality at the click of a mouse before
committing to a specific product like mortgages, insurance packages and loans.
Financial institutions will need to gear up to participate in electronic commerce. For them, the internet
means not only new business opportunities, but also fiercer competition, including across borders. It
will create new risks, which they must recognise and manage.
Financial  supervisors need  to  understand the  nature  of  the  new  internet  based  activities.  They  must
decide whether the new species of players are fish or fowl, in order to regulate them appropriately. In
the borderless internet world, cross-border provision of services will be harder to police and regulate.
Supervisors  will  have  to  cooperate  much  more  closely,  sharing  information  and  coordinating
responsibilities.
WTO
Trade liberalisation at the WTO, particularly liberalisation of trade in services, will gradually open up
financial markets. This will increase competition in our domestic market, but it will also give us better
access  to  foreign  markets,  and  protect  our  rights  in  case  of  disputes.  On  balance  Singapore  will
benefit, and so should our institutions, provided they prepare themselves.
The General Agreement on Trades in Services (GATS) under WTO is already exerting an important
effect,  giving  us  meaningful  protection.  For  example,  it  was  a  decisive  factor  in  our  favour  in  the
CLOB dispute.
3
BIS Review 30/2000
We finally settled CLOB on acceptable terms without actually going to the WTO. But our rights at the
WTO were a major factor which helped bring about this outcome. This measure of protection afforded
by WTO’s multilateral framework gives us additional strategic reason to pursue the liberalisation of
financial markets, ours as well as other countries’.
Free trade agreements
But  we  need  a  fall-back  position  in  case  WTO  runs  into  trouble.  After  the  fiasco  of  the  Seattle
Ministerial Meeting, such a scenario has become less unlikely. This is why we are pursuing free trade
agreements (FTAs) with several potential partners. These FTAs will lead to further opening up of the
financial sector.
Other  countries  are  doing  the  same.  The  EU  is  enlarging  its  markets  through  FTAs  with  East
European, African and Latin American economies. North and South America, including the US, aim
to conclude a Free Trade Area of the Americas by 2005. Japan and South Korea have mooted the idea
of a Northeast Asia FTA, but otherwise, amidst this flurry of activity,  Asia  has  been  conspicuously
quiet.  Our  FTA strategy  is  an  insurance policy  so that  we  will  not  be  left  out  in the  cold,  should a
weakened WTO fail to protect our interests.
In every FTA negotiation, our partner will ask for bilateral trade concessions beyond what we have
committed in WTO. Our regime for trade in goods is already almost totally open. What many of our
FTA partners want is preferential market access in services, in particular in financial services. For the
US, this would be a major motivation for their considering an FTA with Singapore.
Singapore  financial  institutions  must  clearly  brace  themselves  for  the  greater  competition  this
development would bring.
Financial sector reform - a change in mindset
4.
Our response to these challenges must be to press on with liberalising and upgrading in the financial
sector.  The  key  shift  is  in  the  mindset  of  the  players.  We  must  be  keenly  aware  of  the  changing
environment,  and  of  the  urgency  to  respond.  For  all  the  concrete  changes  over  the  last  two  years,
changing  mindsets  will  be  even  harder.  And  mindsets  must  change  on  all  sides:  the  financial
institutions, the investing public, and the MAS.
Institutions
In  the  recently  liberalised  industries  like  banking,  insurance  and  stockbroking,  institutions  need  a
sense of urgency, to be aware that even if they are not immediately threatened they will be unless they
act soon.
Singapore bankers used to feel very comfortable about things. To quote one who knew that the salad
days would not last: “As a banker, all I need to do is to do what MAS tells me to do, and not do what
MAS disallows, and the bank will make money”.
Contrast this  with  what  Rolf  Breuer  of  Deutsche  Bank  said  in  London  two  weeks  ago:  “There  is  a
sense of being insecure, afraid and uncertain. The markets have changed, the customers have changed,
and  the  competition  has  changed.  On  the  internet,  many  traditional  banking  services  are  obsolete”.
[reported in Straits Times]
Fortunately, attitudes in Singapore are also changing. Mr Wee Cho Yaw, in announcing good results
for UOB this year, said that he foresaw fierce competition ahead. Straits Times reported [25 Mar]: “the
outlook is OK for the next one or two years, but beyond that is an open guess. Three to four years on
… I don’t know … how the big banking giants will affect us, but I assume margins will be squeezed”.
Mr  Wee  is  one  of  our  shrewdest  bankers  and  the  industry  would  do  well  to  take  note  that  he  is
worried.
BIS Review 30/2000
4
Local banks  have  upgraded  their  corporate  governance.  They  have  renewed  their  boards,  appointed
nominating committees, and emphasised recruitment of talent, including from abroad. The structures
are now in place. But getting the new forms to work as intended will take time and effort. Banks must
persevere to strengthen their boards and management, their systems of recruitment and promotion, and
their ethos of shareholder value, meritocracy and professionalism.
Investing public
The  public  needs  to  shift  more  towards  an  investment  rather  than  a  punting  mentality.  Few  fully
appreciate  the  meaning  of  caveat  emptor:  that  they  take  responsibility  for  their  own  investment
decisions, and accept the risks along with the upside. Unfortunately this is only brought home when
the market crashes, or when problems surface.
The  tech  stock  mania  has  reached  Asia.  Even  Abby  Cohen  of  Goldman  Sachs,  the  foremost  Wall
Street bull, last week sounded a cautionary note about tech stocks, and stressed the importance of a
diversified investment portfolio. In Hong Kong, tom.com was 669 times over-subscribed. An old lady
queuing  up  for  her  application  form  was  heard  to  ask  “What  is  the  internet”?  People  believe  that
tom.com is a sure bet, even though it has no business and no revenues to date.
Mr Andrew Sheng, Chairman of HK’s Securities and Futures Commission, has been trying to cool the
frenzy.  But  he  told  me  that  investor  education  does  not  work.  This  is  the  universal  lament  of
regulators.  As  Securities  &  Exchange  Commission  Chairman  Arthur  Levitt  Jr  said  recently,  “No
government agency can protect you from your own foolishness”.
Our dot-com mania is much milder, but Singaporeans too are carried along by the general enthusiasm
for tech stocks. MPs have already expressed concern about SGX’s more liberal listing rules, because
they fear the public does not understand the risks, and may even believe that the government approves
of the companies, or else it would not have allowed Singaporeans to invest in them. Much as we hope
to prevent the dot-com enthusiasm from getting out of hand, we cannot go back to merit regulation,
judging the business merits of IPO candidates. The surest form of investor education is to get burnt.
But we hope the lesson, if it comes, will not be too painful.
MAS
As the regulator, MAS must continue to build up its expertise and new skills, to better understand and
recognise the different types and magnitudes of risk faced by financial institutions. This will equip us
to assess the adequacy of systems and capabilities set up by financial institutions to manage risk, and
to craft appropriate supervisory responses.
We seek to regulate with a lighter touch, but a lighter touch does not mean doing less. Risk-focused
supervision is more difficult to do than taking a one-size-fits-all approach. It demands much greater
understanding of the business and risk profile of the institution and the exercise  of judgement  as to
where dangers may possibly arise. We are already doing more regular on-site inspections of financial
institutions, and we are building up expertise in risk management. But to shift fully to risk-focussed
supervision will take longer.
At  the  same  time,  as  regulators,  we  must  learn  to  accept  that  there  are  risks  in  allowing  financial
institutions to innovate. It is a supervisory challenge that we simply have to manage. We used to be
able to add on many layers of bullet proofing, in the hope of reducing risks to the bare minimum  -
substantial  capital  requirements,  plus  hidden  reserves,  plus  unrealised  valuation  surpluses,  etc.  The
cost was a sluggish industry and low returns. This is no longer viable.
We must be more explicit in assessing the risks, and in setting the safety margin that we require. We
expect institutions to comply  with  our requirements  with  some  to  spare,  and  not  to try  to  game  the
rules  that  have  been  set.  They  must  make  prudent  commercial  decisions,  which  rules  alone  cannot
compel them to do. Banks and life insurance companies in particular have a special responsibility to
safeguard the interest of  depositors  and  policy  holders.  But  within these limits institutions  will also
5
BIS Review 30/2000
want to mobilise their balance sheets and maximise shareholder returns, and we must allow them to do
so.
Risks are a matter of judgement as much as calculation. Different MAS officers will not necessarily all
take the same view of what risks are acceptable. The officers responsible for supervision will naturally
be  more  conservative  than  those  promoting  the  financial  sector.  Managed  well,  this  tension  is
constructive.  Officers  must  continue  to  speak  up  and  express  their  views,  even  though  they  may
sometimes be overruled.
With  this  approach  to  regulation,  it  is  imperative  for  MAS  to  foster  closer  cooperation  with  the
industry. We have made a serious effort to build a constructive exchange and dialogue with the private
sector.  We  must  continue  to  strengthen  this  culture  of  openness.  Central  bankers  must  treat  some
matters with the utmost discretion, to be discussed only in hushed tones among a select priesthood.
But we cannot do all our business this way.
In our day-to-day dealings with the financial institutions, we have to be constantly willing to explain
the rationale for decisions and policies. At the same time, we must listen to proposals and ideas from
the industry and feedback. As we continue to liberalise, we will need inputs from industry participants
on many issues. We have to understand the industry’s point of view, and yet not be captured by the
industry we are regulating. This mindset must permeate the whole of MAS, to every staff member.
5.
Industry specific issues
Banks
The  first  priority  for  banks  is  to  upgrade  their  capabilities  and  strengthen  their  management  teams.
This is the only way for them to hold their own in the new environment, either by themselves or linked
up  with  others  in  a  strategic  alliance  or  merger.  Banks  also  need  to  prepare  themselves  for  new
business opportunities, especially e-banking.
MAS will track the progress of the banking liberalisation programme. We will review the status next
year,  and  decide  on  further  steps  to  open  up  the  sector.  Local  banks  will  come  under  increasing
pressure,  not  from  MAS,  but  from  the  rapid  changes  in  technology  and  the  market.  The  banks  will
have  to  continually  reassess  their  competitive  positions  and  strategies,  and  adapt  themselves  as
conditions change.
MAS  will  continue  discussing  with  the  local  banks  ways  to  increase  bank  transparency  further,  for
example  by  disclosing  more  information  on  remuneration  and  incentive  structures,  related  party
transactions,  the  banks’  risk  profiles  and  their  risk  management  processes.  Greater  disclosure  will
reinforce corporate governance. Singapore banks are ahead of most of their Asian counterparts in these
two areas, but they are still some way from the best international practices.
We  are  reviewing  the  current  Minimum  Liquid  Assets  and  Minimum  Cash  Balance  requirements
imposed on banks, and the capital requirements for financial holding companies and banking groups.
This is part of the shift from regulation to supervision, replacing “one-size-fits-all” requirements with
a  more  “tailored”  approach.  We  should  not  unnecessarily  disadvantage  Singapore  banks  vis-à-vis
foreign competitors.
We  are  reviewing  bank  involvement  in  non-financial  activities,  and  the  cross-holding  structures
typical of Singapore banking groups. An appropriate separation between financial and non-financial
activities is important to minimise the risk of contagion and ensure that management is focussed on the
core business of banking. This is a complex issue, which MAS will study carefully, and discuss with
the banks. Changes to existing rules can have major implications for the players, so MAS will take
care to give them enough time in the implementation, to make the adjustments without disrupting the
markets.
BIS Review 30/2000
6
Insurance
Insurance  companies  need  to  raise  their  standards  of  professionalism  and  proficiency.  They  must
become  more  efficient  and  upgrade  customer  service.  They  must  also  become  as  competent  as
professional fund managers in managing their funds. I hope that the liberalisation of the industry will
give them the competitive impetus to do so.
Moving forward in a liberalised insurance market, MAS needs to promulgate a framework for capital
adequacy  that  is  risk-based  and  which  enhances  standards  of  corporate  governance  and  market
conduct. This will encourage innovation in the industry while at the same time guard the interests of
policy holders. MAS will also work with the industry to raise disclosure standards to international best
practice. We have formed a committee comprising leading industry representatives and MAS officials,
to recommend changes to improve the efficiency, transparency and quality of distribution of insurance
products. This  will include  the study  of  alternative  distribution  channels  such  as  the  internet,  direct
marketing and bancassurance.
In developing the insurance industry, we aim to service emerging opportunities in the Asian market.
We will also promote new insurance activities, such as specialised underwriting skills and Alternative
Risk Transfer (ART) activities.
Capital markets
In addition to sound and forward-looking financial institutions, it is important that we develop broad
and deep capital markets. These are two complementary pillars of a vibrant and dynamic financial hub.
Our domestic markets alone will not sustain the depth, breadth and resilience needed by liquid capital
markets. It is thus critical for us to develop the equity and debt markets to help service Asian needs,
and be linked up with global markets.
Foreign companies must find distinct advantages to list on SGX, or to issue bonds in Singapore. They
want  to  raise  capital  at  the  lowest  cost,  and  find  liquidity  and  support  for  their  securities  in  the
secondary market. This requires adequate interest from local and foreign investors for securities issued
in  Singapore.  We  must  thus  offer  investors  easy  access  to  trading  securities  and  derivatives  in
Singapore, as a key Asian leg in their global cycle.
Equities
In  the  equities  market,  although  SGX  was  the  first  exchange  in  Asia  to  merge  and  demutualise,  in
other areas, other countries are ahead. For example, we have been slow to develop online trading. To
get  more  shares  traded  online,  SGX  will  build  up  IT  capacity  and  systems  at  the  exchange  and  the
brokerages,  and  ensure  that  prudential  safeguards  are  in  place.  SGX  is  also  considering  faster
liberalisation  of  commissions  for  on-line  trading,  so  that  it  need  no  longer  regulate  what  brokers
charge and whether they give customers discounts.
SGX must attract more foreign companies to list and trade actively in Singapore. This will not be easy.
Unlike  with  bonds,  equities  still  tend  to  be  traded  most  actively  in  the  exchanges  where  they  have
primary listings, either their home countries or nowadays perhaps NASDAQ. The NYSE lists many
foreign companies as secondary listings, but these foreign shares are much less liquid than US shares.
SGX  should  also  seek  alliances  with  other  exchanges,  both  in  the  region  and  globally.  Exchanges
worldwide are transforming themselves and consolidating, even faster than anyone expected just a few
months ago. So SGX must forge these links quickly, and position itself to collaborate with other major
players. On the futures side, the SGX-DT (formerly SIMEX) linkup with CME, and now as part of the
Globex alliance, was a vital strategic move. On our part, MAS will help to facilitate such alliances, by
continuing to seek agreements for regulatory cooperation with foreign regulators.
SGX will face competition as an exchange, just like the brokers. In the US, ECNs pose a significant
challenge to NYSE and NASDAQ. This is partly because NYSE and NASDAQ are less efficient than
7
BIS Review 30/2000
ECNs, and partly the result of regulatory arbitrage. If SGX is to hold its own against competition, it
must not leave openings for ECNs to exploit.
MAS will develop appropriate supervisory oversight over SGX, as a profit-oriented exchange. We are
also  looking  to  further  improve  disclosure  standards  of  listed  companies.  For  individual  brokerage
firms, we are taking measures to help them improve their competitiveness. These include moving to
risk-based  capital  requirements  and  allowing  brokerages  to  enter  new  businesses  such  as  fund
management and corporate finance. This will encourage them to go into higher value-added activities
such as product origination.
Debt
We have made significant headway in developing the S$ debt market. Last year saw S$9.2 bn worth of
non-government S$ issues, more than double the amount raised in 1998.
To promote the bond market further, MAS will address both the government as well as statutory board
issues. We  will improve  the  efficiency  and  liquidity  of  the  SGS  market,  and  do  more  to  encourage
institutional investors to participate in the market. We have worked out a package of measures for this
purpose, which we will announce soon.
We will encourage more GLCs and statutory boards to tap the bond market for their funding needs. To
broaden and deepen the debt market, we are studying ways to promote asset-backed securitisation, in
particular  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS).  We  will  also  look  at  the  feasibility  of  establishing  a
mortgage corporation. This would pool mortgages from financial institutions so as to jump-start the
development of the MBS market.
Sustaining  a  flow  of foreign  issuers  remains  the  fundamental  challenge.  Global  issuers  will  seek  to
diversify  their  funding  currencies,  and  we  have  to  offer  Singapore  as  an  efficient  and  credible
marketplace, with the Singapore Dollar a stable and reliable currency of funding. Asian borrowers will
also  turn  increasingly  to  the  bond  markets  to  reduce  their  reliance  on  bank  funding.  Singapore  can
offer Asian borrowers a venue to raise capital, not necessarily in S$, by reaching out to Asian-based
investors  who  will  be  more  familiar  with  their  businesses,  and  will  view  their  risks  with  less
apprehension than investors outside Asia.
We recognise that the liquidity of the S$ market, and MAS rules to discourage the internationalisation
of  the  S$,  constrain  the  growth  of  the  bond  market.  We  are  not  likely  to  change  our  basic  stance
against  S$  internationalisation.  But  we  have  relaxed  the  specific  restrictions,  and  will  continue  to
review regularly how much further we can safely go.
International bond markets are rapidly moving towards electronic trading, as equity markets have long
done. This  will  tend  to  concentrate  bond  trading  in  a  few  centres  around the  world  -  London,  New
York, and perhaps one Asian centre. Singapore will contend to be that Asian centre. But trading alone
is  insufficient  to  make  us  a  major  hub  for  capital  markets  in  Asia.  We  must  attract  and  develop
expertise  in  originating  and  structuring  debt  issues  and  products,  areas  where  we  have  traditionally
lagged behind Hong Kong and the more developed markets.
Fund management
The Government will continue to put out more money for the fund managers to manage. We will also
encourage individuals to be more active in managing their own retirement savings. Retirement funds
should  earn  higher  returns  than  the  risk-free  interest  rate  offered  by  the  CPF  Board.  Some  have
suggested that the CPF should therefore raise its interest rate, but that would be the wrong approach. It
is far better to get individuals to invest their funds directly, instead of relying on the Government to do
it  for  them.  This  will  not  only  be  better  for  developing  the  fund  management  industry.  It  will  also
promote the spirit of self-reliance and personal responsibility that is essential to Singapore’s success.
Dr Richard Hu announced in the Budget Speech that MOF will introduce a Supplementary Retirement
Scheme. This is a tax-advantaged vehicle for individuals to save for retirement, over and above CPF
BIS Review 30/2000
8
contributions,  like  US  401(k)  accounts.  If  this  scheme  takes  off,  it  will  give  a  boost  to  the  fund
management and annuities industry.
But  the  main  issue  is  the  CPF  funds  themselves.  The  CPF  already  allows  members  to  invest  their
savings in unit trusts or other privately managed long term investment schemes. But most members
still just leave their money with the CPF. We should find more effective ways to encourage and enable
CPF members to look after their retirement
Conclusion
6.
There is no turning back from our quest to liberalise and to go global. We will continue developing a
more  open  and  competitive  environment,  in  order  to  create  a  dynamic  and  vibrant  world-class
financial centre.
In  this  new  regime,  local  financial  institutions  must  upgrade  and  match  international  standards  of
management  and  technology,  or  risk  becoming  marginalised.  MAS  will  work  together  with  the
industry in their efforts to meet this challenge.
We need to build up a critical mass of players and activity in our capital markets. Refining the rules,
developing liquid capital markets and promoting the asset management industry will provide the basis
for attracting this critical mass.
Shifting  our  regulatory  regime  to  a  more  flexible  risk-based  supervisory  approach  will  encourage
existing and new players to innovate, expand, take a bolder approach and introduce new services and
products.  But  we  have  to  recognise  that  opening  up  means  exposing  ourselves  to  more  risk.  The
balance  between  prudential  concerns  and  liberalisation  is  a  fine  and  dynamic  one.  To  keep  this
balance, we need to be vigilant, and to respond promptly and flexibly to the rapid developments.
MAS therefore has its work cut out for itself. We must build MAS into an organisation able to carry
out the important and difficult tasks that have been entrusted to it. We have reorganised and reinforced
our departments in line with our expanded mission. We are training and developing our people, and
growing  our  talent  pool  through  further  recruitment. We  have  worked  hard at sharing  MAS’  vision
with our people, to get them to work together and not separately, or worse at cross-purposes. We have
had some success, and therefore we must now try harder still to do better.
However, MAS does not exist in a vacuum. A competent MAS is part of the Singapore Government,
just as a vibrant financial hub is part of the Singapore economy. To succeed as a financial hub depends
on more than financial reforms. The overall social, economic, and political climate and policies need
to  be sound.  Similarly,  MAS  can  function effectively  only  because  the  Singapore  Government  as  a
whole is honest, efficient, and committed to public service. If MAS does its work well, we will not
only  develop  an  international  financial  hub,  but  also  contribute  to  the  governance,  stability  and
prosperity of Singapore.
9
BIS Review 30/2000
