European Central Bank: Press Conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement given by Mr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
and Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Press Conference held in
Frankfurt, on 11 May 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here to report on the outcome of today’s meeting
of the Governing Council of the ECB.
The Governing Council conducted its regular examination of the outlook for price developments and
the risks to price stability in the euro area. The interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the
Eurosystem was left at 3.75% and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit
facility were maintained at 4.75% and 2.75% respectively.
Allow me to give you an overview of the main elements of our assessment of the latest information on
monetary, financial market and other economic developments.
In March 2000 the three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 - covering the period from
January  to  March  2000 - rose  to  6.0%,  compared  with  5.9%  in  the  period  from  December  1999  to
February 2000. Consequently, M3 growth remained 1½ percentage points above the reference value of
4½%. The annual rate of increase in credit to the private sector also rose, to 10.9%, compared with
10.4%  in  the  previous  month.  These  figures  confirm  our  earlier  assessment,  namely  that  liquidity
continued to be ample in the euro area in early 2000.
As regards economic developments, recent information confirms the very positive outlook for strong
growth in the euro area. All available indicators and forecasts seem to point to a phase of continued
economic  growth,  following  the  upturn  observed  in  the  second  half  of  1999.  Industrial  production
rebounded in February and this, together with further increases in  capacity  utilisation  and  industrial
confidence  up  to  April,  suggests  an  ongoing  strengthening  in  industrial  activity.  In  addition,  with
consumer  confidence  remaining  at  an  all-time  high  and  unemployment  continuing  to  decline,  the
recent strength of private consumption should be sustained. Looking at the world economy, the upturn
in growth has become more broadly based, pertaining to both industrial and emerging economies, and
most forecasts indicate that current growth differentials between economic areas are in the course of
narrowing.
Notwithstanding  the  strong  growth  performance  and  favourable  outlook  for  euro  area  economic
activity,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  has  continued  to  decline  over  the  past  few  weeks  and  has
thereby moved further out of line with the increasingly positive economic fundamentals of the euro
area, as well as international balance of payments positions.
In March consumer price inflation, as measured by increases in the Harmonised Index of Consumer
Prices (HICP), rose to 2.1%, up from 2.0% in the previous month. This was due to developments in
both oil prices and exchange rates. A moderation in 12-month inflation rates can be expected in the
course of 2000, reflecting the decline in oil prices from around mid-March and base effects dampening
the increase in inflation rates compared with the same month a year earlier. However, what matters for
monetary policy are the trends underlying the outlook for price stability in the medium term. In this
respect, the depreciation of the exchange rate of the euro, until it is reversed, will increase the risks to
price stability in the medium term. These risks have to be taken seriously in the light of the current
strong  upswing.  Other  important  factors  which  will  have  a  crucial  impact  on  the  outlook  for  price
stability over the medium term are a continuation of currently moderate wage developments, a further
fiscal  consolidation  in  line  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  further  implementation  of
structural reforms in product and labour markets.
The Governing Council would like its message to be very clear: price stability in the euro area will be
maintained and, as I already said last week, the citizens of Europe can be confident that their savings
1
BIS Review 39/2000
and pensions will keep their value over time. Price stability will help to turn the current upswing into a
long period of high economic growth and falling unemployment, and it will strengthen the currency.
Finally,  I  should  like  to  inform  you  about  two  items  related  to  the  field  of  statistics.  First,  the
Governing  Council  has  decided  in  the  near  future  to  publish  a  comprehensive  description  of  the
statistical information collected and compiled by the ESCB, mainly in the areas of money and banking
statistics, securities issues, interest rates, balance of payments and financial accounts, with pointers to
possible developments in these areas. Second, the Governing Council has adopted a revised Guideline
and a revised Recommendation on “the statistical reporting requirements of the ECB in the field  of
balance  of  payments  statistics,  the  international  reserves  template  and  international  investment
position  statistics”.  Both  the  Guideline  and  the  Recommendation  will  be  published  in  the  Official
Journal of the European Communities in due course.
BIS Review 39/2000
2
