Bank of Japan’s July report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 19 July 2000.
 The Bank’s View2
Japan’s  economy  is  recovering  gradually,  with  corporate  profits  and  business  fixed  investment
continuing to increase.
With regard to exogenous demand, net exports (real exports minus real imports) continue to follow a
moderate upward trend due to steady developments in overseas economies, and public investment is
picking up reflecting the progress in the implementation of the supplementary budget for fiscal 1999.
As regards domestic private demand, business fixed investment is increasing. The recovery in private
consumption continues to be weak as a whole through lack of notable improvements in employment
and  income  conditions,  although  there  are  somewhat  positive  signs  in  some  indicators.  Housing
investment is mostly unchanged.
Reflecting such developments in final demand, industrial production is increasing. Corporate profits
and  sentiment  continue  to  improve,  and  the  number  of  firms  that  take  positive  action,  such  as
increasing  the  amount  of  fixed  investment,  is  increasing,  especially  in  high-growth  sectors.  Income
conditions  of  households  still  remain  severe,  but  the  decreases  in  the  number  of  employees  and  in
wages are slowing, while regular and overtime payments as well as new job offers are increasing in
line with the recovery in corporate activities.
As for the outlook, public investment is likely to start decreasing in the near future, but net exports are
expected  to  continue  increasing  gradually,  reflecting  the  expansion  in  overseas  economies.  In  the
corporate sector, firms still strongly feel that they have excess equipment and that they should reduce
their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.  However,  it  is  very  likely  that  fixed  investment  in  high-
growth  sectors,  including  those  related  with  information  technology  services,  will  increase  as
corporate  profits  continue  to  recover.  Moreover,  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  will  increase
household  income  and  this  in  turn  is  expected  to  boost  private  consumption.  However,  the  pace  of
recovery in household income will be modest for the time being, since firms’ perceptions of excess
employment still persist, and thus significant changes have not been observed in their efforts to reduce
personnel expenses. Overall, the economy is likely to recover gradually led mainly by business fixed
investment,  unless  there  are  major  adverse  external  shocks.  In  addition,  the  favourable  financial
environment created partly by the Bank’s monetary easing is expected to continue underpinning the
economy.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  decreasing  slightly,  reflecting  a  temporary  decline  in
international commodity prices such as crude oil prices. Domestic wholesale prices, notwithstanding
the fall in prices of electric machinery, are unchanged mainly due to the rise in prices of petroleum and
chemical  products  reflecting  the  increase  in  crude  oil  prices  to  date.  Meanwhile,  consumer  prices
continue to be somewhat weak owing to the slight decrease in the prices of private-sector services and
the decline in prices of imported products reflecting the past appreciation of the yen. Corporate service
prices are still falling slowly.
1  This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on July 17, 2000.
2  The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on July 17, 2000 as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 60/2000
As for the outlook on prices, downward pressure on prices stemming from weak demand is declining
significantly  while  an  economic  recovery  is  expected  to  continue  moderately.  Upward  pressure  on
prices is likely to arise temporarily from the increase in crude oil prices. On the other hand, in addition
to the declining trend of machinery prices due to technological innovations, the decline in prices of
consumer  goods  arising  from  the  past  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  the  streamlining  of  distribution
channels  will  exert  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Thus,  prices  overall  are  expected  to  be  stable  or
weak somewhat.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has generally stayed near zero, and financial institutions
have been confident about the availability of overnight funds. The amount of funds outstanding in the
call money market has increased slightly.
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  have  been  increasing  from  mid-June  reflecting  a  possible
termination of the zero interest rate policy. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds increased somewhat from mid-June and are recently moving
around 1.7 percent. The  yield  spread  between  private  bonds  (bank  debentures and  corporate  bonds)
and government bonds remains mostly unchanged.
Stock prices fell towards mid-June, but have recovered thereafter along with the rise in US stocks.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen temporarily rose to around 104 yen in late June against the US
dollar, but then started to decline. The yen is currently being traded in the range of 107-109 yen.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base has eased considerably. Given this, major banks are becoming  more active in extending  loans,
while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
On the other hand, the improvement in economic activities has not stimulated corporate demand for
external funds, since firms’ cash flow is increasing in parallel with a recovery in profits. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result, credit
demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish. Issuance of corporate
bonds and CPs has been steady.
Money stock (M2 + CDs) grew slower in June compared with the previous month on a year-on-year
basis.
In this financial environment, the lending attitude of financial institutions is perceived by firms as less
severe, and corporate financing conditions are easing.
BIS Review 60/2000
2
