Jürgen Stark: The emerging face of European banking
Speech  by  Dr  Jürgen  Stark,  Vice-President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  European  Banking
Technology Fair 2000, held in Frankfurt, on 30 October 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I
Given the pace of developments in the financial markets, any attempt to describe the emerging face of
European banking can only mean providing  an appraisal of  major current  trends  and  specifying  the
driving  forces  in  the  foreseeable  future.  The  various  determinants  in  the  financial  sector  operate  in
concert, as if in  an  interactive  process,  and  give  rise  to  ever-new  responses  by  the  banks  and  other
market players.
What, then, are some of the key factors that shape the image of the European banking sector?
I should like to dwell briefly on
• 
• 
• 
the integration of the European financial markets,
aspects of bank profitability, and of the shifting of focal points of business, and
the  impact  of  technology,  and  of  new  forms  of  organisation  in  the  banking  system
(catchword: “outsourcing”), and finally
 consolidation in the banking sector, which is gathering pace.
II
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  launch  of  the  euro  has  manifestly  fostered  integration  of  the  financial
markets  of  Europe.  However, some  distinctions  must  be drawn here.  Owing  to  the  single  monetary
policy and the interlinking of national markets through the TARGET payment system, the interbank
money  market  is  meanwhile  highly  integrated.  On  the  capital  market,  by  contrast,  (notwithstanding
some  progress  towards  integration)  genuine  European  segments  such  as  a  single  equity  market  and
bond market are still lacking. To help the bond market in particular to become more integrated, and to
enhance its liquidity, it is sometimes suggested that the national governments in the euro area should
pool their dept issuing with the aid of a central agency. But that would also imply a pooling of the
risks and liabilities of the public borrowers. That, however, would contravene Article 103 of the EU
Treaty (known as the “no-bail-out clause”), which prevents governments from assuming any liability
for other governments, and is therefore to be rejected.
Banks’  customer  business  has  been  affected  to  different  degrees  by  the  launch  of  the  euro.  Retail
banking in general has so far stayed a largely national domain on account of the prevailing tax, legal
and  “cultural”  differences  remaining  in  the  EU  countries.  In  other  words,  the  changes  due  to  the
advent  of  the  single  market  and  of  the  euro  are  rather  making  themselves  felt  gradually  in  retail
banking. In wholesale banking, by contrast, cross-border operations are continuing to accelerate, with
a focal point within the Euro area. Altogether, the growth rates of cross-border operations within the
euro area are much higher than those of domestic operations in many lines of business.
The higher degree of integration of the markets in Europe at the same time ensures stiffer cross-border
competition.  Credit  institutions’  interest-based  business  is  more  strongly  affected  by  that  than  their
off-balance-sheet operations, which generate commission earnings.
III
1
BIS Review 96/2000
However, the focal point of the business of many banks continues to lie in traditional, interest-based
business. On the continent, banks’ receivables from domestic lending operations are far higher - both
in absolute terms and relative to GDP - than, for instance, in the capital-market-based financial system
of  the  United  States.  Thus  the  virtually  global  decline  in  margins  in  banking  business  is  reflected
particularly clearly here. Although the share of non-interest-based receipts in the aggregate operational
revenue  of  continental  European  banks  has  gone  up  sharply  in  recent  years,  in  the  dynamic  and
profitable field of commission-based business (e.g. investment banking or asset management), many
credit  institutions  are  still  lagging  distinctly  behind  the  banks  in  English-speaking  countries.  The
often-cited  “return  on  equity”  (ROE)  figure  of  over  20%  reflects  magnitudes  which  have  yet  to  be
attained.
Altogether, the pressure on the banks to substitute other receipts for the relatively declining interest
income is increasing. A strategy geared merely to greater volume and higher risks in lending business
in order to stabilise or increase profitability could not work in the long run, and at all events could be
no substitute for the requisite structural change.
Further efforts will also be needed on credit institutions’ expenditure sides in order to enhance their
profitability.
A  number  of  countries  in  the  euro  area,  including  Germany,  are  sometimes  designated  as
“overbanked”  or  “overbranched”.  As  a  matter  of  fact  in  1998,  according  to  the  latest  IMF  figures,
Germany with about 1,800 inhabitants per bank office was, by international standards, distinctly below
the  figures  of  the  United  States  and  Japan  (about  4,300  and  2,900  inhabitants  per  bank  office
respectively),  and  also  below  the  United  Kingdom,  where  each  bank  office  caters  for  about  3,700
inhabitants.  On  the  other  hand,  according  to  statistics  of  the  OECD  and  BIS,  the  number  of  staff
members per bank office in Germany is much lower than, say, in the United States. On balance, the
ratio of “number of inhabitants to bank-office staff members” in Germany  is  below the comparable
figure in the United States. Moreover, the presentation of the current situation with the aid of simple
statistical indicators remains unsatisfactory. Qualitative factors, such as the duration of opening hours
or the range of services provided by bank offices are disregarded.
Despite  these  warranted  qualifications  of  statements  about  “overbanking”,  cost-intensive  and  not
always  very  profitable  branch-office  operations  are  sometimes  regarded  as  a  reason  why  German
banks, on an international comparison of profitability figures, tend to lie in mid-table.
IV
Ladies and  gentlemen,  the  deployment  of  new technologies  will no  doubt  also prompt  the  banks to
reconsider the dimensions of their branch networks. But the significance of technology extends well
beyond that: it is a main driving force behind change in the banking sector, and in financial markets
worldwide.
of the organisation of banking operations.
of the marketing of financial services, and
of communication between bank and customer,
At the moment, we are witnessing the advent of completely new forms
• 
• 
• 
A  very  important  platform  of  communication  between  banks  and  their  customers  in  the  future  will
unquestionably be the Internet. According to recent data, at the end of 1999 - in Germany alone - no
fewer than over 10 million online accounts were being operated. That represents a growth of as much
as 50% on the previous year. Current expansion is so dynamic that the forecasts of future growth, both
in  Germany  and  in  Europe,  lie  far  apart,  albeit  at  a  high  level.  The  wide  range  of  the  forecasts
demonstrates,  incidentally,  that  the  banking  sector  in  its  projects  and  development  has  to  plan  and
invest under conditions of great uncertainty, i.e. has to run significant strategic and other risks. That
applies to an even greater extent to “mobile banking”, e.g. via WAP (Wireless Application Protocol)
mobile phones, which is expected to expand sharply following the introduction of the UMTS standard.
BIS Review 96/2000
2
What  might  the  banking  business  of  the  future  look  like  under  these  conditions?  Many  observers
assume that in future at least retail banking will constitute a combination of “click and mortar”, i.e.
will be offered and implemented in the context of multi-channel banking strategies in several different
forms,  that  is  to  say  both  through  the  physical  branch  network  (“bricks  and  mortar  banks”)  and
through virtual PC banking windows, via WAP mobile phones and television sets. In this context, the
presumably  shrinking  branch  network  will  concentrate  increasingly  on  those  services  which  require
counselling, whereas the sale  of  products  and  settlement  of  banking  transactions  will  be  effected  in
large part online.
The  new  information  and  communication  technologies  may  have  significant  indirect  effects  in
business with corporate customers, too. Thus the new technologies may reinforce tendencies towards
disintermediation, since corporate customers are increasingly in a position to take personal charge of,
say, cash management and capital procurement as part of in-house banking operations.
Quite  generally,  the  emergence  of  financial  service  providers  on  the  Internet  not  only  ensures
enhanced  transparency  of  the  service  range  but  also  blurs  the  geographical  boundaries  of  business
operations.  This  increases  the  competitive  pressure  on  every  institution  on  account  of  foreign
competitors, as well as domestic ones. At the same time, the degree of customer attachment decreases.
Especially  at  the  international  level,  banks  compete  not  only  with  other  banks,  but  also  with  other
enterprises, such as insurance companies, investment and pension funds or online brokers.
So-called  “aggregators”, i.e.  Internet  platforms  which juxtapose  offers  by  different  financial  service
providers  at  the  touch  of  a  button,  increase  price  pressure  still  more,  above  all  that  for  standard
services.
V
Closely associated with the enhanced deployment of technologies such as the Internet, but also parallel
to that, are the efforts of many banks to realise cost savings by optimising their own organisation. The
outsourcing  of  certain  banking  operations  is  high  on  the  agenda  here,  and  is  regarded  by  many
institutions as a potential means of streamlining their operations. It is particularly the new technologies
that are making the outsourcing of functions appear attractive, and are encouraging it.
In this connection, the banking supervisors must define the possibilities and limitations of outsourcing
very carefully. In my view, a prudential bias is appropriate here. In the final analysis, a purely virtual
bank, which has outsourced almost all its functions to other enterprises, would be incompatible with
our supervisory legislation. Moreover, in the sphere of the outsourcing accepted by  the  supervisors,
the monitoring and control options of the bank’s management must be retained without reservation.
The auditing rights and control options of the banking supervisors must likewise be safeguarded.
VI
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  irrespective  of  any  new  marketing  channels  for  financial  services,  and  of
innovative forms of the division of labour by means of outsourcing, in future credit institutions will
mould the structure of the banking sector in different ways from in the past. What I am thinking of is
one of the most conspicuous developments in the field of banking, namely the consolidation process.
A topical example of that is the recently announced merger of Banca Intesa and Banca Commerciale
Italiana (BCI). That merger is intended to create the largest credit institution in Italy, which wishes to
establish itself among the Big Banks of Europe.
The  trend  towards  consolidation  in  the  European  financial  system,  which  has  been  evident  for  a
number of years, has several dimensions, notably:
• 
• 
the question of which banking categories are affected, and why.
the geographical aspect; and
3
BIS Review 96/2000
An  analysis  shows  that  mergers  in  the  European  banking  sector  have  hitherto  mainly  taken  place
within  national  markets.  Mergers  between  smaller  banks  (especially  in  the  savings  bank  and
cooperative  bank  sectors)  are  in  the  forefront  in  terms  of  number.  In  these  areas,  the  objective  of
mergers  is  frequently  to  reach  an  optimum  size  of  bank  or  even  to  ensure  the  survival  of  the
institution.  The  optimum  minimum  size  of  a  bank  (which  is  difficult  to  define  anyway)  has
presumably  increased  in  recent  years,  not  least  on  account  of  the  need  to  invest  in  state-of-the-art
banking technology, and to ensure more efficient compliance with supervisory requirements.
Mergers and takeovers involving major, mainly private institutions must undoubtedly be seen against
the background of the need to secure a better position on national markets. Ultimately, however, all
mergers are motivated by the wish to cut costs by exploiting rationalisation potentials, for instance by
reducing the branch network, some of which is then redundant.
Altogether, although the number of mergers in Europe declined in the second half of the nineties, the
volume  of  the  business  operations  involved  substantially  increased.  Such  mergers  resulted  in  the
creation of more than fifteen of the thirty largest banks in the Euro area, and the average size of the
five largest banks in Europe has doubled since 1995. As a result, the degree of concentration on the
banking markets of many countries has vastly increased. Especially in the smaller countries of Europe,
the five largest banks often account for more than 50% of the national market. In some countries, such
as Belgium or the Netherlands, the concentration is even more marked; there, in each country the two
largest  banking  corporations  account  for  over  90%  of  the  total  volume  of  business.  In  the  larger
countries,  the  degree  of  concentration  is  considerably  lower,  with  Germany  having  the  least
concentrated  banking  market  in  the  Euro  area  (the  market  share  of  the  five  largest  banks,  on  a
single-institution basis, and relative to the domestic volume of business: about 20%).
Cross-border mergers have so far been less numerous, but have been at the centre of public interest on
account of the size and eminence of the banks concerned. The primary aim of the banks involved has
been to present themselves more effectively in the face of European and global competition, as well as
the  wish  to  open  up  new  markets  and  new  lines  of  business.  I  may  mention,  as  the  most  recent
example,  the  announced  takeover  of  the  Norwegian  Christiana  Bank  og  Kreditkassen  by  the
Finnish-Swedish-Danish  financial  group  Merita  Nordbanken.  Beyond  the  European  horizon,  I  may
also mention the merger between Deutsche Bank and Bankers Trust.
Viewed  as  a  whole,  however,  the  number  of  cross-border  mergers  has  hitherto  been  very  limited,
compared to those within national boundaries. What are the principal reasons for that?
Mergers are considerably easier to implement if they take place in the familiar cultural, linguistic and
legal (especially tax) environment.
Particularly  in  the  larger  countries,  there  have  so  far  been  enough  options  for  mergers  and
diversifications on the home market, so that it has not been essential to step over the border.
In  part,  national  mergers,  with  the  establishment  of  “national  champions”,  are  a  preliminary  to
cross-border expansion.
The differences in corporate cultures, which give rise to frictional losses, are much more obvious in
international terms, especially if banks from countries with different banking systems are involved.
Given  the  problems  posed  by  cross-border  mergers,  a  number  of  banks  are  currently  fostering  the
establishment  of  pan-European  strategic  alliances.  Mutual  capital  interests  are  intended  to  bolster
cooperation agreements, and to reduce the risk of hostile takeovers.
Even  so,  in  my  opinion,  and  notwithstanding  all  the  problems,  an  increase  in  the  number  of
cross-border mergers in the banking and financial sectors is to be expected in future, as well as more
mergers within national markets.
Ladies and gentlemen, a lot is currently in a state of flux in the European banking sector. The markets
are  undergoing  massive  changes.  The  pace  of  such  structural  changes  actually  seems  to  be
VII
BIS Review 96/2000
4
accelerating,  with  not  least  the  ongoing  IT  revolution,  new  types  of  division  of  labour  and  the
consolidation of the banking sector exerting a significant impact.
Needless to say, in a more dynamic environment the risks faced by credit institutions will increase.
Those  risks  must  remain  manageable  by  the  individual  enterprise  and  by  the  market  as  a  whole.
Specific banks will withdraw from the market in future, too; the propensity to withdraw might even
increase. It is therefore essential for credit institutions,  supervisory  authorities and  policy  makers  to
safeguard  the  stability  of  the  European  financial  system  effectively.  Only  then  can  the  European
banking  and  financial  sector  discharge  its  macroeconomic  duties,  that  is  to  say,  bolster  economic
growth and employment efficiently.
Thank you very much for your attention!
5
BIS Review 96/2000
