Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy in Norway
Opening remarks by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Norges Bank, to Norges Bank workshop on
“The Conduct of Monetary Policy in Open Economies”, held in Oslo, on 26-27 October 2000.
 Introduction
I  am  happy  to  welcome  you  to  this  workshop  on  “The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  open
economies”. The  workshop  brings  together  researchers  and  practitioners  of  monetary  policy  from  a
wide  variety  of  countries.  The  aim  is  to  stimulate  exchanges  both  across  countries  and  between
researchers and monetary policymakers on a topic of common interest.
Research on monetary policy is an international field. We thus find it tremendously useful to be a part
of an international network of researchers and practitioners concerned with monetary policymaking.
Contact  across  central  banks  does  represent  an  important  source  of  inspiration  to  the  policy
discussions in Norges Bank.
Norwegian monetary policy
The papers presented at this workshop address topics that are highly relevant to monetary policy  in
general  and  Norwegian  monetary  policy  in  particular.  Some  of  you  may  be  familiar  with  the
Norwegian system. For others it may be unknown that Norway has a monetary policy regime that is
unique in an international context: it is a system of neither a fixed exchange rate nor an inflation target.
Let me explain in more detail:
The political authorities formulate Norges Bank’s mandate for the conduct of  monetary  policy.  The
Exchange Rate Regulation of 6 May 1994 states that monetary policy in Norway should be aimed at
maintaining a stable exchange rate in relation to European currencies over time.
Norges Bank has defined “European currencies”  as  the  euro.  What  we  mean  by  a  “stable  exchange
rate…. over time” needs to be made more precise. The krone exchange rate has fluctuated in recent
years,  in  spite  of  Norges  Bank’s  active  use  of  instruments,  indicating  that  Norges  Bank  cannot
fine-tune  movements  in  the  krone  exchange  rate.  Thus,  in  its  use  of  the  interest  rate  Norges  Bank
focuses on the fundamental preconditions for stability of the krone exchange rate over time.
Empirical work on the Norwegian economy suggests that there is mean reversion in the real exchange
rate. This implies that higher inflation in Norway than among its trading partners tends to be followed
by a nominal exchange rate depreciation. Thus, in order to stabilise the nominal exchange rate against
the euro, monetary policy instruments must be oriented towards bringing inflation down to the level
aimed at by the Eurosystem.
However, we cannot exclude the possibility that a shock that leads to a change in the equilibrium real
exchange  rate  occurs.  Examples  of  such  shocks  are  a  large  permanent  shock  to  the  oil  price  or  a
permanent increase in the government expenditure. If such shocks occur, Norges Bank must prevent
monetary  policy  from  contributing  to  higher  inflation  or  a  deflationary  recession,  since  that  would
undermine the confidence in the krone. There are, however, some institutional responses that will take
place  if  the  Bank  is not able  to return  the  exchange  rate  back  to its  initial  range,  as  defined  by  the
mandate, without contributing to inflation or a deflationary recession. I will come back to this issue
later in my speech.
1
BIS Review 101/2000
The base drift problem
If  the  inflation  rate  in  Norway  deviates  from  the  inflation  rate  in  the  euro  countries,  the  nominal
exchange  rate  will  need  to  adjust  over  time.  However,  some  of  you  may  object  that  stabilising  the
Norwegian inflation rate at the level aimed at by the euro countries may not be sufficient to stabilise
the nominal exchange rate. The reason is that inflation in both Norway and the euro countries will be
subject to stochastic shocks. This means that even if the expected inflation rates in Norway and the
euro  countries  were  the  same,  the  actual  inflation  rates  would  deviate.  Technically  speaking,  the
relative  price  levels  will  be  subject  to  base  drift,  and  so  will  the  nominal  exchange  rate.
Professor Larry Ball has discussed this in a paper on Norwegian monetary policy.
Keeping  the  relative  price  level  constant  would  require  that  we  target  the  price  level  and  not  the
inflation rate. However, in the 1920s Norway experienced that a policy aimed at achieving a specific
level  for  the  purchasing  power  of  money  led  to  substantial  macroeconomic  instability.  Aiming  at  a
price  level  target  may  in  some  situations  require  a  monetary  policy  that  leads  to  a  deflationary
recession, which may be hard to turn due to the zero limit on nominal interest rates. In other situations
it  may  require  inflating  the  economy.  A  monetary  policy  leading  to  inflation  or  a  deflationary
recession will undermine confidence in the krone, thereby generating exchange rate instability.
We also note that the present exchange rate range has more or less prevailed for more than 10 years,
indicating that base drift may not represent a substantial problem in practical policymaking.
How does Norges Bank operate?
Forecasts  of  inflation  and  general  macroeconomic  development  play  a  large  role  in  the  conduct  of
Norwegian monetary policy. Projections are presented in the Bank’s quarterly Inflation Reports. If the
inflation forecast does not approach the level aimed at by the euro countries in 2 to 3 years for a given
interest rate path, Norges Bank will consider adjusting the interest rate. In this narrow sense, one could
say  that  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  Norway  has  some  similarities  with  “inflation  forecast
targeting”, in Lars Svensson’s terminology.
In addition to economic forecasts, we aim to develop tools that can supplement the use of our large
macroeconometric  model.  At  the  moment  we  are  working  on  the  construction  of  simple  calibrated
models that will be presented at this workshop. The calibrated models can be employed, for instance,
to test the performance of simple indicator rules.
How does the Norwegian system differ from inflation targeting?
The institutional arrangement for monetary policy in Norway does differ in some respects from that in
countries with an inflation target. Some central banks with explicit inflation targets  have  to  give  an
explanation  to  the  Government  or  other  authorities  if  the  inflation  target  is  not  being  met.  Our
mandate,  however, refers  to an  exchange  rate  target  as  opposed to  an  inflation  target.  If  a  situation
arises  in  which  Norges  Bank  is  not  able  to  return  the  krone  to  its  initial  range,  as  defined  in  the
mandate, without triggering inflation or a deflationary recession, the Bank will inform the authorities
that measures other than those available to the central bank are required. One possibility could then be
to recommend fiscal measures that make it possible to bring the krone exchange rate back to its initial
range and stabilise it.
Some observers have argued that the possibility that such situations can arise creates an uncertainty
that may weaken the credibility of Norwegian monetary policy. However, Norges Bank has declared
that  it  cannot  with  open  eyes  contribute  to  higher  inflation  or  a  deflationary  recession.  Financial
market indicators show no evidence of monetary policy lacking credibility.
Although the actual conduct of monetary policy is similar to inflation targeting, there are a number of
institutional differences between the Norwegian system and inflation targeting regimes.
BIS Review 101/2000
2
1. 
2. 
Norway has a long tradition of cooperation between the political authorities and the social
partners.  Income  and  wage  determination  is  fairly  centralised,  and  the  social  partners
evaluate the effects of wage outcomes on employment.
In a number of countries that have switched to a monetary policy regime based on inflation
targeting,  fiscal  policy  is  oriented  towards  reducing  government  debt  and  deficits.  In
Norway, fiscal policy has traditionally played an important role in demand management.
This task is facilitated by the fact that the Norwegian government has greater financial leeway than
most other countries, due to its oil revenues.
Norwegian government authorities receive substantial revenues from the extraction of oil in the North
Sea.  Norway  is  the  world’s  second  largest  exporter  of  oil,  and  the  budget  surplus  is  currently
approximately 11% of GDP.
Oil revenues increase consumption possibilities. However, it is a challenge to manage these resources
in  a  way  that  increases  welfare  for  both  current  and  future  generations.  A  rapid  expansion  of  the
sheltered sector based on uncertain and perhaps temporary increases in petroleum revenues may lead
to the situation called Dutch disease.
To  manage  its  resources,  Norway  has  created  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund,  which  receives
revenues from the petroleum sector, transfers the amount necessary to produce a balanced government
budget and invests the surplus abroad. As long as the increase in petroleum income is kept outside the
domestic economy, there will be less need for structural change and thus less need for exchange rates
to change.
A one dollar increase in the oil price gives an increase in GDP of almost 1% and most of it arrives as
increased budget revenues. With large and varying budget revenues, the basis for determining central
government  expenditure  and  taxes  from  one  year  to  the  next  may  easily  be  impaired.  If  budget
expenditure is allowed to fluctuate in step with oil prices, the result may be abrupt shifts and instability
in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Changes  in  oil  prices  may  then  quickly  influence  wage  and  price
expectations, the exchange rate and long-term rates. In that case it will be very demanding to achieve
nominal  stability.  Short-term  interest  rates  would  have  to  be  changed  frequently  and  sharply  and
would generally reflect a high risk premium for the Norwegian krone. It is therefore important that the
annual  budgets  are  anchored  in  a  long-term  strategy  that  takes  into  account  that  oil  revenues  may
fluctuate  from  one  year  to  the  next.  In  addition,  it  is  advantageous  if  fiscal  policy  can  be  used  to
counter fluctuations in demand and production.
Final words
By hosting this workshop, we hope to take part in an exchange of new knowledge about the conduct of
monetary  policy.  We  hope  that  the  workshop  will  be  a  fruitful  experience  for  both  researchers  and
monetary policymakers.
3
BIS Review 101/2000
