European Central Bank: Press Conference - introductory statement
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and
Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at the  Press  Conference,  held  in
Paris, on 19 October 2000.
 Today, the Governing Council met for the second time outside Frankfurt. Therefore, let me first of all
thank  our  host,  Governor  Trichet,  for  inviting  us  to  meet  in  Paris  and  for  the  generous  hospitality
offered  to  us.  Our  meeting  was  also  attended  by  the  President  of  the  EU  Council,  Mr  Fabius,  and
European Commissioner Solbes.
As  usual,  we  conducted  our  regular  examination  of  recent  monetary,  financial  and  economic
developments  and  their  implications  for  a  monetary  policy  aiming  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the
medium term. Following this review, the Governing Council decided to leave the ECB interest rates
unchanged. Moreover, we exchanged views on achievements so far and the challenges ahead.
Let me briefly report on developments since the last meeting of the Governing Council before turning
to our  more  general  assessment.  As  regards the first pillar  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  no  new
data on monetary developments have become available since 5 October. Turning to the second pillar,
oil prices and exchange rates remained two important factors under examination. Before coming down
somewhat,  oil  prices  had  surged  again  as  markets  were  concerned  about  the  impact  of  political
tensions in the Middle East. Meanwhile, real GDP growth over the four quarters up to mid-2000 has
proved to have been very strong. As mentioned at our last meeting, some uncertainty about short-term
growth  dynamics  stems  from  oil  price  developments,  as  is  reflected  in  survey  or  confidence  data.
While these indicators have weakened somewhat in recent months, overall they remain at high levels
and underlying forces for continued robust growth remain favourable. This  is  also  reflected  in little
changed bond market developments.
As foreseen at the time of the Governing Council meeting two weeks ago, energy price developments
have had a strong impact on inflation rates; in September the HICP rate of inflation rose further  to
2.8%, compared with 2.3% in August and 2.4% in July. This development did not come as a surprise
and was already taken into account in our considerations on monetary policy action on 5 October.
Overall, latest developments underpin the message we stressed on 5 October, namely that monetary
policy continuously needs to ensure that expectations remain firmly anchored in the maintenance of
price stability, despite current inflation rates.
In addition to commenting on more recent developments, I should like to take the opportunity offered
by this special meeting to make a few remarks on where we stand almost two full years after the start
of Monetary Union and where we see the main challenges.
First,  the  process  of  monetary  policymaking  and  its  implementation  has  functioned  efficiently.  Our
policy intentions to maintain price stability in the medium term are increasingly well understood by
the  general  public.  Second,  the  euro  area  economy  impressively  overcame  the  negative  mood
prevailing in early 1999 and has recovered to a state of affairs not seen for more than a decade. Not
only has real GDP grown by  more  than  3½%  over  the  past four  quarters,  but  employment  has also
increased and unemployment has decreased considerably.
Clearly,  the  external  value  of  the  euro  stands  in  sharp  contrast  with  this  very  positive  picture.  The
undervaluation of the euro is giving cause for concern that it might have adverse implications for the
world  economy,  including  the  risk  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  that  it  entails.  Adhering  to  its
mandate and following its forward-looking strategy, however, the Governing Council will ensure that
price stability can be maintained over the medium term. The confidence of investors in  the internal
stability of the euro and the positive outlook for euro area growth are contributing to the attractiveness
of investing in the euro area and will support a stronger external value of the euro. Looking forward,
1
BIS Review 89/2000
there are indeed challenges to be taken up by means of appropriate and determined action, but there
are good reasons for remaining confident.
Monetary  policy  will  ensure  that  risks  stemming  from  import  price  developments  will  not  translate
into  more  permanent  inflationary  tendencies,  thereby  also  helping  to  preserve  steady  GDP  and
employment growth in the medium term.
Governments have increasingly come to recognise the benefits of sound public finances and adequate
policies  over  the  long  term  so  as  not  to  overburden  future  generations.  However,  continued
determination is required. While overall budget positions have improved significantly, this has been
helped considerably by the relatively low level of interest rates and the strong upturn in growth. These
favourable  conditions  should  be  used  to  intensify  the  process  of  fiscal  consolidation.  Governments
should  demonstrate  their  commitment  to  structural  budget  consolidation  by  accompanying  the
forthcoming tax reforms with spending restraint. This would ensure the full benefits of such reforms.
Governments have also acted in the field of product markets in order to make them more competitive
to the benefit of consumers. A favourable impact on prices, growth and employment of  opening  up
sectors  to competition  has  become  clear  with  regard  to  the  telecommunications  and  energy  sectors.
The  challenge  is  now  to  further  reduce  the  level  of  regulation  so  as  to  stimulate  activities  in  other
sectors of the economy, too.
Governments  and  social  partners  have  started  initiatives  to  enable  labour  markets  to  function  more
efficiently. The remarkable performance in employment growth in the past few years also reflects an
increasing  proportion  in  part-time  employment  and  points  to  some  improvements  in  labour  market
flexibility.
Further improvements in labour markets can be supported from many sides. The social partners will
play a key role by adhering further to a path of moderate wage increases, in line with price stability,
and  taking  into  account  both  productivity  developments  and  the  need  to  reduce  the  level  of
unemployment further. The benefits of such behaviour have already been seen. Moreover, there is a
broad consensus that the larger part of the still high level of unemployment is of a structural nature;
this challenge needs to be addressed continuously by policies which remove structural rigidities from
the  labour  markets  and  which  diminish  adverse  incentives  provided  by  tax,  benefit  and  pension
systems.  Ongoing  structural  reform  will  be  particularly  important  with  regard  to  the  changing
character of jobs in an economy which needs to be open to rapid advances in new technologies and
globalisation.
The Governing Council feels that the first 22 months of Monetary Union have been very successful. It
is determined to continue addressing the challenges related to monetary policy and is confident that
other policy areas will play their part in the overall policy framework of the Community and the euro
area.
BIS Review 89/2000
2
