MR Chatu Mongol Sonakul: Inflation targeting - a new monetary policy
approach for Thailand
Speech  by  Mr  MR  Chatu  Mongol  Sonakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Bank  of
Thailand’s International Economic Conference “Practical Experiences on Inflation Targeting” held in
Bangkok on 20 October 2000.
 Distinguished panelists,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This is the second seminar on inflation targeting organized by the Bank of Thailand. But this is the
first  seminar  at  international  level,  with  highly  distinguished  speakers  from  many  famous  central
banks.
To  set  the  right  tone  for  the  seminar,  I  want  to  start  with  a  question:  what  does  the  general  public
expect from the central bank?
People  invariably  want  the  good  life:  a  high  standard  of  living,  abundant  goods  and  services  to
consume. They also want  political  freedom,  a  clean  environment,  and  many  other  things,  but let  us
concentrate on the economic aspects in order to keep it relevant to central banking.
To give people the good life, the economy has to be generating output at a high level, the highest level
in relation to its capacity. The economy will also have to generate enough jobs to accommodate the
new workers entering the labor force yearly. For many Asian countries where the demographic slant is
heavily towards the younger ages, the number of new workers entering the labor force each  year  is
substantial. Therefore, the level of output has to grow to provide adequate employment.
The people can rightly expect the central bank to have an important role in this: giving them the good
life.
But they do not stop here. People also want the good life to continue, avoiding the excessive boom and
bust cycles and, of course, avoiding unnecessary crises. They invariably want more and more of better
goods and services.
This  requires  the  economy  to  not  only  simply  produce  at  a  high  level,  but  also  to  make  adequate
capital formation to generate a high growth  rate. There  are  many  factors  other  than  investment  that
affect growth - things like productivity, innovation and education. But they are outside the realm of
central banking. Within the area of central banking, however, the general public can rightly expect the
central bank to provide them with an environment conducive to growth, without the excessive boom
and bust cycles and avoiding crisis whenever possible.
What  else  do  the  people  expect?  People  also  expect  a  fair  distribution  of  opportunity  and  income.
Central banks generally do not have a direct hand in providing equal distribution of income, much less
opportunity.  This  responsibility  generally  lies  with  the  overall  machinery  of  government.
Nevertheless,  high  inflation,  if  it  exists,  does  have  an  adverse  effect  on  real  individuals’  income,
especially those in the lower brackets who are less able to renegotiate their pay. Therefore, while the
central bank does not have direct power to enforce a fair distribution of income, if the central bank
fails to do its job properly and this results in high inflation, it can make the situation worse.
Next, the general public also wants the country’s exports to be competitive. Here we are talking about
the export of goods and services, inbound tourism included. Again, the competitive edge of business
depends  on  many  factors  outside  the  scope  of  central  banking:  marketing  know-how,  research  and
development, and technology included. And when one looks at competitive advantage of firms at the
international level, things like quotas, trade protection and trade negotiations do add complications to
the equation.
1
BIS Review 106/2000
But there is one factor that cuts across all considerations and that is inflation. If the inflation rate in a
country far exceeds those in its trading partners, it will erode that country’s competitiveness over time.
Therefore, the central bank can affect the country’s export competitiveness, and the public can rightly
expect the bank to guard against this.
Finally, the people invariably want transparency. They want to know how the central bank views the
situation, how  it  acts and  how it can  be  held  accountable for  its  action.  They  will  also  want  to  see
whether the central bank is capable of looking ahead into the future.
…
How can the central bank in an emerging economy like Thailand best deliver to the people all that they
expect? My answer is inflation targeting.
The best environment that the central bank can provide for the economy to attain a high level of output
and steady growth is one with price stability. Under inflation targeting, the Monetary Policy Board has
to look ahead 18-24 months and adjust its stance today to influence the outcome of the future. This
will help minimize the boom and bust phenomenon. The floating exchange rate regime will also help
prevent imbalances from building up excessively, hence minimizing the risk of major crises.
In  terms  of  transparency  and  accountability,  inflation  targeting  is  probably  the  best  tool  of
communication.  While  the  general  public  may  have  difficulty  understanding  and  keeping  track  of
monetary growth targets, it fully understands inflation, the index of which is calculated and announced
by an independent agency, in the case of Thailand the Ministry of Commerce. The regular publication
of inflation reports will also help inform and educate the public much better than in the past.
In the case of Thailand, inflation targeting is the best tool to ensure high output, sustainable growth,
export  competitiveness,  prevention  of  a  worsening  of  income  distribution  and  a  transparent  and
accountable central bank. The Bank of Thailand last year announced our explicit intention to control
inflation,  and  the  range  of  0  to  3.5%  of  core  inflation  was  announced  in  23  May  2000.  Since  the
beginning of the year, we have seen the yield on 10-year bonds drop from 7.91% per annum to 6.1%.
While other factors may have helped toward this reduction of long term borrowing costs, I am sure
that  public  confidence  in  our  commitment  to  control  inflation  was  certainly  one  of  the  important
factors.
…
The first seminar we organized concentrated on the principles of inflation targeting and laid the overall
groundwork.  In  this  seminar,  we  will  go  deeper  into  its  implementation,  its  relevance  to  emerging
economies, and the problems that it may face in the environment of large public debt overhang. We
are  very  fortunate  indeed to  have  with  us  eminent  speakers,  most  of  them  from  countries that  have
successfully  applied  this  technique.  I  therefore  strongly  urge  the  audience  to  take  advantage  of  the
presence of the experts by asking questions and airing your concerns to the fullest extent possible. I
very much hope that by the end of the seminar, you will all become convinced.
BIS Review 106/2000
2
