M R Chatu Mongol Sonakul: National Central Bank and building world peace
Speech  by  Mr  M  R  Chatu  Mongol  Sonakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the
27th International Conference on World Peace “Building a Culture of Peace in the New Millennium”,
held in Bangkok on 1 December 2000.
 Members of the Professors World Peace Academy, Participants of the 27th International Conference
on World Peace, Ladies and gentlemen.
The history of central banking is normally agreed to have begun around four thousand years ago in the
Greece, Roman and other empires up to the middle  ages  when  banks  were  put  up  primarily  for the
purpose of getting finance for governments to wage war. So the first period of central banking cannot
very well be said to have been in conformity with the topic I’ve been asked to talk about here today,
which is entitled “National Central Bank and Building World Peace”.
But in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and especially later on when industrialisation began in
earnest, there were great needs for finance for the many various industries that sprang up around that
time.  Commercial  banks  and  great  finance  houses  became  common  but  the  limitations  of  the
technology of that period of using precious metals as currency became quickly apparent.
Commercial  banks  began  issuing  their  own  paper  notes,  for  the  amount  of  the  valuable  metals  that
they had in stock being much more transportable. But human nature being what it is, they also began
issuing paper notes equivalent to the value of precious metal which they don’t have in the vaults and
the various currencies issued by the various banks became devalued very quickly.
Another aspect to the whole thing is that people do cash in paper notes at times and banks have to hold
large reserves sometimes up to 30% of their liabilities in order to make sure that they have adequate
liquidity that may be used in case of unforeseen events.
The first central banks in its relatively modern form were therefore established to provide the function
of being the sole issuer of currencies and the single keeper of reserves as defined by law, notably the
Bank of England in 1694 and epitomised in a tome in 1873, Lombard Street by Bagehot, Editor at the
time  of  the  Economist,  where  the  concept  of  the  Banking  Department  and  the  Note  Issuing
Department was so clearly explained.
This gave credibility and value to paper currency and it was also a very much more efficient system in
that  the  single  reserves  at  the  central  bank  could  be  used  by  the  many  commercial  banks  who
thereupon  kept  much  smaller  contingencies,  historically  sometimes  as  low  as  4  %  of  liabilities  and
accessed the joint “reserves” at the central bank whenever necessary enabling a much more efficient
use of financial reserves than each bank having its own large reserves. Thus was born the term “banker
to the bankers” and “lenders of last resort”.
Thus,  in  this  way  central  banking  for  the  first  time  really  became  a  cornerstone  of  the  building  of
world prosperity and world peace.
Of course the single reserves might be sufficient under normal circumstances but when things get out
of  hand,  it  may  not  be  sufficient,  and  banks  do  shut  down.  The  government  and  the  central  banks
thereupon undertook that most important function of building world peace, which is looking after the
poor and the disadvantaged, by putting up deposit insurance schemes, the first being in New York in
1829 but the first nationwide schemes being in Czechoslovakia in 1920 whereby at least the smallest
and the least knowledgeable depositors are protected.
Of course, a better alternative would be to try and make banks less liable to failure. Since banks are
often in an oligopolistic system or at the very least, they are leveraged by the ratio of debt to equity of
around 12:1, being the inverse of the capital adequacy ratio now defined by the Bank for International
Settlements to be at least 8%, and using other people’s money in a way that normal companies cannot
1
BIS Review 111/2000
do - the central bank then underpins the viability of commercial banks by supervising and examining
them so that sensible decisions are made and fraudulent activities are minimised.
Surprisingly,  that  may  not  even  be  the  biggest  way  central  banks  contribute  to  world  peace.  For
nations  taken  individually,  the  biggest  function  deemed  to  be  of  the  central  banking  is  monetary
policy. By trading in foreign exchange, in local currencies, by credit extension, by rule making, and by
setting interest rates, the general level of economic activity can normally be influenced by the central
bank.
In so doing, central banks used to try to contribute to peace and prosperity by making sure that the less
advantaged or the more useful activities or social class and such like have better access to  funds in
general or to the funds of the central bank, and in the extreme case even go so far as financing projects
and infrastructure.
In the modern world, it is now normally agreed that each national economy is so vast and complex that
central banks could be  considered  to  have  done  very  well if it just  keeps  the country  stable  and let
government build infrastructure and help the poor and private sector trade and invest to economically
develop the nation.
The recent trend is that, central banks are now given the sole task of  keeping  price  stability,  and  is
given the independence to do that since if they have no independence, government will, at time ask it
to do things that are in conflict to that sole function.
Thus the modern central bank is really akin to keeping peace in the nation through enhancing stability
and  it’s  other  people’s  jobs  to  create  wealth  or  turmoil  as  the  case  may  be,  the  turmoil  being  a
necessary  instrument  in  coming  to  the right policies or  at time  the  wrong  ones  or  in  an  ever  worse
ending turmoil without apparent purpose as is so often the case in emerging markets.
But it certainly is not now deemed the function of the central bank to be doing this sort of thing. So
central bankers can now claim that they are basically trying to create peace and hopefully in a peaceful
economy, there will be better prosperity than a wildly gyrating one.
In a peaceful economy, growing stably at a high but sustainable rate, one cannot expect that there will
be no criminals hidden deep down somewhere inside the society. A new instrument has therefore been
added  to  the  arsenal  of  monetary  policy  and  financial  supervision  in  the  anti-money  laundering
legislations.
The first anti-money laundering legislation was issued in 1970 by the US government. The mechanism
is generally that cash deposit of more than the minimum stipulated amount would be examined.
In the case of Thailand, this legislation was issued in April and became effective in August 1999. The
central bank participated fully in the draft and cooperates with its implementation.
We  have  taken  the  option  though  that  central  banks  should  be  trying  to  put  up  a  good  system  for
people to operate in rather than having another prime function of catching thieves and criminals, and
in this legislation therefore a new independent government office has been put up dedicated solely to
the pursuit of the articles of the legislation.
We sit on the committee under the legislation as I have just said, and cooperate wherever we can to
make  sure  its  execution  is  effected  and  effective.  This  is  another  occasion  where  central  banks
contribute directly  to  peace  in  that  criminal  activities  which  by  nature  are  not  peaceful  is  kept  to  a
minimum.
Speaking  of  criminal  activities,  vote  buying  in  an  election  is  also  a  criminal  activity  and  although
legislation  makes  it  difficult  for  us  to  tackle  this  problem,  we  cooperate  with  the  Neutral  National
Election  Commission  in  tracking  down  movement  of  funds  and  we  have  assigned  an  assistant
governor to directly coordinate with this Commission.
The banking laws in Thailand at present though is that banking activity is secret and this inhibits us
from doing as much as we could to help in curbing this criminal activity. New legislations, both in the
central bank act and financial institution act will empower the central bank to have much more ability
to manage the nature of commercial banks and will follow the principle of transparency when we shall
BIS Review 111/2000
2
be  able  to  do  much  more  for  such  an  important  event  as  a  national  election  and  hopefully  then
commercial banks would be much less inclined to cooperate in less than virtuous activities.
Whilst it is probably true central banks of the modern era spend so much time in trying to stabilise
national events, the biggest single cause of untold misery, poverty, death and famine in the modern
economy is probably neither disease nor natural events, but it is the ever more frequent financial and
currency crises and many central banks in many economies have been helpless in this prevention.
There  are  now  many  international  fora  to  tackle  these  problems,  but  all  of  them  now  are  bent  on
making emerging  markets behave themselves better with a better system, monitor themselves  better
and monitor what’s going on in the rest of the world, the latter is actually an impossibility.
All  financial  transaction  of  significance  is  now  computerised.  A  central  bank  with  any  kind  of
competence will have good access within the nation and  understand  and  manage  their  own  destiny.
Given a reasonable government and even minimal legal system, each nation should be able to keep
peace and stability.
But international transaction is something else. No amount of computer capability will enable you to
access the computers of the money centers of other countries, and of the off-shore center of the world.
These are vast sum that we are talking about, directed at an opportune moment on markets which are
not yet sophisticated, deep or varied and for political or financial reasons are at the time vulnerable
somehow.
In Thailand, for instance in 1997, the amount of non-resident baht moved in that year was 900 billion
dollars when our total GNP was only 140 billion dollars.
When that kind of money moves against a nation, there is really no way a reasonable defence could be
made. Of course, the important powers of the world say that the country should behave itself better,
but one has to ask a question why important powers of the world try to make sure that each country
behaves itself, yet allows the international monetary system to behave totally as it wishes without due
regard to responsibility or the misery and famine that such events could cost.
The  obvious  answer  is  that  all  the  major  important  money  centers  and  funds  are  in  the  advanced
countries  and  the  major  countries  systems  being  much  more  diverse  is  less  liable  to  collapse  when
there are large movements of funds in any particular sector.
Banking in Thailand for instance provides 77% of all credit available in the country at this moment
while in the US it is only 26%.
Before  you  ask,  we  are  of course trying  to  rectify  this,  trying  to  get  banking  down  to  55%  of  total
credit by the year 2010, and in the last three years, somehow we have got the debt market which was
before then nonexistent to be double the size of the stock market.
But it takes life times and generations to change people’s habits and the nature  of  the  country. The
world monetary system could in fact be monitored quite easily if the superpowers of the world would
only wish it to be done. It sends forces to keep peace in other countries, so it could quite just as well
impose a system , a world monetary system that would significantly reduce this kind of crisis. But the
only  crisis  which  might  have  affected  the  superpowers  were  the  LTCM  crisis  of  the  1998  and  the
Asian crisis of 1997 and it soon became apparent that the suffering could mainly be kept to the poor
nationsand so it looks as though nothing good is going to happen in the international arena.
Let me end my statement therefore by saying that before coming here I looked at the list of speakers
and participants and was truly impressed by the diversity and excellence. I have therefore tried to put
some interesting thoughts in the area of national central banking for your perusal.
All of us here wish for peace and prosperity in the world. Each of us a little bit or a lot depending on
the occasion can contribute to peace. So I truly hope that whenever the opportunity arise we will do
our part to try and put up a better world monetary system at which tasks the emerging countries are so
powerless.
3
BIS Review 111/2000
