European Central Bank: Press Conference - introductory statement
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and
Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President  of the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Press  Conference,  held in
Frankfurt, on 2 November 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here to report on the outcome of today’s meeting
of the Governing Council of the ECB.
its  regular  examination  of  monetary  and  economic
The  Governing  Council  conducted 
developments and their implications for the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. It decided
to  leave  the  minimum  bid  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  unchanged  at
4.75%.  The  interest  rates  on  the  marginal  lending  facility  and  the  deposit  facility  were  also  kept
unchanged at 5.75% and 3.75% respectively.
Starting with the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy of the ECB, the three-month average of
annual M3 growth  stood at  5.4% in the  period from  June to  September  2000,  unchanged  from  the
three-month period ending in August 2000. While remaining above the reference value of 4½%, M3
growth,  reflecting  the  increases  in  ECB  interest  rates  since  November  1999,  has  shown  signs  of
moderation over recent months. A further factor to be taken into account is the fact that the growth rate
of credit to the private sector increased to 10.8% in September. However, this was influenced by the
financing of payments for UMTS licences. The growth rate of total MFI credit to euro area residents
remained broadly unchanged in that month.
Turning  to  the  second  pillar,  one  issue  under  consideration  was  the  likely  further  development  in
world economic activity and particularly real GDP growth in the euro area. Overall, the outlook for
growth  of  the  world  economy  remains  favourable.  In  particular,  as  far  as  the  decline  in  real  GDP
growth in the United States in the third quarter of 2000 is concerned, this may be seen as the first sign
of  an  orderly  slowdown  towards  more  sustainable  levels,  in  line  with  the  projections  currently
available.  More  generally,  the  extended  period  of  rising  and  high  oil  prices  has  increased  the
uncertainty surrounding the sustainability of recent growth trends. However, by contrast with previous
periods of strong and prolonged increases in oil prices, the world economy is less dependent on  oil
today  and  inflationary  pressures  are  still  being  contained.  This  should  help  to  avoid  any  sustained
negative effect on confidence, and thereby ensure that the impact of high oil prices on growth remains
moderate over the medium term.
Very much the same line of argument applies to the euro area. Euro area real GDP has been growing
at  a  high  rate  for  four  consecutive  quarters,  including  the  second  quarter  of  2000.  Some  monthly
indicators which extend into, or cover, the third quarter of this year point to a possible moderation in
growth  rates.  In  particular,  the  pace  of  growth  in  industrial  production  appears  to  have  declined
somewhat  and  some  survey  data  have  also  indicated  that  there  has  been  a  certain  degree  of
moderation. However, survey data remain at high levels and should be underpinned further by positive
factors such as high employment  growth. There is thus good reason to remain confident that strong
growth will be sustained in the euro area.
This  picture  is  broadly  supported  by  bond  yields  in  the  euro  area.  These  have  changed  little  over
recent weeks. They continue to be compatible with market expectations of strong economic growth in
the euro area in the medium term and with developments in consumer price inflation, which are in line
with the ECB’s definition of price stability.
We trust that this assessment will also increasingly be reflected in exchange rates. These have clearly
lost touch with economic fundamentals and this is posing risks to the world economy. For the  euro
area in particular the continued undervaluation of the euro vis-à-vis other major currencies is putting
upward pressure on import prices. We shall, therefore, monitor exchange rate developments closely.
1
BIS Review 97/2000
As regards developments in consumer prices, no additional euro area-wide data on the Harmonised
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) have become available since our last meeting. In September 2000
inflation rose to 2.8%, mainly as a result of higher energy prices. As I mentioned earlier, inflation rates
may  remain  above  2%  for  longer  than  was  expected  just  a  few  months  ago,  owing  to  unexpected
developments in energy prices and the past decline in the euro.
In  order  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  it  is  important  that  economic  agents
accurately perceive the nature of current price developments. In particular, it needs to be recognised
that current upward pressures can be successfully overcome if economic agents see them for what they
are  -  namely,  one-off  or  temporary  price  increases  resulting  from  external  factors  -  and  act
accordingly. These factors must not give rise to second-round effects. If oil prices do not rise further,
as  the  markets  expect,  the  effects  of  past  oil  price  increases  will  gradually  drop  out  of  the  annual
inflation rate.
At the current juncture two main considerations should guide expectations regarding the outlook for
the euro area economy.
First, the Governing Council is committed to maintaining price stability in the medium term. It will
continue to assess thoroughly the outlook for price stability in the euro area. Monetary policy will not
accommodate inflationary tendencies in the euro area and in this way will make its best contribution to
sustainable growth.
Second, euro area countries are now in a much better position to withstand the adverse  effects of  a
sharp oil price increase than they were in the 1970s. The Governing Council remains optimistic with
regard to the economic outlook for the euro area. This positive outlook needs to be underpinned by
responsible  fiscal  policy-making  and  by  social  partners  reacting  appropriately  to  the  increase  in  oil
prices.  It  is  crucial  that  any  loosening  in  fiscal  policy  be  avoided.  Similarly,  continued  wage
moderation is important in order both to contribute to further decreases in the level of unemployment
and  to  maintain  a  favourable  outlook  for  price  stability.  It  will  be  equally  important  for  structural
reform  to  be  intensified  further  in  order  to  allow  current  high  growth  rates  of  real  GDP  and
employment to be sustained into 2001 and beyond, without generating inflationary pressure.
Let me now give the floor to the Vice-President to inform you about two further issues decided by
the Governing Council today.
I should like to inform you that, in the course of  next  week,  the  ECB  will release  an  update  of  the
so-called  Balance  of  Payments  Book.  This  annual  publication  documents 
the  statistical
methodologies applied in EU Member States for the compilation of balance of payments statistics and,
as such, improves the transparency of the compilation of euro area statistics. In addition to updated
individual  country  chapters,  this  version  includes  two  new  chapters  on  the  compilation  and
methodological standards for the euro area balance of payments and international investment position.
The Book will be published on the ECB’s website and hard copies will be available at the ECB.
The  Governing  Council  has  today  also  adopted  an  ECB  Regulation  establishing  transitional
provisions  for  the  integration  of  Greek  credit  institutions  into  the  Eurosystem’s  minimum  reserve
system, as a consequence of the introduction of the euro in Greece as from 1 January 2001.
BIS Review 97/2000
2
