European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in
Frankfurt am Main, on 14 December 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here to report on the outcome of today’s meeting of
the Governing Council of the ECB.
Let me first report that the Governing Council decided to reconfirm the existing reference value for
monetary growth, namely an annual growth rate of 4 1/2% for the broad aggregate M3. This decision
was taken on the grounds that the available evidence continues to support the assumptions underlying
the  initial  derivation  of  the  reference  value  in  December  1998  (and  its  confirmation  in  December
1999), namely those for trend potential output growth and the trend decline in M3 income velocity in
the euro area. With regard to the assessment of trend potential output growth, there is still no decisive
evidence that measurable and lasting increases in productivity growth in the euro area would warrant a
significant  upward  revision  in  the  assumption  for  trend  potential  growth.  This  notwithstanding,  the
uncertainties surrounding estimates of the medium-term development of potential output growth in the
euro area  have  become  skewed  to  the  upside.  Against this  background,  the  Governing  Council  will
carefully monitor further evidence with regard to an acceleration of productivity growth in the euro
area.  The  Governing  Council  also  wishes  to  emphasise  that  potential  output  growth  could  be
strengthened  by  further  structural  reforms  in  the  labour  and  goods  markets.  Naturally,  the  ECB’s
monetary policy will take such changes appropriately into account. The ECB will issue a press release
today to provide some background information on the review of the reference value carried out by the
Governing Council.
The  Governing  Council  also  conducted  its  regular  examination  of  monetary  and  economic
developments and their implications for the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. It decided
to  leave  the  minimum  bid  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  unchanged  at
4.75%.  The  interest  rates  on  the  marginal  lending  facility  and  the  deposit  facility  were  also  kept
unchanged at 5.75% and 3.75% respectively.
Starting with the first pillar, it is fair to say that M3 growth rates have shown signs of moderation over
the  past  few  months.  However,  taking  into  account  the  protracted  upward  deviation  of  M3  growth
from the reference value of 4 1/2% and the still robust growth of credit to the private sector, caution
continues  to  be  warranted  with  regard  to  the  upside  risks  to  price  stability  stemming  from  the
monetary side.
As for key indicators related to the second pillar, the assessment is currently complicated by increased
uncertainty.  In  the  first  place,  this  applies  to  tendencies  in  the  world  economy.  With  regard  to  the
evolution of  real GDP growth currently foreseeable for  the  euro  area, the underlying  dynamism  of
growth continues to prevail, although subject to some moderation. Developments in euro area bond
markets, characterised by a decline in bond yields in November and December, broadly confirm this
assessment  of  growth.  In  foreign  exchange  markets,  also  reflecting  the  current  outlook  for  global
growth  patterns,  the  euro  has  appreciated  against  the  currencies  of  the  euro  area’s  most  important
trading partners. The Governing Council considers this development to be a step in the right direction.
Turning  to  consumer  price  developments,  recent  developments  have  continued  to  reflect,  above  all,
developments  in  oil  prices,  but  also  previous  developments  in  the  euro  exchange  rate.  Over  the
medium  term,  the  upward  pressures  from  energy  prices  are  expected  to  disappear  gradually,  while
HICP  rates  of  inflation  will  increasingly  depend  on  domestic  forces.  On  balance,  the  Governing
Council judges the risks to price stability still to be on the upside.
The Governing Council will continue to counteract any risks to price stability in the medium term by
responding in a timely manner. At the same time, it does stress the importance of all economic actors
1
BIS Review 115/2000
responding in an appropriate manner to the current oil price-led increase in consumer price inflation.
In particular, social partners can rely on the commitment of monetary policy to maintain price stability
over the medium term and they should continue along the path of wage moderation observed in recent
years. In the same vein, fiscal authorities should control expenditure growth, as it could otherwise fuel
upward pressures on prices.
Let me now give the floor to the Vice-President to inform you about other issues discussed by  the
Governing Council.
First  of  all,  I  should  like  to  provide  you  with  information  on  several  issues  relating  to  the  euro
banknotes and coins.
First, pursuant to the Treaty (Article 106 (2)), the ECB has the exclusive right to approve the volume
of coins issued by the euro area Member States. To this end, the Governing Council adopted an ECB
Decision on the volume of coin issuance in 2001. This Decision, which also covers Greece for the
first time, will soon be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities.
Second,  in  order  to  raise  citizens’  awareness  and  to  prepare  them  for  the  cash  changeover  at  the
beginning  of  2002,  the  Governing  Council  agreed  to  organise  a  series  of  conferences  on  euro
changeover  issues  in  the  course  of  2001.  These  conferences  will  bring  together  the  key  parties
involved in the euro cash changeover process, both at the national and at the European level, with a
view  to  focusing  on  the  cash  changeover  preparations.  This  action  should  also  be  seen  against  the
background of the Conclusions of the European Council meeting in Nice on 7 to 9 December 2000.
Third, the Governing Council decided that tests on the euro banknotes will be carried out in all euro
area countries in 2001. These tests will offer companies an opportunity to check and fine-tune their
cash and/or vending machines and sensors with regard to their being able to recognise and accept euro
banknotes. They will be organised by the euro area national central banks; the Bank of England will
also be invited to participate. The ECB will monitor the test scenario in order to ensure a consistent
approach and will act as the contact point for companies registered in a country without a test centre.
Fourth,  further  to  the  ECB’s  press  release  of  3  August  2000,  when  the  decisions  of  the  Governing
Council regarding the euro area financial modalities for the 2002 cash changeover were announced,
the  so-called  frontloading  and
the  Governing  Council  agreed  on  general  principles  for 
sub-frontloading  of  euro  banknotes  outside  the  euro  area  as  from  1  December  2001.  Today’s
decision,  which  complements  the  principles  agreed  with  regard  to  the  frontloading  and  sub-
frontloading  of  euro  banknotes  inside  the  euro  area,  has  to  be  seen  as  a  contribution  to  ensuring  a
smooth  cash  changeover  in  2002.  You  will  find  further  information  relating  to  this  decision  in  a
separate press release to be issued this afternoon.
With  regard  to  TARGET,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  establish  a  long-term  calendar  of
TARGET operating days to be applied from 2002 onwards. The establishment of such  a common
long-term  calendar  was  deemed  necessary  in  order  to  reduce  uncertainties  for  financial  markets.  In
addition to Saturdays and Sundays, TARGET as a whole, including both domestic and cross-border
transactions,  will  be  closed  for  a  total  of  six  days  in  the  calendar  year.  You  will  find  further
information relating to this decision in a separate press release to be issued this afternoon.
The Governing Council also adopted several legal acts related to the field of accounting, which will
be  published  shortly  in  the  Official  Journal  of  the  European  Communities.  These  acts  relate  to  the
legal framework for accounting and reporting within the ESCB, the annual accounts of the ECB and
the allocation of monetary income of the euro area national central banks and losses of the ECB for the
financial years 1999 to 2001.
Let  me  also  draw  your  attention  to  some  of  the  decisions  taken  by  the  Governing  Council  at  its
previous two meetings.
First, the ECB budget for 2001 has been approved. It includes a staff increase of 7%. By the end of
2001, the ECB will therefore have approximately 1,100 staff members.
Second, in connection with the Bank of Greece’s entry into the Eurosystem, the Governing Council
adopted several legal instruments on the transfer of foreign reserves from the Bank of Greece to the
BIS Review 115/2000
2
ECB, the crediting to the Bank of Greece of a corresponding claim on the ECB and the contribution to
the  capital,  reserves  and  provisions  of  the  ECB  by  the  Bank  of  Greece.  These  legal  acts  will  be
published in the Official Journal of the European Communities shortly. Amendments to several other
legal instruments were also adopted.
Third,  I  should  like  to  mention  that,  following  the  very  positive  reaction  to  last  year’s  "Helsinki
Seminar",  the  ECB  is  organising  a  second  seminar  with  high-ranking  officials  from  the  central
banks of the EU accession countries. This seminar will be held tomorrow in Vienna, in co-operation
with  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  and  will  focus  in  particular  on  issues  related  to  the  price
dynamics in accession countries, the role of the central banks in managing the accession process and
the  co-operation  between  the  Eurosystem  and  the  accession  countries’  central  banks.  The  "Vienna
Seminar" will be followed by a press conference at 4 p.m. tomorrow.
Finally,  I  should  like  to  inform  you  that  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  that  its  next  meeting,
which  is  scheduled  for  4  January  2001,  will  be  held  by  means  of  a  teleconference.  The  press
conference originally planned for that day has thus been cancelled. The next press conference will
take place on 1 February 2001.
3
BIS Review 115/2000
