Gordon Thiessen: Can a bank change? The evolution of monetary policy
at the Bank of Canada 1935-2000
Lecture  by  Gordon  Thiessen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Faculty  of  Social  Science,
University of Western Ontario, on 17 October 2000.
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Faculty  of  Social  Science  here  at  the  University  of  Western  Ontario  for
inviting me to deliver this lecture. The Department of Economics within the Faculty is known for its
long-standing  interest  in  monetary  economics,  as  well  as  its  appreciation  of  economic  history.  I
thought that it would be appropriate, therefore, to combine these two elements and use this occasion to
reflect upon the dramatic changes that have taken place in the theory and practice of monetary policy
in Canada during the Bank of Canada’s 65-year history.
Over  this  period,  there  has  been  a  fundamental  transformation  in  the  way  monetary  policy  is
conducted  in  Canada  and  in  most  other  industrial  countries.  While  globalization  and  technological
change have played an important role in this area, as in so many others, they have not, to my mind,
been  the  principal  driving  force  behind  this  transformation.  Far  more  important  has  been  the
interaction of experience and economic theory. The puzzling and, at times disappointing, performance
of the economy has often served as the catalyst for major theoretical advances and policy innovations.
Although  the  evolutionary  process  set  in  motion  by  these  forces  has  not  always  been  smooth  or
painless, it has, without question, deepened our understanding of how the economy works. It has also
taught us valuable lessons about how monetary policy should be conducted.
One  of  the  most  important  lessons  that  monetary  authorities  have  learned  through  this  process  of
analysis  and  experimentation  is  that  there  is  no  virtue  or  advantage  in  vague  policy  objectives  and
complex  operating  procedures.  Simpler  and  more  straightforward  approaches  have  generally  turned
out to be better. Monetary policy does not need to be cloaked in secrecy or artificial intricacies to be
effective. What is needed to get the job done is one clear objective and one simple instrument.
My career in central banking - of just over 37 years - covers more than half of the period since 1935
that I am going to review today. I do not intend, however, to describe every policy development since
the early 1960s, when I first joined the Bank, nor all those from the preceding period. Instead, what
follows  is  a  selective  overview  of  certain  events  that  I  believe  were  critical  to  the  evolution  of
monetary policy in Canada. While the conduct of monetary policy will always involve a great deal of
uncertainty and imprecision, the steps that we and other central banks have taken to make it simpler
and more  transparent  have,  in  my  opinion, improved  its effectiveness  and  contribution  to economic
welfare.
The beginning: establishing the Bank of Canada
1.
The Bank of Canada was established in 19351 during the Great Depression. Public confidence in the
behaviour  of  markets,  and  the  financial  system  in  particular,  had  all  but  disappeared.  Traditional
remedies  and  the  natural  re-equilibrating  forces  of  the  capitalist  system  did  not  seem  to  be  having
much effect, and there was growing sympathy for more radical solutions.
1 The Bank of Canada Act was actually passed in July 1934, but the Bank did not begin operations until March 1935.
1
BIS Review 90/2000
Still,  many  observers  questioned  whether  the  creation  of  a  central  bank  would  be  the  answer  to
Canada’s problems. Other countries that had established central banks much earlier had suffered the
same  collapse  in  economic  activity  and  were  experiencing  similar  difficulties  trying  to  extricate
themselves from the situation. Keynes’ General Theory2 would not be published for another year, but
there was already widespread scepticism about the likely effectiveness of a more aggressive approach
to monetary policy. Interest rates were at historically low levels, and the provision of extra reserves
was  seen  as  only  adding  to  the  surplus  liquidity  that  already  existed  in  most  commercial  banks.
Nevertheless, excessive credit creation in the period immediately preceding  the  Depression,  and  the
severe liquidity problems that many borrowers had experienced once it was underway, were generally
viewed  as  important  contributors  to  the  collapse,  if  not  the  primary  cause.  Perhaps  a  central  bank,
learning from past experience, could reduce the likelihood of a similar occurrence in the future.
Doubts about  the  usefulness  of  monetary  policy  in stabilizing  output  did  not  prevent  the  legislators
who drafted the original Bank of Canada Act from giving the Bank a broad and ambitious mandate.
According to the preamble of the Act, which is the only description that we have ever had of its basic
functions, the Bank was expected to:
.  .  .  regulate  credit  and  currency  in  the  best  interest  of  the  economic  life  of  the
nation, to control and protect the external value of the national monetary unit and
to  mitigate by  its influence  fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of  production,  trade,
prices  and  employment,  so  far  as  may  be  possible  within  the  scope  of  monetary
action,  and  generally  to  promote  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of  the
Dominion.3
While the legislators seemed to appreciate that not all of these objectives were mutually consistent or
even attainable with a single policy tool,4 they may have assumed that the Bank would have more than
one instrument at its disposal. Indeed, moral suasion, interest rate ceilings and various other means of
directly  influencing  the  volume  and  composition  of  credit  had  already  been  used  extensively  in
Canada.  The  segmented  nature  of  our  financial  system,  in  which  banking,  insurance,  trust  and
securities activities were all carefully segregated from one another, combined with the high levels of
concentration  that  existed  in  most  of  these  industries,  contributed  to  the  “success”  of  such  an
approach. In any event, according to the new Keynesian orthodoxy that was soon to take hold, most of
the heavy lifting associated with economic stabilization would be performed by fiscal policy.
To  ensure  that  the  new  central  bank  would  not  be  subject  to  undue  influence  from  either  the
government or the financial sector, the architects of the Bank  of  Canada  made  it  a  privately  owned
corporation  with  widely  distributed  shares.  Neither the  shareholders  nor  senior  officers of the  Bank
were allowed to work in the financial sector, and the only formal representation that the government
was  permitted  was  through  the  Deputy  Minister  of  Finance,  who  was  expected  to  serve  as  a
non-voting member of the Board of Directors. The Bank’s accountability and reporting requirements
were limited to the publication of weekly financial statements and an annual report.
Even though Parliament in 1935 was prepared to allow greater public regulation of the economic life
of  the  nation,  it  realized  that  some  separation  of  money  creation  from  the  government’s  spending
activities  was  probably  important.  Subsequent  legislation  reversed  some  of  this  separation  by
eliminating  private  equity  holdings  and  making  the  government  the  exclusive  owner  of  the  Bank’s
shares. Other restrictions, however, on the government’s ability to participate in Board meetings and
influence  the  daily  conduct  of  monetary  policy  remained  in  place.  The  issue  of  whose  will  would
prevail if there was ever a major disagreement between the Minister of Finance and the Governor of
the Bank of Canada was not explicitly addressed until much later.
2 Keynes, J M (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, MacMillan, London.
3 Bank of Canada Act, 1934, c. B-2, Preamble.
4 Note the words “so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action”.
BIS Review 90/2000
2
The contrast between the policy environment in 1935 and that of today could not be more dramatic.
Diffuse policy objectives, uncertain reporting lines, interventionist policy measures and a distrust of
financial  markets  have  given  way  to  clearly  defined  inflation  targets,  improved  governance  and
accountability,  simple  operating  procedures  and  a  more  open  approach  to  policy  formulation  and
implementation.  We  now  have  a  single  long-run  objective - price  stability - and  a  single  policy
instrument - the  overnight  interest  rate.  The  targets  for  our  objective  and  our  instrument  are  both
publicly announced, and our actions are subject to constant scrutiny and review. The story of how this
profound transformation was brought about is the subject of the rest of my lecture.
How did we get here?
2.
The  changes  that  I  am  about  to  describe did not  happen  overnight  or  in  any  continuous  way.  They
were the result of  a  long,  and sometimes  painful,  process  of  experience,  experimentation,  academic
investigation  and  market  pressures.  At  times,  Canada  was  able  to  trade  on  the  experience  of  other
countries,  but  on  other  occasions  it  had  to  find  its  own  way.  The  challenges  and  problems  that  we
encountered were often unique or unprecedented. Our proximity to the United States, coupled with our
smaller size and openness, forced us to confront many of the issues associated with globalization long
before the term became fashionable. We have always been the archetypal small open economy.
The early years: 1935 to 1950
2.1
The Great Depression may have been exacerbated or even caused by monetary policy errors in Canada
and elsewhere, but the newly created Bank of Canada had limited means of dealing with it. Financial
markets were not very well developed in the 1930s and the monetary policy instruments at the Bank’s
disposal did not appear likely to be effective.5 Interest rates, as noted earlier, had reached historically
low levels and commercial banks, with few exceptions, had more than enough liquidity. No serious
effort  was  made,  therefore,  to  mount  an  aggressive  countercyclical  policy.  Various  fiscal  initiatives
were  undertaken  prior  to  the  outbreak  of  the  Second  World  War,  but  not  much  progress  had  been
made in reducing unemployment or restoring industrial output to its pre-Depression levels.
Most of the Bank’s activities from 1939 to 1945 were directed towards financing the war effort. This
involved  extending  cash  advances  to  the  government  and  overseeing  the  sale  of  Victory  Bonds.
Determined not to repeat the economic mistakes made during the previous war, the government tried
to finance most of its expenditures through taxes and new bond issues. Consequently, the Bank’s main
responsibility immediately after the war was to keep interest rates as low as possible, to facilitate the
rollover of the massive public debt that had accumulated. In the event, the reconversion of wartime
production facilities and the absorption of decommissioned military personnel into the domestic labour
force were much easier than many had imagined.6
By the late 1940s and early 1950s, however, inflationary pressures had started to build. The Bank and
the  government  tried  to  suppress  them  by  imposing  temporary  controls  on  certain  types  of  bank
financing.  Some  of  this  was  accomplished  through  explicit  legislation,  the  rest  through  private
conversations between the Governor of the Bank and the presidents of the 10 chartered banks. These
actions proved to be insufficient, however, in the face of rising world commodity prices, a booming
US economy, large foreign investment inflows and increased defence expenditures to support the war
effort in Korea. All of these factors put upward pressure on the Canadian dollar and made it difficult to
control  the  domestic  monetary  expansion.  With  some  reluctance,  the  government  was  forced  to
undertake a more decisive and, at the time, revolutionary action.
5 Although  Canada  was  no  longer  on  the  gold  standard  and  might  have  used  an  exchange  rate  depreciation  to  help
stimulate the economy, it had a large amount of foreign debt outstanding and a high priority was put on maintaining a
stable exchange rate.
6 Watts, G S (1993): The Bank of Canada: Origins and Early History, edited by T K Rymes, Carleton University Press,
Ottawa.
3
BIS Review 90/2000
On 30 September 1950, Douglas Abbott, the Minister of Finance, announced that:
Today  the  Government,  by  order  in  Council  under  the  authority  of  the  Foreign
Exchange  Control  Act,  cancelled  the  official  rates  of  exchange  which,  since
September  19th  of  last  year,  had  been  calculated  on  the  basis  of  a  10  percent
premium for the United States dollar in Canada. It has been decided not to establish
any new fixed parity for the Canadian dollar, at this time, nor to prescribe any new
official fixed rates of exchange. Instead, rates of exchange will be determined by
conditions of supply and demand for foreign currencies in Canada.
With  this  announcement,  Canada  abandoned  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  pegged  exchange  rates,
which  had  been  established at  the  end  of  the  Second  World  War,  and  allowed  its  currency  to  float
freely  in  international  markets.  The  resulting  appreciation  would  hopefully  discourage  some  of  the
inflow of funds, defuse the inflationary pressures that the economy had been experiencing, and obviate
the need to pick a new, more sustainable value for the dollar. The flexible exchange rate was expected
to remain in place only until markets had settled and a more reasonable value for the dollar had been
determined.  In  fact, the experiment lasted for  almost  12  years and  had  far  greater  significance  than
anyone could have imagined.
Canada was the only major country in the world operating under a flexible exchange rate through the
1950s and early 1960s, and was regarded as something of a renegade in international circles. By the
end of 1951, we had also eliminated all remaining controls on foreign exchange transactions and most,
if  not  all,  controls  on  foreign  investment  inflows.  Canada’s  financial  markets  were  now  open  and
exposed to external shocks. Our experience  during  this  period  would  serve  not  only  as  a  model for
other  industrial  countries  after  the  Bretton  Woods  system  collapsed,  but  also  as  the  catalyst  for  a
revolutionary advance in the theory of international finance.
Few  students  of  Canadian  economic  history  know  that  Milton  Friedman  played  a  role  in  Canada’s
decision to float. In 1948, Friedman, then a young Associate Professor at the University of Chicago,
participated  in  a  radio  debate  with  Donald  Gordon,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  and
William Mackintosh, a Professor at Queen’s University and an adviser to the Department of Finance.7
One  of  the  topics  that  they  were  asked  to  discuss  was  whether  Canada  should  move  to  a  flexible
exchange  rate. The  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Department  of  Finance  were  both  strong  supporters  of
fixed exchange rates, as were most governments at the  time.  Friedman,  as  you  might  expect, spoke
with great conviction about the advantages of a flexible exchange rate. Indeed, many of the arguments
that he presented would later appear in his classic essay, “The Case  for  Flexible  Exchange  Rates”.8
Although the debate did not have any noticeable effect on policy for the next two years, Friedman’s
ideas seem to have influenced official thinking  in  Ottawa.  A  number  of secret  memos  were  written
within the Bank beginning in 1948, reviewing the feasibility and even desirability of his proposal.9
Monetary policy under a floating exchange rate: 1950 to 1962
2.2
In  June  1954,  Graham  Towers,  the  first  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  retired  after  19  years  of
service  and  was  replaced  by  James  Coyne,  one  of  the  authors  of  the  secret  memos.  Like  many
Canadians  at  the  time,  the  new  Governor  had  become  increasingly  concerned  about  the  level  of
foreign ownership in Canada and was anxious to increase national savings as a means of reducing our
dependence on foreign capital inflows. Another concern, which was not as widely shared, involved the
7
8
9
Friedman,  M,  D  Gordon  and  W  A  Mackintosh  (1948):  “Canada  and  the  Problems  of  World  Trade”,  transcript  of  a
University of Chicago Roundtable radio discussion broadcast in cooperation with the National Broadcasting Company,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, 18 April 1948.
Friedman, M (1953): “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates”, in Essays in Positive Economics, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, pp 157-203.
See,  for  example,  “A  Method  of  Combining  a  Free  Exchange  Rate  With  the  Present  System  of  Exchange  Control  in
Canada”, Memorandum, 31 January 1949, Bank of Canada Archives.
BIS Review 90/2000
4
domestic rate of inflation. Canada had experienced a sharp escalation in consumer prices during the
Korean War, and inflationary pressures had persisted for some time after. While  domestic  spending
had  faltered  in  1954,  the  subsequent  recovery  pushed  inflation  well  above  the  level  that  the  Bank
implicitly  associated  with  price  stability.  Coyne  was  convinced  that  the  solution  to  both  problems
- low savings and high  inflation - was  a  tighter  monetary  policy.  Higher  interest rates  would reduce
domestic demand and help raise national savings.
Although a rudimentary money market had started to form in Canada, with the active encouragement
of  the  Bank,  it  was  not  well  developed.  Popular  wisdom,  in  any  case,  suggested  that  traditional
monetary  policy  mechanisms  were  unlikely  to  be  effective,  even  when  they  involved  tightening
monetary policy.10 As a result, Coyne decided to combine reductions in the supply of bank reserves
with healthy doses of moral suasion, much as his predecessor had done in earlier periods.
The Bank continued with this restrictive monetary policy stance through most of the late 1950s and
into the early 1960s. In the face of rising unemployment and weakening economic activity, inflation
dipped below 1% by the spring of 1961. Relations between the Bank and the Minister of Finance had
deteriorated sharply, and numerous government ministers had demanded a change in policy direction.
However, any desire to remove James Coyne and replace him with a more sympathetic Governor ran
up  against  the  ambiguous  nature  of  the  legislation  regarding  the  government’s  powers  vis-à-vis  the
Bank.  The  academic  community  also  became  involved  in  the  dispute  and  circulated  a  pamphlet
entitled “The Economists versus the Bank of Canada”.11 A W Phillips had just published his famous
paper  on  unemployment  and  the  growth  of  money  wages  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  shown  how
higher (wage) inflation was typically associated with lower rates of unemployment.12 Not surprisingly,
Phillips’ work found a receptive audience in Canada, and researchers soon replicated his results with
North American data.
Much  of  the  commentary  in  the  popular  press  during  this  period  was  also  critical  of  the  Bank’s
policies,  and  reflected  the  widespread  view  that  a  little  more  inflation  was  not  such  a  bad  thing
- provided  it  could  bring  higher  employment  and  stronger  output  growth.  James  Coyne  remained
unconvinced, however. While he had no formal model or elaborate regression results to put forward in
his  defence,  his  instincts  seem  to  have  told  him  that  any  attempt  to  improve  the  economy’s
performance by targeting a higher inflation rate was misguided and could only end in difficulty:
There  are  those  who  sometimes  set  out  the  false  alternatives  of  either  full
employment  with  inflation,  or  stable  prices  with  a  high  level  of  unemployment.
They say the nation must choose between unemployment and inflation. No person
in  any  position  of  responsibility  could  possibly  subscribe  to  that  doctrine.  It  is
false. Full employment and stable prices are not only compatible, they are in  the
long run inseparable.13
10 Doubts  about  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  were  usually  related  to  the  presumed  difficulties  associated  with
stimulating  the  economy  (ie  “Pushing  on  a  string”).  Policy  tightening  was  also  thought  to  be  ineffective  during  this
period, however, since large interest rate increases were regarded as “unacceptable” and probably destabilizing. See the
Bank  of  Canada’s  testimony  before  the  Porter  Commission  (Porter  Commission  Report  (1964):  Report  of  the  Royal
Commission on Banking and Finance, Queen’s Printer, Ottawa).
11 Thirty  prominent  Canadian  economists  also  signed  a  letter  to  the  Minister  of  Finance  calling  for  the  dismissal  of
Governor Coyne. See  Gordon, H.S. (1961): The Economists versus the Bank  of  Canada,  The  Ryerson  Press,  Toronto,
pp v-vi.
12 Phillips, A W (1958): “The Relation between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money Wages  in  the  United
Kingdom, 1861-1957”, Economica 24, no 100, November, 283-99.
13 Coyne,  J  E  (1961):  Remarks  to  the  Annual  Conference  of  the  Business  Paper  Editors  Association,  Ottawa,  Ontario,
18 January 1961.
5
BIS Review 90/2000
The pathbreaking work of Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps on the vertical Phillips curve would
not be published until 1968, but their results were anticipated by Coyne in many of his speeches.14,15
He was convinced that there was no long-run trade-off between unemployment and inflation, except
possibly  in  the  sense  that  lower  inflation  might  actually  lead  to  higher  output  and  employment.
Experience and the new theory of rational expectations that would emerge 10 years later confirmed
this  result  and  showed  that  any  positive  employment  effects  associated  with  higher  inflation  were
likely to be shortlived.
There was one critical area, however, where Coyne and many other policy analysts, both within and
outside  the  Bank,  appear  to  have  been  misguided.  Those  who  had  questioned  the  effectiveness  of
monetary policy in earlier years had failed to appreciate that it was likely to be much stronger than
fiscal policy under a flexible exchange rate system, especially when capital was highly  mobile. The
large capital movements triggered by any change in interest rates would put significant pressure on the
exchange  rate,  amplifying  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  while  undercutting  the  effects  of  any
opposing  fiscal policy.  Coyne  did  not realize  that,  for  similar reasons,  it  was  unlikely  that a  tighter
monetary  policy  would  ever  raise  national  savings  or  reduce  foreign  investment  inflows.
Robert Mundell, in his article on “The Appropriate Use of Monetary and Fiscal Policy for Internal and
External  Stability”,  was  the  first  economist  to  explain  this  apparent  reversal  of  Keynesian  theory.16
Mundell’s article was published in 1962, one year after Coyne had resigned in response to mounting
criticism and ongoing efforts to remove him.
The  timing  of  Mundell’s  work  was  no  coincidence.  According  to  Mundell,17  the  inspiration  for  his
work  on  policy  effectiveness  under  fixed  versus  flexible  exchange  rates  was  a  conversation  he
happened  to  overhear  while  working  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  Wynne  Plumptre,
Canada’s Executive Director at the IMF, was talking to another official in the elevator about a problem
that  the  authorities  back  home  had  been  wrestling  with.  The  Bank  of  Canada  had  been  pursuing  a
restrictive  monetary  policy  in  an  apparent  effort  to  reduce  domestic  spending,  increase  saving  and
limit  the  flow  of  capital  into  Canada.  While  economic  activity  had  slowed,  very  little  progress  had
been made on improving the trade balance or reducing foreign investment, owing to Canada’s strong
dollar and high interest rates. Efforts by the Department of Finance to counter the negative effects of
the Bank’s monetary policy through fiscal stimulus and to return the economy to full employment had
thus far been unsuccessful. Government analysts were at a loss to explain why.
The rest, as they say, is history. Mundell had written a number of papers on international capital flows
as part of his PhD thesis, and this chance encounter seems to have been something of an epiphany.
Suddenly, many of the ideas that he had been working on were transformed into a coherent model of
the way the global economy worked in the presence of capital mobility.
Downward-sloping Phillips curves and the dash for growth: 1962 to 1970
2.3
The  controversy  surrounding  James  Coyne’s  departure  in  1961,  together  with  publicly  expressed
government  concerns  that  the  value  of  the  dollar  was  too  high  and  that  a  nationalist  program  was
needed  to reduce  foreign  investment,  put  downward  pressure  on  the  Canadian  dollar.  It  fell  from  a
slight premium vis-à-vis the US dollar to roughly 95 cents (US) within a few months. Efforts to halt
the  decline  through  aggressive  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  were  unsuccessful.  On
2 May 1962, the government decided to return to the Bretton Woods system and fix the value of the
14 Friedman, M (1968): “The Role of Monetary Policy”, American Economic Review 58, March, 1-17.
15 Phelps,  E  (1968):  “Money-Wage  Dynamics  and  Labour  Market  Equilibrium”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy 76,
July/August, 678-711.
16 Mundell,  R  A  (1962):  “The  Appropriate  Use  of  Monetary  and  Fiscal  Policy  for  Internal  and  External  Stability”,
International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 9, March, 70-76.
17 As told by R Mundell to J Murray, Bank of Canada.
BIS Review 90/2000
6
Canadian dollar at 92.5 cents (US). Unfortunately, it took some time for academics and policymakers
to appreciate the full implications of Mundell’s work. Indeed, there is nothing that I am aware of in the
official  documents  written  over  the  next  few  years  that  would  indicate  whether  the  Bank  or  the
Department  of  Finance  fully  appreciated  that,  by  returning  to  a  pegged  exchange  rate  system,  the
government would effectively neutralize whatever independent influence monetary policy might have
on the macroeconomy.
With domestic fiscal policy on a strong expansionary track, and monetary policy constrained by the
new exchange rate peg, the Bank of Canada would have no way of resisting the inflationary pressures
that were gradually building in the second half of the 1960s. Government expenditures in Canada were
growing at an accelerating rate with the new health care and unemployment insurance systems that had
been introduced. Similar pressures were emerging in the United States in response to the Vietnam War
and  President  Johnson’s  program  for  a  Great  Society.  With  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  these  pressures
would inevitably spill over into Canada.
Few  serious  concerns  about  inflation,  however,  were  expressed  outside  central  banking  circles.
Phillips and his followers had shown how a little bit of inflation might be beneficial,  and  monetary
authorities  were  encouraged  to  be  more  forgiving.  “Reasonable  price  stability”  was  touted  as  a
preferred policy objective by the Economic Council of Canada, and “inflation-unemployment trade-off
zones” were dutifully reproduced in many of its publications.18
Another development during this period is also worth noting. It concerns the clarification of the roles
and responsibilities of the government and the Bank of Canada with regard to monetary policy. Louis
Rasminsky, who had succeeded James Coyne as Governor in May 1961, had insisted as a condition of
his  appointment  that  the  government’s  powers  regarding  monetary  policy  be  clearly  defined.19  The
Bank of Canada Act was amended in 1967 to allow the government to issue a directive to the Bank in
the  event  there  was  a  serious  disagreement  over  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Under  this
amendment, the government would have the right to override the Bank’s policy decisions. To do so,
however,  the  Minister  of  Finance  would  have  to  publish  the  reasons  for  his  (her)  dissatisfaction,
indicating  both  the  new  measures  that  the  Bank  was  supposed  to  undertake  as  well  as  the  period
during  which  they  were  to  apply.  It  was  generally  agreed,  I  believe,  that  such  a  “nuclear  weapon”
would  only  be  used  when  there  was  a  fundamental  disagreement  between  the  Governor  and  the
Minister,  and  that  following  its  use,  the  Governor  would  resign.  In  this  way,  the  rights  of  a
democratically elected government to determine policy were balanced against the needs of the Bank
for operational independence. While governments must always have the final say in important policy
matters, the Bank had to be protected from undue political influence in its day-to-day operations. A
key element that was missing from this solution was a clear measure by which the government and the
public could judge the Bank’s performance.
Stagflation and monetarism: 1971 to 1981
2.4
The  early  1970s  began  much  like  the  1950s.  Foreign  capital  was  flowing  into  Canada  at  an
unprecedented rate and the Bank of Canada was finding it difficult to resist the upward pressure on the
Canadian  dollar.  Rather  than  guess  where  the  new  equilibrium  exchange  rate  might  lie,  the
government  again  decided  to  let  the  currency  float.  As  in  the  1950s,  this  move  was  regarded  as  a
temporary measure. Within three years, however, the rest of the Bretton Woods system had collapsed.
While Canada’s decision was in no way responsible for what followed, its positive experience with a
floating  exchange  rate  through  the  1950s  and  the  early  1970s  did  provide  some  assurance  to  other
countries that the new regime was at least workable.
18 See, for example, Economic Council of Canada (1966): “Prices, Productivity and Employment”, in Third Annual Review
Queen’s Printer, Ottawa.
19 Muirhead, B (1999): “Into the Breach”, in Against the Odds: The Public Life and Times of Louis Rasminsky, University
Press, Toronto, pp 167-82.
7
BIS Review 90/2000
Canada  was  now  able to  pursue  an independent  monetary  policy.  The  Bank’s  efforts  in  the  face  of
building international inflation pressures, however, proved to be insufficient. Outdated views about the
Phillips curve, overly ambitious estimates of the natural rate of unemployment and a concern  about
letting  the  Canadian  dollar  appreciate  much  above  US$ 1,  contributed to  the  problem.  The  Bank  of
Canada was not unusual in this regard, and its performance did not differ noticeably from that of most
other  central  banks.  Economic  thinking  among  the  major  industrial  countries  was  very  similar,  and
received wisdom was, for the most part, imported from the United States.
Although Canada’s experience had, in effect, been providing the rest of the world with an example of
how  an  open  economy  operates  in  the  presence  of  near-perfect  capital  mobility,  it  went  largely
unnoticed. Closed-economy concepts continued to dominate most national policy discussions. While
Mundell’s results were slowly filtering through the academic community, they had not yet reached the
ranks  of  practising  economists.  Little  recognition  was  given  to the effects that  market  liberalization
and different exchange rate arrangements might have on policy outcomes.
In the meantime, the combination of generalized excess demand in the world economy and the OPEC
oil cartel had sent inflation and unemployment soaring to postwar highs. Policymakers in Canada and
elsewhere were having difficulty dealing with this stagflation and were initially confused by the twin
phenomena of rising inflation and high unemployment. Within a short time, however, three things had
become evident. First, higher inflation was not always associated with higher output and employment.
The Phillips curve was not only vertical in the long run, but was probably upward-sloping. Second,
efforts  to  fine-tune  the  real  economy  were  likely  to  end  in  failure.  Optimism  about  our  ability  to
forecast  and  about  the  level  of  full  employment  introduced  a  strong  inflationary  bias  to  fiscal  and
monetary  policies.  Third,  money  mattered  and  was  the  ultimate  source  of  all  sustained  inflation.
Excessive  government  spending  and  other  positive  demand  shocks  could  not  generate  ongoing
inflation unless monetary policy was prepared to validate it.
To avoid similar problems in the future, many central banks began to target the monetary aggregates.
If, as Friedman suggested, inflation was always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon, a gradual
deceleration in the rate of money growth would eventually squeeze it out of the system. Once this had
been accomplished, money growth could be set just high enough to meet the legitimate needs of the
economy - thereby  ensuring  long-run  price  stability.  If  the  new  money  targets  were  publicly
announced  and  fully  credible,  some  monetarists  argued,  it  might  even  be  possible  to  achieve  this
disinflation without any significant loss in output. If this proved to be impossible, some deterioration
in economic performance would have to be accepted. A “gradualist” approach, however, would ensure
that this was kept to a minimum. While fixed money targets might not deliver the best of all worlds,
they were regarded as the safest alternative in a second-best world. Trying to forecast the future and
optimally  adjust  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  settings  had  proved  not  only  to  be  impossible  but  also
potentially destabilizing.
Canada adopted a target for the narrow monetary aggregate, M1, in the autumn of 1975, a short time
after the United States and Germany. For a while, the strategy appeared to be working. Inflation began
to decelerate, and the economy began to recover from the 1974-75 recession. While some of this early
success could be credited to the wage and price controls that the government had introduced in late
1975,  proponents  of  the  monetarist  view  believed  that  Canada  would  soon  be  on  its  way  to  price
stability.
Initial optimism over what the monetary targets could deliver soon gave way to frustration as inflation
began to rise again in the late 1970s. A second oil shock and continued fiscal expansion added to the
inflation pressures that  were  already  in  place.  By  the  early  1980s, inflation  had  returned  to  double-
digit levels, and inflationary  expectations  were again  beginning  to  accelerate.  Research  at  the  Bank
revealed  that  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  weak  relationship  between  the  movements  in  M1  and
subsequent  changes  in  prices  was  the  high  interest  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  this  narrow  money
BIS Review 90/2000
8
aggregate. The modest changes in interest rates that were required in the short run to keep M1 within
its target band were not enough to have much impact on real output or prices.20
Another,  more  serious  problem  in  using  M1  was  the  uncertain  impact  of  financial  innovation.
Technological developments had allowed financial institutions to introduce a number of new products
designed to help depositors protect themselves from high inflation by shifting their idle balances into
daily  interest  savings  accounts.  This  weakened  the  relationship  between  M1  and  the  other
macroeconomic variables that normally influenced its behaviour, and made it difficult for the Bank to
interpret its movements.
The search for a new nominal anchor: 1982 to 1990
2.5
In 1982, after several disappointments, the Bank of Canada reluctantly conceded that the monetarist
experiment had not worked and that the Bank would no longer  be targeting  M1. Movements  in the
monetary aggregates would continue to be monitored for any information they might provide on future
economic  developments,  but  no  aggregate  appeared  to  be  sufficiently  reliable  to  serve  as  an
intermediate target. Similar difficulties were experienced in other industrial countries that had adopted
money targets and, one by one, they were forced to follow Canada’s example. Gerald Bouey, who had
succeeded Louis Rasminsky as Governor of the Bank of Canada in 1973, probably summarized  the
situation as well as anyone when he said: “We did not abandon M1, M1 abandoned us.”21
The search for a new nominal anchor had begun well before the Bank announced it would no longer
be targeting M1, but without much success. Alternative definitions of money were tested and found to
be  equally  unstable.  For  a  time,  nominal  income  was  used  as  a  guide  for  the  Bank’s  internal
forecasting  exercise,  but  it  was  also  deemed  to  be  unsuitable  as  an  intermediate  target.  While  it
included  the  two  variables  that  macroeconomists  cared  about  most - output  and  prices - precise
judgments were still required about the state of the real economy in order to make it work. Moreover,
explaining  nominal-income  targeting  to  the  public  would  be  difficult.  Inflation  and  money  growth
were  generally  regarded  as  legitimate  central  bank  objectives,  but  efforts  to  control  the  level  of
spending and income might be seen as too invasive and suspiciously close to trying to control the level
of employment.
Although conducting monetary policy without a clear objective posed certain problems, the  eclectic
approach that the Bank was forced to follow after it abandoned M1 did yield some results. The strong
monetary  policy  medicine  that  Canada  had  applied  in  early  1981,  following  similar  action  in  the
United States, soon brought inflation down. And within a short period of time, output and employment
also began to recover. Through most of the 1980s, inflation hovered in a range of 3 to 5%. While the
decade as a whole was viewed by many as a time of prosperity and growing optimism, much of this
apparent affluence was based on  speculative  activities  focused  particularly  on  the  real  estate  sector.
Expansionary  fiscal  policies  and  rising  world  commodity  prices  were  again  generating  strong
inflationary  pressures,  which  monetary  policy  was  trying  to  resist.  These  pressures  were  largely
masked, however, by the sharply appreciating exchange rate.
Without an explicit target for monetary policy, the Bank had difficulty explaining its policy actions. In
addition,  there  was  no  obvious  basis  on  which  to  judge  its  performance.  One  could  use  rough
qualitative benchmarks such as strong growth, rising employment and the absence of high inflation as
performance measures, but monetary policy needed a firmer place to stand. It was supposed to provide
a nominal anchor for the economy, but seemed to be lacking an anchor of its own to help guide policy
decisions and ensure accountability. As Gerald Bouey explained in 1982:
20 Thiessen,  G  G  (1983):  “The  Canadian  Experience  with  Monetary  Targeting”  in  Central  Bank  Views  on  Monetary
Targeting,  100-104. Proceedings  of  a  conference  held  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  May  1982,  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, New York.
21 Canada, House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Trade and Economic Affairs, Minutes of Proceedings and
Evidence, No 134, 28 March 1983, p 12.
9
BIS Review 90/2000
Central  bankers  are  always  looking  for  more  reliable  guides  to  the  conduct  of
monetary policy than they have had. Part of the reason is that they want to find a
better  place  to  stand  against  the  constant  pressures  that  arise  from  many  sources
- almost irrespective of economic conditions - for easier money and lower interest
rates.22
From today’s perspective, explicit inflation targets might seem like an obvious alternative, but price
stability  had  not  yet  been  widely  accepted  as  the  pre-eminent  objective  of  monetary  policy.
Graham Towers, James Coyne, Louis Rasminsky and Gerald Bouey had extolled the virtues of price
stability and had regarded it as one of the  Bank’s  most important  objectives.  But  it  had  never  been
defined  and  the  extent  of  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  achieving  it  was  not  always  clear.  The  major
preoccupation of the 1970s and early 1980s had been to “get inflation down”. How far down was a
question that could be postponed for a later day, once we were within striking distance of this nirvana.
The problems that arose because there was no clearly articulated and credible objective or end point
for  monetary  policy  were  most  evident  in  financial  markets.  Changes  in  US  interest  rates  or  some
other  external  shock  would  often  produce  exaggerated  swings  in  Canadian  interest  rates  and  the
exchange rate, and made it difficult for the Bank to control domestic monetary conditions. A sudden
increase in US interest rates, for example, would put sharp downward pressure on the Canadian dollar,
causing  import  prices  to  rise  and  raising  concerns  about  the  future  course  of  inflation.  Because
inflation expectations were not firmly anchored, prices in other areas of the economy would also come
under upward pressure, setting off a potential inflationary spiral. Investors, worried about the future
value of their money, would start to demand much higher rates of interest. The end result was higher
interest rates, a weaker dollar and much stronger inflation expectations  than  the  domestic  economic
conditions alone would warrant.
Any efforts to keep interest rates low and to support economic activity were often misinterpreted as
signs that the Bank was, in fact, pursuing an inflationary policy and would only make matters worse.
As a result, the Bank found itself having to follow the US lead on interest rates and resist downward
movements in the exchange rate for tactical reasons. Failure “to defend the Canadian dollar” would
produce  even  larger  increases  in  domestic  interest  rates  and  inflict  more  serious  damage  on  the
economy.
A  major  step  towards  dealing  with  this  problem  was  taken  in  January  1988,  when  John  Crow,  the
Bank’s  new  Governor,  delivered  his  Hanson  Memorial  Lecture  at  the  University  of  Alberta.  Price
stability was set out explicitly as the Bank’s prime objective and, realistically, the only thing that it
could  deliver  with  the  tools  at  its  disposal.  The  hard  lessons  that  had  been  learned  from  past
experience  were  reviewed,  as  well  as  the  advantages  that  might  be  realized  with  the  consistent
attainment of this objective:
What  pace  of  monetary  expansion  is  most  helpful  to  the  development  of  the
Canadian  economy?  Theory  and  experience - much  of  this  experience  not  overly
cheerful  but  certainly  instructive - both  point  to  a  very  clear  answer.  Monetary
policy  should  be  conducted  so  as  to  achieve  a  pace  of  monetary  expansion  that
promotes stability in the value of money. This means pursuing a policy aimed at
achieving and maintaining stable prices.23
The Hanson lecture contained probably the strongest commitment to price stability that had ever come
from the Bank of Canada. It was designed to convince people that the Bank would do whatever was
necessary to achieve price stability. Businesses, households and the government were, in effect, put on
22 Bouey,  G  K  (1982):  “Monetary  Policy:  Finding  a  Place  to  Stand”,  The  1982  Per  Jacobsson  Lecture,  University  of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 5 September.
23 Crow, J (1988): “The Work of Canadian Monetary Policy”, The Eric J Hanson Memorial Lecture, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Bank of Canada Review, February, 3-17.
BIS Review 90/2000
10
notice - any investment and spending plans that were based on inflationary expectations were likely to
end in disappointment.
Price stability, although often referred to, was not, however, clearly defined. It was presumably much
lower  than  the  prevailing  rate  of  inflation  (which  was  hovering  around  4%  and  under  upward
pressure), but this was not made explicit. In addition, the path that inflation was expected to follow on
the  way  to  price  stability  was  not  outlined.  A  desired  inflation  path  was  an  important  part  of  the
Bank’s internal projection exercise, but it was not announced publicly.
Inflation targets: 1991 to 2000
2.6
All of this changed in February 1991, when the Bank of Canada, in a joint statement with the Minister
of Finance, announced the introduction of inflation-reduction  targets.  Academic  economists  had not
been advocating targets focused directly on inflation. They had, however, already built a strong case
for  some  form  of  nominal  anchor,  arguing  that  an  explicit  commitment  of  this  sort  would  improve
central  bank  accountability,  help  shape  expectations,  facilitate  the  disinflationary  process  and  allow
central banks to avoid something known as the time-inconsistency problem.
According to the time-inconsistency theory, monetary authorities were subject to a serious inflationary
bias. If a central bank could initiate an unexpected easing in monetary policy, it might be possible to
raise short-term output and employment. However, once businesses and households realized what had
happened, they would quickly revise their inflation expectations, and output and employment would
return to their original equilibrium levels. Because businesses and households knew that central banks
were always subject to this temptation, they would assume that central banks might try to trick them
(even when no monetary policy easing was being planned) and would raise their inflation expectations
in anticipation. The end result was a kind of prisoner’s dilemma, in which inflation was higher than it
would  otherwise  be,  while  employment  and  output  remained  unchanged.  Without  some  form  of
credible commitment that would allow monetary authorities to foreswear such policy actions, society
was trapped in an inferior equilibrium.
Inflation targeting, though it had not been proposed by any of the time-inconsistency authors, might be
a way to correct this problem. The public nature of announced targets would raise the costs associated
with any failure to meet them and, hopefully, move the economy towards the preferred, low-inflation
equilibrium.
Central banks were quite skeptical about whether the time-inconsistency literature provided a useful or
accurate description of the situation in which they found themselves.24 Even so, the idea of inflation-
reduction  targets  did  have  strong  appeal, but central  banks  were still  reluctant to  adopt  them.  Their
resistance can probably be credited to two things. First, central banks were worried about what would
happen to their credibility if, for some reason, they failed to meet the inflation objectives. Second, they
were  concerned  that  the  inflation  targets  might  be  too  constraining.  Their  ability  to  deal  with
unexpected shocks, such as an oil crisis or a jump in other world commodity prices, would be severely
restricted  unless  the  target  bands  were  quite  forgiving.  But  if  the  inflation  target  range  was  wide
enough  to  accommodate  these  sorts  of  disturbances,  it  was  unlikely  to  provide  much  discipline  or
comfort in more tranquil periods.
The answer to both problems is now clear. If central banks are unable to achieve and maintain their
targets on a regular basis, this is something that should be shared with the public. Credibility is not
enhanced by the absence of targets. Special exceptions can be made for commodity-price shocks and
other unusual events, as long as the monetary authority has a plausible explanation. The advantage of
inflation targets, even if they occasionally cannot be achieved, is that they provide a convenient basis
from which policy actions and outcomes can be judged.
24 Central banks believed that there was an inflationary bias in the system, but that the pressure came from governments
rather  than  any  desire  on  their  part  to  boost  output  and  employment  through  an  unexpected  jump  in  inflation.  (See
Howitt, P (2000): “Learning about Monetary Policy and Theory”, Brown University Working Paper, unpublished.)
11
BIS Review 90/2000
It  was  one  thing  to  understand  these  points  on  a  conceptual  level,  it  was  another  to  put  them  into
practice.  Canada  was  the  second  country  in  the  postwar  period  to  introduce  inflation  targets  (New
Zealand was first). Even then, it is unlikely that targets would have been adopted as early as 1991 if
the  government  had  not  been  planning  to  introduce  a  new  goods  and  services  tax  (GST).  The
government actively supported the  introduction  of inflation  targets  because  it  was seen as  a  way  of
preventing the one-time jump in prices associated with the GST from becoming entrenched in inflation
expectations. More specifically, it would help to reassure government employees who were subject to
salary restraints, as well as other wage earners, that inflation would be held in check.25
The  lower  and  upper  bounds  of  the  original  inflation-reduction  targets  were  set  at  2%  and  4%,
respectively, with a midpoint of 3%. These bounds were to gradually decline to 1% and 3% by the end
of  1995.  At  this  point,  a  new  inflation  target  was  to  be  announced,  consistent  with  long-run  price
stability and based on the experience of the previous four years. While the inflation targets have been
renewed  twice  during  the  past nine  years,  neither  the  government  nor  the  Bank  were  convinced  on
those occasions that the conditions were right for a final determination of where the long-run target
should be set. The Bank decided that further research and experience with the existing targets were
needed before committing itself in this manner.
As I have pointed out elsewhere,26 inflation-control targets have had a major impact on the Bank and
on the way it conducts monetary policy. Perhaps the most important influence has been to encourage
greater  transparency.  With  an  explicit  target  for  inflation  and  the  central  bank  accountable  for
achieving that target, there is a strong incentive to be as forthright as possible about any trends in the
economy  likely  to  influence  inflation,  the  decisions  policymakers  may  have  to  take  to  achieve  the
targets, the shocks that may temporarily push inflation outside the target range, and the pace at which
inflation can be returned to the target.
As monetary policy has become more transparent, it has become evident that it works more effectively
when  financial  markets  and  the  public  understand  what  the  Bank  is  doing  and  why.  We  no  longer
regard surprise as an important element in monetary policy actions. We prefer to see private agents
anticipate, rather than respond to, monetary policy actions.
Where are we now?
3.
Monetary  policy  has  come  a  long  way  since  1935.  It  is  now  directed  towards  a  single  long-run
objective:  the  attainment  and  maintenance  of  price  stability.  Monetary  authorities  in  Canada  and
elsewhere have realized that this is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to economic
welfare,  and  indeed  the  only  one  that  they  can  deliver  on  an  ongoing  basis.  There  is  no  inherent
conflict between price stability and most of the other objectives that are set out in the preamble to the
Bank of Canada Act. Focusing on price stability helps us to guard against the sort of systematic errors
that often occurred when we tried to aim directly at output and employment. Optimistic estimates of
potential output and full employment in the early 1970s introduced a strong inflationary bias into the
policy-formulation  process  and  did  not  deliver  any  of  the  long-run  improvements  in  real  economic
performance that the Phillips-curve literature had promised.
Today’s monetary policy differs from past approaches in yet another important way. It is conducted in
a far more open and less complicated manner. Secrecy and surprise are no longer critical elements of
our  modus  operandi.  The  Bank  tries  to  work  with  markets,  rather  than  against  them,  to  avoid
surprising  them  with  unexpected  actions.  Greater  transparency  facilitates  the  policy-transmission
25 The Economic Council of Canada had also recommended that Canada adopt inflation targets in its 1990 report. Economic
Council of Canada (1990): Transition for the 90s. Twenty-Seventh Annual Review, Supply and Services Canada, Ottawa.
26 Thiessen, G (1998): “The Canadian Experience with Targets for Inflation Control”, The 1998 Gibson Lecture, Queen’s
University, Kingston, Ontario, 15 October.
BIS Review 90/2000
12
process by conditioning market expectations and helps avoid unnecessary confusion about the reasons
for our actions.
Various techniques for manipulating domestic credit conditions and the external value of the currency
by  means  of  direct  controls,  moral  suasion  and  active  foreign  exchange  market  intervention  are  no
longer used. Globalization and market liberalization have eliminated many of the barriers that used to
separate  different  segments  of  the  domestic  financial  system  and  have  subjected  them  to  increased
international competition. As a result, these techniques became both less effective and more costly in
terms of their impact on market efficiency. Monetary authorities now have a clearer understanding of
the  limitations  of  alternative  policy  measures,  as  well  as  more  sympathy  for  indirect,  market-based
solutions.
Monetary  policy  is  now  implemented in  a  more  straightforward  manner. Today,  policy  adjustments
are effected and signalled to the market mainly through announced changes in the Bank Rate and the
target band for the overnight interest rate. Private agents are then free to determine how these changes
will  be  transmitted  through  the  rest  of  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  in  general.  The  Bank
simply  issues  a  press  release  indicating  what  the  new  Bank  Rate  is,  and  this  in  turn  anchors  the
short-term end of the yield curve.
Central  bank  independence  and  accountability  have  also  been  more  clearly  defined.  As  I  explained
earlier,  the  1967  amendments  to  the  Bank  of  Canada  Act  allow  the  Minister  of  Finance,  acting  on
behalf  of  the  government,  to  issue  a  directive  to  the  Governor  if  serious  differences  arise  on  the
conduct  of  monetary  policy  that  cannot  be resolved. The directive  must  indicate  the  specific  policy
changes that the Bank is supposed to undertake. Ultimate responsibility for monetary policy, therefore,
rests  where  it  should  in  a  democratic  society - with  the  elected  government.  But  because  of  the
consequences of issuing a directive, it is likely to be used only in unusual circumstances. Thus, a high
degree of operational independence has, nevertheless, been preserved to allow the Bank to maintain its
medium-term  focus  for  monetary  policy  without  the  short-run  pressures  that  arise  in  the  political
process.
Moreover, the explicit targets for inflation control in Canada have been set jointly by the Bank and the
Minister  of  Finance.  It  is  then  the  Bank’s  responsibility  to  achieve  the  agreed  target.  An  explicit
objective, a clear assignment of responsibility for achieving  it  as  well  as  the  appropriate instrument
and independence of action to do what is required to meet the objective, are crucial ingredients in an
effective process of accountability. That is what we now have in place in Canada for monetary policy.
 Where  does  all  this  leave  us?  We  now  have  a  much  better  understanding  of  what  monetary  policy
should be asked to do, who should be responsible for it and how it should be conducted. But has the
evolutionary process been pushed as far as it can go? Is the transformation of monetary policy coming
to an end? The answer, of course, is no. But I will leave it to my successor to return at some point in
the future and update you on the evolving path of monetary policy in Canada.
13
BIS Review 90/2000
