Bank of Japan’s December Report of Recent Economic
and Financial Developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 18 December 2000.
 The Bank’s View2
Japan’s economy continues to recover gradually, albeit at a somewhat slower pace due to decelerating
export growth.
With regard to exogenous demand, public investment is decreasing gradually since the implementation
of  the  supplementary  budget  for  fiscal  1999  has  peaked  out.  Net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real
imports), which had been increasing, are starting to level off as inventories of some raw materials and
electronics parts became somewhat excessive in East Asian economies. As regards domestic private
demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  on  an  increasing  trend.  The  recovery  in  private  consumption
continues to be weak as a whole through lack of notable improvements in employment  and income
conditions,  although  there  are  somewhat  positive  signs  in  some  indicators.  Housing  investment  is
declining slightly.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand,  industrial  production  remains  on  a  rising  trend
although  the  pace  is  somewhat  slowing.  Corporate  profits  continue  to  improve,  and  the  number  of
firms that take positive action, such as increasing the amount of fixed investment, is rising, especially
in high-growth sectors. Income conditions of households still remain severe, but regular and overtime
payments  as  well  as  new  job  offers  continue  to  increase  in  line  with  the  recovery  in  corporate
activities, and compensation of employees has stopped decreasing.
As for the outlook, public investment is expected to maintain the current level for the time being, but
is  likely  to  start increasing  again in  the  future  along  with  the  implementation  of  the  new  economic
stimulus package by the government. While the U.S. economy is decelerating gradually, the expansion
in overseas economies is projected to continue, albeit at a slower pace. In these circumstances, exports
are  likely  to  remain  level  for  the  time  being  mainly  due  to  inventory  adjustments  in  East  Asian
economies.  Meanwhile,  imports  are  projected  to  continue  increasing,  particularly  for  those  of
consumer goods, and capital goods and parts. Therefore, net exports will decline slightly for a while.
In the corporate sector, firms still strongly feel that they have excess equipment and that they should
reduce their debts to restore financial soundness. However, it is very likely that fixed investment in
high-growth  sectors,  including  those  related  with  information  technology  services,  will  increase  as
corporate  profits  continue  to  recover.  Moreover,  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  will  increase
household  income  and  this  in  turn  is  expected  to  boost  private  consumption.  However,  the  pace  of
recovery in household income will be modest for the time being, since firms’ perceptions of excess
employment still persist, and thus significant changes have not been observed in their efforts to reduce
personnel expenses.
Industrial production is expected to remain on a rising trend, although the pace of increase may slow
down further temporarily.
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on December 15, 2000.
2
The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on December 15 as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 114/2000
Overall,  the  economy  is  likely  to  follow  a  gradual  upward  trend  led  mainly  by  business  fixed
investment, while the developments in overseas economies as well as in foreign and domestic capital
markets,  along  with  their  effects  on  the  economy,  need  to  be  carefully  monitored.  In  addition,  the
favorable financial environment created partly by the Bank’s sustaining easy monetary stance and the
new economic stimulus package by the government are expected to underpin the economy.
With regard to prices, import prices are rising, reflecting an increase in international commodity prices
such as crude oil prices. Domestic wholesale prices, notwithstanding the rise in prices of petroleum
products reflecting the increase in crude oil prices, are declining somewhat mainly due to the decrease
in prices of electrical machinery. Consumer prices continue to be somewhat weak owing to the decline
in  prices  of  other  imported  products  and  their  substitutes,  although  prices  of  petroleum  products
increased. Corporate service prices are still falling slowly.
As for the condition surrounding price developments, the balance between supply and demand in the
domestic  market  is  projected  to  be  on  a  gradual  improving  trend,  while  an  economic  recovery  is
expected  to  continue  moderately.  On  the  other  hand,  semiconductor  prices  are  declining  reflecting
softer  international  semiconductor  prices,  and  crude  oil  prices,  which  had  been  exerting  upward
pressure on prices, are dropping recently. In addition to the declining trend of machinery prices due to
technological innovations, the decrease in prices of consumer goods arising from the streamlining of
distribution  channels  will  exert  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Overall,  prices  are  expected  to  be
somewhat weak for the time being.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate is moving around 0.25 percent.
As for interest rates on term instruments, Euro-yen transactions, TB and FB rates maturing beyond the
year-end are rising somewhat. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields  on long-term  government  bonds  have  been  on  a  downward  trend  since  mid-October,  having
decreased to around 1.55 percent temporarily, and are recently moving around 1.65 percent. The yield
spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  are
mostly unchanged or decreasing somewhat.
Stock  prices  continue  to  be  weak,  having  recorded  this  year’s  lowest  level  towards  the  end  of
November.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen has been depreciating from the beginning of November, and is
currently being traded in the range of 111-113 yen to the U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans mainly
to blue-chip companies, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
On the other hand, the improvement in economic activities has not stimulated corporate demand for
external funds, since firms’ cash flow is at a high level in parallel with recovery in profits. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result,
credit demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish, although the expansion
in the year-to-year decline is ceasing. Meanwhile, the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is
slightly above the previous year’s level. Issuance of CPs is increasing towards the year-end.
Money stock (M2 + CDs) continues to grow at around 2 percent on a year-on-year basis.
As for the funding costs for firms, the short-term funding rates basically remain flat but the long-term
funding rates are declining slightly reflecting the decrease in market interest rates.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions remain easy.
BIS Review 114/2000
2
