Stephen Grenville: Exchange rate regimes for emerging markets
Speech by Mr Stephen Grenville, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Economic
Society of Australia, Inc., (New South Wales Branch) Sydney, on 30 October 2000.
 At the outset,  I  should  explain  what  motivates  my  interest  in  this topic.  It  goes  without  saying  that
none of what I say today implies any  dissatisfaction  with  the  Australian exchange  rate  regime.  The
float  has  worked  well  in  Australia  and  there  is  no  reason  to  reassess  or  reconsider.  Today’s  talk  is
intended  to  be  part  of  a  vigorous  debate  currently  going  on  in  the  international  community  about
which  exchange  rate  regime  should  (and,  more  specifically,  should  not)  be  adopted  in  emerging
countries, with this particularly aimed at countries which are undergoing financial deregulation. These
countries are being exhorted to adopt exchange rate regimes at the ends of the spectrum - either a pure
free  floating  rate,  or  a  strongly  fixed  rate  (preferably  with  institutional  backing  in  the  form  of  a
currency union or even dollarisation).
One  argument  with  superficial  attractiveness  is  that  the  old  regimes  failed  these  countries,  and
therefore something else - preferably very different from the old regime - will solve the problem. A
principal purpose of this paper is to argue that the appropriate regime will differ between countries and
perhaps also over time - there are no simple rules and no easy solutions. Whatever regime is chosen, it
has pluses and minuses, and any regime will require careful nurturing and support from other policies.
The  crisis  countries  should  learn  from  their  experience,  but  should  not  assume  that,  because  one
regime  failed,  another  will  be trouble-free.  It  is certainly  true that  the  countries  at  the  centre  of  the
Asian crisis - Thailand, Indonesia and Korea - had rates that were de facto soft fixes - a high degree of
stability in the good times, but not any serious institutional defences when they came under pressure.
One clear lesson is that these exchange rate regimes did not perform well in the crisis. Some have also
noted that Hong Kong and Argentina, with hard pegs, were able to withstand the pressure, in the sense
that  their  exchange  rate  regimes  did  not  break  down.  Others  have  observed  that  countries  such  as
China and India were able to maintain parities by virtue of the application of capital controls, so an
equally-vigorous debate on the role of capital controls is intertwined with the debate on regimes. This
paper attempts to draw together this diverse experience.
What have we learnt from the recent crisis?
As a preface to this section, I should note that, as usual, the crisis has been used by various people to
advance their own theories on the way the world works and the way it should work. As with many
debates, the coalitions which form to advocate a particular outcome often have diverse motives, and
not everyone comes from the same starting point or uses the same analytical framework. Any sensible
observer of the crisis understands that there were a variety of causes, and identifying one single cause
is unlikely to move us to a world of perfection. With this preamble, let us look at the immediate and
obvious lessons for exchange rates from the crisis.
• 
Exchange rates overshoot, resulting in substantial and sustained shifts of real exchange rates
not explicable in terms of fundamentals. Indonesia entered the crisis with its exchange rate
only modestly overvalued, but the rate fell to one-fifth(!) of its pre-crisis value. Markets are
prone to exhibiting a herd mentality and, once an exchange rate starts to move, or a peg is
broken, it can be difficult to limit adjustments to modest amounts.
  Contagion is a problem. While markets did discriminate among countries to a  degree,  this
was more noticeable in the longer run than in the short run.
There  has  been  a  lack  of  players  willing  to  take  contrarian  foreign  exchange  positions  in
newly-emerging  countries.  This  is  a  self-reinforcing  problem.  There  are  few  stabilising
1
BIS Review 97/2000
speculators so the exchange rate moves a long way; but because the rate moves a long way,
there  are  few  who  are  willing  to  take  on  the  risk  of  stabilising  speculation.  This  lack  of
contrarian  position-taking  might  reflect  some  relative  lack  of  information  about  these
economies, which should be straightforward to remedy. But more often the problem is more
deep-seated and the remedy more difficult. Part of the problem here is that the market’s view
of exchange rate fundamentals (“the model”) is nebulous and fragile. As well, there may be a
lack of policy credibility, which can only be redressed over time.
The transition from regulated to liberalised financial systems is a vulnerable period. Careful
sequencing may help, but it is difficult to create the necessary infrastructure quickly.
Massive capital flows (inflows prior to the crisis, and outflows after) were a dominant factor.
For example, Thailand experienced inflows equal to 13% of GDP in 1996. Choice of regime
needs to take into consideration not only current account issues but also the greatly increased
mobility of capital and the international integration of financial markets.
  Choice of regime
Some high-profile commentators drew from the Asian Crisis experience the conclusion that countries
should  opt  for  either  a  very  “hard”  fix  or  a  very  free  float.  “Thus  the  new  language  of  speculative
attacks, multiple equilibria and moral hazard is in many ways simply a new overlay on an old debate.
And yet, a genuinely new element has recently been thrown into the mix. This is the proposition that
countries are - or should be - moving to the corner solutions. They are said to be opting either, on the
one  hand,  for  full  flexibility,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  for  rigid  institutional  commitments  to  fixed
exchanges, in the form of currency boards or full monetary union with the dollar or euro. It is said that
the intermediate exchange rate regimes are no longer feasible - the target zones, crawls, basket pegs,
and  pegs-adjustable-under-an-implicit-escape-clause  -  are  going 
the  dinosaur.”
(Frankel et al  2000).  The Economist  (1999,  pp 15-16)  put  the  same  point  more  briefly:  “Most
academics  now  believe  that  only  radical  solutions  will  work:  either  currencies  must  float  freely,  or
they must be tightly tied (through a currency board or, even better, currency union).”
the  way  of 
The rationale is rather different from the traditional textbook arguments about the choice of exchange
rate  regime.1  The  new  argument  is  a  response  to  the  volatility  of  capital  flows  and  the  threat  of
self-fulfilling speculative attacks: both strong fixes and free floats are immune from attack, at least in a
definitional sense. At the fixed end, the  emphasis is  on  credibility,  so irrevocability  is  an important
element of the fix - hence the interest in currency boards and the ultimate fix - dollarisation.  At  the
other end of the spectrum, the pure float also has the attraction of its ability to withstand an attack (or
large volatile capital flows) without the exchange rate regime collapsing.
Considering the depth and sophistication of traditional arguments, pro and  con,  for  a  wide range  of
different regimes, the new slant on this seems at first sight rather superficial, not far from a truism (if
an attack on a fixed rate succeeds, the “fix” wasn’t strong enough:2 and an attack on a floating rate
leaves it immune only to the extent that the authorities can put up with whatever movement in the rate
occurs). If this new slant on choice of regime is to make a useful contribution to the debate, it has to be
seen as another layer on top of the other (still valid) arguments about regimes and has to be seen to
address, more specifically, why the perceived advantages of intermediate regimes (“the middle of the
spectrum”) are overridden.
 1 The traditional case for a fixed rate rested on one of two grounds. The first could be broadly termed “optimal currency
area”  arguments -  when  there  are  close  trade  ties  and  similarity  of  productive  structure,  a  fixed  rate  will  encourage
beneficial trade and capital flows. The second traditional strand of arguments in favour of fixed rates sees the exchange
rate regime as  the  anchor  for  monetary  policy.  The  traditional  argument  in  favour  of  flexible  rates  was  that  it  freed  a
country to apply an independent monetary policy, directed at the needs of its own domestic economy. The exchange rate
could then be a buffer to soften the impact of external shocks such as changes in the terms of trade.
 2 And Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) note that few fixes last longer than five years.
BIS Review 97/2000
2
One  flawed  argument  in  support  of  the  “disappearing  middle”  of  the  spectrum  goes  under  the
shorthand  of  the  “Impossible  Trinity”:  it  is  not  possible  to  have,  simultaneously,  an  open  capital
market, a fixed exchange rate, and an independent monetary policy. While the trinity may indeed be
impossible,  it relates  only  to  a fixed  rate  and therefore  says  nothing  about the  possibility  of  having
intermediate positions - a flexible but managed rate, a reasonable degree of monetary independence,
and  an  open  capital  account.  For  that  matter,  the  criticisms  arising  from  the  Asian  Crisis  could  be
properly  directed  only  at  the  “fixed  but  adjustable”  segment  of  the  spectrum,  where  reserves  were
spent in futile defence of a rate which markets no longer believed was viable. Even here, the argument
is far from clear-cut: Indonesia did not defend its exchange rate when it came under pressure, and yet
suffered the greatest fall (and the most serious consequences from this fall).
The valid elements of the case against a “fixed but adjustable” regime are two-fold:
• 
that  the  fixed  element  may  have  encouraged  borrowers  to  be  too  confident  in  taking  out
foreign-exchange-denominated loans;
 that  when  pressure  came  on  the  exchange  rate,  it  created  the  same  incentives  which  drive
bank runs - the one-way bet which makes rational investors close out their position ahead of
a  possible  collapse,  and  creates  the  incentive  on  the  part  of  the  authorities  to  defend  the
status quo to avoid triggering the run.
The  prescription  seems  easy,  but  these  “ends  of  the  spectrum”  may  not  be  comfortable  or  easy  to
maintain. Only a limited number of countries will find the policy constraints of a currency board or the
loss  of  sovereignty  involved  in  dollarisation  politically  palatable.  Smaller  countries  with  a  suitable
pegging partner may find this an acceptable and viable solution, but - leaving aside the special case of
the  euro -  medium-sized  countries  will  only  be  attracted  to  a  hard  fix  if  there  are  very  compelling
constraints  on  their  choice,  and  they  will  find  the  degree  of  adaptation  needed  in  the  domestic
economy  can  be  painful  indeed.  Where  relative  prices  cannot  change  through  exchange  rate
adjustment,  domestic  prices  must  adapt.3  Even  super-flexible  Hong  Kong  has  found  this  hard,  with
GDP falls as large as Korea’s during the Asian crisis. Argentina’s choice of a strong fix may well be
correct policy, but it is clearly painful.4
If  the  fixed  end  of  the  spectrum  does  not  facilitate  the  sorts  of  adjustment  which  the  underlying
fundamental  may  require,  then  the  free  float  end  of  the  spectrum  may  well  deliver  much  more
variability than the fundamentals require.
Views on how a free float would work in practice have changed over the past thirty years, in the light
of  experience.  Early  protagonists  were  confident  that  floating  exchange  rates  would  be  stable  and
would reflect fundamentals. Harry Johnson (1973, p 208) assured us that: “A freely flexible exchange
rate would tend to remain constant so long as underlying economic conditions (including government
policies)  remain  constant;  random  deviations  from  the  equilibrium  level  would  be  limited  by  the
activities of speculators.”5 Friedman (1953) believed: “… instability of exchange rates is a symptom of
instability in the underlying economic structure … a flexible exchange  rate  need  not  be an  unstable
exchange  rate.  If  it  is,  it  is  primarily  because  there  is  underlying  instability  in  the  economic
conditions …’.
In practice, the general experience might be summed up this way:
 3  Friedman, arguing the case for floating, drew an analogy with daylight-saving time - it is easier to move to summer time
than to co-ordinate everyone to move the time of their activities.
 4  Those countries which adopted a fixed exchange rate in order to anchor prices in the face of persistent inflation usually
found that this worked well in reducing inflation, but at the cost of loss of international competitiveness, leaving a legacy
which had to be addressed by other painful remedies. It is worth noting, also, that even hard fixes are subject to attack: it
just takes a different form - a run on domestic banks which drives up interest rates.
 5  Quoted by Cooper (1999, p 9).
3
BIS Review 97/2000
   nominal exchange rates are, unaccountably, closely correlated with real exchange rates;6
the  switch  from  fixed  to  floating  rates  has  produced  much  more  variability  (“an  order  of
magnitude more”), even when fundamentals are not more variable (Flood and Rose 1999);
fundamentals cannot explain the behaviour of the exchange rate over a short/medium-term
horizon;7
exchange  rates  have  at  times  exhibited  long-lived  swings,  with  no  apparent  changes  in
fundamentals significant enough  to justify  them.  The  US dollar  appreciated  by  about  90%
against  the  Deutsche  mark  in  the  first  half  of  the  1980s,  only  to  completely  unwind  this
appreciation by 1988. The yen appreciated by about 75% against the US dollar in the first
half of the 1990s, and unwound this appreciation by 1998.
As a result of this experience, a textbook free float with interest rates set exclusively for the needs of
the domestic economy (ie “benign neglect”) is out of favour. The exchange rate is routinely a factor in
setting interest rates. Many countries intervene (if only occasionally) in foreign exchange markets, and
when this is done with finesse and sensibly (ie not to defend a particular exchange rate), it has often
been helpful.8
much less well-defined trade-based fundamentals;
The intrinsic problems of exchange rates in emerging countries
If  all  this  produces  volatility  and  misalignment  in  developed  countries’  exchange  rates,  how  much
more serious is it for emerging countries which have:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
much larger and more volatile capital flows, in relation to the size of their domestic capital
markets and economies more generally.
no long historical experience of market-determined exchange rates;
few Friedmanite stabilising speculators;
rapidly evolving production structures;
On top of this, we have the evidence from Hausmann et al (1999) that those Latin American countries
which  embraced  floating  during  the  1990s  experienced  substantially  larger  changes  in  interest  rates
6  See Cooper (1999, p 16).
7  The  classic  reference,  Meese  and  Rogoff  (1983),  showed  that  existing  exchange  rate  models  based  on  economic
fundamentals could not reliably out-predict the naïve alternative of a “no-change” forecast for  year-to-year changes in
major-industrial-country exchange rates. Some more recent models can out-predict a “no-change” forecast (for example,
MacDonald and Taylor 1993) but the basic empirical fact remains largely intact. No-one has yet been able to uncover
macroeconomic  fundamentals  that  explain  more  than  a  modest  fraction  of  year-to-year  changes  in  industrial-country
floating exchange rates. Frankel and Rose (1995, p 1707) summarise the dismal state of exchange rate empirical research:
“… the  case  for  macroeconomic  determinants  of  exchange  rates  is  in  a  sorry  state.  With  the  exception  of  some
significance in bits of statistical innovation and announcements at very short horizons, and some hazy predictive power at
long horizons, there is little support for standard macroeconomic models”. Flood and Rose (1999) find that the switch to
a  floating  rate  produces  much  more  variability,  even  if  the  fundamentals  are  no  more  variable:  “The  policy  switch
between fixed and flexible exchange rates entails an essential shift in market structure across regimes … Expectations
are policy-dependent.” (p F668).
 8 
It is not the purpose of this paper to address the issue of stability among the G3 currencies, but it might be noted that
greater stability would clearly have been very helpful for the other countries. When the yen moved from 80 yen per dollar
in  April 1995  to  almost  150  in  the  middle  of  1998,  this  was  clearly  quite  disruptive  for  countries  with  liabilities
denominated in either dollar or yen. A case can be made that a trigger or catalyst for some of the crisis has, in fact, been
movements  in  foreign  exchange  rates  or  interest  rates -  with  the  tightening  of  US interest  rates  in  early  1994  being  a
factor in Mexico, and the depreciation of the yen after April 1995 being a factor in causing yen-denominated borrowers to
focus on their yen-carry borrowing strategies.
BIS Review 97/2000
4
than fixed-rate countries (ie they were not, in fact, able to direct monetary policy to the needs of the
domestic economy, but had to use it to defend their exchange rates).
But  the  main  problem  faced  by  emerging  countries  which  chose  a  free  float  is  how  the  rate  would
behave  in  the  face  of  the  large  and  volatile  capital  flows  which  these  countries  experienced  in  the
1990s. In due course, these flows seem likely to resume for many, if not all, of the countries which
experienced  them  in  the  1990s.  They  are  driven  by  two  powerful  factors.  First,  the  desire  for
diversification  on  the  part  of  the  managers  of  the  huge  stock  of  investment  funds  in  America  and
Europe, whose weight of  foreign  assets is  well  below the theoretical  desideratum.  Secondly,  by  the
intrinsically high profit prospects in the Asian emerging countries (more on this later).
It is worthwhile spending some time to see just how difficult a problem this is. In standard versions of
the exchange rate story, the real exchange rate is determined by productivity developments in the real
economy, and capital flows tend to play a rather secondary role. They are often treated, essentially, as
a residual. Implicitly, there is a ready supply of world capital, so that the current account is determined
by a country’s saving/investment balance, and the capital account is a residual to fund this. There is
also a presumption that there is a ready supply of stabilising speculators, so any significant departures
from fundamentals will be ironed  out  promptly.  The  standard  model  for incorporating  capital flows
into the analysis is the portfolio balance view, where the main action is with interest differentials. With
some interest differential in place (usually reflecting differing cyclical positions), enough capital flows
to  the  country  to  push  up  the  exchange  rate  so  that  expected  returns  are  equalised  internationally
(risk-adjusted, of course) by  the  prospect  of a  subsequent reversal of  the exchange  rate. The  higher
exchange rate helps to open up a current account deficit, which provides the real transfer counterpart
of the financial flows.
But if we try to apply this to the emerging countries, the fit is not good. Perhaps most fundamentally,
the countries which received huge capital inflows in the first half of the 1990s offered high interest
rates (real and nominal), not as a temporary cyclical policy response to the phase of the cycle, but on a
continuing basis. While these countries are making the transition towards the technological frontier, it
is  quite  likely  that  higher  returns  will  be  available to  capital,  so  a  real  interest  rate  differential  will
persist over the medium term - decades rather than years. Capital inflow cannot immediately reduce
this interest differential. In the meantime, portfolio equilibrium could, in theory, be maintained by the
real exchange rate being bid up, so that the higher domestic interest rate is balanced by the prospect of
subsequent depreciation.9, 10
How should the exchange rate behave in these circumstances? Real interest differentials of, say, 3%
might persist for a decade or more. If these numbers are realistic, the portfolio balance model would
suggest that the exchange rate has to appreciate initially by some 30% (and will appear seriously and
persistently uncompetitive for trade in goods and services), before depreciating by 3% per year over
the following decade. So the potential swings in real exchange rates, even if well-behaved in terms of
the model, are much greater for emerging markets. Add to this some extrapolative expectations, some
herding, and above all a risk premium which varies with the latest wave of euphoria or pessimism, and
the potential both for volatility, and for significant and sustained misalignment - in both directions - is
clear. It seems unlikely, to say the least, that an exchange rate could follow this portfolio-balance path
of  appreciation  followed  by  depreciation  without  the  market  balking  at  the  large  shifts  and  the
overvaluation during the long transition.
Is  it  not  surprising,  in  such  a  world,  that  countries  have  sought  to  limit  the  extent  of  the  swings
(misalignments). They have sought to resist the appreciations of the exchange rate during the periods
9  Whether these persistently high rates were a response of the underlying fundamentals, or a period of prolonged euphoria,
is not the point. I favour the first explanation, but whatever the reason, domestic borrowers had strong incentives to seek
foreign-currency-denominated (ie lower interest rate) funding overseas, and foreigners had incentive to provide funds.
10  Keynes  (1980)  had  identified  this  problem  in  1942:  “In  my  view  the  whole  management  of  the  domestic  economy
depends upon being free to have the appropriate rate  of  interest  without  reference  to  rates  prevailing  elsewhere  in  the
world. Capital control is the corollary of this.”
5
BIS Review 97/2000
of  large  capital  inflow  partly  because  of  an  intuition  (which  gains  some  support  from  the  Japanese
experiences  in  the  1950s  and  1960s)  that  strong  international  competitiveness  provided  beneficial
price signals for the most dynamic sector of the economy - tradeables, especially exports. Elements of
old-fashioned mercantalism may be present also.
Perhaps more important still, the large foreign capital inflow creates a destabilising feedback loop -
while the inflow is strong, the rising exchange rate reduces the cost of borrowing in foreign currency,
and encourages more borrowing. At the first sign of some weakness in inflow or the exchange rate,
domestic borrowers (including, sometimes, banks) are exposed to greater credit risk, and their lenders
(understandably) will want to withdraw funding. This has many of the characteristics of a  domestic
bank run. If confidence could be maintained (in this case, in the stability of the exchange rate), then
the withdrawal of funds will not occur. If confidence weakens, the process is self-reinforcing.
This  self-reinforcing  instability  cannot  be  easily  removed.  Some  have  suggested  hedging  as  the
answer. There is, first, the question of whether the country as a whole can hedge its foreign exchange
risk. While an individual can shift the risk to another party, a country in aggregate can only hedge its
risk if it can persuade foreigners to take on the foreign exchange risk - in effect, lend in the domestic
currency.  Even  if  this  could  be  achieved,  one  party  in  foreign  capital  flow  transactions  (either  the
borrower or the lender) will be exposed to foreign-currency risk, and will have the incentive to unwind
the transaction in the face of a threat to the exchange rate. In this rather unstable world, it is hardly
surprising  that  countries  have  resisted  the  upward  pressure  on  exchange  rates  that  accompanies  big
capital inflows, because they feel (with some justification) that it makes them vulnerable to later sharp
depreciation.
When, after the crisis, many commentators attribute the crisis to overvalued exchange rates, and others
urge these countries to hold reserves equal to their short-term debt (the so-called Guidotti Rule), is it
surprising that authorities intuitively feel justified in resisting appreciations? But if the correct lessons
are to be taken from the crisis, then those countries which do not have strong reasons to go to a hard
fix should move decisively away from “fixed-but-adjustable”, to adopt a version of what has become
widely-used  best  practice: allowing  the  market  to  determine  the  rate,  leaving  considerable  volatility
(ie not  leaning  against  the  wind  through  frequent  intervention),  and  even  when  the  rate  moves
significantly away from what are judged to be the “fundamentals”, being prepared to put up with this,
and stay the resort to intervention, until the case is overwhelming and the prospect of success good.
Interest  rate  changes  in  support  of  the  exchange  rate  are  a  legitimate  part  of  this  regime,  while
acknowledging  that  feasible  interest  rate  settings  may  not  be  enough  to  counter  extreme  market
pessimism. This is clearly distinct from the totally passive position of a free float (“benign neglect”),
but it is what is generally done in most developed countries. And, most importantly, it is a long way
from the day-by-day activism that has been discredited by the crisis.
Unless we take into account why countries have a “fear of floating”, and have often gravitated to soft
fixes in the face of capital inflows, we will be in no position to provide persuasive arguments for the
adoption of greater flexibility.
Perhaps the basis of persuasion might be three-fold:
• 
that  some  flexibility  will  be  helpful  in  absorbing  the  capital  inflow,  in  buffering  external
shocks, and responding to the changing productive capacity of their economies;
 that this flexibility (aka short-term volatility) may inhibit some short-term flows, by serving
as a constant reminder that exchange rate volatility can outweigh the interest-rate advantage
of foreign-currency borrowings;11
11  The value of this should not be overstated. Much of the foreign  borrowing  in the  Asian  countries  before  1997  was  in
currencies other than US dollars (mainly yen - see Table 11 of Goldstein and Hawkins (1998)), and so the volatility of
exchange rates would have been abundantly plain to borrowers. This did not seem to inhibit their borrowing.
BIS Review 97/2000
6
 allowing (even encouraging) a fair degree of volatility around a real exchange rate which is
stable over time (or moves only slowly, in response to changing fundamentals) provides the
opportunity  for  the  authorities  to  have  the  best  of  flexibility,  while  leaving  open  the
possibility of intervention (both via interest rates and directly in foreign exchange markets)
when the rate has already moved quite some distance away from the fundamentals. There are
obviously difficult practical issues regarding the operation of intervention, but the intuitive
idea is straight-forward enough - the further the actual exchange rate has departed from the
equilibrium, the more damage the misalignment will do; the more confident the authorities
can be that they will be acting as profitable stabilising speculators (buying cheap and selling
dear); and the greater likelihood of success of any intervention on the part of the authorities
(see Volcker (1995)).
In  short,  there  is  scope  for  emerging  economies  to  operate  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes  without
them having to adopt a textbook type of pure float. Indeed, it would be odd if the international debate
urged emerging markets to adopt more pure forms of floating than the industrial countries have been
able to sustain, especially when the conditions necessary for a successful pure float are less likely to be
present in such economies. Even this strategy will be uncomfortable, and is not guaranteed to succeed.
Large reserves and uncomfortable interest rates might be needed to mount an effective defence, and it
will be tempting to mount this defence too early (not to allow enough flex).
If a concrete example is needed to illustrate the point, Singapore provides it. It was, arguably, the most
successful country exposed to the full force of the crisis, with a managed exchange rate (managed both
in the sense of intervention and through well-designed active capital account policies) (see Lee Hsien
Loong (2000)).
Back-up or support for the exchange rate regime
What more could be done by emerging  markets to enhance the possibility of a successful exchange
rate regime? If we accept that one of the central factors presenting pressures on exchange rate regimes
in emerging markets is large and volatile capital flows, then the obvious issue is whether measures can
be taken to reduce the size and volatility of the flows.
The first possibility here is capital controls. Mere mention of this possibility creates deep rifts in the
debate,  with  views  strongly  held  and  a  fair  bit  of  heat  generated  in  the  process.  The  process  of
transition  (financial  deregulation)  is  tricky  and  time-consuming.  Perhaps  the  common-sense  way  to
approach this is to accept the possibility that Chilean-style controls (taxes on short-term inflows) may
be useful for some countries during the transition, but not too much should be expected of them (see
the conclusions on Chile itself, which suggest that the controls managed to lengthen the maturity of
the debt, without being able to prevent the exchange rate from appreciating during the phase of capital
inflow)  (see  Edwards  (1998)).12  It  may  also  be  useful  to  adopt  the  techniques  used  successfully  by
Singapore (and  now  others) to limit  the  ability  of  domestic  banks  to  lend  to  foreigners  in  domestic
currency,  thus  making  it  much  harder  for  foreign  speculators  to  take  large  short  positions  on  the
currency.
Other than these specific types of capital control, there are a set of issues which can be put in terms of
prudential supervision,  rather than capital controls.  The  sorts  of  prudential  controls  which  might  be
used are to limit the opportunities for residents to borrow in foreign currency (ie to prevent a repeat of
the Bangkok International Banking Facility) and to monitor them when they do; and to keep very tight
(indeed, unashamedly intrusive) constraints on banks’ ability to have open foreign exchange positions
or indirect exposure through foreign exchange loans. The brief lesson here is that emerging countries
should  be  very  ready  to  put  on  tough  prudential  controls,  and  should  ignore  those  who  claim  (as
happened in Australia during the 1980s) that such prudential controls are “re-regulation by the back
12  The other much rarer possible use of capital controls is that, in extremis, a crisis  might be sufficiently bad to justify a
standstill on repayment of debt, in the context of “private sector involvement” (“bailing-in the private sector”).
7
BIS Review 97/2000
door”. The  doctrinal  protagonists  of  free  markets  (usually  arguing  their  own  self-interest  above  all)
must not be allowed to intimidate regulatory authorities into ignoring the case for “rules of the game”.
On  a  wider  canvas,  the  emerging  countries  should  press  forward  with  the  efforts  to  put  in  place
best-practice  accounting,  legal  and  corporate  systems  and  regulations.  The  quality  of  credit  and
investment  standards,  and  the  strength  of  management  of  corporate  risks  and  balance  sheets  will
determine how closely capital flows match fundamental investment opportunities. This will determine
how  effectively  a  country  captures  the  benefits  of  access  to  world  capital  markets.  Paradoxically,
marked improvement in these areas may well encourage even greater inflows: but it should, at least,
lessen the likelihood of sudden reversals of capital.
A tentative operational classification
Countries might be categorised this way:
(a) 
Those whose size or market development justify floating (ie those who will want to have an
independent monetary policy, and have the institutions to make this feasible). While credible
monetary  and  fiscal  policy  will  contribute  to  exchange  rate  stability,  even  these  countries
will, at times, find that exchange rates move too far relative to fundamentals. There may be a
legitimate  role  for  intervention  in  these  circumstances,  but  it  should  be  used  sparingly  to
have  the  desired  impact  upon  expectations  and  the  behaviour  of  market  participants.  In  a
flexible rate regime, what is the appropriate nominal anchor to pin down market expectations
(eg an inflation target)?
(b) 
(c) 
Those in transition to this state. While accepting the advantages of flexibility, these countries
may want a greater degree of fixity for a time, to help anchor expectations where these are
fragile. These countries may reinforce their exchange rate stability by policies that reduce the
attractiveness  and  the  potentially  harmful  effects  of  short-term,  easily-reversible  capital
flows.  Countries  in  these  categories  might  need  to  focus  on  systems  that  encourage
long-term financing and on maintaining stable current account deficits. These countries may
want  to  contemplate  Chilean-style  capital controls (price-based  aimed  at  short-term  flows)
and  to  moderate  the  pace  of  financial  liberalisation,  to  keep  in  step  with  the  pace  of
development of financial infrastructure. Adoption of sound and consistent economic policies
may gradually build credibility, but the economy may remain vulnerable during this building
process. Financial infrastructure will develop and gain depth over time. As this happens and
markets gain knowledge of and confidence in the regime, exchange rates should become less
vulnerable and less in need of defensive capital controls. In the meantime, countries should
be  ready  to  move  quickly  away  from  defence  of  an  unsustainable  rate  (which  obviously
requires fine judgment  about  “sustainability”).  Allowing  exchange  rate  movement  (even if
excessive) will, generally, be preferable to exhausting foreign exchange reserves defending a
particular level of the exchange rate.
Those countries where the case for a fixed rate is compelling might want to consider the rival
merits of some form of strong policy commitment - a currency board or dollarisation. This
would  include  small  countries  with  a  similar  economic  structure  to  the  potential  anchor
country; countries (including larger countries) with a high degree of economic  integration,
measured  by  trade  or  investment  flows;  or  those  with  a  history  of  poor  economic
management and currency crises, where governments cannot borrow long-term domestically,
or in domestic currency offshore. For many small, and typically open, countries, the cost of
an independent monetary policy will often be greater than the stabilising benefit of a flexible
exchange  rate.  But  there  are  costs,  too,  in  these  strongly  fixed  systems -  if  lender  of  last
resort is to be provided, it would be a fiscal rather than central bank matter; and dollarisation
may imply loss of seigniorage. If a hard fix is elected, what is the most appropriate anchor
currency?
BIS Review 97/2000
8
Conclusion
The  Harry Johnson  and  Milton Friedman  quotes  cited  above  now  seem  touchingly  naïve,  or  at  best
outdated advocacy, overtaken by the experience of three decades of floating rates. Flexible rates have
turned out to flex more than expected. Developed countries have learned to live successfully with this,
but  it  is  harder  going  for  emerging  countries  with  big  capital  flows.  The  best-practice  regime
commonly used in developed countries allows wide latitude for the market to set the rate, supported by
occasional intervention and  rather  more frequent  help  from  interest  rates.  Many  emerging  countries
could benefit from moving to this generic type of regime, and to help this process, we need a vigorous
debate  about  when  to  intervene  (and,  more  importantly,  when  not  to);  what  role  interest  rates  and
inflation  targets  might  play;  and  what  additional  measures  might  help  to  handle  large  and  volatile
capital  flows.  This  will  take  the  debate  far  away  from  the  fixed-but-adjustable  regimes  that  failed
during the crisis, towards the floating end of the spectrum.
But no good case is improved by exaggeration: “benign neglect” is not best practice anywhere, and a
rhetoric which fuzzes this issue is unhelpful. To truncate the debate by excluding, from the outset, the
valid modifications to this “end spectrum” solution runs the risk that countries will not only fuzz the
debating  points,  but  fuzz  their  own  understanding  of  the  issues,  and  leave  them  unprepared  for  the
coming challenges.
The last word could be given to a veteran of this debate, Richard Cooper (1999, pp 16-17): “What is
less  obvious is that  floating  rates,  independent  monetary  policy,  and  freedom  of  capital  movements
may  also  be  incompatible,  at  least  for  countries  with  small  and  poorly  developed  domestic  capital
markets, ie for most countries. That would leave a more limited menu of choice for  such countries:
between floating rates with capital account restrictions and some monetary autonomy, or fixed rates
free of capital restrictions but with loss of monetary autonomy. Put bluntly, two prescriptions regularly
extended  to  developing  countries  by  the  international  community,  including  the  IMF  and  the
US Treasury, namely to move toward greater exchange rate flexibility and to liberalize international
capital movements, may be in deep tension, even deep contradiction.”
References
Cooper,  Richard  N  (1999),  “Exchange  rate  choices”,  Harvard  Institute  of  Economic  Research
Discussion Paper No 1877, July.
Dornbusch, R (1976), “Expectations and exchange rate dynamics”, Journal of Political Economy, 84,
pp 1161-76.
Edwards,  Sebastian  (1998),  “Capital  flows,  real  exchange  rates  and  capital  controls:  some  Latin
American experience”, NBER Working Paper 6800.
Flood,  Robert  P  and  Andrew  K  Rose  (1999),  “Understanding  exchange  rate  volatility  without  the
contrivance of macroeconomics”, The Economic Journal, 109 (November), pp F660-F672.
Frankel, J A and A K Rose (1995), “Empirical research on nominal exchange rates”, in G Grossman
and K Rogoff (eds), Handbook of International Economics, Vol III, Elsevier Science, pp 1689–1729.
Frankel,  Jeffrey,  Sergio  Schmukler  and  Luis  Servén  (2000),  “Verifiability  and  the  vanishing
intermediate exchange rate regime”, NBER Working Paper 7901.
Friedman,  Milton  (1953),  “The  case  for  flexible  exchange  rates”,  in  Essays  in  Positive  Economics,
Chicago: University Press.
Goldstein,  Morris  and  John  Hawkins  (1998),  “The  origin  of  the  Asian  financial  turmoil”,  Reserve
Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper 9805 (http://www.rba.gov.au).
Hausmann,  Ricardo,  Ugo  Panizza  and  Ernesto Stein  (1999),  “Why  do  countries  float  the  way  they
float?”,  Inter-American  Development  Bank  Research  Department  Working  Paper  No 418,  May
(http://www.iadb.org/OCE/pdf/418.pdf).
9
BIS Review 97/2000
Johnson,  H  G  (1973),  “The  case  for  flexible  exchange  rates,  1969”,  Further  Essays  in  Monetary
Economics, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Keynes, J M (1980), “Letter to R F Harrod, 19 April 1942”, in The Collected Writings of J.M. Keynes,
ed. D Moggridge, Vol 25, Chapter 3, London: Macmillan.
Lee Hsien Loong (2000), “Post crisis Asia - the way forward”, William Taylor Memorial Lecture by
Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Singapore,  and  Chairman,  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  Basel,
Switzerland, 21 September (http://www.mas.gov.sg/newsarchive/sp_20000921-c.html).
MacDonald,  R  and  M  P  Taylor  (1993),  “The  monetary  approach  to  the  exchange  rate:  rational
expectations, long-run equilibrium and forecasting”, IMF Staff Papers, 40, pp 89–107.
Meese, R A and K Rogoff (1983), “Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: do they fit out of
sample?”, Journal of International Economics, 14, pp 3–24.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (1995), “The mirage of fixed exchange rates”, NBER Working
Paper 5191.
The Economist (1999), “Global finance: time for a redesign?”, 30 January, pp 1-18.
Volcker, Paul A (1995), “The quest for exchange rate stability: realistic or quixotic?”, The Stamp 50th
Anniversary  Lecture,  University  of  London,  29  November  (http://www.iie.com/TESTMONY/
volcker.htm).
BIS Review 97/2000
10
