The Swedish economy’s future path
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Association  of  Swedish
Chambers of Commerce & Industry, Stockholm, on 8 November 2000.
 First of all, a word of thanks for the invitation to discuss the economic situation in Sweden with you.
As I see it, there are a number of dimensions to our economy’s  favourable  development  at  present.
Today I will be considering some of them, as well as the challenges facing the Riksbank.
Globalisation has created a new economic environment
Conditions in general for the Swedish economy, and for the environment in which Swedish companies
operate, have changed in major respects. I am referring, of course, to the globalisation that has swept
over the world in recent decades, leading to more international trade, increased competitive pressure
and growing cross-border capital flows. Today people can travel and work all over the world. With the
removal of barriers, countries have become increasingly interdependent.
These developments have  benefited the international  economy  and  raised living  standards  for  many
people throughout the world. In the course of two decades, the global level of per capita purchasing
power has more than doubled. The improvement has occurred in developing countries as well as in the
industrialised world. It is generally true to say that never before have things become so much better so
quickly for so many people as they have during the past twenty years of globalisation. Take Asia, for
instance,  where  six  persons  out  of  ten  were  living  in  absolute  poverty  in  1975,  while  today  the
proportion has fallen to two out of ten. This positive picture is reinforced by statistics on other parts of
the world. Studies show that  in twenty  years,  countries  with  a liberal trade  policy  have  become  six
times  more  prosperous  than  countries  where  policy  has  been  more  protective.  This  illustrates  the
potential conferred by economic integration. We must, however, bear in mind that all the problems are
far from being solved. Still, globalisation has contributed to growing prosperity throughout the world.
The economic  processes  created  by  globalisation have  been  accentuated  by  many  of  the  impressive
innovations  we  have  seen,  in  computer  technology  and  telecommunications,  for  example.  The  new
technologies  in  turn  are  providing  additional  facilities  for  further  internationalisation.  Measures  for
making  economies  function  more  efficiently  are  being  taken  in  many  quarters  to  benefit  from  the
opportunities that internationalisation offers.
The  ongoing  integration  can  be  described as  the  second  wave  of  globalisation  in  economic  history.
Before the crises in the 1930s and particularly before World War One, there was a period characterised
by  openness,  increased  cross-border  trade  and  growing  international  capital  flows.  Major  technical
advances in  the  19th  century  were  introduced  successively  as  the  production  of  goods  and  services
gradually become more modern. These developments peaked in the 1920, a period of high economic
growth  in  many  countries.  Stock-market  investors  as  well  as  consumers  looked  forward  to  rising
future income. These expectations were broken, however, when the gains from the new technology,
instead of leading to rapidly rising corporate profits, accrued mainly to the national economy in the
form of a lower price rise and substantial real wage increases.
With the global depression in the 1930s, the move towards further integration was checked. A number
of  decisions  to  raise  tariffs  and  prohibit  international  capital  movements  exacerbated  the  economic
situation.  This  made  the  negative  consequences  for  the  global  economy  even  more  serious  and  the
international  economy  landed  in  a  deep  depression.  Developments  in  this  period  demonstrated  that
protectionism and closed doors are not conducive to higher living standards. After World War Two,
some  minor  steps  were  therefore  taken  once  more  towards  increased  international  cooperation.  The
deregulation  of  trade  began  in  earnest  in  the  1950s  and  financial  deregulation  started  in  the  1970s.
1
BIS Review 99/2000
Important  breakthroughs  in  technology  followed  in  their  wake.  All  this  heralds  another  favourable
period  of  rising  living  standards  in  the  countries  that  manage  to  reap  the  benefits.  Turning  now  to
Sweden, there are a number of parallels with developments here in the 19th century.
From a poor agrarian society to a wealthy industrial nation
In the early 19th century Sweden was still a poor country. Strategic social institutions were in a shaky
state. The form of government was unstable, the payment system was rather chaotic and there was a
general  shortage  of  credit  facilities.  People  who  wanted  to  try  something  new  found  themselves
restricted. Many saw no alternative to emigrating and trying their luck in America. It seems that more
than  a  million  people  left  Sweden  for  the  new  country  in  the  west  before  the  process  of
industrialisation began in earnest here.
Less than a hundred years later, at the end of the 19th century, the Swedish economy had undergone a
dramatic transformation. Inflation was low and the payment system functioned properly. The country
vibrated with energy in every sphere. An impressive number of new products were developed on the
basis of Swedish inventions and many of them became world leaders. Swedish financial experts were
involved early on in exploiting the innovations. More and more people found work, living standards
rose and Sweden achieved one of the highest growth rates in the world.
When it comes to the causes of Sweden’s rapid economic transformation, there are some differences
of opinion. The industrialisation taking place elsewhere was probably a major factor. Another was the
possibility of importing capital for large investments. Domestic reforms in key areas may also have
helped create the conditions for growth.
Price stability was presumably of some significance. Low, stable inflation reduces uncertainty about
the  future  for  those  who  have  to  plan  for  the  long  term.  Confidence  in  the  commitment  to  price
stability was gradually built up after parliament in 1830 decided to base the currency on the value of
silver.  Another  important  factor  was  probably  the  development  of  the  credit  system  in  the
19th century.  Banks  were  established  and  financial  know-how  grew  after  interest  controls  had  been
abolished. This made it possible to finance industrial investment and exploit all the new inventions.
An  increasingly  stable  form  of  government  no  doubt  also  contributed  to  the  transformation.  The
constitution was reformed by degrees and served to guarantee stability. Business enterprise benefited
from the abolition of trade guilds, the freedom to trade and the introduction of joint stock companies.
Another import measure was, of course, the introduction of compulsory education, which led in time
to increased human capital.
This is not intended to be a complete account of all the factors behind Sweden’s transformation from a
poor  country  into  a  rapidly  growing  industrial  nation.  My  point  is  that,  if  a  number  of  institutional
changes had not been made, the outcome would have been less favourable. These changes provided a
stable framework for the process of industrialisation and ensured that our country could benefit from
the ongoing globalisation.
Realignment of Sweden’s economic policy
It may be asked whether the good growth at present can also be attributed to a realignment of Swedish
economic  policy.  There  are  no  doubt  those  who  consider  the  political  decision-makers  could  have
gone further in this direction, just as there are others who think they have gone too far. I shall not enter
that discussion but simply note that a number of important decisions have been made in the past ten to
fifteen years.
They include the deregulation of credit and foreign exchange markets, the reform of the tax system,
changes  to  components  of  the  transfers  system  and  the  enhancement  of  competition.  All  this  has
helped  the  Swedish economy  to  function  better. Moreover,  price  stability  is  now  monetary  policy’s
statutory objective and the Riksbank, now also formally independent, has been made accountable for
this.  Other  steps,  in  the  form  of  a  far-reaching  consolidation  of  the  government  budget,  provide  a
stable and credible framework for this objective. As a further move in the new direction of economic
BIS Review 99/2000
2
policy, Sweden joined the European Union in 1995. This opened up sectors that previously had been
protected from international competition. Competition grew in many fields and prices for some goods
and services began to be adjusted downwards towards European levels.
The  economic  policy  realignment,  which  began  some  time  in  the  1980s,  has  coincided  with  larger
changes in the global economic environment. The Swedish economy has therefore been in a position
to benefit from the developments elsewhere and so far this has led to a favourable economic path.
The realignment of economic policy and the ongoing globalisation were accompanied in the 1990s by
a  rapid  development  of  the  new  information  technology,  globally  as  well  as  in  Sweden.  The
innovations have been adopted successively in various segments of our economy. The thresholds for
establishing and operating companies have been lowered. Existing production processes can be made
more efficient. The internet has made information more accessible and many firms can cut transaction
costs. There is less need to hold large stocks that tie up capital.
The same applies to consumers, who can quickly search the internet for cheap goods and services. So
far, however, prices on the internet differ relatively little from shop prices. But this will presumably
change as the internet continues to be developed and usage rises.
Sweden, spearheaded by the telecom company Ericsson, is one of the countries where the IT sector is
relatively large. This sector is also contributing a growing share of our annual output. But we are also
one of the countries with a relatively high level of spending on the introduction of new information
technology in various parts of the economy.
The  introduction  and  development  of  information  technology  in  Sweden  has  been  facilitated  by  an
efficient capital market, particularly as regards the supply of venture capital.
So, as I have tried to show, the favourable economic development at present has many aspects. But it
should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  fundamental  economic  laws  still  apply,  just  as  they  did  in  the  late
19th and early 20th centuries. That makes it important to prevent  a  build-up  of  imbalances  that  can
create tensions and jeopardise a continuation of good economic growth and low unemployment. This
brings me to the subject of stabilisation policy.
Strong economic activity
We can look back on several years of strong economic growth. This has occurred in an environment
where price and wage increases have remained comparatively low even though the economic upswing
is  now  in  its  seventh  year,  with  annual  GDP  growth  averaging  around  3%.  In  recent  years,  annual
demand growth has been in the region of 3 to 4%. A common, though not entirely certain, estimate is
that in the long run the Swedish economy can sustain an annual growth rate of 2 to 2.5%.
So the economy has been expanding faster than the supply side can cope with in the longer run. This is
liable  to  result  in  problems  with  bottlenecks.  That  in  turn  can  generate  growing  tensions  and
accelerating rates of price and wage increases. In the worst case, the result could be a recession, with
falling  output  and  rising  unemployment.  It  goes  without  saying  that  that  must  not  happen.  The
Riksbank  is  required  by  the  Riksdag  (Sweden’s  parliament)  to  “maintain  price  stability”,  which
involves ensuring that the rate of price increases is kept stable around the 2% target. If we can manage
this and take timely measures that prevent imbalances from arising, economic growth will normally
follow the long-term trend.
As the economy has been expanding above its sustainable rate, the  spotlight  falls  on  the  amount  of
unutilised  resources.  When  resource  utilisation  is  liable  to  generate  upward  pressure  on  prices,  the
economy must wind down from the strong upward trend to a stable rate that is more sustainable.
A  rapidly  expanding  economy  is  liable  to  encounter  bottleneck  problems  because  new  production
facilities are  not  always  available just  when demand  is  rising.  Experience  from  the  1990s  suggests,
however, that firms are more flexible than they used to be. This applies both to the utilisation of the
existing  capital  stock  and  to  investment  in  machinery  and  plant  and  the  introduction  of  new
3
BIS Review 99/2000
technology when demand does pick up. The amount of unutilised capital resources may therefore not
be the important factor at present.
Instead, an analysis of the amount of unutilised resources in the Swedish economy  should  probably
focus on the labour market. Another reason for this is that in a macro analysis of price trends, wages
are the largest component of costs, being equivalent to over two-thirds of GDP.
In an economy that is moving closer to  full  resource  utilisation,  one can accordingly  expect certain
phenomena  to  occur  with  a  greater  intensity  and  frequency.  This  refers,  for  instance,  to  companies
reporting difficulties in recruiting competent labour. It can also take the form of a greater propensity to
resort to disputes, both regular strikes and unlawful action. Firms are also forced to compromise when
recruiting and employ less qualified personnel in order to cope with demand for goods and services.
The matching of job seekers with job vacancies has functioned better than expected and to date this
year the wage statistics show increases that, if anything, are slightly lower than expected. During the
past year, however, there have been certain signs of incipient tensions between demand and supply.
Firms are already having difficulties in recruiting some categories of labour. Shortages have not yet
reached  alarmingly  high  levels  in  general  but  each  measurement  is  higher  than  the  previous  one.
Moreover, the situation is more strained in some parts of the country than in others.
It also seems to be considered that those in work have increased their negotiating strength. How else is
one to explain that, according to the negotiating parties, wage demands in the coming round are higher
than on the previous occasion? That at least is the picture which has emerged in recent weeks.
Could this be a sign that the Swedish economy is approaching the point at which the increase in wage
costs begins to accelerate, albeit from moderate levels? If that is the case, it can be concluded that, if
the present rate were to continue, the Swedish economy is moving towards a situation where resource
utilisation will be unduly strained.
A  gradual  adjustment  of  demand  to  the  long-term  growth  trend  can  result  from  a  spontaneous
slowdown in the economy, for instance because external demand slackens. It could also come from
more  subdued  household  demand  for  durable  goods  after  the  extensive  purchases  in  recent  years.
Another possibility is a damper on demand from a diminishing  effect  of the  positive  supply  shocks
that have depressed prices and thereby benefited real wages.
To some extent there have been a number of signs of more subdued growth in the rest of the world,
above all in the United States. Moreover, new statistics suggest that Swedish households are not quite
as optimistic as before. Somewhat weaker car sales may be an indication of more subdued demand for
durables. Asset prices also seem to be in a calmer phase. All of this may point to some slowdown in
the development of demand. But is it enough? It is still a matter of forward indicators and we have not
yet seen any clear outcome in the statistics. Neither does there seem to be any notable fall-off in labour
demand. The number of new job vacancies continues to be comparatively high, at least to date.
In the absence of a sufficient slowdown in demand, an adjustment to the long-term growth path will
need to be achieved with interest rate increases by the Riksbank. It seems to me that it is deliberations
of this type that the Riksbank will face at the coming monetary policy meetings. Consideration will
also have to be paid, of course, to the inflation risks associated with the high price of oil and the high
dollar rate. These were some of the risks we highlighted in the October Inflation Report.
This type of discussion about the direction of stabilisation policy basically deals with how, after some
favourable  years  in  the  late  1990s,  we  should  act  so  that  growth  and  employment  in  the  Swedish
economy can be sustainably high and stable. The Riksbank’s assignment from  the  Riksdag  requires
that we do what we can to ensure this.
BIS Review 99/2000
4
