Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Scaling new heights after the banking consolidation
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia, at the opening of the Malaysian
Banking Summit 2001, Kuala Lumpur, 17 May 2001.
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Introduction
While we cannot predict the future with any certainty, we can most certainly by our actions taken today
contribute towards determining the future that we aspire. To do so, we need to have at the outset, a
clear  vision  of  what  the  future  should  be  like.  The  Financial  Sector  Masterplan  (FSMP)  is  about
defining the blue print for the financial structure that is envisioned to best serve our economy, as we
move forward to the next stage  of development. It  is  within the  context  of  this  vision,  that  the  Plan
outlines  the  strategies  to  be  adopted  in  the  transition  for  the  development  of  the  desired  financial
system. While  envisioning  the  future  provides  the  strategic  focus  and  the  common  goal,  of  greater
importance, is the action that needs to be taken to make it happen. It is our actions, and  initiatives
taken now that will help realise this vision in the future.
It is indeed my pleasure to be here today at the Malaysian Banking Summit 2001 which is most aptly
themed  “Scaling  New  Heights  After  the  Banking  Consolidation”.  This  summit  is  both  relevant  and
timely. It is relevant, given that we are now embarking on the task of driving the future development of
our nation’s financial sector. It is timely, given, that the masterplan which has just been released early
this year outlines our vision of the desired financial system as we advance forward. In relation to this, it
is  also  recognised  that  the  financial  landscape  is  being  shaped  by  powerful  forces  of  change,  in
particular, the advances in technology. It is therefore time for concrete efforts by all parties involved to
work  towards  the  realisation  of  our  common  vision  that  has  been  outlined  in  the  Financial  Sector
Masterplan.
The focus of my presentation today will be on the banking sector. Let me begin by first providing a
perspective  on  the  significance  of  the  banking  sector  in  general  and  within  the  Malaysian  financial
system and economy before proceeding to provide an overview of where the banking sector stands
today. This is followed by a discussion of the strategies that are expected to drive the process. More
specifically,  the  key  building  blocks  that  are  necessary,  that  will  provide  the  basis  on  which
subsequent blocks can be built.
The role and significance of the banking system
The  banking  sector  remains  at  the  core  of  our  financial  system.  A  well  functioning  and  efficient
banking system is vital for achieving robust economic performance. Within the context of the economy,
the  banking  sector  performs  three  main  functions.  The  primary  function  of  the  banking  sector  is
essentially  the  intermediation  of  funds  from  savers  to  borrowers.  In  performing  the  mobilisation  of
savings, depositors need to be assured of the safety of the deposits and the efficiency in the manner
the  funds  are  mobilised.  As  part  of  the  intermediation  process,  banks  channel  these  savings  to
productive  investments.  This  however,  involves  taking  risks.  The  credit  decision  making  process
therefore needs to be rigorous. Banking institutions however, need to fully appreciate their special role
in the credit delivery system. There is no inherent conflict between pursuing sound banking practices
and  having  the  proactive  role  in  disbursing  loans  to  promote  growth.  These  two  objectives  are
complementary. In the process, banks would expand their loan base and the availability of financing
would enhance the growth prospects of the economy. Ultimately, it is the loans granted that is central
to the profitability of the banking system. An excessive risk aversion among bankers would restrict the
flow of credit in the economy and would have adverse effects on the profitability of the banking system
and on economic growth. Banking institutions therefore need to play their role in the economy in order
to facilitate and contribute to the overall functioning and growth of the economy.
Finally, the banking sector also provides a means of payment both nationally and internationally. The
banking  system  facilitates  an  efficient  and  safe  means  of  making  and  receiving  payments.  Public
confidence in the banking system is therefore vital to ensure payments can be made on a safe and
BIS Review 40/2001
1
timely basis. While there may be new channels for payments, banks will continue to be special. The
state-of-the-art security measures which are important in providing assurance and confidence to the
public as well established in the banking system. There are also other safeguards and processes to
deal with fraud to provide customers with the highest level of confidence.
The current situation: where the banking sector stands
Despite the trend towards a more diversified financial sector, the banking sector has continued to be
the most significant component of the financial sector. As at end of the year 2000, the banking sector
provided 83% of the total financing to the economy, with total credit provided by the banking sector
accounted for 133.9% of our GDP. While this trend can be expected to continue, the banking sector
will remain the dominant component.
The banking sector has emerged from the East Asian crisis significantly strengthened. Malaysia has
taken  full  advantage  of  the  conducive  economic  environment  over  the  last  two  years  to  implement
financial  restructuring  and  structural  reforms  in  the  banking  sector  and  is  well  placed  to  chart  the
medium  and  long-term  agenda  for  the  financial  system  as  embodied  in  the  Financial  Sector
Masterplan. The banking system has also emerged relatively resilient and is well placed to meet the
slowdown in economic growth and uncertainties in the global markets. The risk-weighted capital ratio
of the banking system has remained at a healthy level of 12%, even after writing off the total goodwill
that has arisen from the merger exercise against the capital base of anchor banking institutions. The
capital ratio is expected to increase further in coming months once the capital raising plans of at least
two institutions are implemented in the near term.
The  healthy  capital  ratios  mean  that  the  banking  system  would  not  be  constrained  in  meeting  the
financing needs of viable investments and businesses. This is particularly important in an environment
in which the main source of economic growth is to be from domestic sources. Positive trends  have
also  emerged  on  lending  activities  since  the  year  2000  with  the  loan  growth  being  now  firmly  in
positive  territory.  For  the  first  three  months  of  this  year,  loan  approvals  and  disbursements  have
expanded  at  an  annual  rate  of  6.7%  and  8.7%  respectively.  Total  loans  outstanding,  including  the
private  debt  securities  (PDS)  held  by  the  banking  institutions  have  expanded  at  an  annual  rate  of
6.6%. A structural shift in financing patterns from traditional bank lending to the private debt securities
(PDS) market can be observed to have occurred. Total loans and PDS outstanding increased at an
annual rate of 7.6% as at the end of March 2001. On the portfolio quality of the banking institutions, it
can  be  expected  that  non-performing  loans  will  increase  in  an  environment  in  which  there  is  a
slowdown  in  economic  activities.  However,  the  level  is  expected  to  be  contained  well  within
manageable  proportions.  NPLs  increased  to  7.1%  as  at  end-Mac  2001  based  on  a  6-month
classification period mainly due to the  expiry of the  indulgence for the classification of a number of
loans that were granted earlier under the debt restructuring process. As at end-March 2001, another
RM2.6  billion  worth  of  loans  are  yet  to  be  classified  as  NPL.  Although  such  loans  have  yet  to  be
classified  as  NPL,  banking  institutions  are  only  allowed  to  recognise  interest  on  a  cash  basis.
Furthermore,  starting  last  financial  year,  banking  institutions  are  required  to  set  aside  20%  specific
provisions on these loans.
The  asset  quality  and  the  level  of  NPLs  are  one  of  the  indicators  closely  monitored  by  the  Central
Bank. For the banking sector, credit due diligence should take place not only at the time the loan is
made  but  also  during  the  entire  period  in  which  the  loan  is  outstanding.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia
conducts  regular  stress  tests  to  assess  the  NPL  levels  and  capital  positions  of  banking  institutions
under more difficult economic scenarios and most stringent provisioning requirements. The results of
these  forward  looking  assessments  indicate  that  the  banking  system  continues  to  be  resilient  even
under the worst case scenario. Under these scenarios, the risk weighted capital ratio would remains
above the 10% level. Thus, while NPLs can be expected to increase, the magnitude can be absorbed
by the banking system without threatening its solvency position nor disrupting the payments system.
The banking system can still be expected to record another profitable year in 2001. This will contribute
towards  further  strengthening  the  capital  base  and  provide  further  buffer  for  banking  institutions  to
meet unexpected shocks to the system.
One  of  the  areas  where  significant  growth  will  take  place  is  the  Islamic  banking  and  takaful.  Since
1983,  the  measures  implemented  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to  expand  Islamic  banking  on  a
nationwide  basis  in  terms  of  the  number  of  players  through  introduction  of  the  Islamic  Banking
Scheme (IBS),  which  allows conventional  banking  institutions  to  offer  Islamic  banking  products  and
services using their existing infrastructure. Since its inception, the significance of the Islamic Banking
2
BIS Review 40/2001
Scheme  has  been  on  a  progressive  upward  trend,  recording  an  average  annual  growth  of  64%  in
terms  of  assets  over  the  period  1994-2000.  As  at  end  2000,  the  total  assets  of  Islamic  Banking
Scheme stood at RM33 billion. The number of banking institutions participating in the scheme has also
increased significantly from 17 in 1993 to 47 in 2000.
A major accomplishment by the domestic banking industry was the consolidation that took place in the
year  2000.  The  consolidation  of  the  domestic  banking  institutions  represents  a  major  structural
enhancement to the banking system. With the legal mergers now completed, the focus has been on
the  operational  integration  process  to  allow  the  merged  banking  institutions  to  operate  as  a  single
entity. Opportunities must also be taken to assess existing processes and relook at the possibility of
rationalising the various processes on a group-wide basis. This will allow for the new group structure
to achieve greater operational efficiency and cost effectiveness as well as potential productivity gains
in the future.
The completion of the legal and operational merger will also place the Malaysian banking institutions
in a better position to meet future business challenges and respond to the forces of change. Banking
institutions  would  be  expected  to  leverage  on  the  opportunities  presented  by  the  consolidation  to
exploit  economies  of  scale,  diversify  and  strengthen  their  earning  base  and  create  bigger  market
presence. Hence, the flexibility to conduct cross-selling within the group would need to be fully utilised.
Cross-selling of banking products would allow the existing customer base of each institutions  within
the group to be more comprehensively serviced.
These encouraging trends in the banking industry in terms of performance and resilience however will
not be enough. To forge ahead in this new economy, it will require more than just the adoption and
implementation of gradual and incremental changes. Strong management teams that are committed to
bringing  about  overall  performance  improvements,  capacity  enhancements,  agility  on  a  continuous
basis, and the courage to implement strategic changes will be key to the process. Strategic changes in
the banking sector can take many forms, and this may vary, depending on the individual organisation’s
strengths  and  opportunities.  Paradigm  shifts  would  mean  that  new  strategies  would  have  to  be
conceptualised and articulated to address the increasingly complex issues at hand. I am sure that this
Banking summit will provide an excellent platform for bankers to discuss new  and relevant  ideas to
deal with some of these issues.
Benchmarking against the best
A  key  recommendation  that  will  drive  improvements  in  the  banking  sector  is  the  benchmarking
exercise.  These  indicators  are  to  be  used  to  monitor  performance  and  help  establish  priorities  and
strategic plans to enhance performance. The benchmarks should not only encompass macro data but
should  also  include  micro  data  on  the  cost  and  returns  of  the  different  products,  transactions,
customer segments and delivery channels. It is through the monitoring of such detailed ratios would
banking institutions be able to evaluate their key strengths and capabilities. This understanding would
help banking institutions re-examine existing business models, define future focus, by leveraging on
their respective strengths to enhance shareholders value.
While indicators and benchmarks have been used previously, this is the first time that a wide-ranging
set of indicators will be formulated to form a basis for such a systematic assessment. A committee
comprising of a number of industry players, the Association of Banks and Bank Negara Malaysia has
now been set up this drive the benchmarking exercise. The group is responsible for developing the
quantitative and qualitative benchmarks that would serve as ‘drivers’ of performance improvement. To
initiate this process Bank Negara Malaysia has begun to disseminate reports to banking institutions,
benchmarking each bank’s performance against that of the industry on the basic indicators. Banking
institutions  should  not  consider  this  benchmarking  exercise  as  an  additional  burden  or  as  a
cumbersome process of statistical collection and reporting that has been imposed by the regulator. A
change in mindset is required at all levels of management if the benchmarking is to set new levels of
performance  in  the  industry.  It  needs  to  be  recognised  that  tracking  our  progress  in  achieving  the
greater heights is an important part of the process. Boards of directors are certainly expected to show
commitment  to  drive  this  process.  Banking  institutions  need  to  formulate  clear  plans  with  clearly
defined  milestones  in  addition  to  the  resources  required  to  achieve  the  set  goals.  In  essence,
baselines for future comparisons need to be established. Banking institutions must therefore allocate
adequate resources to this strategic initiative.
BIS Review 40/2001
3
In  the  new  financial  landscape  that  is  to  come,  it  will  become  clear  that  only  few  will  emerge  to
compete effectively and efficiently across all banking markets and to provide the full range of banking
services. As such, bankers will be forced to re-examine existing business models to see where their
strengths lie and to what opportunities these strengths can be applied to enhance returns. There may
be advantage to move towards strategic differentiation among the banks in order to better serve the
relevant market segment or niches. This may involve market specialisation or functional specialisation
as  banks  decide  which  functional  areas  or  combinations  of  risk  management,  customer  service,
product innovations and other areas are their comparative advantage.
As we move forward, we can expect customers’ expectations to take a quantum leap. Banking will no
longer involve providing standard products to customers. Today, transactions can take place  at any
time  and  any  place  and  through  any  delivery  channel.  In  order  to  remain  relevant  as  financial
intermediaries, banking institutions would need to be sensitive to customer needs for greater efficiency
and  convenience.  There  is  now  a  growing  demand  for  financial  products  to  be  personalised  and
customised to the individual needs of corporate and retail clients. Banking institutions would therefore
need to be more proactive and innovative in packaging and marketing their products. While customers
will expect wider range of products to be offered, of greater importance is for the banking institutions to
be  able  to  provide  these  products  at  competitive  pricing.  As  competition  intensifies,  banking
institutions will have no option but to be more innovative in pricing which will result in further narrowing
of margins.
Banking institutions would also need to consider new business arrangements and approaches in order
to  enhance  returns.  One  way  this  can  be  achieved  is  through  strategic  alliances,  which  is  already
widely  practised  by  global  players.  Strategic  alliances  have  become  a  viable  strategy  for  banks
contemplating new markets. Through these alliances, banks can complement their existing strengths
with those of their partners’ capabilities, distribution channels, and access to new markets.
At the individual banking institution level, the ability to make real improvement would also depend very
much  on  the  availability  of  competent  human  resource.  The  quality  of  manpower  will  be  a  defining
element of performance and competition among the banking institutions. Attracting the best skills and
talents in the  industry  must  also  be  complemented  with  better  management  and  communication  so
that  there  is  an  awareness  and  understanding  of  visions  and  shared  values  throughout  the
organisation. Just as the change of management mindset is a key factor that is needed to embrace
strategic change, changing employees’ mindset becomes a key factor to building commitment towards
the overall success of the organisation.
Towards this end, training and development of employees must also be seen as a contributing factor
towards  value  creation  within  the  banking  institutions  rather  than  merely  to  comply  with  regulatory
requirements or as a non-revenue function that is costly and unnecessary. Only with both competence
and commitment from the organisation’s workforce, and their continuing training and development, will
real strategic change take place.
To  achieve  our  vision  for  a  stronger  banking  system  that  is  more  effective  and  efficient,  banking
institutions  will need to recognise the greater role of knowledge  and  ICT  in  the  changing  economic
landscape.  There  are  some  clear  benefits  including  increased  convenience,  increased  access  to
information,  speed  of  transactions,  and  enhanced  control  and  management  of  personal  finances.
Banking  institutions  are  therefore  urged  to  explore  and  capture  new  opportunities  offered  by  the
advances  in  ICT.  The  new  innovations  will  be  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  landscape.  A  more
logical response would perhaps be the full integration of high technology systems into the “brick and
mortar” facilities that banking institutions already offer. With online technology, new levels of customer
segmentation can be achieved. In this context, close coordination between the existing channels and
the online channel is needed to fully optimise an integrated multichannel approach.
As  we  undergo  the  transition  towards  a  more  deregulated  and  a  more  market  oriented  financial
system,  strong  corporate  governance  and  risk  management  becomes  a  key  part  of  successful
institutions.  With  the  larger  pool  of  resources  after  the  merger  process,  banking  institutions  are
expected to further enhance these capabilities. Specifically, the adoption of best practices with regard
to credit practices would be monitored, consistent with the requirement of the credit risk management
guidelines to be issued by Bank Negara Malaysia.
In such environment, the need to ensure adequate and effective consumer education and protection
would also become even more crucial. The prevention of any disruptions in the level or reliability of
services to bank customers and also their protection from potential unfair practices reflects favourably
on the ability of the financial system to absorb increasing competition in such an environment.
4
BIS Review 40/2001
There  needs  to  be  active  and  structured  consumer  education  programmes  to  increase  consumer
understanding of banking institutions’ products and services, which will in turn give rise to more active
consumerism.  In  pursuing  this  effort,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  together  with  the  banking  institutions
have  established  a  working  committee  for  the  Consumer  Education  Programme  in  November  last
year. The  working committee will facilitate and coordinate the  launching  of a Consumer  Awareness
Campaign  nationwide.  The  objectives  of  this  initiative  are  threefold,  i.e.  to  educate  and  enhance
consumer  knowledge  on  personal  financial  issues;  to  improve  legal  protection  for  consumers  and
customer redress avenues; and to increase product transparency and disclosure.
Working closely with the consumer associations, the committee aims to identify and clarify misleading
information on products and services available to the banking public. In moving towards a standard full
disclosure  model  for  products,  the  committee  will  determine  the  minimum  level  of  product
transparency to ensure that consumers are clearly informed of all risks and liabilities associated with
the product. In addition, a review of the current legal protection for consumers will  be conducted  to
provide  further  assurance  to  the  public  that  their  rights  will  not  be  compromised.  As  part  of  this
exercise, the committee intends to publish information leaflets and pamphlets on specific issues that
have been raised by consumers. In the longer term, it is hoped that a more active consumerism would
increase  consumer  pressure  for  market  efficiency  leading  to  more  innovation  by  the  banking
institution.  It  will  also  entail  greater  market  discipline  among  these  institutions  while  increasing
consumer  buying  power  and  reducing  consumer  complaints  arising  directly  from  ignorance.  It  is
envisaged  that  all  these  factors  will  push  the  local  banking  institutions  towards  a  higher  level  of
professionalism and efficiency.
In line with the on-going efforts to accord further protection to consumers, the “Guideline for Lending
Institutions  Accepting  Guarantee  for  a  Credit  Facility”  issued  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  in  1995  is
currently  being  reviewed.  As  an  initial  step,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  the  waiver  clause,  which
pertains to the ability of the prospective guarantor to voluntarily waive his rights under the guideline,
will be removed. In addition, the threshold of credit facilities which are covered under the Guideline will
now be increased from RM200,000 to RM250,000.
Conclusion: Making it happen
The financial sector masterplan has identified the building blocks for an effective and efficient financial
system that will meet Malaysia’s requirements as we advance forward into the next decade. The Plan
has provided  a shared  vision,  a common goal to be achieved  over the next  ten  years. The various
initiatives that are required to realise this vision form the building  blocks. It needs to  be recognised
however, that the objectives that have been outlined cannot be achieved within a short period of time.
It  is  an  evolutionary  process  rather  than  a  discontinuous  process.  The  realisation  of  the  vision
however,  involves  initiatives  to  be  taken  now  by  the  industry.  Having  the  medium  and  longer  term
goals outlined provides a basis to ensure the short term initiatives will be consistent and coherent with
the long term objective. In other words, the construction of the building blocks must move in the right
direction and must begin now. As part of the process, each banking institution needs to formulate their
own strategic plans and short-term action plans within this longer term perspective.
While the foundations have been built and the plans are in place, the future is by no means secure. It
is only with the combined efforts of all the stakeholders, especially the banking institutions themselves
that the probability to scale these greater heights will be enhanced.
BIS Review 40/2001
5
