Willem  F  Duisenberg:  Presentation  of  the  ECB's  Annual  Report  2000  to  the
European Parliament
Introductory statement delivered by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
to the European Parliament, Strasbourg, 3 July 2001
 It is my great pleasure today to present the third Annual Report of the ECB, two and a half years after
launch of the euro and less than half a year before the single currency will become fully visible for our
citizens in the form of banknotes and coins.
Economic and monetary developments and the monetary policy strategy of the ECB
2000 was a remarkable year for the euro area, as economic growth reached its highest level for over a
decade and was accompanied by continued strong job creation. The HICP in the euro area has also
been above 2% since the middle of 2000, mainly owing to oil price increases and the depreciation of
the exchange rate of the euro last year. While this increase in the HICP to above the ECB's definition
of price stability is not welcome, the ECB cannot and should not avoid short-term price fluctuations
caused  by  such  temporary  factors.  Nonetheless,  it  is  crucial  to  prevent  any  spillover  of  transitory
short-term  pressures  into  medium-term  inflation  expectations.  During  2000  the  ECB  had  to  be
particularly  vigilant  in  this  regard  in  a  context  of  strong  economic  growth  and  given  that  monetary
developments clearly indicated the existence of upward risks to price stability. It was for this reason
that  we  raised  interest  rates  six  times  in  2000.  By  doing  so,  the  ECB  contributed  to  ensuring  the
sustainability of non-inflationary economic growth in the euro area.
In this respect, the evolution of long-term interest rates in the euro area in 2000 indicated that financial
markets generally expected medium-term price developments to remain in line with the definition of
price stability. The forecasts which became available in 2000 painted a similar picture. This is a clear
indication that the ECB affirmed its credibility in 2000.
Before sharing with you my analysis of the current situation, let me turn to some issues raised in the
draft  resolution  prepared  by  your  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  concerning  the
monetary policy strategy of the ECB. I should like to begin by saying that I share the view expressed in
the draft resolution that the ECB's two-pillar strategy can be understood as a means of analysing all
the  pieces  of  information  relevant  for  monetary  policy.  However,  there  are  other  points  in  the
resolution  with  which  I  would  not  agree.  These  concern  the  doubts  expressed  with  regard  to  the
definition of price stability, the importance that the first pillar should be given in our strategy and the
role of projections under the second pillar.
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  defined  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  "year-on-year
increases in the HICP for the euro area of below 2%", and has stated that "price stability has to be
maintained  over  the  medium  term".  The  definition  provided  by  the  Governing  Council  ensures
accountability  and  gives  clear  guidance  to  expectations  of  future  price  developments.  The  phrase
"below 2%" clearly defines the upper boundary of the rate of HICP increases which is consistent with
price  stability.  This  upper  boundary  is  in  line  with  the  practice  of  the  national  central  banks  of
participating  Member  States  before  the  start  of  the  Stage  Three  of  EMU.  In  addition,  the  word
"increase" clearly signals that prolonged declines in the level of the HICP index would not be deemed
consistent with price stability. There should be no doubt that the commitment of the ECB to maintain
price stability is compatible neither with inflation above 2% in the medium term nor with deflation. In
this  sense,  the  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  is  fully  symmetric,  fighting  both  upward  and  downward
pressures on prices which may result in outcomes not in line with our definition of price stability.
Within our monetary policy strategy, the first pillar assigns a prominent role to money. This reflects the
fundamental  monetary  nature  of  inflation  –  as  supported  by  empirical  evidence,  much  of  which  is
available from our Working Paper Series – which indicates a stable long-run demand for M3 and good
leading indicator properties of M3 growth for inflation in the medium term. The need to follow monetary
developments is therefore key to analysing risks to price stability in the euro area in the medium term.
I should also emphasise at this point that the quality of monetary statistics is among the highest of all
statistics  available  in  the  euro  area.  These  monetary  statistics  are  based  on  a  fully  harmonised
reporting scheme across all Monetary Financial Institutions in the euro area. The quality of monetary
BIS Review 62/2001
1
statistics  has  recently  been  improved  by  identifying,  as  a  separate  item,  non-resident  holdings  of
money market funds. Furthermore, we expect that it will be possible for the non-resident holdings of
other negotiable paper to be appropriately measured and published towards the end of the year. For
all these reasons, M3 will continue to play a prominent role in the monetary policy of the ECB.
With  regard  to  the  projections,  and  in  particular  to  the  suggestion  that  they  should  be  explicitly
endorsed by the Governing Council, let me remind you that the Governing Council is accountable only
for  maintaining  price  stability.  It  is  up  to  the  Governing  Council  to  take  the  decisions  necessary  to
ensure  the  performance  of  the  tasks  entrusted  to  the  ESCB  by  the  Treaty.  In  this  respect,  the
Governing  Council  decided,  for  several  reasons,  to  follow  a  two-pillar  strategy.  In  particular,  it  was
decided not to follow a strategy under which monetary policy decisions would be made solely on the
basis  of  inflation  forecasts.  While  the  staff  projections  play  an  important  role  in  the  analysis  the
Governing Council conducts under the second pillar, it is important to understand that this analysis is
not centred on these forecasts. Given the difficulties of forecasting over longer-term horizons and the
uncertainty  regarding  the  appropriate  economic  model,  the  Governing  Council  does  not  deem  it
advisable to use only a single projection to analyse risks to price stability. The uncertainty surrounding
forecasts  has  also  been  appropriately  reflected  in  the  manner  in  which  the  ECB  publishes  them,
namely in the form of ranges rather than point estimates.
Turning to an analysis of current economic and monetary developments, after the decision on 10 May
to lower the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points, at its meetings in June the Governing Council
considered that, on the basis of the information available, the current level of key ECB interest rates
was appropriate to ensure price stability in the euro area over the medium term. Since the last meeting
of  the  Governing  Council,  there  has  not  been  any  new  information  that  would  justify  changing  this
assessment.
As  regards  the  information  contained  in  the  first  pillar,  monetary  developments  point  towards  a
favourable outlook for the medium-term maintenance of price stability. After having followed a gradual
downward trend since spring 2000, the three-month average of annual M3 growth rates has tended to
broadly  stabilise  over  recent  months.  When  account  is  taken  of  the  upward  distortion  to  monetary
figures,  M3  would  have  been  growing  at  around  the  reference  value  in  the  most  recent  period.
Moreover,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  has  continued  to  moderate,  mainly
driven by the slowdown in loans to households.
With regard to the second pillar, we continue to expect the currently high rates of inflation to remain a
transitory phenomenon and, in the absence of further unfavourable price shocks, inflation rates should
fall below 2% in 2002. These developments are expected to take place in an environment of weaker
economic growth, which should, however, remain broadly in line with trend potential growth of the euro
area.
In  this  context  let  me  turn  to  an  issue  which  has  attracted  considerable  attention  just  recently:  the
potential  impact  of  the  cash  changeover  on  price  pressures.  In  general,  price  transparency  and
competition are likely to limit inflationary pressures from the cash changeover. In this respect it is also
worth noting the commitment of finance ministers in the euro area, as reflected in a statement issued
by the Eurogroup, that, overall, the conversion into euro of all prices, charges and fees administered
by their governments will be price neutral or else "smoothed" in favour of the consumer. We call on
governments at other levels but also on firms to follow this example set by central  governments. In
addition, the public's vigilance in monitoring prices and price changes will also be important during the
conversion period.
The  ECB  will  continue  to  pursue  its  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,
irrespective of whether prices are quoted in euro or in the component currencies. We shall therefore
continue  to  remain  vigilant  as  regards  future  developments  affecting  the  balance  of  risks  to  price
stability, including – in particular – monetary developments, real GDP growth, price-setting behaviour
and  wage  developments.  At  this  juncture,  when  price  developments  are  mainly  being  affected  by
transitory factors, it is crucial that the current upward movement of prices does not become a more
lasting one, and it is therefore important that wage moderation continue.
The introduction of the euro banknotes and coins
With a view to the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins, I can report that the Eurosystem's
preparations are well on track. At the end of June 2001 the total number of euro banknotes produced
so far amounted  to about 9 billion,  which is  about 90% of the  initial  launch  stock.  Moreover,  as  an
2
BIS Review 62/2001
insurance  against  potential  production  risks,  in  March  2001  the  ECB  decided  to  establish  a
Eurosystem central reserve. This reserve will amount to about 10% of the launch and logistical stocks.
On  1  January  2001  the  Eurosystem  launched  the  "Euro  2002  Information  Campaign",  which  is
designed to complement other information campaigns being conducted at the national level. The main
objective of the campaign is to familiarise the general public and specific target groups with the visual
appearance of the euro banknotes and their security features and to raise the awareness of citizens
about the overall changeover modalities. The information campaign is progressing on schedule. It will
become fully visible for citizens once the mass media part of the campaign starts on 30 August 2001,
after the unveiling of the final visual appearance of the euro banknotes and their security features.
The Eurosystem is fully aware of the importance the successful introduction of the euro banknotes and
coins  will  have  for  overall  confidence  in  the  single  currency,  and  the  careful  and  comprehensive
preparations being made by the Eurosystem are commensurate with this task. We should all bear in
mind the fact that the cash changeover is an unprecedented challenge and a huge logistical exercise
and that all the parties involved will have to assume their part of the overall responsibility for making
the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins a success.
At this point, I should like to comment briefly on the issue of the sub-frontloading of euro banknotes to
the general public, a matter on which I have reported to you in greater detail on previous occasions.
Let me remind you that the ECB's decisions have been taken in full respect of the general interest,
and after a thorough assessment of all the aspects involved. No new elements have emerged which
would justify a renewed reflection on this issue.
Issues related to banking supervision
Turning  to  issues  related  to  banking  supervision  also  raised  in  the  draft  resolution  on  the  ECB's
Annual Report, I should like to recall, at the outset, that the framework for financial stability in the EU
relies  on  two  building  blocks:  national  competence  and  co-operation.  It  is  our  firm  belief  that  the
impressive changes in financial markets prompted by the introduction of the euro call for a substantial
enhancement  of  the  mechanisms  for  co-operation  between  national  authorities  and  with  the
Eurosystem. This is so because EMU is changing the nature and scope of systemic risk. It is no longer
possible to assess threats to financial stability or the potential channels for the spread of contagious
risks  only  at  the  domestic  level.  I  was  therefore  particularly  glad  to  see  that  the  contribution  of  the
ESCB to improving the institutional framework for financial stability and, in particular, the development
of macro-prudential analysis have been acknowledged and supported in the draft resolution.
The draft resolution also refers to the need to avoid conflicts between supervisory responsibilities and
the responsibilities of the monetary authorities. I should like to say, first, that the empirical evidence of
potential  conflicts  between  the  objectives  of  financial  stability  and  price  stability  is  unclear  and,
second,  there  is  no  possibility  for  such  a  conflict  to  arise  in  the  context  of  the  institutional
arrangements  in  the  euro  area.  Indeed,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  entailed  an  institutional
separation between monetary policy decision-making, which is addressed to the euro area as a whole,
and  the  exercise  of  supervisory  tasks,  which  relates  to  domestic  institutions  and  markets.  The
decision-making mechanisms for the two tasks no longer coincide, and the risk of conflict has been
overcome by the institutional set-up. To conclude my statement, I should like to underscore that the
introduction of the single currency has indeed reinforced the need for the strong involvement of central
banks in prudential supervision and financial stability.
BIS Review 62/2001
3
