Paul  Jenkins:  Communicating  Canadian  monetary  policy:  towards  greater
transparency
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Jenkins,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Ottawa  Economics
Association, Ottawa, Ontario, 22 May 2001.
 I want, first, to thank the Ottawa  Economics Association for  your invitation to speak to  you today.  I
welcome  this  opportunity  to  talk  about  an  important  aspect  of  the  work  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  in
conducting monetary policy – communications.
In the next few minutes I would like to discuss some of the factors that are central to monetary policy
communications. I will touch on a few of the particular challenges we at the Bank of Canada face. And
I’ll conclude with a few words on the Bank’s communications approach, including its role in the new
system of fixed dates for announcing interest rate decisions.
The trend to openness and transparency
Let  me  begin  with  a  brief  backward  glance.  It  is  not  so  long  ago  that  central  banks  did  little  to  let
people know what they were up to and why. Indeed, in the conduct of monetary policy, little emphasis
was  placed  on  trying  to  explain  the  objectives  of  policy  because  those  objectives  were  not  clearly
defined.  Without  clear  objectives  for  monetary  policy,  central  bank  actions  were  generally  not
predictable.  And  the conventional  way of thinking among central  banks was that  it  was  best  to  say
nothing and let actions speak for themselves.
It is a different story today. Indeed, there has been nothing less than a sea change in the way central
banks view the role of communications in monetary policy. What we have seen in recent years is a
broad and continuing trend among central banks towards greater openness and transparency in the
conduct of monetary policy. This trend has come about not because of any “fad” for public relations or
for marketing  a  central  bank’s  image.  It  has  occurred  because  of  fundamental  changes  in  the  way
monetary  policy  is  approached  and  conducted  and  the  corresponding  recognition  that  the
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  is  improved  through  greater  transparency.  And  to  be  transparent
requires proactive and well-planned communication.
thus 
towards 
increased 
important  step 
transparency,  and 
towards  clear  and 
Why communications has become so important for monetary policy
For the  Bank of Canada, communications has become a strategic  priority  in  supporting  our  goal  of
preserving  a  low  and  stable  inflation  environment.  We  believe  that  maintaining  low,  stable,  and
predictable inflation is the best contribution monetary policy can make to a productive, well-functioning
economy.
An 
focused
communication,  was  taken  in  1991  when  Canada  adopted  explicit  inflation-control  targets.  The
announcement of the targets clarified the objective of monetary policy and provided a nominal anchor
for economic and financial decisions. (As you know, last week the government and the Bank agreed to
renew the inflation-control target of a 1 to 3 per cent target range and a 2 per cent target midpoint.)
The  greater 
to
communicating  what  monetary  policy  is  trying  to  achieve,  our  means  of  achieving  it  and  our
assessment of the state of the economy.
While the targets continue to define our inflation objective, conditions in the economy are constantly
changing. Both international and domestic developments can affect the economic outlook in Canada.
The  Bank  has  to  continually  assess  these  changes  and  their  implications  for  future  inflation.  If
required,  we  take  appropriate  policy  actions  that  are  consistent  with  achieving  the  inflation-control
target  over  the  medium  term.  The  role  of  communications  is,  therefore,  to  explain  how  and  why
circumstances  have  changed  and  to  relate  the  Bank’s  actions  to  our  inflation  target  and  to  the
well-being of the economy.
I’d  like  to  suggest  to  you  that  there  are  at  least  three  important  and  related  ways  that  good
communications can help monetary policy be effective.
targets  has  also  anchored 
the  Bank’s  approach 
transparency  of 
inflation 
BIS Review 46/2001
1
First, good communications helps put the Bank and financial markets on the same wavelength. That is
very important because, generally speaking, monetary policy is more effective when financial markets
understand how the Bank assesses economic developments in relation to our policy objectives. When
we are all on the same wavelength, markets can anticipate, rather than simply react to, interest rate
actions by the Bank.
If the Bank does a good job of keeping market expectations broadly in line with the direction of policy,
there tends to be less volatility in financial markets and a smoother, more rapid incorporation of any
shifts  in  policy  into  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates.  In  other  words,  effective  communications
improves the monetary policy transmission process and leads to responses in the exchange rate and
in the term structure of interest rates that are more consistent with the Bank’s intentions. This greater
stability and predictability is in everyone’s interest.
A second reason why communications has become so important has to do with the  effect of public
expectations  and  behaviour  on  the  Bank’s  ability  to  meet  our  policy  objectives.  Improving  public
understanding and acceptance of what the Bank is trying to do increases the chances of success in
achieving the inflation targets with as little economic disruption as possible. It is largely a matter of the
credibility of the Bank’s commitment to those targets.
Let me be more specific. If consumers, investors, workers, businesses, and governments believe that
action will be taken to ensure that inflation remains close to the target, then they are more likely to
make economic and financial decisions accordingly. Pricing decisions by producers and suppliers will
reflect  inflation  expectations  consistent  with  our  target.  Wage  bargains  between  employees  and
employers  will  tend  to  be  in  line  with  the  inflation  target.  The  net  effect  will  be  a  more  stable
macro-economic environment and greater success in keeping inflation low.
Keeping  in  touch  with  expectations  also  entails  good  two-way  communication.  The  Bank  consults
Canadians in business, finance, and government across the country on a regular basis. By doing so
we keep informed of economic developments and perspectives on the ground, and this contributes to
our understanding of what is happening in the “real” economy.
A third reason why communications is important is accountability. As a public institution with a high
degree of autonomy for the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank of Canada bears an obligation to
account to Canadians for how well it is doing its job. An explicitly defined and agreed upon inflation
target provides a clear basis for accountability. This clear basis for judging the Bank’s performance is
extremely important for credibility. But for the Bank to be fully accountable, it must provide the public
with the information it needs to be aware of, and understand, the Bank’s policy objectives, the factors
we take into account in making decisions, and our progress in meeting our objectives. That is the job
of communications.
Challenges in communicating monetary policy
Recognizing  and  understanding  the  importance  of  good  communications  does  not  mean  the  job  is
easy.  In  fact,  being  more  open  and  transparent  has  created  a  wide  range  of  communications
challenges.
One of these challenges stems from the medium-term time frame in which monetary policy operates.
When the Bank raises or lowers interest rates, it takes about 12 months for this change to have its
peak impact on aggregate demand and about 18 to 24 months to fully affect inflation. In other words,
when the Bank acts, it does so on the basis of assessing developments, gauging the impact on the
economy and on inflation 1 to 2 years down the road, and taking action to achieve our inflation target
over that horizon.
If the public is going to make informed economic and financial decisions, then it needs to understand
and take into account the time frame over which monetary policy has its effects. Yet there continues to
be a tendency to view Bank actions only as a short-term response to immediate events rather than in
the context of medium-term trends and objectives.
Adding to this communications challenge is the fact that assessing economic trends in the future is not
an exact science but rather a highly interpretive exercise. Unforeseen developments or “shocks” are
always  occurring,  and  there  is  always  an  element  of  uncertainty  about  the  order  of  magnitude  and
persistence of these developments. Thus, what we say and communicate about the future has to be
phrased  in  conditional  terms.  And  if  the  picture  looking  forward  is  clouded  by  uncertainties,  it  is
2
BIS Review 46/2001
impossible  for  a  central  bank  to  provide  financial  markets  and  the  public  with  a  high  degree  of
precision and certainty.
A  second  key  communications  challenge  could  be  formulated  as  a  question  something  like  this:  In
becoming more transparent, how can the Bank best ensure value in what we communicate?
At  the  risk  of  sounding  a  touch  glib,  I  would  argue  that,  when  it  comes  to  monetary  policy
communications,  “more”  isn’t  necessarily  “better.”  It  is  “quality”  that  is  of  greater  importance  in
transparency than “quantity.”
As  I  have  already  noted,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  viewed  from  a  medium-term  perspective.
Therefore, the Bank can provide substantive value by communicating what it sees as the key trends in
the economy and inflation and how the conduct of monetary policy relates to these trends.
Usually it is the accumulation of information that gives understanding to these trends. For that reason,
the Bank cannot, and should not, comment on every piece of new economic data or information that
becomes  public.  But  by  transmitting  our  view  of  the  larger  trends  in  the  economy,  the  Bank  can
promote better anticipation of the direction of policy.
Our concern about quality has also influenced how we approach the flow of information just prior to,
and  at  the  time  of,  our  policy  announcements.  The  Bank  consciously  refrains  from  making  public
comments  on  issues  relating  to  monetary  policy  in  the  week  before  an  announcement  on  official
interest rates. This is a sensitive period, particularly for financial markets, and comments could easily
be misinterpreted.
The  other  point  I  would  stress  about  the  quality  of  information  relates  to  how  the  Bank  arrives  at
monetary  policy  decisions.  The  decision-making  of  the  Bank’s  Governing  Council  is  a  process  of
consensus building. Members of the Governing Council are full-time employees of the Bank who meet
on a daily basis. In the two weeks prior to a policy announcement, there is a series of meetings at
which information from several sources is presented by Bank staff and discussed. Out of this process
a consensus is developed within the Governing Council on the appropriate policy decision. Therefore,
what is of greatest value from a communications perspective is a clear statement of the substantive
reasons for a policy decision. That statement is the press release announcing our decision.
Four times during the year, the announcement is supplemented two weeks later with the publication of
our semi-annual Monetary Policy Reports (in May and November) and Updates to the full Report (in
February and August). These publications,  which are finalized as of the  policy  announcement date,
elaborate in greater detail the Governing Council’s assessment of the factors that shaped the interest
rate decision.
Another  challenge  revolves  around  the  fact  that  the  Bank`s  communications  are  with  different
audiences that may have different degrees of interest in what the Bank says and does.
The general public, for example, is generally interested in inflation, the value of the dollar, and whether
or not interest rates are going up or down – those developments that have an impact on their daily
decision-making.
Financial markets, on the other hand, are intensely interested in both the direction and the intricacies
of monetary policy and tend to be highly sensitive to any Bank action or comment bearing on these
issues.  They  scrutinize  Bank  publications  and  speeches  by  senior  Bank  officials  for  any  shade  of
meaning about where monetary policy might be heading. This makes communicating monetary policy
a difficult task, because some of the subtleties and complexities related to the direction of monetary
policy simply can’t be reduced to a few words.
The  challenge  is  in  tailoring  messages  that  communicate  as  clearly  as  possible  the  Bank’s
assessment of the economy and the direction of policy, while bearing in mind the specific concerns
and information needs of different audiences.
This challenge is all the more difficult when it comes to the media, an audience that is instrumental in
whether or not we communicate successfully.
There  are  no  two  ways  about  it.  The  Bank  relies  heavily  on  the  media  to  get  our  message  to  the
public, whether it is via TV and radio, newspapers and magazines, or the various wire services that
feed financial institution trading rooms as well as news outlets across the country.
We also recognize that the media act  as a filter for what  we say and often  determine which  of our
statements will be reported. It is part of the media’s job to interpret our decisions and perspectives and
BIS Review 46/2001
3
to comment on how they see the Bank executing its mandate. It is also their job to reflect the views of
third parties on what we say and do. That is healthy for democracy, healthy for our accountability, and
can be healthy for raising public awareness of monetary policy issues.
In  this  rather  complex  communications  environment,  it  is  squarely  in  the  Bank’s  interests  that  the
media cover monetary policy as fully and accurately as possible. And the chances of full and accurate
reporting are enormously better if the media are well informed about monetary policy and the factors
affecting  what  we  at  the  Bank  do.  Bearing  in  mind  my  comments  a  few  moments  ago  about  the
frequently complex and conditional nature of monetary policy, I don’t underestimate the challenge –
either for us or for the media.
For the Bank’s part, we have taken a number of steps in recent years to strengthen our relations with
the  media  and  to  furnish  them  with  the  information  necessary  for  high-quality  reporting  and
commentary. We now provide not only more information than in the past but more occasions when we
explain information directly to the media and respond to their questions.
Thus, for example, we have instituted regular media briefings prior to the release of key Bank reports.
We installed a special “lock-up” facility at the Bank to enable the media to read our releases and write
their  stories  in  advance  of  their  official  publication.  We  have  increased  the  number  of  press
conferences and media sessions given by the Governor and Deputy Governors.
The  media  tell  us  these  changes  have  been  helpful.  But  I  would  suggest  that  there  is  still  some
progress  to  be  made  to  ensure  that  Canadians  receive  the  accurate  and  insightful  coverage  of
monetary  policy  they  have  every  right  to  expect.    For  example,  the  media  might  assess  whether
investing more time and intellectual capital could strengthen and deepen its reporting and commentary
on  monetary  policy  issues.  And  there  may  well  be  additional  things  the  Bank  could  do  to  promote
better  understanding  of  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  we  have  been  looking  at  the  greater  use  of  the
electronic  media  to  reach  the  public,  and  our  new  Governor  has  already  done  a  fair  number  of
interviews on radio and television. Our goal here is to continue the move to greater openness in Bank
communications while at the same time being careful to stay clear of any short-run, market-sensitive
issues.
We will continue to consult with journalists and reporters about this and other improvements that we
might consider.
The Bank’s communications strategy – an evolving process
To this point, I’ve underlined why communications is important for effective monetary policy and some
of the challenges we face in communicating a complex subject to a variety of interested audiences.
Now  I’d  like  to  say  a  few  more  words  about  what  we’ve  been  doing  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  to
communicate monetary policy in an open and transparent way.
As I’ve already indicated, our overriding objective is to focus attention, debate, and understanding on
the Canadian economic and financial situation and what it means for keeping inflation low and stable.
To  do  this,  the  Bank  has  taken  a  number  of  initiatives.  In  1995,  we  introduced  our  semi-annual
Monetary  Policy  Report,  which  in  many  ways  has  become  the  centrepiece  of  our  communications
strategy. It is the Bank’s fullest interpretation of recent developments in the economy as well as our
outlook for the medium term, the horizon over which monetary policy has its effects.
Between  each  Report,  we  publish  an  update  of  the  Bank’s  views.  Interspersed  between  these
releases  are  speeches  and  press  conferences  by  the  Governor,  speeches  by  Deputy  Governors,
press  releases,  and  regional  outreach  activities,  which  have  greatly  broadened  our  audience
coverage.
As  part  of  our  communications  strategy,  we  have  tried  to  schedule  our  publications  and
communications events throughout the year to achieve a regular, continuous, and integrated program
of public communications. This permits us to communicate on a more continuous basis our evolving
views on the economy and on the trend of inflation.
On the operational side, in 1994, we introduced an operating band for the overnight rate of interest to
give greater clarity to financial markets about the Bank’s desired rate setting. In 1996, we set the Bank
Rate – the rate at which we lend to financial institutions – at the upper limit of the operating band. And
in 1999, we set the target for the overnight rate as the midpoint of the band. Currently, we are moving
to  place  more  focus  on  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate  in  our  announcements  since  it  is  the
4
BIS Review 46/2001
appropriate  policy  rate  for  international  comparisons.  For  example,  our  target  for  the  overnight  rate
corresponds with the U.S. Federal Reserve’s target for the federal funds rate.
We have also put a lot of emphasis on developing and maintaining our Web site. It gives the public at
large direct access not only to our publications and speeches but also to more easily understandable
information about the Bank and monetary policy. (By the way, I encourage you to take a look at our
Web  site  at  www.bankofcanada.ca.  It  was  recently  ranked  second  among  24  central  bank  sites
reviewed by the London-based organization, Lombard Street Research Ltd.)
Fixed announcement dates
Our most recent innovation to our strategy, launched on 5 December last year, is a new system for
announcing  decisions  on  official  interest  rates.  Any  change  to  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate  of
interest  is  now  announced  on  eight  pre-specified  or  “fixed”  dates  during  the  year.  On  each  date,  a
press  release  is  issued,  indicating  the  Bank’s  decision  either  to  change  rates  or  to  leave  them
unchanged and giving a short explanation of the reasons for the decision. This approach replaces the
former practice of only making an announcement if we changed interest rates and doing so without
any warning to the public or to financial markets.
The new, fixed-date approach is an extremely important step for the Bank in implementing monetary
policy actions. From a communications perspective, it provides a number of important benefits. First, it
gives the public, the media, and financial markets the certainty of knowing exactly when the Bank will
make an announcement on interest rates. This allows them to plan more efficiently and make more
orderly assessments as each announcement approaches.
A second communications benefit of fixed dates is the increased emphasis they bring to the economic
situation in Canada as the primary focus of Canadian monetary policy. We believed this would lead to
increased  commentary  on  Canadian  economic  circumstances  and  their  implications  for  monetary
policy during the period leading up to a fixed announcement date. That, in turn, would contribute to
building public awareness of both economic developments in Canada and the role of monetary policy.
A  third  benefit  is  that  fixed  dates  provide  the  Bank  with  a  regular  opportunity  to  put  the  recent
economic  and  financial  developments  into  a  medium-term  perspective.  As  I  said  earlier,  this  is
important because the effects of monetary policy actions are usually spread over 1 to 2  years. The
press release on each fixed date, together with the Bank’s other communications vehicles such as the
Monetary Policy Report and Updates, enables the Bank to position recent developments in terms of
the  underlying  trends  over  this  time  horizon.  If  we  communicate  this  successfully,  there  should
ultimately be more public focus on the trends over time that are important to monetary policy and less
reaction to near-term developments.
Finally, the eight new fixed dates increase the number of opportunities for the Bank to communicate its
views on the economy. Whether or not there is a change in our policy rate, the analysis in the press
release  should  stimulate  a  more  frequent  and  continuous  dialogue  with  key  audiences  and  should
generate more regular commentary among analysts and the media.
We now have the experience of four fixed announcement dates under our belts. While it is still early to
draw conclusions, generally we are very pleased with the way fixed dates are working and with the
positive reaction they have generated. We have already seen more focused public commentary on the
Canadian  economic  situation,  and  that  is  extremely  encouraging.  With  the  benefit  of  further
experience with the new approach and feedback from financial markets and the public, we will be able
to assess what further improvements might be made. But we are more convinced than ever that this
new approach will increase the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Conclusion
To conclude, I want to emphasize that the Bank will continue to look at ways to build on the progress
we have made in increasing the openness and transparency of monetary policy. Communications will
play an increasingly vital and strategic role in helping achieve this further progress. It is a role that we
at the Bank are extremely serious about. For in the final analysis, monetary policy is most effective
when it is effectively communicated. Thank you.
BIS Review 46/2001
5
