Klaus Liebscher: The European integration: policies towards stability, growth
and employment
Speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  to  the  Bertelsmann
Foundation,  European Forum Alpbach, Institute for Public Affairs, and the  Bruno  Kreisky  Forum  for
International Dialogue, Baden, 29 June 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure for me being with you this evening and let me first congratulate the organisers of
this  conference  for  having  chosen  a  combination  of  two  very  important  issues  for  discussion  on
European integration – labour markets and enlargement. I am pleased to share some thoughts with
you from the view of monetary policy.
The  two  elements  of  your  conference  title  touch  upon  both  the  deepening  and  the  widening  of
European integration. I may recall that, in the wake of the fall of the Berlin wall, those two dimensions
were often discussed as alternative strategies. However, today it seems clear to almost everybody that
European integration has to proceed in both directions. The deepening of European institutions and
the widening of Europe's geographical extension are not mutually exclusive but rather dependent on
each other. Progress in one area does certainly give momentum to the other.
The most important step in the deepening process of European integration – at least to my mind – has
been the creation of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). From a Governor of one of the euro area
central banks this statement will certainly not come as a surprise to you.
Although  there  was  some  scepticism  or  even  criticism  in  the  run-up  to  EMU,  not  only  European
officials but also many observers outside the area have since confirmed that the transition to EMU was
taken successfully – including those observers who were originally very sceptical about the ambitious
aims lined out in the Maastricht treaty. And indeed, the list of preconditions for monetary union met in
recent years is impressive.
Let me single out just a few of those points, without attempting to gloss over the challenges that lie
ahead:
 
First  and  foremost,  while  inflation  has  come  down  to  historically  low  levels  we  cannot  be
satisfied with the current inflation performance. At this point it has to be stressed that price
stability was not only a precondition of Monetary Union but – even more importantly – is the
prime  objective  of  the  independent  Eurosystem.  Thus,  the  European  Central  Bank  will
ensure that medium-term inflation is in line with price stability. We are confident that such a
conduct of monetary policy will gain the trust of the public.
Public finance has improved  with the implementation of the Growth  and  Stability  Pact.  An
increasing  number  of  countries  are  already  recording  budget  surpluses.  However,  this
amelioration  has  predominately  been  due  to  favourable  cyclical  conditions  and  one-off
measures,  with  only  modest  help  from  structural  changes.  What  is  more,  the  visible
improvement in the average deficit ratio for the euro area as a whole may come to a halt in
2001  as  large  tax  cuts  throughout  the  area  are  being  implemented  without  due
compensation on the expenditure side.
Unemployment has come down to the lowest levels in a decade as economic recovery has
taken  hold.  Furthermore,  labour  markets  have  also  become  increasingly  responsive  to
growth, which may give an indication of progress with regard to labour market reforms. High
rates of turnover in the labour market are a signal that employers enjoy greater flexibility in
tailoring their staff numbers to production needs. However, remaining limits to the choice of
the most profitable combination of productive factors may still prevent firms from exploiting
the full possibilities of new technologies reducing both welfare and employment prospects.
Despite  the  favourable  common  trend  of  wage  moderation  –  which  increasing  levels  of
inflation  may  now  put  under  threat  –  national  wage  negotiations  should  further  take  into
account sectoral and regional differences in productivity.
  BIS Review 61/2001
1
to  undertake  necessary  structural 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  single  currency  has  been  an  important  catalyst  in  stimulating  structural
reform processes.
Greater  commitment  of  governments 
reforms  can  be
observed – reforms to render product markets more competitive, to make labour markets more flexible
and  to  make  the  tax  system  more  supportive  to  employment  and  investment.  Additionally,  several
countries  are planning to reform pension  and  social  security  systems  in  response  to  the  increasing
demographic  burdens.  Certainly,  much  more  needs  to  be  done,  and  awareness  of  the  need  for
structural  changes  must  also  rise.  In  line  with  this,  the  Lisbon  process  for  employment,  economic
reform  and  social  cohesion  –  to  which  the  Göteborg  summit  has  added  an  environmental
dimension – will surely increase the potential of the European Union.
Some fruits of Monetary Union have already been harvested. Real convergence of interest rates to
relatively low levels has given a great impetus to economic growth. Another example is that currency
devaluation,  which  had  been  an  important  source  of  market  distortion,  is  eliminated  with  EMU.
Particularly traditional so-called "hard currency countries", such as  Austria has  been during  the  last
two decades, were suffering from some elements of "beggar thy neighbour policies". Fortunately, this
is a thing of the past.
Still, the euro is rather an abstract notion to most of the citizens since it does not yet exist as a tangible
transaction currency. The euro project will receive much more support once the common coins and
banknotes  have  been  introduced  at  the  start  of  next  year.  The  single  currency  will  enhance  price
transparency and reduce transaction costs, both of  which are likely to  promote  competition  and  full
implementation of the Single Market for goods and services. But the euro will only be able to fulfil this
expectations if it is a stable currency strengthened by a determined monetary policy, structural reform
and wage moderation.
Last but not least, the introduction of a single currency is not just an economic project. It also carries a
political,  symbolic  and  psychological  dimension  of  European  integration.  While  the  replacement  of
national  currencies  by  a  pan-European  symbol  is  hardly  changing  the  national  identities  of  the
Member States, it certainly helps to promote pan-European thinking. Perhaps one should recall at this
point that integration is not only an objective by itself. What is at stake is sustainable economic and
social development and ultimately political stability and – without sounding pretentious – peace.
European integration will only be truly successful if it reaches out to the whole of Europe. Again it is
the concept of stability orientation that  urges us to complete  European unification. According to the
underlying rationale of enlargement, either we export stability to the accession countries, or we stand
to import instability.
If we manage the enlargement process successfully, this will also be conducive to our endeavour to
guarantee stability for the whole euro area. Such a mutual improvement is desirable in a very broad
sense: political stability, financial market stability, macroeconomic and – in the particular interest of the
Eurosystem – price stability.
The  enlargement  of  the  European  Union  to  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  has  arrived  at  a  critical
juncture. Accession negotiations with ten Central and Eastern European countries and with Malta and
Cyprus  have  advanced  dynamically,  especially  during  the  past  half  year.  Difficult  chapters  –  like
"Freedom  of  movement  for  persons",  "Free  movement  of  capital"  or  "Environment"  –  have  been
provisionally  closed  with  some  applicants.  Furthermore,  some  of  the  six  "Helsinki  group"  countries
(which  started  negotiations  only  in  early  2000)  have  made  good  progress  in  catching  up,  in  the
accession negotiations, to the "Luxembourg group" countries.
The European Council in Nice opened the door for a widening of the Union, even if it did not fulfil all
expectations.  Ratification  of  the  new  Treaty  is  proving  more  difficult  than  expected  –  as  we
experienced quite recently – but it has to go forward, and I am convinced that it will go forward. The
new entrants deserve our full solidarity after having been the victims of historically tough luck.
There  is  no  doubt  that  enlargement  will  encourage  stability,  growth  and  employment  in  a  wider
Europe. There is consensus that the accession countries will reap substantial growth and employment
benefits  from  their  membership  in  the  European  Union.  Still,  let  me  add  a  word  of  caution  in  this
context:  It  may  take  quite  a  while  before  new  entrants  will  be  in  a  position  to  fully  harvest  these
benefits. A fair share of realism is called for to avoid disappointment.
2
BIS Review 61/2001
Enlargement will also foster macroeconomic stability in the acceding countries. Economic policy co-
ordination  and  surveillance  will  surely  play  a  crucial  role  in  making  further  headway  towards  price
stability, fiscal prudence and stable exchange rates.
I  am  sure  that  price  stability  should  be  regarded  as  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  in
transition countries, too. However, while steering a clear course towards disinflation, explicit targets of
monetary  policy  should  be  chosen  carefully.  Adequate  efforts  towards  stabilization  and  structural
change can reinforce each other and  will foster the catching-up  process. Structural reforms are the
key  to  long-term  success  and  sizeable  resources  have  still  to  be  devoted  to  the  structural
transformation of the production and financial sectors in Central and Eastern Europe. While accession
countries will have to shoulder a large share of these burdens, the European Union is committed to
support  and  underpin  this  process  with  significant  financial  means  and  extensive  technical
cooperation.
This conference focuses on labour markets and social policies. For a central banker, labour markets
and, in particular wage-setting mechanisms, are of crucial importance. Still, I have the feeling that we
in  the  European  Union  do  not  know  very  much  about  the  functioning  of  labour  markets  in  the
accession  countries.  Without  any  doubt  there  is  still  room  for  improvement  in  these  countries,  and
lessons  can  be  drawn  from  the  experience  of  EU  Member  States  with  reconciling  economical  and
social  aims –  while  on  the  other  hand  there  is  evidence  that  Central  and  Eastern  European  labour
markets  tend  to  be  more  flexible,  in  a  number  of  ways,  than  those  of  many  Western  European
countries. For instance, in Austria we discuss (and postpone) greater flexibility of shop opening hours,
whereas in some of our neighbouring accession countries they already have this degree of flexibility. If
both flexibility and security are important objectives, learning from each other should  definitely  be  a
two-way street.
As you surely know, the accession countries will first join the European Union and only later adopt the
euro,  after  the  sustainable  fulfilment  of  the  Maastricht  convergence  criteria.  Retaining  a  reasonable
degree  of  labour  market  flexibility  will  certainly  be  helpful  to  bring  about  eventual  full  monetary
integration of accession countries. To be sure, this is not a plea for full deregulation. Rather, I would
commend  to  adopt  a  broadly  liberal  stance  with  selective  regulation  in  areas  where  it  is  needed.
Moreover, and this comes from my Austrian experience, it should not be  overlooked that  the social
partners can play a constructive and, indeed, beneficial role in labour market and social policies.
I have sketched a number of challenges that European integration is currently facing. Political will and
leadership  will  be  required  for  mastering  these  tasks  effectively.  Much  is  at  stake,  for  the  current
European Union and for the accession countries alike. I am convinced that the Eurosystem will play its
role in the process: We will make the euro a success by both unveiling and increasing the economic
potential of the Monetary Union.
Given the stability-oriented framework of EMU, combined with the determination of the independent
Eurosystem, the euro will be a stable and attractive currency. Alongside, the European stability zone
will  gradually  expand  to  more  and  more  European  countries,  both  incumbents  and  prospective  EU
Member States. It will be a key task for the Eurosystem to manage this process properly, in particular
in terms of speed and timing.
Thank you very much for your attention.
BIS Review 61/2001
3
