Lars Nyberg: Economic slowdown - but how soon and how severe?
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  Danske  Securities,
Stockholm, 2 May 2001.
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  about  economic  developments  in
Sweden and the world around us. We economists usually begin and end by covering ourselves and
pointing  out  that  the  situation  is  uncertain  and  that  assessments  can  vary.  However,  this  seems  a
more relevant approach than normal right now. A lot has happened in recent months and there are
some important pieces missing from the economic puzzle.
When in December we raised the repo rate by a quarter of a percentage point, to 4 per cent, we saw
signs  of  an  incipient  overheating  in  the  Swedish  economy.  We  were  approaching  the  production
ceiling in a situation where a number of sensitive wage negotiations were under way and we assessed
that the krona could remain weak for some time longer, which would give extra stimulation to export
demand. Although we saw signs of a slowdown, particularly in the American economy, the likelihood
of this slowdown having a serious effect on the Swedish economy over the next few months seemed
limited.  The  overall  assessment  was  that  the  Swedish  economy  needed  some  easing  up  on  the
throttle to move down into a lower gear.
Today, just over four months later, the picture looks rather different in several important aspects. The
international economic picture has darkened considerably and in the Inflation Report published at the
end  of  March  GDP  growth  was  estimated  at  2.4  per  cent  for  both  2001  and  2002.  This  entails  a
reduction of a whole percentage point for the current year and half a percentage point for next year,
compared with the Report  published  in  December. The growth figures are still good  in  an historical
comparison, but we have undoubtedly begun the slowdown that appeared desirable in December. The
question now is whether the downturn will be too rapid and too severe.
A good starting point
When one considers this question, it is useful to observe that the Swedish economy has a pretty good
starting  point.  A  lot  has  happened  since  the  crisis  years  of  the  early  1990s.  Deregulation  of  the
financial, telecommunications and electricity markets, as well as the ongoing liberalisation in trade has
increased  competition  in  the  economy  and  forced  companies  to  become  ever  more  efficient.  A
purposeful management of the bank crisis and an equally single-minded consolidation of the central
government finances have restored the international confidence  in  Sweden  that  had  become  rather
tarnished. We have directed our policies towards price stability and thus, hopefully, left behind us a
long period of price and wage spirals, followed by devaluation and where growth was lower than in our
competitor  countries.  A  credible  inflation  target  is  now  seen  as  a  necessary  condition  for
macroeconomic stability.
The primary factor behind the falling inflation rate is a growing confidence in inflation targeting, which
during the years following 1993 gradually affected inflation expectations. In recent years the repo rate
in Sweden has been lower than the corresponding steering interest rates in the USA, the UK and the
EMU area. Many doubted whether Sweden as a small country outside of the euro area would ever be
able  to  live  with  short-term  interest  rates  lower  than  those  set  in  Frankfurt.  However,  we  have
succeeded in doing so for some time. If one looks at the short-term real interest rates now, they are at
approximately the same level as in the euro area and Sweden, at around 2 per cent.
The fact that we in Sweden succeeded in achieving a good growth rate during the second half of the
1990s without causing overheating and raised interest rates, was because we started off with a very
low level of resource utilisation. Following the crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, unemployment was
at  a  record  high  level  and  there  was  considerable  unutilised  capacity  in  industry.  It  was  not  until
recently, since the end of last year, that we have begun to approach the capacity ceiling.
Furthermore,  Sweden  has  shown  a  positive  development  in  private  saving  throughout  the  entire
1990s, and the household sector's burden of debt is currently much lower than it was after the crisis at
BIS Review 34/2001
1
the  beginning  of  the  last  decade.  In  addition,  we  have  a  surplus  on  the  current  account,  which  is
tantamount to a surplus in the balance for the economy as a whole. Things look rather different in the
USA. There, private sector saving has declined to –7 per cent of GDP, the household sector's burden
of debt is at a record high level and the deficit on the current account balance is growing rapidly. Both
American  consumers  and  international  investors  have  had  strong  confidence  in  the  American
economy's capacity to generate future income.
USA central point in economic picture
When it comes to the actual economic activity situation, interest  is mainly focused on the USA,  not
least because of the low level of saving and the large build-up of debt described above. If American
households  were  to  rapidly  increase  their  saving  and  reduce  their  consumption,  and  if  foreign
investors  were  to  begin  to  feel  hesitant  over  financing  the  current  account  deficit,  there  would  be
considerable consequences for the global economy.
However,  the  American  economic  picture  is  still  fragmented.  It  is  true  that  the  household  sector's
consumption is still at a high level and developments in the construction and residential sector are also
satisfactory. Moreover, the large fall in the confidence indicators seems to have slown down, at least
for the time being. But at the same time, industrial production is still weak, the inflow of orders is falling
and the adjustment of stocks is moving unexpectedly slowly, particularly in the sensitive IT sector. The
figures from the labour market also look gloomy and leading indicators  are  retreating.  Although  the
stock exchange has shown an upturn in recent weeks, it is still very volatile and the household sector's
burden of debt is continuing to increase. Leading economists have ceased talking of a V-shape when
they describe economic developments. The upturn will come, but it will probably take longer than was
estimated a month or so ago.
This is what one should bear in mind when regarding the four American interest rate reductions of a
total  of  2  percentage  points  during  the  spring,  two  of  them  outside  of  the  normal  Federal  Reserve
Board meetings. It is hardly likely that the Fed knows something they have not told the market, which
is  what  is  sometimes  implied  by  analysts.  This  is  not  the  way  a  central  bank  works.  However,  the
American economy came to a standstill more quickly than expected and the Fed probably fears that
the unease on the financial markets will frighten away  both investors in real capital and consumers
from spending their money. This fear is certainly justified.
Then, of course, one can feel some hesitation over the fact that monetary policy is taking on the role of
short-term  saviour  of  the  American  consumers,  who  can  thus  carry  on  consuming  beyond  their
incomes for some while longer, i.e. with a negative savings ratio. If the substantial optimism regarding
the future that is reflected, for instance, in the development in savings proves partially unwarranted,
the problems may become even more difficult to handle at a later stage.
Although the focus is on the USA at the moment, concern over developments in Japan has increased
recently. Here there appear to be both severe problems in the real economy and in the finance sector,
as  well  as  political  difficulties  in  dealing  with  these  problems.  In  the  insurance  sector  there  are  a
number  of  major  life  insurance  companies  that  are  insolvent  in  the  technical  sense,  as  they  have
promised pensioners a return that they are unable to deliver. A large part of the insurance companies'
assets are of  course  traditionally  invested  in  low-yield  treasury  bonds.  The  Japanese  10-year  bond
rate is currently around one and one-third per cent. The Bank of Japan has declared that it intends to
continue  with  its  zero  interest  rate  policy  for  the  foreseeable  future  and  the  market  expects  to  see
prices  falling  rather  than  otherwise  during  the  coming  year.  If  interest  rates  and  inflation  were  to
gradually  rise,  which  at  the  moment  does  not  appear  likely,  this  would  of  course  further  erode  the
value of Japanese pension money, as the bonds stock in the insurance companies would fall in value.
It is not possible for an outsider to take in the size of the holes in the banks' balance sheets as a result
of bad credit; it is probably not possible for the Japanese authorities to see this either. However, all of
this must eventually rise to the surface, just as it did in Sweden during the finance crisis. It remains to
be seen whether the new administration will bring problems in the finance sector closer to a solution.
In Sweden we can of course be pleased that the stock exchange has made a slight recovery during
April, although it is too early to conclude that the lowest level has been reached. The stock exchange
tends  to  jump  the  gun  a  few  times  before  it  really  takes  off.  There  is  still  great  uncertainty  on  the
financial markets. At the same time, many of the recent signals regarding economic activity have been
distinctly  negative.  A  fall  in  the  inflow  of  orders  and  weaker  production  growth  are  reported  in  the
telecommunications and motor vehicle industries, for instance. Exports and investment are declining.
2
BIS Review 34/2001
Household  sector  consumption  and  expectations  for  the  future  are  also  showing  a  downturn.  The
number of newly registered  vacancies on the labour  market  is  giving  negative  indications,  although
employment is still rising.
The inflation figures turned out to be  higher than expected,  both  with regard to the consumer price
index  and  underlying  inflation.  It  is  always  misleading  to  draw  conclusions  from  individual
observations, as temporary factors can have a major effect. However,  price  increases  may  also  be
due to the fact that the utilisation of resources or propensity for inflation have been slightly higher than
we had assessed earlier. There is every reason to increase vigilance in this respect. The rapid price
rises  in  parts  of  the  services  sector  give  particular  cause  for  concern.  There  is  every  reason  to
increase vigilance over the next few months with regard to price signals from the market.
What significance does the krona have?
I thought that in this context I would spend a little more time on the development of the Swedish krona.
When  the  krona  is  undervalued,  as  it  is  today,  this  tends  to  stimulate  exports,  which  raises  total
demand  and  increases  inflationary  pressure.  At  the  same  time,  import  prices  become  higher  in
Swedish krona. The development of the krona thus affects inflation in various ways and is therefore of
interest to the Riksbank and to monetary policy in the same way as other factors that affect inflation.
On the other hand, the Riksbank has no target for the krona exchange rate, as was the case prior to
1992, when monetary policy was aimed at a fixed exchange rate rather than price stability.
However, I think, as do many others, that the krona is currently very undervalued. This is because a
given basket of goods today costs considerably more if bought in Europe or the USA using exchanged
euro or dollars than if bought in Sweden. Sometimes they talk about "hamburger parity" as a simple
illustration  of  this  concept,  i.e.  compare  what  a  certain  well-known  hamburger  costs  in  different
countries. And this brings us to the fact that the krona should be valued approximately ten per cent
higher in order to buy the same hamburger here as in the USA. More complicated calculations of the
balanced real exchange rate provide similar results, perhaps even slightly more than ten per cent. The
Riksbank's forecast of the path of the krona shows a similar development.
Now we in Sweden are not alone in having seen our currency weaken; other industrial nations with a
floating exchange rate are seeing the same thing, e.g. Canada, Australia and New Zealand. This is
probably due to the unease on the financial markets during the spring, as times of trouble often entail
capital moving away from the less liquid currencies and fleeing to those perceived as more stable and
liquid, primarily the US dollar.
On top of this comes the development on the Swedish stock exchange, which appears to have played
a  major  role  recently.  The  foreign  exchange  market  and  the  stock  exchanges  have  been  strongly
correlated for a period of time, particularly since the stock exchange fell. Since mid-2000, 85 per cent
of  the  variations  in  the  -SEK/EUR  exchange  rate  can  be  explained  by  variations  in  share  prices.
Foreign  investors  sold  Ericsson  shares  to  a  value  of  SEK  30  billion  between  September  2000  and
February 2001. At the same time, the AP funds' new investment regulations and investments in the
premium pension scheme have  led  to  substantial  outflows.  These  flows  can  undoubtedly  have  had
significance in the short term, although this effect should not be exaggerated.
However, the situation in Sweden is basically stable, as I pointed out earlier. There is no distrust of
Sweden pressurising the exchange rate as at the beginning of the 1990s; no fundamental imbalance
in our economy to arouse international concern. One measure of this is the spread between the long-
term German interest rate and the corresponding Swedish interest rate, which grazed 5 percentage
points during the crisis period at the beginning of the 1990s. That was how much more the pension
funds in the USA and Japan wanted to receive to invest money in the unstable Sweden rather than the
secure  Germany.  Today  the  interest  rate  margin  is  roughly  the  same  and  has  been  so  since  early
1999. The long-term confidence in the Swedish economy appears unshaken and the explanation for
the weak krona must therefore be sought in the financial markets rather than the real economy.
A floating exchange rate floats!
If the krona is undervalued, shouldn't we at the Riksbank do something about it? We do have a foreign
currency  reserve  that  can  be  used  to  buy  krona  if  necessary.  However,  there  is  good  reason  to
approach this question with great caution. One important reason is, of course, the above, namely that
the  weakness  of  the  krona  is  the  other  side  of  the  dollar's  strength  and  reflects  the  international
BIS Review 34/2001
3
financial unease. We can't do very much about this, no more than can the Canadians or Australians
who are in the same situation.
Another reason is that we have a price stability target and not an exchange rate target and trying to
maintain both with the aid of the repo rate is not an easy task. In many cases the targets are in total
conflict with one another. We in Sweden have chosen a floating exchange rate and will therefore have
to accept that the exchange rate floats. If the Riksbank were to intervene on the market now and then,
we  could  easily  cause  speculations  as  to  what  exchange  rate  we  might  have  as  a  target.  The
forecasts as to when the Riksbank might intervene and the positions it might take would then become
a  part  of  stockbrokers'  daily  work.  This  is  not  a  good  thing,  as  it  increases  unease  on  the  market,
rather than reducing it.
Nevertheless, it should be remembered that every central bank may need to intervene under certain
circumstances, either by buying or selling currency, e.g. to restore some order to a market that has
become unbalanced or to even out sudden large flows. In both cases, one should of course state the
purpose of the intervention. There could  also  be reason  at some point to  indicate that the market's
pricing has  moved  significantly  out  of  the  region  considered  reasonable.  For  instance,  this  was  the
case, as I understand it, when the ECB intervened last autumn. In these cases the central bank can
take action to "nudge" or reinforce a trend in the market without  actually establishing  any ceiling  or
floor. In my opinion, however, one should be restrictive in the use of such interventions. If the trend
should turn and move in the opposite direction, the intervention might do more harm than good.
Is  it  good  for  Sweden  if  our  currency  is  undervalued  over  a  long  period  of  time?  All  experience
indicates that this is not so. Although an undervalued currency gives the export industry and import-
competing industry a competitive advantage, which may sound positive in the short term, it reduces
competition pressure and in the longer perspective it delays the structural transformation necessary
when the exchange rate eventually returns to a balanced level. At the same time, the import industry
has an uphill struggle, which leads to companies being wiped out in this sector that would have not
have collapsed with a correctly valued currency.
In  addition,  major  fluctuations  in  themselves  have  a  subduing  effect  on  developments  as  the  risks
increase on all international transactions. This can be counteracted to some extent through hedging,
but hedging also has a price that rises as uncertainty increases.
The alternative is, of course, a fixed exchange rate, which in Sweden's case would be synonymous to
adopting  the  euro.  In  the  short  term  we  have  managed  perfectly  well  outside  of  EMU,  with  lower
interest rates and  inflation  and a  higher growth rate than  the  euro  area.  However,  in  a  longer  term
perspective, periods of a wrongly valued krona and major fluctuations in the exchange rate – and we
will probably have to live with these – may be a high price to pay. For a small economy with a large
foreign trade like Sweden this is a development worth considering.
Some conclusions
Let me finish where I began, namely by concluding that the economic situation still appears uncertain
in essential areas. The main clue is that the American economy will show an upturn, but take a more
prolonged  path  than  the  V  shape.  However,  there  are  imbalances  that  could  cause  a  much  less
favourable development. In addition, the inflation rate has begun to rise more than expected.
There is no sign of improvement in Japan; on the other hand there is a risk of a "cooling down" in the
finance  sector  really  taking  hold,  following  an  incubation  period  of  ten  years.  In  the  longer-term
perspective, this may be necessary to put right the underlying problems, but in the short term it may
have undesirable effects on the global economy.
In Sweden  we can see continuing sings of a slowdown. This slowdown  is  partly  counteracted  by  a
continued weak krona and by the Swedish repo rate being low in relation to the corresponding interest
rates in most other industrial nations. At the same time, we can see signs of a high level of resource
utilisation and price rises in certain industries. The collective wage negotiations are not yet complete,
either. The question of how the threatening international slowdown will affect the Swedish economy in
greater detail is still open.
It is in this light that one should regard the Riksbank's decision last Thursday, 26 April, to hold the repo
rate unchanged. On 15 May the minutes of the monetary policy meeting will be published, enabling a
view of the detailed reasoning behind the decision. It will be time for the next monetary policy meeting
4
BIS Review 34/2001
on 30 May. A lot can happen before then and perhaps the economic picture will have become a little
clearer by then.
BIS Review 34/2001
5
