David Klein: Israel’s policy of integration in the global economy: the difficulties
Speech by Mr David Klein, Governor of the Bank of Israel, to The Directors’ Forum, The Association of
Electronics and Information Industries, Tel Aviv, 29 April 2001.
 The economic strategy
1.
For  the  past  decade  the  object  of  Israel’s  macroeconomic  policy  has  been  to  achieve  economic
integration within the global economy. The main aspects of this policy are well known:
• 
Reducing  tariffs  and  abolishing  non-tariff  barriers,  so  that  goods  and  services  can  move
freely;
Removing foreign-currency control, enabling the free flow of capital;
Introducing  structural  changes  to  render  the  economy  more  competitive  and  reduce  the
government’s share in it;
Adopting international standards of economic management, inter alia in the macroeconomic
sphere, the most prominent among them being to adhere to the fiscal discipline required in
order  to  reduce  the  government’s  debt  burden,  and  to  attain  price  stability  via  an
independent central bank.
  The logic underlying this policy is two-fold:
• 
 Contending  with  competition  in  world  markets  will  require  us  to  become  more  specialized
and more efficient. Utilizing the resources available to us, this will result in a higher growth
rate.
Abolishing 
introducing  structural  changes,  and  adopting
international standards of economic management will enable us to build another stratum on
this  basis:  improving  the  investment  climate  and  attracting  foreign  capital  to  Israel.  As  a
result,  Israel  will  be  able  to  finance  investment  not  only  by  domestic  saving  but  also  by
foreign saving, making an even faster growth rate possible.
foreign-currency  control, 
We are evidently referring to a policy that focuses on sustainable growth accompanied by an ongoing
increase in productivity, and led by a rise in investments and exports; while the improvement of the
standard  of  living  is  not  the  leading  factor,  but  the  result  of  that  structure,  alongside  adherence  to
budgetary restraint and price stability. This policy differs substantially from that adopted in the first four
decades of Israel’s existence, although it embodies elements-such as tariff-reduction-that have been
on the agenda in the past. On the other hand, the change in Israel was made possible because of the
significant shift towards globalization in the world at large.
Nonetheless,  the  adoption  of  the  new  approach,  in  all  its  aspects,  has  not  gone  smoothly.  Many
interests and habits were based on the old framework, and although the number of advocates of the
old view is dwindling they are still able to drag out the process of change unduly, as they did in the last
decade. My aim here is to describe some of the difficulties that confronted  us in the  last  decade in
attempting to implement the new approach.
2.
The difficulties in adapting the policy instruments
The first difficulty: the exchange-rate regime
a.
This difficulty kept cropping up, for two reasons:
• 
Foreign-currency liberalization cannot exist alongside a fixed exchange rate such as existed
in  Israel,  between  depreciations,  for  about  40  years.  The  combination  of  the  free  flow  of
capital  and  a  government  commitment  to  a  given  exchange  rate  is  a  prescription  for
speculation and financial crises.
BIS Review 34/2001
1
 On  the  other  hand,  Israel’s  exchange  rate,  especially  since  the  Economic  Stabilization
Program  of  1985,  served  as  a  nominal  anchor,  i.e.,  the  main  instrument  for  stabilizing
inflation at a low level was supposed to be a fixed exchange rate.
This contradiction between the need to make the exchange-rate regime more flexible because of the
liberalization and the need to fix it in order to stabilize inflation had to be resolved. It is worth noting
here  that  in  every  transition  process,  whenever  we  encountered  basic  dilemmas  that  obliged  us  to
decide  which  path  to  take,  we  always  asked  ourselves  what  other  countries  did  in  similar
circumstances.  In  general,  we  aspired  to  re-invent  as  few  wheels  as  possible,  saving  our  creativity
– such as it was – for other matters. Thus, using the experience of others, we adopted the following
solution:
• 
The  exchange  rate  would  be  gradually  made  more  flexible,  parallel  to  the  liberalization
process. This began early in 1989, when the exchange rate band was first introduced, and
continued when its determination was transferred to the market five years later, in 1994;
Its  place  as  a  nominal  anchor  would  be  taken  by  the  short-term  interest  rate,  to  be
determined  by  the  Bank  of  Israel  in  view  of  the  inflation  target;  this  transition  was  also
implemented gradually.
That shift turned out to be difficult for various elements:
Those,  mainly  in  the  business  community,  who  had  become  accustomed  to  a  policy  of  a
fixed exchange rate (thus, for example, the transition from a horizontal to a crawling band at
the end  of 1991  was still  being justified by  the  need  to  give  economic  agents  engaged  in
international  trade  greater  long-term  certainty  regarding  the  development  of  the  exchange
rate-a  commitment  that  could  not  be  met,  as  has  been  proved  innumerable  times  in  the
history of exchange-rate bands).
Those in the policy-making community who still believed in the exchange rate as a nominal
anchor: they continued to vigorously oppose each stage of the relaxation of exchange-rate
controls.  These  elements  continue  to  this  day  to  resist  the  abolition  of  the  exchange-rate
band,  even  though  their  reasons  have  changed  and  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  it  will  be
impossible to defend it should the need arise.
Those who did not like the by-product of the change under which the Bank of Israel acquired
greater independence in managing monetary policy: the tradition in Israel is that changes in
the exchange rate can be made only with the agreement of the Ministry  of Finance,  while
changes in the interest rate can be made solely on the basis of the Bank of Israel’s decision.
The person who immediately grasped that aspect of the change-although that was not the
reason  it  was  introduced-was  the  Minister  of  Finance,  Yitzhak  Modai,  when  the  shift  was
made from a horizontal to a crawling exchange-rate band, in December 1991.
One question still remains open: can the Bank of Israel’s intervention in the foreign-currency
market  serve,  in  certain  circumstances,  objectives  that  are  also  important  for  the  central
bank? This question can be placed on the agenda once the exchange-rate band has been
abolished.  In  the  last  three  years  the  Bank  of  Israel  has  refrained  from  intervening  in  the
foreign-currency market in any way. As long as that policy continues, changes in the Bank of
Israel’s 
the  government’s
foreign-currency cash flow, because only the government has direct access to the Bank of
Israel  for  selling  and  buying  foreign  currency,  and  from  profits  made  from  investing  the
reserves.  There  are  small  changes  from  time  to  time  because  of  shifts  in  the  banks’
voluntary deposits with the Bank of Israel. The level of the reserves is not affected, as some
still  think,  by  private  capital  flows  and  interest-rate  differentials.  Only  a  few  days  ago  an
analyst explained in an interview why “Israel’s foreign-currency market is not a classic target
for assault by foreign speculators.” One  of  the  reasons  for  this,  he  claimed,  was  that  “the
foreign-currency reserves are very high” (Ma’ariv, 17.4.2001). Since we are not active in the
market, there is no relevance in this context to the question of how large our foreign-currency
reserves are.
foreign-exchange 
result  primarily 
reserves  can 
from 
      2
BIS Review 34/2001
b.
The second difficulty: managing monetary policy so as to attain price stability in a
regime of inflation targets
Israel’s economic integration within the global economy requires inter alia accepting the standard of
price stability prevailing in the developed countries, obtained  via an  independent  central  bank.  This
transition also created several difficulties:
• 
At  one  time  the  slogan  ‘inflation  isn’t  everything,’  meaning  that  other  objectives  such  as
growth  and  employment  also  need  to  be  considered,  was  very  popular.  The  debate  was
conducted between those who believed that expansionary monetary policy (i.e., reducing the
interest rate) could stimulate employment and those who thought that the end-result would
only  be  inflation  which,  if  it  persisted,  would  eventually  increase  unemployment.  The
discussion  of  this  subject  was  concluded  in  the  world,  and  the  general  consensus  comes
down to the following two points:
Monetary policy has to be geared first of all towards maintaining price stability;
To  the  extent  that  it  does  not  contradict  that  primary  aim,  interest-rate  policy  can  also  be
administered so as to aid the government in attaining other policy objectives.
As  long  as  we  were  endeavoring  to  reduce  the  inflation  rate-until  two  years  ago-the
argument as to whether price stability was at all possible in Israel continued. It was claimed
that  it  was  not  feasible  because  of  structural  reasons,  defined  as  ‘nominal  rigidities’  or  a
‘monopolistic structure.’ In any case, a low inflation rate was said to be achievable in Israel
only if it was ‘latent,’ in which case it would be bound to re-emerge at the first opportunity.
For example, a low inflation rate would be possible only with a large  balance-of-payments
deficit and ‘cheap imports flooding the economy’-an unsustainable situation. Thus, according
to  this  scenario,  there  would  eventually  be  massive  devaluation,  followed  by  accelerated
inflation. The inevitable conclusion was that it would be better not to try to eliminate inflation,
as it would not last. We appear by now to have acquired sufficient experience to be able to
see that this argument was baseless.
  On the basis of these considerations, until 2000 the government continued to display reluctance to set
annual inflation targets (it deferred determining a target for as long as possible, leaving it to the end of
the  year, ignoring the logic regarding the lags with which monetary policy takes effect; from time to
time  it  considered  accepting  the  inevitability  of  rising  inflation;  it  refused  to  set  a  long-term  or  final
target). In August 2000 conditions were created in which the government decided to adopt a target of
‘price stability’ for 2003 and subsequently. This brought to an end a period in which it was necessary
each year to take a stand with regard to the inflation target. The target from now on is to maintain price
stability, defined as an annual inflation rate in the range of 1 percent to 3 percent.
• 
In the Bank of Israel, too, the shift to managing a policy based on inflation targets created
difficulties.  In  the  first  half  of  the  1990s  we  were  still  wavering  between  reducing
unemployment and lowering the inflation rate; between defending the exchange rate so that
it did not deviate far from the mid-point of the band and aiming for price stability. In 1994 the
inflation  rate  was  14.5  percent,  compared  with  a  target  of  8  percent-the  most  outstanding
failure of monetary policy in the last decade-and in mid-1996 inflation expectations were still
14  percent.  Altogether,  1995–96  was  a  period  of  impending  crisis.  Fiscal  policy  was  at
breaking-point because of growing deficits, and monetary policy was contending with a new
problem:  defending  the  lower  limit  of  the  exchange-rate  band  against  the  massive  capital
inflow of billions of dollars while persevering with the effort to attain the inflation target. Only
in the last third of the 1990s did inflation start declining, albeit not continuously, towards price
stability.  The  lack  of  focus  in  the  first  half  of  the  decade  obliged  us  to  display  greater
decisiveness  in  conducting  monetary  policy  in  the  second  half,  so  that  we  could  indeed
advance towards the target.
The  list  of  difficulties  would  be  incomplete  without  mentioning  the  need  to  uproot  all  the
habits  and  institutionalized  arrangements  acquired  and  established  in  the  long  years  of
inflation in order to enable us to live ‘in peace’ with it. Most prominent among them are the
arrangements  with  regard  to  public-sector  wages,  the  various  kinds  of  indexation  in  the
goods and services markets, and inflation-adjusted taxation and reporting regulations. The
government needs to address all these issues in order to get rid of them once and for all.
 BIS Review 34/2001
3
The third difficulty: managing fiscal policy in order to reduce government debt
c.
In this sphere, too, several problems have arisen:
• 
First, there was a longstanding tradition in Israel and the world according to which the budget
can serve as a counter-cyclical instrument, with a surplus during a period of prosperity and a
deficit during a slump. Experience shows that it is easier to create a deficit in a slump than to
maintain a surplus in a period of prosperity. The result is rising government debt, an increase
in the share of debt-servicing costs in the budget, and a heavier tax burden.
The conclusion throughout the developed world was that priority has to be given to reducing
government debt to a reasonable level by limiting the budget deficit, and to easing the tax
burden by cutting government expenditure as a share of GDP. This conclusion has not yet
been accepted by everybody in Israel, even though the basic approach has been adopted by
all governments in the last decade.
Second, the way the budget deficit was defined in Israel differed from that in the rest of the
world, so that our measured deficit was significantly lower than it would have been had the
generally-accepted definition been used. This misled many people, including prime ministers
and members of the government, made it very difficult to compare the situation in Israel with
the rest of the world, and also hampered efforts to explain the need to reduce the deficit. The
advocates of our own special method of defining the deficit, which is still used, claimed that it
is more correct and refused to change it. For years the Bank of Israel has avoided arguing
about  which  definition  is  more  correct,  suggesting  that  both  figures  be  presented  to  the
government and the public, but so far without any success.
The reduction of inflation has served to greatly narrow the gap between the two definitions,
but has not eliminated it completely. Naturally, it is not difficult, statistically or otherwise, to
measure and present the deficit in the same way as is done elsewhere, and it is time we did
so.
Third, the need to adhere to fiscal discipline over the long run requires a change of approach
in setting the order of priorities in allocating government resources. Whereas in the past it
was possible to solve any problem, whether genuine or imaginary, by increasing expenditure
and  the  government  debt,  the  need  to  maintain  the  declining  path  of  government
expenditure-albeit not absolutely but as a share of GDP-raises new issues all over the world,
for example:
Should the social services that the government provides be extended universally or depend
on  a  means  test?  Should  the  government’s  plans  to  reduce  poverty  make  a  distinction
between people of working age and others?
Is  there  a  place  for  private  services  alongside  the  public  services  in  the  spheres  of
education, health, and welfare?
Should the government be the sole agent involved in developing and operating the economic
infrastructure, or is there  room  for  the  activity  of  private  for-profit  elements  in  part  of  it,  in
accordance with a framework determined by the government?
     In Israel, too, we have begun dealing with these and other questions, but we are still a long way away
from  their  implementation  as  an  integral,  routine  aspect  of  the  long-term  effort  that  features
prominently-as it rightly should-in the government’s discussions of the budget. In the world in general
considerable progress has been made on these subjects, extensive experience has been acquired by
other  governments,  and  we  can  and  should  benefit  from  it;  there  is  no  need  to  invent  everything
ourselves.
Coping with problems of adaptation
3.
A decade of administering a macroeconomic policy designed to open up the economy and reduce the
government’s share in economic activity, against the backdrop of the changing geopolitical situation,
has served to create closer economic integration between Israel and the rest of the world. There no
longer seems to be anyone who disagrees with the view that this is the way to fulfill Israel’s potential
for sustainable economic growth. An organic part of this approach is to adhere to accepted standards
of  economic  management,  including  fiscal  discipline,  price  stability,  and  an  exchange  rate  that  is
4
BIS Review 34/2001
determined  by  market  forces.  This  framework  obliges  us  to  cope  with  several  additional  problems,
some  of  them  as  yet  unresolved,  as  we  have  just  seen.  Because  of  the  extensive  economic
involvement  of  foreign  elements  in  Israel  that  is  a  result  of  that  policy,  we  are  subject  to  constant
review by foreign analysts, who rank our economic performance. In addition, many of Israel’s foreign
liabilities  and  assets  are  traded  on  international  stock markets,  which  also  continually  indicate  their
confidence in us. We are not isolated from the rest of the world, and we must grow accustomed to that
idea in order to continue developing the economy, creating jobs, and raising the standard of living.
BIS Review 34/2001
5
