Masaru Hayami: Recent economic developments and monetary policy
Speech by Mr. Masaru Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Research Institute of Japan,
Tokyo, 7 March 2001.
 1. Introduction
Two months have passed since the dawn of the new century. After Japan’s economy went through a
very  tough  decade  at  the  end  of  the  twentieth  century,  it  has  yet  to  regain  economic  strength  and
restore a full-fledged growth.
In 2000 Japan’s economy was on a moderate recovery path as improvements became increasingly
evident mainly in the corporate sector. However, unsavory developments followed. In particular, US
economic  growth  slowed  down  in  autumn  2000  more  steeply  than  had  been  expected,  and  has
recently begun to exert a significant influence over Japan’s economy.
In  a  longer-term  perspective,  there  had  been  a  number  of  incipient  cyclical  recoveries  in  Japan’s
economy during the past decade, but they were followed not by a strong recovery but by a repeated
threat of recession. At present, pessimism seems to overwhelm Japan’s economic outlook. This has
an aspect of both short-term business cycle and longer-term adjustment of Japan’s economy.
Bearing these in mind, I would like to discuss, today, recent developments in Japan’s economy as well
as financial markets, and offer my thought about monetary policy.
2. Recent economic and financial developments
Economic developments
Allow me first to discuss economic and financial market developments. To put it in short, the Bank of
Japan is of the view that Japan’s economic recovery is slowing further and uncertainty over economic
prospects is growing. Accordingly, we are becoming increasingly cautious.
During  the  past  two  years,  a  moderate  economic  recovery  has  been  supported  by  the  following
mechanism.  Growth  in  exports  and  demand  for  information  technology  (IT)  has  led  recovery  in
production  as  well  as  profits,  which  in  turn  induced  increase  in  business  investment.  However,  the
recovery in the business sector has exerted only a limited impetus to the personal sector because of
strong  pressures  of  corporate  restructuring.  Nonetheless,  wages  began  to  grow  year  on  year  in
summer  2000.  In  other  words,  there  was  a  momentum  in  the  economy  by  which  recovery  in  the
business sector led, albeit slowly, that in the personal sector.
In  late  2000  it  became  gradually  evident  that  growth  in  exports  and  production  slowed  under  the
influence of rapid slowdown in US economic growth. In fact, Japan’s exports stopped growing in the
final  quarter  of  2000,  which  is  now  being  followed  by  a  decline.  In  accordance  with  export
deceleration,  production  has  come  to  a  halt,  and  inventories  have  become  somewhat  excessive  in
some  areas  of  industrial  materials  and  semi-conductors  whose  export  demand  fell  sharply.
Consequently, some IT firms have announced  a downward  revision  of  their  profit  forecast  although
they  continued  to  expect  an  increase.  Under  these  circumstances,  some  concern  has  begun  to  be
voiced with respect to the prospect for business investment. In view of the fact that economic recovery
has  been  pulled  by  manufacturing  and  other  industries,  the  recent  developments  might  as  well  be
considered to foreshadow economic outlook.
Downside risks
These  discussions  lead  to  the  question  of  what  are  important  risks  in  economic  outlook  and  the
magnitude thereof. The economy always faces a variety of risks, but since last autumn, we have paid
BIS Review 20/2001
1
particular attention to  two  downside risks, i.e. slowdown  in  world economic growth and  instability  in
capital markets both at home and abroad. These risks intensified in early 2001, and now appear to be
materializing gradually.
With respect to world economic slowdown, US economy has a key role to play. Having displayed a
rapid  growth  of  5  percent  until  mid-2000,  US  economy  has  slowed  its  growth  considerably  in  the
second half. This slowdown proved to be more drastic than had been widely anticipated. Against this
background, the Federal Reserve, or the central bank of the United States, decided on a reduction of
its  target  interest  rate  by  0.5  percentage  points  at  an  unscheduled  meeting  of  the  FOMC  at  the
beginning  of  the  year,  followed  by  an  additional  reduction  of  0.5  percentage  points  at  the  end  of
January 2001. This sudden change in the economy is reflected in a significant downward revision of
the  central  tendency  among  FOMC  members  with  respect  to  real  GDP  growth  rate  from  3  ¼-3¾
percent in July 2000 to 2-2 ½ percent in February 2001.
With respect to US economic outlook, a low  growth rate seems inevitable  as far as the first half  of
2001 is concerned. A more critical question concerns the likelihood and degree of rebound later in the
year. Economists and market players are divided in this regard: some expect a quick rebound, some
others  a  modest  recovery,  and  others  prolonged  deceleration.  Optimists,  who  expect  V-shaped
recovery in the second half of 2001, point out the continued improvements in productivity bolstered by
IT revolution as well as wide room for actions of both monetary and fiscal policies. On the other hand,
it is pointed out that after an extremely high economic growth, the subsequent adjustment might prove
to be severe and also that the adjustment period is practically unpredictable before it is over. In recent
months, optimistic views appear to be  receding.  Under  these  circumstances,  I  would  like  to  remain
vigilant as well as unprejudiced about the extent to which US economy regains its strength later in the
year.
As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  the  US  economic  slowdown  has  already  begun  to  exert  a  negative
influence  on  Japan’s  economy  through  a  variety  of  channels  including  an  indirect  impact  involving
economic slowdowns in East  Asian  countries  that  are  closely  linked  to  the  US  economy.  In  Japan,
production  growth  slowed  under  the  influence  of  decreases  in  exports.  If  this  leads  to  declines  in
corporate  profits  and  reductions  in  business  spending,  the  momentum  for  economic  recovery
stemming from the business sector will be put at a greater risk than before. Therefore, we all need to
examine carefully the ongoing production, profits, and investment plans for some time.
There is another downside risk for Japan’s economy, i.e., capital markets both at home and abroad,
especially stock price developments and their impact. Weakness of Japanese stock prices has been
particularly pronounced in recent months. Nikkei Stock Average renewed its lowest record during the
post-bubble period beginning in 1990 although one must make allowances for the technical changes
in  the  index  of  April  2000.  It  is  by  no  means  easy  to  identify  the  causes  for  weak  stock  price
developments,  but  they  seem  to  be  influenced  by  not  only  US  stock  market  adjustments  but  also
bearish sentiment in the market with respect to Japanese economic outlook. They may as well be a
reflection  of  concerns  that  the  markets  both  at  home  and  abroad  have  with  respect  to  delays  in
addressing a number of structural problems that Japan’s economy has. The Bank of Japan will remain
vigilant  about  the  influences  that  these  weak  stock  prices  will  have  on  consumer  and  business
sentiment as well as corporate finance.
Price developments
Against  the  background  of  recent  economic  and  financial  market  developments,  analysis  of  price
developments is becoming an issue of renewed interest. In recent months, a variety of price indices,
such  as  domestic  wholesale  prices,  consumer  prices,  and  corporate  service  prices,  have  been
showing small declines year on year, and are expected to be weak for some time.
These price developments have obviously been influenced by both supply and demand elements. A
wide output gap remains after a significant improvement on the demand side since the economy hit
the  bottom  two  years  ago.  Because  economic  growth  is  decelerating  further  at  present,  there  is  a
concern that downward pressures on prices stemming from weak demand might intensify in coming
months. On the supply side, a variety of elements are at work, e.g., technological innovation, increase
in efficiency in the distribution system, and deregulation, all of which exert a downward pressure on
prices.  Take  domestic  wholesale  prices  for  example.  Declines  in  prices  of  electric  equipments  and
other  machines  have  been  most  pronounced  under  the  influence  of  a  very  rapid  technological
innovation. For another example, declines in consumer prices have been accounted for in large part
by imports and import competitive goods, e.g., clothing.
2
BIS Review 20/2001
Let me hasten to add to it by saying that the Bank of Japan has never argued for so-called “good price
declines.” Instead, the Bank has repeatedly said that the present price developments have been under
the  complex  influence  of  both  demand  and  supply  elements,  and  therefore,  no  one  can  afford  to
understand on the basis of movements of price indices alone whether the ongoing price developments
are consistent with sound developments in the economy. The issue of utmost importance is whether
the current weak prices will invite declines in corporate profits and/or incomes of workers, leading to a
deflationary spiral, or vicious cycle of economic recession and price declines. The Bank of Japan is of
the  view  that  Japan’s  economy  has  so  far  avoided  such  a  deflationary  spiral,  but  that  because
economic growth has recently weakened further as I mentioned a few minutes ago, the economy has
entered the phase that warrants enhanced attention to price developments.
3. Deliberation on monetary policy
a. Improvements in the way of liquidity provision and reduction in interest rates
Decisions of February 9 and February 28, 2001
Now  let  me  offer  my  thought  about  monetary  policy  on  the  basis  of  the  economic  and  financial
developments I have discussed. As you are well aware, the Bank of Japan decided at its Monetary
Policy Meeting of February 9, 2001 on both improvements in the way in which liquidity is provided to
the  market  and  a  reduction  in  the  official  discount  rate  by  0.15  percentage  points.  With  respect  to
liquidity provision, we decided upon three specific measures: introduction of a Lombard-type standby
lending  facility,  active  use  of  outright  purchase  operations  of  short-term  government  securities,  and
preparation for bill purchase operations at all offices of the Bank.
At the Monetary Policy Meeting of February 28, 2001, the Bank decided to reduce, by 0.10 percentage
points, both its target level of overnight call rate to 0.15 percent and the official discount rate to 0.25
percent.
Lombard-type lending facility and the new role of the official discount rate
Among these policy measures, the Lombard-type lending facility is new to Japan. Officially, it has a
name  of  “Supplementary  Lending  Facility.”  Under  the  existing  framework  of  liquidity  provision,  the
Bank of Japan selects its counter-parties and decides on the timing as well as amount of lending. In
contrast,  the  Lombard-type  lending  facility  entitles  financial  institutions  to  borrow  at  the  Bank  of
Japan’s  discount  window  the  amount  that  they  want  at  any  time  they  wish,  as  long  as  collateral  is
properly set against the borrowing and the borrower meets the conditions pre-specified with respect to
eligibility of collateral and other technical aspects. From a viewpoint of financial institutions, this is a
means of funding available any time.
The most  important  function  that  this  supplementary  lending  facility  performs  is  to  stabilize  interest
rates  in  the  market.  Under  usual  circumstances,  the  overnight  call  rate  fluctuates  below  the  official
discount rate because the former is the rate of which the Bank of Japan sets such a target level. When
end-of-fiscal year pressures mount or a shock arises in the market, e.g., steep declines in stock prices
or rumors of a large bankruptcy, interest rates tend to go up in the market. Even in that case, overnight
market  rates  will  be  kept  below  the  official  discount  rate  because  financial  institutions  are  able  to
borrow  at  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  discount  window  at  their  discretion.  Moreover,  because  financial
institutions are freer from anxiety over funding capabilities, this will have a stabilizing effect on not only
the overnight call rate but also other short-term interest rates across the board. This effect has been
strengthened  further  by  two  reductions  in  the  official  discount  rate  amounting  to  0.25  percentage
points in February 2001.
Now let me say a few words about the roles that the official discount rate plays. In the past, the Bank’s
decision as to the official discount rate was a basic tool of monetary policy. Therefore, change in that
rate had an announcement effect since it embodied change in the basic stance of monetary policy. In
1994, however, deregulation of interest rates was complete, and the institutional linkage between the
official discount rate and bank deposit rates disappeared. In 1996, the Bank of Japan made it clear
that the Bank would no longer use the discount window lending, to which the official discount rate was
applied, as a means of monetary operations. Consequently, the role of the discount rate as a policy
variable was played down, whereas the target level of the overnight call rate began to assume that
role.
BIS Review 20/2001
3
By the introduction of the Lombard-type lending facility, however, the official discount rate is given a
new function of setting a ceiling on call rates and thereby ensuring stability of short-term interest rates
in  the  market.  The  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  to  guide  the  call  rate  at  an  intended  level  by  daily
market operations, but at the same time it will begin to use the new function of the discount rate as a
means to supplement the effects of market operations.
Timely and flexible implementation of monetary policy
Having explained the policy decisions made at the two Monetary Policy Meetings in February 2001,
allow me to elaborate on their background. First of all, we have taken these policy measures on the
basis of our understanding of economic and financial developments at present and in the future. As I
said  a  few  minutes  ago,  economic  recovery  is  weakening  in  Japan  and  uncertainty  over  economic
prospects have intensified under the influence of overseas economic slowdown and declines in stock
prices.  In  part  of  money  and  capital  markets,  there  was  a  certain  degree  of  instability,  reflecting
concerns over the future. Under these circumstances, we decided on the policy measures with a view
to ensuring both smooth functioning and stability of the financial market as well as to strengthening
monetary  support  for  economic  recovery.  Subsequently,  not  only  the  overnight  call  rate  but  also
interest rates of longer maturities, e.g., those maturing beyond the fiscal year end and even long-term
interest rates, declined by a considerable degree.
Another  point  I  would  like  to  emphasize  is  the  fact  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  continues  to  conduct
monetary policy in a timely and flexible manner, in view of changes in economic conditions. As I said
earlier,  Japan’s  economic  recovery  has  decelerated  further  against  the  background  of  sudden
slowdown of US economic growth and other elements. In light of these developments, we believe we
have taken appropriate policy actions in a timely manner, and will continue to do so in the future. At
the same time, the Bank of Japan hopes that the policy measures that it took in February 2001 will
contribute to autonomous economic recovery led by private demand.
b. Monetary policy stance in the future
Now let me leave aside the discussion of a series of policy measures the Bank of Japan decided in
February and take up something else. There continue to be a variety of arguments about monetary
policy  in  Japan.  For  example,  we  sometimes  hear  the  views  that  the  present  monetary  ease  is
insufficient, and therefore, the Bank of Japan should resort to so-called “quantitative easing” or return
to the zero interest rate policy. I would like to explain the basic thought about monetary policy on the
basis of the discussions held at the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan.
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  implemented  aggressive
monetary easing to a degree unprecedented in the history of central banking in the world in terms of
both interest rates and volume. Under the influence of this monetary easing, both short and long term
interest  rates  have  been  kept  extremely  low.  The  Bank  has  also  provided  the  market  with  ample
liquidity and consequently, the monetary base, which consists of money that the Bank directly provides
the system with, has shown a considerable growth, to which I will come back later.
A second point I would like to make is whether or not the Bank should resort to additional measures
such  as  “quantitative  easing”  hinges  crucially  upon  conjectural  analysis  of  growth  and  price
performance of the economy. The word “quantitative easing” is meant differently across people who
use  this  term.  For  example,  there  is  an  argument  for  stepped  up  outright  purchases  of  long-term
government  bonds.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  buying  such  bonds  in  line  with  a  trend  growth  in
banknotes  in  circulation.  This  purchase  amounts  to  \5  trillion  per  year.  If  the  Bank  increased  its
purchase  dramatically,  that  would  have  some  positive  effects  but  at  the  same  time  it  might  be
accompanied by negative side effects. Therefore, a careful examination of both positive effects and
side effects must be in place before that policy is implemented. The possible effects of the stepped up
bond purchases include a decline in long-term interest rates or a rise in expected rate of inflation. In
light of the serious budget situation of today, however, the possibility that such a bold measure would
damage credibility of fiscal discipline and in turn raise long-term interest rates cannot be ruled out.
A  policy  to  induce  a  massive  depreciation  of  the  yen’s  exchange  rate  is  another  drastic,
unconventional  policy.  In  the  present  legal  framework,  it  is  the  Ministry  of  Finance  that  has  the
authority  for  exchange  market  intervention.  Leaving  this  issue  aside,  it  is  uncertain  how  effective
official intervention can be in affecting exchange rates. Neither is it certain how to cope with terms-of-
trade losses stemming from rises in import prices and adverse influences over Asian economies.
4
BIS Review 20/2001
After all, before the Bank embarks on unconventional policies like the ones categorized by quantitative
easing and the zero interest rate policy, it has to judge that the conditions of the economy and prices
warrant  such  policies.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  to  examine  and  analyze  the
situation with its full force and on that basis it  will seek the most appropriate policy that the central
bank can take.
A third point I would like to emphasize is we all have to face the reality that during the past decade
both monetary and fiscal policies have been eased dramatically and yet they have failed to meet with
robust economic growth. There are reasons for it.
Let me mention three numbers here. During the past five  years the monetary base expanded at an
annual  rate  of  7.3  percent,  the  money  stock  at  3.3  percent,  and  nominal  GDP  at  0.4  percent.  In
contrast to the  1970s and 1980s,  when  all three  indicators  grew  pari  passu,  what  large  differences
exist between them in recent years.
The difference between the growth rate of monetary base and that of money stock can be interpreted
in the following. The monetary base consists of all banknotes and all current deposits that banks and
other financial intermediaries hold at the Bank of Japan. A textbook of monetary economics tells you
that the Bank of Japan supplies the monetary base, on which basis banks extend credit so that the
monetary  base  creates  a  multiple  increase  in  the  money  stock.  In  the  course  of  discussions  about
monetary  policy  at  present,  an  argument  is  sometimes  made  as  if  the  monetary  base  were  in
shortage. As I pointed out a minute ago, the monetary base has been expanding at a relatively high
rate. Despite this, however, the money stock failed to increase as much. It is mainly credit extension of
financial institutions through which the money stock is supplied, but bank lending, which constitutes
the core of credit extension, has decreased at an annual rate of 1.4 percent during the past five years.
In  contrast,  bank  holding  of  government  bonds  expanded  at  a  remarkable  rate  of  15.7  percent.  In
other words, financial intermediation took place  during this period in the  way that  government bond
issues  increased,  financing  government  expenditure,  through  which  channel  money  circulated  to  a
greater extent.
There is another discrepancy, i.e., the money stock and nominal GDP. The money stock grew at a
modest rate of 3.3 percent per annum. This amounts to as much as \20 trillion every year, but nominal
GDP stayed virtually unchanged notwithstanding. In sum, despite relatively ample supply of monetary
base, economic growth remains lackluster.
All  this  suggests  the  significance  of  structural  obstacles  in  Japan’s  economy,  e.g.,  problems  of  the
financial system, and on the flip side of the coin, corporate restructuring. Resolution of these problems
will prepare a foundation on which the effectiveness of monetary policy can be enhanced. I  plan to
come back to this issue before closing my remarks today in conjunction with a topic of non-performing
assets.
c. Price stability and monetary policy
Allow me to turn to another topic: the relationship between price stability and monetary policy. I hear
often that it is nothing but monetary policy that can prevent deflation as well as inflation. Indeed, the
Bank of Japan Law stipulates that the Bank’s purpose is the maintenance of price stability, and the
Bank  in  fact  conducts  monetary  policy  in  accordance  with  that  idea.  In  terms  of  practical
implementation of monetary policy, however, the relationship between the objective of price stability
and monetary policy is somewhat more complex.
This complexity is mentioned in the report that the Bank of Japan published last year with respect to
price  stability.  For  one  thing,  the  relationship  differs,  depending  on  the  length  of  time  you  envision
about price stability. For example, during a very long period, say ten or twenty years, excess supply of
money in many cases corresponds to rises in prices while short supply does to price declines. This is
quite  natural  in  light  of  the  fact  that  prices  are  the  rate  of  exchange  between  goods/services  and
money. Based on this long-term relationship between prices and money, price fluctuations are referred
to  as  essentially  monetary  phenomenon  and  price  stability  is  considered  to  be  the  objective  of
monetary policy.
During a shorter period, say a few months or a few years, however, price fluctuations are influenced
by not only money but also a variety of other variables. Output gap of the whole economy, inflation
expectation, international commodities prices, exchange rates are interrelated in a complex fashion. In
such a complex world, it is no easy task to decide on how precisely monetary policy can control prices,
BIS Review 20/2001
5
and also on how far it should do. Suppose an oil price shock gives rise to inflation pressures. If we are
to contain them in a short period, it will take a very tight monetary policy. The upshot may be a steep
decline  in  economic  activity.  This  is  inconsistent  with  sustainable  price  stability  in  the  long  run.
Conversely,  at  a  time  when  prices  decline  on  account  of  productivity  gains  based  on  rapid
technological innovation, a forceful reduction in interest rates with a view to raising prices may amplify
economic swings.
I  firmly  believe  that  monetary  policy  is  an  important  determinant  that  ultimately  influences  price
developments,  but  in  order  to  fulfill  its  responsibility  in  the  long  run,  we  must  first  analyze  not  only
superficial movements in price indices but also a variety of underlying developments, and see if the
ongoing  price  developments  are  consistent  with  sustainable  economic  growth.  I  believe  that  this  is
indeed  what  the  Bank  of  Japan  Law  means  by  its  clause  that  the  Bank’s  currency  and  monetary
control shall be aimed at, "through the pursuit of price stability, contributing to the sound development
of the national economy."
4. Concluding remarks
Having  discussed  monetary  policy  issues,  allow  me  to  close  my  speech  today  by  touching  on
structural problems of Japan’s economy. In my view, efforts to enhance productivity by addressing the
supply side structure of the economy are essential for Japan’s economy to achieve strong growth. The
fact that US and UK economies revived strongly in the 1990s can be attributed to such efforts. From
this  viewpoint,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  that  Japan  speed  up  reform  on  the  basis  of  common
understanding of the following issues.
First,  economic  growth  stems  from  the  innovative  strength  of  the  private  sector.  Creativity  and
knowledge of the private sector are the key to bring the economy to its maximum potential. Excessive
dependence on the public sector is not the answer.
Second,  strength  of  the  private  sector  will  materialize  when  the  market  mechanism  functions  fully.
Productivity of the private sector will improve when the resources of capital and labor are reallocated
and repositioned between the business area of high growth potential, efficiency, and profitability and
that otherwise. This process goes on most efficiently through the market mechanism.
Third, such reform is inevitably accompanied by a certain degree of pains. In the course of structural
reform, negative influences may arise to the economy, albeit temporarily, e.g., corporate bankruptcies
and  restructuring.  Opportunities  must  be  accorded  to  those  firms  and  workers  who  are  defeated
amidst structural reform so that they can make a new attempt in the area they can take advantage of
their own competitiveness.
There are a variety of views with respect to specific forms of reform, but today I would like to say a few
words about my ideas that I have always been turning in my mind.
The first issue concerns the resolution of non-performing assets of banks. During the past three years
of my term as Governor of the Bank of Japan, Chairman Greenspan of the Federal Reserve and other
eminent people in the international circles have said to me that from the S&L problem and  banking
crises  in  the  United  States,  they  had  learned  a  lesson  about  the  importance  of  removing  non-
performing assets off the balance sheet of the banks. On Japan’s side, too, we have maintained that
mere provisioning against non-performing assets would not solve the problem and that it is essential to
remove them from the balance sheet. During the  past several  years, the aggregate  non-performing
assets remained virtually unchanged in the magnitude of \30 trillion. This is a regrettable fact. Under
these  circumstances,  Minister  for  the  Financial  Services,  Mr.  Yanagisawa  expressed  his  view  that
banks  should  step  up  write  off.  We  are  of  the  same  opinion.  I  consider  his  remark  to  be  both
appropriate and timely.
I believe that increase in write off will facilitate structural reform. To promote write off, there are some
specific means. For example, a company be split into good and bad parts, and the bad part, or non-
performing  part  be  written  off.  Loan  sales  markets  be  also  enhanced.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  such
specific  actions  be  announced  and  put  in  practice  soon.  At  the  same  time,  I  strongly  hope  that
management of banks will determine to embark on an enhanced write off. As for the assets classified
under  the  category  of  “special  mention,”  the  importance  of  sufficient  provisions  cannot  be  over-
emphasized.
While such stepped up write off will contribute to the resolution of the non-performing problem, it might
accelerate  bankruptcies  and  have  an  adverse  influence  over  employment.  The  Bank  of  Japan  is
6
BIS Review 20/2001
prepared  to  conduct  monetary  policy  to  relieve  the  negative  impact  of  this  painful  friction  on  the
economy.
The second issue I would like to mention is that it is absolutely necessary to invite the personal sector
to stock and bond markets in order to help resolve the problem of banks’ non-performing asset as well
as  to  promote  structural  reform.  At  present,  the  aggregate  financial  assets  in  the  personal  sector
amount to \1,380 trillion, 54 percent of which is held in the form of cash and deposits.
In Germany a shift from indirect financing to direct financing has been going on successfully in recent
years, and as a result risk capital has increased. Between the early 1990s and 1998, the law has been
enacted three times to promote financial and capital markets, by which several reforms of the stock
market and investment trusts have proceeded. Specific measures include a reduction in the minimum
denomination of stock, lifting of a ban on Fund of Funds, improvement in product design of investment
trusts, promotion of senior citizens’ fund. As a result, the proportion of cash and deposits within total
financial assets of the personal sector declined from 45.8 to 35.2 percent in Germany between 1991
and  1999,  while  in  Japan  it  went  up  from  50.8  to  54.0  percent.  The  proportion  of  stocks  and
investment trusts went up dramatically in Germany from 14.6 to 27.3 percent while in Japan from 10.9
to 10.4 percent.
Growth of investment trusts and mutual funds are expected to happen also in Japan. In this regard,
improvements in product design of investment trusts are an urgent task. In particular, a wide variety of
investment trusts should be marketed to meet a variety of demand of the personal sector, and at the
same time sound market practices should also be established.
Furthermore,  establishment  of  investment  funds  can  contribute  to  increasing  flow  of  funds  into  risk
capital.    Private  Investment  Funds  Ripplewood,  which  established  Shinsei  Bank  after  acquiring  the
Long Term Credit Bank of Japan, and Lone Star,  which bought Tokyo  Sowa Bank, are both  equity
funds whose shareholders consist of mutual funds, pension funds, university endowments. In Japan
measures to promote the establishment of a large number of such funds should be taken.
If the financial assets of the personal sector that are currently held predominantly in cash and deposits
are to be invested more in financial and capital markets through a variety of channels, that would, I
hope, contribute to ensuring stability in the financial system through prompter resolution of the non-
performing asset problem as well as to facilitating structural reform in Japan.
BIS Review 20/2001
7
