Joseph Yam: Fourth Hong Kong Monetary Authority Distinguished Lecture:
opening remarks
Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the
Fourth Hong Kong Monetary Authority Distinguished Lecture on the theme of Monetary Policy and
Financial Stability, Hong Kong, 13 February 2001.
 jurisdictions  has 
indicated  problems 
It is an honour for  me  to  welcome  Mr  Andrew  Crockett  to  deliver  this  Fourth  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority  Distinguished  Lecture.  I  am  also  delighted  to  welcome  Dato’  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz  as  the
Discussant. Both are good friends of the HKMA, and it is a special pleasure to see them here today
before this large and diverse audience. I extend to all of you, on behalf of the HKMA, a very warm
welcome.
The subject matter of this Lecture – monetary policy and financial stability – is at the heart of central
banking. Much attention has been given to resolving the apparent conflicts between the two desirable
objectives of monetary stability and financial stability, at the policy as well as the operation levels. The
recent  experience  of  a  number  of 
in  achieving  both
simultaneously. Some have gone as far as to introduce institutional changes to alleviate the tension,
or the embarrassment, or the risk of policy credibility being undermined as a result of such conflicts.
While the jury is still out on what institutional arrangements for delivering simultaneously monetary and
financial  stability  are  appropriate,  there  is  doubt  as  to  whether  institutional  changes,  politically
attractive as they may be, are the right answer. Today Andrew will give us his insights on the subject.
He is particularly qualified to do so, being responsible for the running of the central bank of central
banks.
Some of you may feel that this subject matter is a little arid. I am aware of the fact that those in the
private  sector  have,  particularly  at  this  time  of  the  year,  more  practical  and  "profitable"  issues
occupying  their  minds.  But  the  achievement  of  monetary  and  financial  stability  is  central  to  any
successful economy and therefore important to the general conduct of business. It is also a burning
issue in this region, where the experiences over the last few years have underlined its importance, and
the  consequences  of  failure.  Knowing  Andrew,  who  has  an  admirable  ability  to  present  technically
complex  issues  of  money  and  finance  in  the  simplest  of  terms,  I  am  sure  you  will  find  the  subject
refreshingly interesting.
Andrew Crockett has been General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements since 1994. To
pursue the classroom metaphor that I used at the last lecture to describe how central bankers get on
with  each  other  when  they  come  together  at  meetings,  Andrew’s  job  is  to  be  the  "class  prefect"  or
"captain", who maintains order and prevents us from banging our heads too hardly at each other. He
does this difficult job with immense grace and diplomatic skill. He is also the "sports captain", among
central  bankers,  and  organises  the  annual  Governor’s  Cup  at  a  very  fine  golf  course  close  to  the
Franco-Swiss border. In addition, Andrew doubles up as our gastronomic and oenological consultant
at the informal social events that are an important part of any international gathering.
Andrew has been a staunch supporter of Hong Kong and the HKMA for a very long time – indeed,
formerly  as  an  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  England,  he  played  an  instrumental  role  in  the
conception of the HKMA. Since he became General Manager of the BIS in 1994, the HKMA’s ties with
the BIS have gone from strength to strength. We joined the BIS as a shareholder in 1996. In 1998,
Hong  Kong  became  the  location  of  the  BIS’s  first  overseas  office  –  an  office  which  has  become
extremely active in this region, with its most recent event being the organisation in Hong Kong of a
major BIS Governors’ meeting, held just this last weekend. In 1999, Hong Kong was invited, as one of
the four non-G10 economies, to join the Financial Stability Forum, which Andrew chairs: this forum has
the job of proposing reforms to the international financial architecture, and it is making good progress
in this herculean task.
As discussant for today’s lecture, we are privileged to have Dato Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, who has been
Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia since May last year, and who is another one of the ‘classmates’ at
BIS. I have known Dr Zeti for some years now and benefited from her wise counsel, particularly during
the time when she was Assistant Governor in charge of economic research. Dr Zeti is a career central
BIS Review 13/2001
1
banker  who  joined  Bank  Negara  in  1985  and  who  has  taken  up  various  important  positions  within
Bank  Negara.  She  played  a  pivotal  role  in  steering,  very  successfully,  Malaysia  through  the  Asian
Financial Crisis and in introducing the very important financial sector reforms. Dr Zeti is therefore able
to offer a particularly practical perspective on today’s theme, and I look forward to her comments with
much interest.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I now have great pleasure in calling upon our speaker, Mr Andrew Crockett, to
deliver the fourth HKMA Distinguished Lecture. Mr Crockett, please.
2
BIS Review 13/2001
