The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE: Macro-economic management in the UK
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the 2001 Institute of
Directors Convention, London, on 25 April 2001.
 The  theme  of  your  convention  is  change  -  and  as  a  general  observation  what's  always  struck  me
about  change  is  that  it's  not  simply  a  one-off  event  -  a  discrete  step  from  A  to  B.  Change  is  a
continuing process - and once you've embarked upon that process it's not always clear where it will
lead. You either embrace the process, notwithstanding the uncertainty, it seems to me, or you resist it,
with the risk then that the world changes around you and begins to pass you by.
What is certainly true - in this country but much more widely internationally - is that there has gradually
over a long period been a very profound change in the approach to overall economic management.
For a long period after World War II the emphasis of macro-economic policy seemed to concentrate on
aggregate  demand  management,  with  too  little  attention  paid  to  the  constraints  imposed  by  the
supply-side  capacity  of  the  economy  to  meet  that  demand.  When  growth  and  employment  were
judged  to  be  insufficient,  monetary  and  overall  fiscal  policy  were  used  in  combination  to  provide  a
stimulus to the  economy, often supported  by  direct controls of one kind  or another to suppress  the
emerging symptoms of increasing pressure on resources. Then, as those symptoms -price pressures
in  goods  and  labour  markets  and  increasing  external  deficits  -  could  no  longer  be  contained,  the
macro-economic  policy  levers  were  thrown  into  reverse.  The  go-stop  policy  cycle  for  much  of  this
period  served  in  fact  to  aggravate  the  economic  cycle,  and  our  overall  economic  performance
undoubtedly suffered.
We've come a long  way since then in recognising that we  would do a  lot  better by aiming  at  more
sustainable growth in the economy, by keeping overall demand more or less continuously broadly in
line  with  our  supply-side  capacity,  thereby  moderating  rather  than  aggravating  the  economic  cycle.
The emphasis of macro-economic policy has therefore shifted decisively to stability and sustainability,
and I will come back to that.
But the shift of emphasis to stability as the objective of macro-economic management has served to
focus attention increasingly also on the parallel need to improve the supply-side of our economy - for
example by increasing the scope for free trade and increased market competition, both nationally and
internationally; by avoiding unnecessary regulation;  by  increasing  the  flexibility  of  goods  and  labour
markets; and by raising the skills of the workforce through education and training. Lord Haskins has
just  been  talking  to  you  about  the  supply-side  of  the  economy,  and  it  is  fundamentally  important,
because it is our supply-side performance essentially that determines the rate of growth that we can
hope to sustain. It is hugely more complex than macro-economic management, being affected as it is
by the whole range of public policy issues, often involving difficult political judgements on how to strike
the right balance between social and economic considerations. I will have little more to say about the
supply side.
My involvement is on the macro-economic side. Macro-economic management can do relatively little
directly to contribute to improvement on the supply side, but - if we succeed in maintaining stability -
we  can  nevertheless  contribute  to  more  rational  economic  decision-making  by  the  private  sector,
based upon real rather than purely nominal considerations; and that can help improve our supply-side
performance indirectly.
As  the  emphasis  of macro-economic management  -  overall  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy  taken
together  -  shifted  towards  stability,  a  growing  distinction  emerged  between  the  role  of  overall  fiscal
policy, which is set for the medium term, and a more specific role for monetary policy, which became
the principal instrument for shorter-term stabilisation. This distinction crystalised first with the adoption
of an explicit inflation target as the objective of monetary policy, following  our exit from the ERM  in
1992, and subsequently, in 1997, when the Bank, through the Monetary Policy Committee, was given
independent  operational  responsibility  -  legitimised  through  transparency  and  public  accountability  -
for the achievement of the Government's inflation target. It is important to understand, however, that
the stated aim of consistently low inflation is not simply an end in itself: low inflation is a measure - a
barometer if you like - of our success in keeping overall demand in the economy in line with supply-
side capacity, so that the underlying aim is economic stability in that much wider sense.
BIS Review 33/2001
1
imbalance  within 
to  an  uncomfortable 
the  UK  economy  primarily  between 
Now it has to be said that this emphasis on low inflation as the objective of monetary policy was not
without  its  critics.  Some  people  argued  that  "any  fool  can  control  inflation  simply  by  holding  back
growth and employment. It is a recipe" they said "for economic stagnation". Well that has not been our
experience since inflation targeting  was introduced.  In  fact  we've  experienced  the  longest  period  of
continuous and relatively stable quarter by quarter growth since quarterly records began, with average
annual  growth at  around 3% over  the  whole  period  compared  with  our  long  term  trend  rate  of  2¼-
2½%.  Employment  has  steadily  increased,  and  unemployment  has  fallen  to  its  lowest  level  for  25
years. While the rate of inflation has been consistently relatively close either side of the Government's
2½% target - the lowest rate that I suspect most of us can remember. This experience demonstrates -
at least to my mind - that there is no necessary trade-off between growth and stability - certainly in the
medium  and  longer  term,  rather  the  reverse.  And  I  would  hope,  on  this  evidence,  that  the  future
evolution  of  our  approach  to  overall  economic  management  would  be  in  the  direction  of  further
improvements  to  our  supply-side  flexibility,  rather  than  any  retreat  from  the  present  emphasis  on
macro-economic stability.
Of course I am well aware that a stable overall macro-economy does not - and cannot - mean equally
stable economic conditions for every individual sector or individual business. A particular complication
over the past few years has been the surprisingly persistent strength of the exchange rate against the
euro,  itself a reflection  of  the  puzzling  more  general  weakness  of  the  European  currency.  This  has
contributed 
the
euro-exposed  sectors,  which  have  been  under  consistent  pressure,  and  the  domestically-oriented
sectors, which have by and large been doing relatively well. Understandably the suffering sectors and
businesses  tend  to  complain  that  monetary  policy  takes  too  little  account  of  their  position,  often
pointing out that inflation has for the past two years fallen somewhat below the target. The implication
is that monetary policy has been tighter - interest rates have been higher - than was necessary, which,
they say, in turn at least helps to explain the behaviour of the exchange rate.
I hope you won't think me patronising if I tell you that I have genuine sympathy with their concerns.
Indeed  I  very  much  admire  the  huge  efforts  that  many  of  them  have  made  to  overcome  the
disadvantage coming from the strong exchange rate. Imbalance within the economy has in fact been a
persistent pre-occupation for us on the MPC.
We necessarily, of course, take account of the exchange rate in trying to predict the future course of
the  economy.  Its  strength  against  the  euro  has  been  a  factor  which  has  dampened  both  external
demand and the rate of inflation, so that interest rates have certainly been lower than they would have
been if the exchange rate had been weaker. It is nevertheless true that, in common with most other
analysts, we have not fully anticipated the persistence of euro weakness.
We don't of course have a crystal ball. But even if we had, it is important to recognise that the link
between  relative  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  is  much  more  complicated  -  and  indeed  more
unpredictable - than is often suggested. Our own exchange rate against the euro today, for example,
is  actually  somewhat  stronger  than  it  was  before  our  reductions  in  interest  rates  this  year;  and  the
dollar, too,  is substantially stronger  against the  euro than it  was before the much  larger  cuts  in  US
interest rates. So, in setting interest rates, we can - and do - make allowance in our projections for
what has happened, and, on a best guess, for what is likely to happen, to the exchange rate, and that
may  cause  the  exchange  rate  to  soften  or  it  may  cause  domestic  demand  growth  to  strengthen,
thereby offsetting the exchange rate's dampening effect on the economy. But what we cannot do is to
target the exchange rate, without putting the stability of the economy as a whole at risk.
The exchange rate is just one example of the many uncertainties that confront us in our pursuit of the
Government's inflation target.
We  do  not  know,  for  example,  with  any  great  confidence  what  is  happening  in  aggregate  on  the
supply-side of the economy, nor therefore precisely what rate of growth we can expect to sustain. We
can  observe  that  there  has  been  less  price  pressure  in  both  goods  and  labour  markets  given  the
strength of demand in those markets than past relationships would have suggested and we can try to
understand  the  reasons  for  this  change.  But  while  we  do  in  fact  make  some  allowance  in  our
projections for the more benign relationships to continue, we do not actually know very much about
the size of the improvement or whether or not it will persist.
There are familiar uncertainties, too, about the prospective strength of domestic private sector demand
growth,  which  remains  quite  robust  for  the  time  being,  but  which  could  be  adversely  affected  by
confidence effects from developments elsewhere, and which may in any event need to moderate to
accommodate the planned acceleration of public spending.
2
BIS Review 33/2001
And substantial new uncertainties have emerged more recently, relating in particular to the extent and
duration of the slowdown in the United States and to the associated weakness of equity prices, and
their potential impact on our economy, as well as to the direct and indirect effects of our own outbreak
of foot and mouth disease.
The list could go on. But please don't think I'm complaining. We are paid to look ahead as best we can
because of the length of time it takes for monetary policy changes to have their full effect. Our task
would be far less challenging if we could predict the future with great confidence. The point I want to
emphasise is that monetary policy is in the end an art rather than a precise science, no matter how
much science we try to bring to bear on the process. But in looking ahead each member of the MPC
has to try to distinguish between what we actually know, what we think is the most likely outcome, and
what we fear could happen - we cannot simply act on a hunch. We then have to watch the evolving
situation measured against our central expectation for signs that prospective inflationary pressures are
proving to be either weaker or stronger than we had, individually, anticipated, adjusting our policy view
accordingly.
Given the uncertainties, it should not surprise you that the Committee members disagree more often
than not, but usually at the margin, on what should happen in any particular month to interest rates. I
regard that as a strength rather than a weakness of the process. It should not surprise you either that
even though we consistently aim to hit the target, we rarely achieve it precisely. As a matter of fact, I
have been genuinely, and agreeably, surprised that the outcome over the past few years has been as
consistently close to the target as it has been. The best we can realistically hope for is that we come
close on average and over time. And to achieve that, when we identify developments which are likely
to move us away from our target on one side or the other, we must be ready symmetrically to adjust
our policy to bring us back on track. That is why, even though the economy as a whole continues to
perform relatively well on the data, we have moved interest rates downwards this year, to reflect the
emergence of the new downside risks; and it is also why  we indicated, in our recent press release,
that  we  will continue to  monitor  those  downside  risks. That  is  not  a  promise  of  further  interest  rate
reductions, but it is a promise that we are prepared to move further if we have evidence that those
risks are increasing. Given our starting point,  with inflation somewhat below target and  expected to
remain  so  for  a  while,  we  are  relatively  well  placed  to  weather  the  storm  if  it  begins  to  blow  more
strongly.
BIS Review 33/2001
3
