Christian Noyer: Monetary policy formulation in the euro area
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the "Monetary Policy
and the Markets" conference of the National Association for Business Economics, Washington, DC, 21
May 2001.
 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a pleasure, and a very great honour, to have been invited to address this special meeting of the
National Association for Business Economics and to present the monetary policy of the ECB before
this distinguished audience of business economists and policy-makers. The theme of the conference,
"Monetary Policy and the Markets" is of the greatest interest – I believe – both to market participants
endeavouring to discern and assess central banks' policy directions, and to the ECB, which, since its
creation almost three years ago, has been assigning a prominent role to transparency and openness
in its policy-making.
In my brief remarks today, I will first elaborate on the institutional set-up of the ECB and its objectives.
Against  this  background,  I  will  then  attempt  to  explain  the  ECB's  decision-making  process  as  it  is
structured by our monetary policy strategy.
The institutional set-up and the objective of the ECB
The  body  collectively  responsible  for  monetary  policy  decisions  in  the  euro  area  is  the  Governing
Council  of  the  ECB,  which  consists  of  the  ECB's  President  and  Vice-President,  the  remaining  four
members of the Executive Board of the ECB and the Governors of the national central banks of those
Member States that have adopted the euro as their currency.
The Executive Board is responsible for the preparation of the meetings of the Governing Council and
the implementation of the decisions the Governing Council takes. In particular, the Executive Board
instructs  the  national  central  banks  on  the  operations  to  be  completed  in  accordance  with  the
Governing Council's directions, making sure that the entire process develops in a consistent and fully
harmonised manner.
The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  assigned  to  the  ECB  the  maintenance  of  price
stability  in  the  euro  area  as  the  primary  objective  and  unambiguous  mandate.  Rooted  in  the
long-standing experience of the participating national central banks, there rests the conviction that it is
with  the  credible  and  lasting  maintenance  of  price  stability  that  the  ECB  could  best  enhance  the
welfare  of  EU  citizens.  Given  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  monetary  policy  transmission
mechanism that arise from the complexity and the continuous evolution of economic behaviour and
institutional structures, the ECB is ill-suited to fine-tune economic developments. Attempts to support
growth and employment by deviating from a monetary policy needed to maintain price stability would
prove detrimental over longer horizons, thereby decreasing welfare and undermining the credibility of
the single monetary policy. On the contrary, by focusing on its mandate and therefore avoiding both
prolonged  inflation  or  prolonged  deflation,  the  ECB  creates  the  stable  environment  in  which
appropriate structural and fiscal polices may promote output potential effectively.
To  support  and  safeguard  the  pursuit  of  price  stability,  the  Treaty  endowed  the  ECB  with  a  high
degree  of  institutional  independence,  and  in  order  to  ensure  transparency  and  accountability,  it
imposed on the ECB extensive reporting requirements.
The definition of price stability and the two pillars of the ECB's strategy
The  complexity  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  requires  that  the  preparation,
discussion and presentation of policy decisions be placed in a coherent clarifying framework. This is
the  task  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  that  is  designed  both  to  grant  the  policy-making  of  the
BIS Review 45/2001
1
Governing  Council  a  clear  and  consistent  structure,  and  to  provide  the  most  suitable  vehicle  for
communication with the public.
The monetary policy strategy chosen by the Governing Council ensures a comprehensive assessment
of the economic situation, of the size and nature of the shocks hitting the euro area and of the related
risks to price stability.
The  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  constitutes  the  first  feature  of  this  strategy.  The
announcement of a numerical definition has been devised to enhance clarity, anchor expectations and
offer a yardstick against which the ECB can be held accountable. The Governing Council defined price
stability as "a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area of
below 2%". The upper bound of 2% is in line with the practice of participating national central banks
before the start of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). It enables the existence of a
possible  positive  measurement  bias  in  the  HICP  to  be  taken  into  account  and  creates  a  "safety
margin" which helps ensure that negative rates of "true" inflation are avoided. The headline HICP is
the indicator chosen as the preferred measure to quantify our  primary  objective  because this is the
homogeneous  statistic  that  most  closely  approximates  the  "true"  basket  of  private  households'
consumption in the euro area. While core measures of inflation that exclude the most volatile items are
also  regularly  monitored  for  the  purpose  of  a  comprehensive  analysis,  the  headline  HICP  is  the
variable  on  which  we  focus  as  our  objective.  The  Governing  Council  also  emphasised  that  price
stability has to be maintained over the medium term. This reflects the need for our monetary policy to
have  a  forward-looking,  medium-term  orientation.  It  also  acknowledges  that  short-term  volatility  in
prices  owing  to  non-monetary  shocks  cannot  be  controlled  by  monetary  policy  and  that  monetary
policy should therefore only be held accountable for price developments over a longer horizon.
It is important to recognise the role of the definition of price stability in the conduct of monetary policy.
The Governing Council attempts to set the ECB's interest rates in a way that makes, conditional on the
available information, the maintenance of price stability over the medium term in the euro area most
likely.
It is widely acknowledged that central banks are called on to operate in an environment characterised
by  substantial  uncertainty,  not  only  with  regard  to  current  and  future  developments,  but  also
concerning the actual functioning of the economy. This is particularly true in the context of the euro
area  where  the  regime  shift  entailed  by  the  introduction  of  a  single  currency  may  affect  economic
behaviour  and  institutional  structures.  Under  these  conditions  it  is  crucial  to  ensure  that  policy
decisions be robust and  all-encompassing. Therefore, the ECB  not  only  acts  with a forward-looking
orientation, but also relies on a number of models, approaches and on a judgement appraisal.
The ECB designed a two-pillar structure for its strategy, with the objective of capturing and providing
all  of  the  relevant  pieces  of  information  on  the  euro  area  economy  for  the  assessment  of  the
Governing  Council,  thus  enabling  it  to  take  its  monetary  policy  decisions  on  the  basis  of  full
information.  The  first  pillar  foresees  a  prominent  role  for  money,  while  the  second  envisages  the
analysis of a wide range of other economic and financial indicators.
The  ECB  devoted  the  first  pillar  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy  to  the  appraisal  of  monetary
developments and models that accord an important role to monetary and credit developments. This
recognises the fact that inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon and allows to take advantage of
the stability that characterises the relationship between broad monetary aggregates and the price level
in the euro area. As a form of visible public commitment, the ECB also announced a reference value
for  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  monetary  aggregate  M3  that  is  consistent  with  its  definition  of  price
stability.
The  Governing  Council  regularly  receives  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  current  developments  in
monetary and credit aggregates. The information revealed by the analysis of monetary developments
has proved until now to be an important and reliable guide for monetary policy decisions.
Under  the  second  pillar  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  ECB  regularly  monitors  a  broad  set  of
non-monetary  economic  and  financial  variables,  such  as  wages,  unit  labour  costs,  fiscal  policy
statistics and financial market indicators like stock prices and exchange rates.  Most of this analysis
focuses on cost pressures and on the interplay between supply and demand in the goods and labour
markets. It also helps to ascertain whether shocks to the euro area economy and the resulting risks to
price stability have an external or domestic origin, are of a temporary or permanent nature, and arise
from the supply or demand side. Within the framework of the second pillar, the Eurosystem staff also
produce macroeconomic projections which are published in the ECB Monthly Bulletin twice a year.
2
BIS Review 45/2001
The  macroeconomic  projections  elaborated  by  the  Eurosystem  staff  do  not  represent  the  ECB's
predictions of the most likely macroeconomic outcomes, but are built on the assumption of unchanged
short-term  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  of  the  euro.  It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the
Eurosystem's projections are produced on the basis of models that do not assign a relevant role to
money and that there is also a host of other economic and financial indicators whose information could
not be adequately conveyed by a simple figure or a statistical range.
In its decision-making the Governing Council therefore assesses the staff's projections together with
all the other information under the second pillar, in conjunction with the monetary analysis developed
within the first pillar. It is important to understand that the process of monetary policy formulation of the
ECB is not centred on any forecast or projection and thereby departs from the practice followed by
inflation-targeting  central  banks.  The  monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  ECB  have  not  responded
mechanistically in the past, and will not do so in the future, to deviations of staff's inflation projections
from any numerical target. The Governing Council, moreover, does not take any responsibility for the
staff's projections which, as with forecasts produced by other institutions, are regarded as just one of
the inputs into its deliberations. Given the uncertainty and different views about the appropriate model
of  the  economy,  it  would  not  be  productive  for  the  Governing  Council  to  produce  its  own  single
projection. The Governing Council instead focuses directly on setting policy rates, taking into account
all information, and the uncertainty surrounding this information, in such a way that price stability can
best be maintained over the medium term.
The robust and cross-checking assessment of information which characterises our two-pillar strategy
has proved so far to be providing the Governing Council with the analytical support most suitable for
the conduct of monetary policy in the complex and dynamic euro area environment. It is in fact with
the  pursuit  of  price  stability  under  a  forward-looking  orientation  that  it  can  best  safeguard  and
guarantee the conditions for favourable economic development in the euro area.
The financial markets, well-known for their pitiless judgement, have been confirming the credibility of
our monetary policy. The developments of long-term interest rates have in fact been in line with our
objective of maintaining price stability. This is not an insignificant achievement and we are committed
to not putting it at risk.
BIS Review 45/2001
3
