Einars Repse: Links between the Central Bank and financial markets after the
establishment of the Financial and Capital Market Commission in Latvia
Speech by Mr Einars Repse, Governor of the Bank of Latvia, at the Conference “Banking and Finance
in the Baltics 2001”, held in Riga, 19 September 2001.
 Since 1st of July 2001, the Financial and Capital Market Commission (FCMC) has taken over the
regulation  and  supervision  of  the  Latvian  banking  system  from  the  Bank  of  Latvia.  It  is  widely
recognized  that  banking  supervision  was  handed  over  to  the  new  institution  in  good  shape.  The
banking  sector  in  Latvia  is  solid,  adequately  capitalized  and  well  regulated  in  conformity  with  the
European  Union  (EU)  standards.  This  was  confirmed  by  the  joint  International  Monetary  Fund  and
World Bank Financial Sector Stability Assessment that took place in the first half of this year.
The FCMC is now the primary institution responsible for stability and development of the financial
market in Latvia. However, this does not mean that the overall stability of the financial system as a
whole has become less important for the Bank of Latvia. Both institutions will continue to cooperate, as
adequate monitoring of financial stability requires a combination of ‘‘macro’’ and ‘‘micro’’ perspectives.
In  the  future,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  will  concentrate  more  on  macro-prudential  analysis,  while  the
Commission - on supervision and regulation at the micro level.
Pursuant to the Law “On the Bank of Latvia”, the central bank has to implement monetary policy in
Latvia by controlling the amount of money in circulation with the aim to maintain price stability.
Robust health of the financial sector is essential to ensure an efficient monetary policy transmission
mechanism. Therefore, stability of the financial and banking system will remain an important issue
for the Bank of Latvia.
Only a sound and competitive banking sector will be able to:
• 
• 
intermediate savings efficiently, thus contributing to the economic growth;
provide  transaction  services  and  payment  systems  that  increase  the  efficiency  of
economic activities;
ensure mutual confidence among banks, which is a precondition for smooth functioning of
money and securities markets, through which monetary policy is transmitted;
contribute to the accuracy of the data needed for the formulation of monetary policy;
and, last but not least - support exchange rate stability, as a sound banking system serves
to stabilize foreign exchange market and diminish exchange rate volatility.
  The Bank of Latvia has  the  ability  and  possesses  the  necessary  tools  to  influence  the  market
environment:
• 
The commitment to maintain a fixed exchange rate has a favourable impact on savings and
investments in Latvia, thereby strengthening the country’s financial system in the long run.
The  central  bank’s  focus  on  price  stability  enhances  long-term  planning  and  hence
improves the process of resource allocation over time, thus contributing to a more efficient
functioning of the economy. For these purposes it can use monetary policy instruments
to  smooth  out  excessive  interest  rate  fluctuations  and  influence  money  supply  in  the
short run.
 Hence,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  will  influence  and  at  a  certain  level  control  the  financial  system  through
existing monetary policy instruments:
• 
First: Reserve requirements.
Reserve requirements facilitate implementation of monetary policy and to some  extent
create  liquidity  reserves  that  help  to  stabilize  interbank  rates.  On  the  down  side,  reserve
requirements  can  act  as  a  strain  on  commercial  banks  and  thus  limit  financial
intermediation.
BIS Review 79/2001
1
  In line with Latvia’s economic development and to narrow the spread between deposit and
lending rates, the Bank of Latvia has, step  by  step,  lowered  reserve  requirements.  As  a
result, the required reserve ratio has been reduced to 6%, and in the future will be targeted
to gradually reach the 2% level currently set by the European Central Bank.
Second: Open market operations.
The Bank of Latvia currently has the same set of open market instruments as the ECB, and
the most actively used instruments are swap and repo operations. The widespread use
of swap operations was dictated by commercial banks’ desire to use their foreign currency
holdings as a collateral for central bank’s loans. However, as the market for government and
corporate  securities  develops  over  time,  it  is  expected  that  traditional  repo  operations  will
progressively become more important.
By regulating liquidity in the banking  sector  through  open  market  operations,  the  Bank  of
Latvia can influence interest rates in the interbank market. Insofar as the lending rates
to the non-banking sector respond to changes in the interbank market rates, the actions of
the central bank can have implications for the real sector of the economy.
Third: Lender of last resort.
If  temporary  economic  difficulties  of  a  financial  institution  can  threaten  the  stability  of  the
whole  financial  system,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  is  entitled  to  provide  emergency  financial
support.
According to the Law “On the Financial and Capital Market Commission”, the Commission is
“authorised  to  request  the  Bank  of  Latvia  to  extend  a  loan  against  collateral  to  any  credit
institution with short-term liquidity problems.”
The  Latvian  law  clearly  separates  the  function  of  the  lender  of  last  resort  from  banking
supervision.  Although  the  law  stipulates  that  the  necessary  coordination  between  the
FCMC and the Bank of Latvia must take place, it is the Bank that has the final say in this
matter and therefore has to weigh the consequences of its decision.
Effective  functioning  and  security  of payment  and  settlement  systems  is  a  crucial  element  of  the
stability of the banking system. Therefore, this is an issue to which the Bank of Latvia pays particularly
close attention.
In the domestic settlement systems, all interbank settlements are conducted through the Bank of
Latvia.  Currently  there  are  two  systems  in  operation  at  the  Bank  of  Latvia  and  both  are  used  for
interbank settlement.
From November 1998, the Electronic Clearing System replaced the previous, paper-based clearing
system.  Electronic  clearing  is  used  for  processing  retail  payments.  It  can  be  regarded  as  an
Automated Clearing House system where payment processing is fully automated and only electronic
documents are accepted.
A  year  ago,  in  September  2000,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  introduced  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement
System  (RTGS).  The  RTGS  system  is  designed  for  large  volume,  urgent  payments  related  to
interbank market transactions, open market and other Bank of Latvia monetary policy operations. The
system enhances risk control and is an effective tool for the implementation of monetary policy. With
the introduction of the RTGS system, the Bank of Latvia’s interbank payment systems have been
fully automated and harmonised with EU requirements.
2
BIS Review 79/2001
