William J McDonough: The role of financial stability
An  address  by  Mr  William  J  McDonough,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the XIII
International Frankfurt Banking Evening, Frankfurt, Germany, 3 May 2001.
 Mayor Roth, President Duisenberg, and distinguished guests…
It is an honor to address the thirteenth International Frankfurt Banking Evening in a setting so rich in
history and tradition. I have been told that this stately building is more than just the busy town hall for a
major European city, it is also an ever-present witness to culture and history, having hosted banquets
and celebrations for almost six hundred years honoring coronations and the visits of Presidents and
Prime Ministers.
Indeed, it seems highly appropriate that our dinner this evening, which recognizes the importance of
banking  and  finance  to  this  distinguished  city’s  heritage,  is  being  held  here,  so  close  to  one  of
Europe’s most historic marketplaces. Since medieval times, merchants have traveled great distances
to participate in Frankfurt’s many fairs and markets. The wealth that those markets produced no doubt
assisted in the development of increasingly sophisticated financial institutions and a stock market as
early  as  the  16th  century,  plus  several  of  the  most  storied  banking  houses  in  history.  Those
institutions, in turn, contributed to Frankfurt’s ascent to prominence by financing additional trade and
commerce here and abroad.
Framed by this historical perspective, I would like to share with you some of my thoughts on how the
public sector can and should  work with private financial  institutions to  maintain  financial  stability.  In
particular, I would like to discuss the work that we bank supervisors, and other organizations, do to
promote  and  protect  the  safety  and  soundness  of  our  financial  systems  and  institutions.  In  a
complementary  fashion,  I  would  also  like  to  discuss  the  roles  of  the  private  and  public  sectors  in
preventing and resolving international financial crises.
The supervisor’s charge to promote financial stability
One does not need to remind bankers in Frankfurt, or for that matter in any country, of the importance
of stability to financial markets and organizations. We’ve been reminded of this necessity many times
in  the  modern  age,  including  by  the  global  financial  turbulence  triggered  by  the  recent  crises  in
emerging countries.
Regardless  of  whether  financial  systems  and  institutions  face  serious  and  protracted  crises  or  just
temporary downturns, bank supervisors in every country have a special responsibility to safeguard the
sound operation of their banking systems. This charge consists of two duties.
• 
To  promote  stability,  supervisors  must  first  encourage  banks  to  manage  their  risks
appropriately  to  ensure  proper  safeguards  are  in  place  that  limit  an  organization’s
vulnerability. This is the duty of prevention. It is critical for supervisors to remember that the
primary responsibility for the safe and sound operation of a banking organization rests with
its board of directors and senior management. As a former commercial banker, I know that
competent, capable leaders at the enterprise level, supported by a well-trained staff and a
robust system of risk management processes and controls, make up the first line of defense
against financial instability within an economy. As a supervisor, I believe that there should be
sufficient  market  and  supervisory  incentives  to  encourage  banks  toward  responsible
behavior.
The supervisor’s second duty is to assist in the resolution of problems when they do occur,
so that banks can continue to serve as intermediaries of credit, the lifeline of an economy, to
businesses and consumers. This represents the duty of action. From the experience of the
savings and loans crisis in the United States, to more recent regional financial emergencies
elsewhere, we’ve seen that when disaster looms, prompt and decisive supervisory action is
imperative to containing the damage that severely troubled financial institutions can  wreak
on  the  economy.  In  those  extreme  circumstances,  supervisors  must  restore  confidence
 BIS Review 35/2001
1
quickly  so  that  consumers  and  businesses  do  not  lose  access  to  credit  necessary  for  the
economy to grow.
How the delicate  balance  of responsibilities of bank management and supervisors is accomplished,
particularly in a period of stress, is crucial to the outcome of country’s economic performance.
The philosophy of prevention: assist banks to govern themselves
In developing regulations and practices that help to prevent financial crisis, supervisors must not lose
sight of the inherent self-interest that banks have to retain the public’s confidence by maintaining safe
and  sound  operations.  No  responsible  firm  seeks  to  fail,  and  no  responsible  bank  would  willingly
engage in practices that would cause the market to doubt its long-term viability.
Consequently, our role as regulators is not to limit banks’ opportunities for growth and profit. Instead, it
is  to  help  banks  to  improve  continuously  their  abilities  to  manage  their  businesses  and  their  risks,
thereby ensuring that,  across the financial system, banks can maintain their  financial  health.  At  the
same time, if we are to encourage responsible behavior, we must not create the illusion that we will
rescue every institution that does not succeed.
In this regard, you will recall Goethe’s view: "What government is the best? That which teaches us to
govern ourselves." Similarly, one of the best ways for supervisors to carry out the duty of prevention is
by developing regulatory structures that encourage banks and their managers to govern themselves
and control their risks.
I believe that three important elements in a supervisory structure can help to create such incentives
and thereby promote stability. The first consists of the relatively new "risk-focused" approach to bank
supervision that is being adopted in financial centers around the world. It embodies a forward-looking
perspective focusing most heavily on the risks that each individual bank faces. The second element is
for supervisors to conduct independent reviews of a bank’s capital adequacy relative to its risk profile,
while  the  third  is  to  help  improve  the  ability  of  market  forces  to  exert  discipline  on  management
behavior.  These  last  two  elements,  which  I  will  address  in  more  detail  in  a  moment,  have  been
adopted by the Basel Committee as key parts of our proposal to revise the international standards on
capital regulation.
Risk-focused supervision
In terms of the "risk-focused" approach to supervision, many of my colleagues would agree that what
makes bank supervision so challenging is the need to keep pace with such a dynamic, fast-moving,
and diverse industry.
Consequently, supervision must be adaptive. The banking industry is intensely competitive and firms
must  constantly  identify  new  markets,  new  products,  and  new  ways  to  do  business.  Innovative
products and technologies can quickly alter a bank’s exposure to risk. Continuous innovation in the
industry and increasingly rapid changes in risk profiles demand that supervisors, too, keep up with the
latest  developments  and  work  to  anticipate  them  to  ensure  that  our  regulatory  framework  remains
relevant and timely.
Likewise,  supervision  needs  to  be  flexible.  We  all  know  that  the  banking  sector  encompasses
organizations that vary greatly in scope, size, and risk appetite, so it’s obvious that regulations that are
useful  for  small,  community  mortgage  banks  will  not  apply  equally  well  to  massive,  multinational
trading  banks,  and  vice  versa.  In  the  United  States,  the  risk-focused  approach  that  the  Federal
Reserve  and  other  bank  supervisors  have  adopted  over  the  past  five  years  allows  us  to  tailor  a
supervisory plan appropriate for each bank.
This marks a radical shift in the way that we evaluate a bank’s condition in the United States. Rather
than reviewing mainly the quality of individual loans and other items on a bank’s balance sheet, for
example,  our  bank  examiners  now  try  to  identify  the  most  important  risks  to  which  each  bank  is
exposed – and then determine whether bank management employs robust processes to control those
risks.
This  is  a  much more  "top-down"  approach  to  supervision,  as  we  are  evaluating  the  integrity  of  the
managerial  process  in  a  bank  rather  than  only  testing  the  strength  and  quality  of  individual
transactions. This helps us to determine whether a bank that is healthy today will continue to be so in
2
BIS Review 35/2001
the  future.  I’m  pleased  to  note  that  banks  have  welcomed  this  change  in  approach,  as  we  have
enhanced our ability to compare the quality of one bank’s control structure to those of other banks that
face similar risks. We thus are better able to share our views of the "best practices" we see in industry
risk management.
Supervisory review of capital
Supervisory  review  and  market  discipline  are  two  other  elements  that  can  create  incentives  for
responsible behavior, and are of such importance to contemporary supervisory thinking that they have
also  been  adopted  as  two  of  the  three  "pillars"  of  the  Basel  Committee’s  proposal  to  revise  the
international standards on bank capital requirements. There’s been a good deal of public discussion
about  the  first  pillar,  in  which  the  Committee  recommended  changes  to  the  guidelines  that  set
minimum capital requirements for banks. Tonight I will concentrate on the importance of the other two
in promoting financial stability.
Adequate capital is, of course, the foundation of a safe banking system, as it provides banks with a
"cushion" against unexpected losses. Supervisors aim to ensure that banks set aside sufficient capital
relative to the underlying risks that each institution faces, including whether the banks are addressing
the  relationship  between  different  kinds  of  risk. This  will  be  no  easy  task,  as  banks  under  the  new
Capital Accord will increasingly rely on their own internal models to determine the kinds of risk they
face and to what degree.
The Basel Committee proposed that supervisors review the methodologies through which banks set
their capital levels to ensure that banks have an incentive to develop effective processes for aligning
their capital levels with their risks. When supervisors engage in a more active dialogue about those
processes,  we  expect  that  banks  will  apply  greater  resources  to  identify  and  analyze  more
comprehensively the risks that they face, seek more accurate measures of the potential costs of those
risks  to  their  businesses,  and  develop  more  sophisticated  mechanisms  to  mitigate  those  risks,
including maintaining sufficient capital funds.
I must emphasize that the supervisory review of capital is intended neither to replace the judgement
and expertise of bank management nor to shift responsibility for capital adequacy to supervisors. On
the contrary, the Committee recognizes that bank managers are in the best position to understand and
react to the particular risks that their institutions face. Supervisory review seeks to evaluate the quality
of management’s judgement.
As  an  added  benefit,  better  dialogue  through  supervisory  review  will  strengthen  supervisors’
understanding of the risks that banks face. When problems do occur, having greater insight into the
risk profiles and the control mechanisms in place will help supervisors to understand which institutions
are most exposed and enable more rapid corrective action to protect systemic financial stability.
Market discipline
The third pillar of the new capital adequacy framework, market discipline, is an important ally of official
supervision  and  can  create  powerful  incentives  for  banks  to  manage  their  risks  appropriately.
Marketplace participants, including investors, creditors, and other financial counterparties, can reward
sound management or penalize weak management through their influence on the value of a bank’s
equity and debt and on its access to credit.
Such discipline is not possible without meaningful public disclosure of a bank’s financial condition. I
think we would all agree that there is no greater enemy to a stable financial marketplace than a lack of
confidence,  and  surely  nothing  undermines  confidence  more  than  a  lack  of  reliable  information.
Discipline by the market is not always pleasant – a lesson many companies have re-learned recently.
Yet  better  quality  information,  or  what  we  often  call  transparency,  can  boost  the  confidence  of
depositors, investors, and creditors, and it can contribute to stability by encouraging banks to adopt a
more proactive approach to managing their risks.
In this regard, just last month the Basel Committee published the results of a two-year study on public
disclosure  practices  of  internationally  active  banks  as  a  guide  to  the  industry  and  accounting
standards setters on areas where disclosure can be improved.
BIS Review 35/2001
3
While many countries have made great progress over recent years to improve the quality and level of
disclosure,  disclosure  practices  have  not  kept  up  with  the  changes  in  how  banks  manage  their
businesses and in how they measure and mitigate their risks.
To  improve  this  situation,  I  believe  that  the  notions  of  what  is  public  versus  proprietary  information
must  change.  It  is  critical  to  approach  the  question  of  disclosure  as  users  of  financial  statements.
Shareholders, creditors, and counterparties cannot understand the risks of their own exposures to a
bank until they first understand that bank’s appetite for risk and its approach to, and methodologies
for, managing risk. What should drive this debate is market participants’ need for information to make
sound and secure credit and investment decisions, rather than the concerns some have about what
was once considered secret.
Transparency promotes confidence, and in light of the increasingly international nature of markets, we
must  ensure  that  disclosure  in  different  countries  is  sufficient  and  broadly  consistent  to  promote
greater  financial  stability  across  markets.  That  will  no  doubt  require  additional  harmonization  of
accounting  standards  so  that  supervisors,  bankers,  and  other  market  participants  alike  can  better
understand and act appropriately to manage their exposures to markets or institutions abroad.
Managing international financial crises
Our efforts to promote stronger banks through changes in the capital accord, while crucially important,
also  need  to  be  seen  in  their  broader  context.  The  capital  accord  is  part  of  a  broader  series  of
initiatives to promote stronger financial systems globally, and more generally to reduce the likelihood
of future financial crises.
During the latter part of the 1990s the international financial system has endured perhaps its greatest
stress in the post-war period, and currently, we again are seeing signs of strain associated with the
global slowdown in growth. The experience of recent  years has reinforced old lessons and brought
home new insights about  maintaining  financial  stability  and  sustained  growth.  In  particular,  a  broad
consensus  has  developed  on  ways  of  strengthening  the  institutional  framework  at  the  national  and
international level to create more robust, and thus more crisis-resistant, economies. There is general
agreement that in order for countries to enjoy sustained and stable growth, the following are crucial:
• 
• 
a sound and stable macroeconomic environment, and
well-functioning and robust financial systems in both capital exporting and capital importing
countries.
Moreover, both of these are most effective when supported by a dynamic and adaptive policy regime.
There  is  considerable  agreement  on  many  of  the  elements  needed  to  achieve  these  goals,  for
example the importance of attaining and sustaining price stability. This agreement has been reflected,
in  part,  in  the  development  and  promulgation  of  globally  accepted  codes  and  standards  for  best
practice in areas ranging from transparency  in fiscal policy  and  in  monetary  and  financial  policy,  to
public  debt  management,  and  core  principles  for  bank  supervision.  Guiding  themes  across  these
various standards have included the importance of transparency—indeed the whole New Architecture
initiative  has  been  as  much  about  putting  in  more  and  better  windows  as  about  laying  in  sturdier
foundations—and of building stability up from the firm and sector level. The latter is accomplished by
encouraging sound risk management and stronger balance sheets, and creating efficient systems of
market, legal, and regulatory discipline.
Unfortunately,  there  is  no  comparable  degree  of  consensus  on  how  best  to  handle  international
financial crises once they do erupt, or the proper roles of public institutions and the private sector in
containing and resolving such crises. In particular, there is unease that the current approach to crisis
management  that  has  evolved  out  of  the  experiences  in  Mexico  and  Asia,  notwithstanding  its
successes in some cases, entails solutions that:
• 
are  potentially  too  costly,  given  the  repeated  reliance  on  large-scale  financial  support
packages,
introduce adverse incentives, or moral hazard, and
are in themselves a source of uncertainty, and potentially of instability.
BIS Review 35/2001
 4
But  the  alternatives  look  even  more  unpalatable  in  their  implications.  Notwithstanding  considerable
efforts at the public and private level to search for a better way, no magic bullet or formula has been
found.
Nor is one likely to be available. Experience and a reading of the historical record suggest that  the
seductive  allure  of  grand  solutions  must  be  resisted.  Cases  differ  greatly  with  respect  to  what  is
possible and desirable in terms of their implications for the interests of the public and private sectors.
Moreover,  if  history  is  any  guide,  new  developments  in  markets  and  practices  quickly  will  render
obsolete those measures that might seem well attuned to today’s circumstances.
Then  what  is  the  right  path?  The  solution  is  neither  a  single  piece  of  financial  engineering  nor  a
compact  between  the  official  lenders  and  private  creditors.  Rather,  it  is  a  process  incorporating  a
number  of  elements.  Essentially,  I  would  suggest  that  our  current  case-by-case  approach  to  crisis
management needs to evolve in ways that are market-based and adaptive, yet strategic, creative, and
principled. Allow me to explain.
To be successful in today’s environment, a case-by-case approach needs to be market-based and
adaptive  to  the  particularities  of  the  case  at  hand,  as  well  as  the  global  financial  and  economic
context. This requires seeking, as far as possible, to work with the grain of a given situation, as a good
artisan works with the grain of the wood.
• 
The approach needs to be market-based in part because that is what the game is all about.
Today,  the  relevant  considerations  for  crisis  management  relate  more  to  markets  and  the
problem of restoring market confidence, than to individual  borrowers and creditors. To the
extent that systemic concerns pertain, they more often relate to the risks of market disruption
and over-adjustment than to potential domino effects caused by the failure or impairment of
key institutions.
Also,  in  today’s  environment,  a  market-based  approach  is  much  more  feasible.  Financial
recoveries can proceed more rapidly than in the past, because market participants generally
have the ability—and many have little choice, because of the prevalence of mark-to-market
accounting—to digest losses and move on.
Working with the grain means recognizing the realities and limitations inherent in the current
market  structure  and  its  functioning,  and  tailoring  approaches  accordingly.  This  involves
acknowledging 
impose  solutions  are  unrealistic  and  potentially
counterproductive.  Instead  it  involves  identifying  ways  to  induce  and  encourage  desired
behaviors.  I  would  also  suggest  that  it  means  avoiding  departures  from  normal  market
functioning whenever possible. Interventions should seek not to override or suspend market
functioning, but rather to guide market processes.
that  attempts 
to 
A  case-by-case  approach  by  definition  is  supremely  tactical,  but  it  also  needs  to  be  strategic  in
orientation as well, if it is to be successful in the longer run. In particular, we in the public sector would
be  well  served  to  maximize  the  complementarity  between  efforts  to  prevent  crises  and  efforts  to
contain and resolve crises when they do arise.
• 
The consensus on sound preventative policies includes precepts that public sectors should
limit the scale of their involvement in the domestic economy, and that borrowers, public and
private, should be encouraged to follow best practices in the management of their liquidity
and foreign exchange risk. Indeed, as I discussed earlier, this is the essence of what we are
trying to do under the revised capital accord. Moreover, countries are being encouraged to
strengthen  their  legal  and  regulatory  regimes  for  insolvency  resolution  to  better  deal  with
cases when private sector borrowers get it wrong.
Progress in these areas, even if only incremental, will have important implications for what is
possible  and  necessary  in  the  future.  For  example,  having  stronger  banks  and  corporate
balance sheets, with lower leverage, expands the scope for using interest rates, and asset
price adjustments as stabilizing devices. Better liquidity management at both the micro and
macro  level—longer  maturities,  and  greater  reserve  coverage  and  back-up  financing—will
create  margins  to  ride  out  financial  shocks.  And  better  insolvency  regimes  would  make
decentralized workouts more feasible.
As part of the strategy to match better preventive and management efforts, it would be useful
to  encourage  market-based  mechanisms  that  help  build  time  back  into  the  system.  While
numerous  accounting,  regulatory,  technological,  and  structural  market  changes  that  have
    BIS Review 35/2001
5
occurred over the past dozen years have generally made financial systems more resilient,
they  have  also  had  the  effect  of  accelerating  market  processes,  and  thereby  removing
time—and its shock-absorbing and beneficial aspects—from the system.
The  approach  to  crisis  management  and  resolution  also  needs  to  be  creative.  In  part  this  can  be
accomplished by relying as much as possible on the efforts of debtors and private creditors to work
things  out  on  their  own.  The  perception  in  some  circles  that  private  creditors  are  not  interested  in
resolving payment problems expeditiously is mistaken, and stands at odds with recent experience. If
nothing else, investors are interested in restoring liquidity to debt instruments in order to move on to
new opportunities. There is also scope for exploring creative market-based  ways  to  lever  in  private
participation and stretch the impact of public sector funds.
Finally,  a  successful  market-based,  case-by-case  approach  also  needs  to  be  principled.  I  would
suggest that the essence of an effective case-by-case approach is the development of viable plans
that link broader, generally acceptable principles to the particulars of a given situation.
• 
To achieve this, a clearer and more transparent articulation of the public sector’s objectives
is  necessary.  Greater  emphasis  and  clarity  are  needed  as  to  the  purposes  and  limits  of
public intervention, and the extent to which those interests warrant different degrees, modes,
and timing of public and private sector involvement, depending on the particular country and
circumstances.  In  this  way  all  parties  will  be  better  placed  to  understand  current
developments and how the international community might react to future strains.
The argument against standstills
There are of course other  points  of  view.  I  would  note  that  some  have  suggested  that  perhaps  we
should go in a different direction, that we should seek to build time back in by calling a time out. In
particular,  it  has  been  suggested  that  an  early  recourse  to  comprehensive  payment  standstills
(suspensions of debt service perhaps amplified or reinforced by capital controls) would increase the
manageability of crises and enhance predictability.
My reading of the record convinces me that trying to freeze market processes would do the opposite. I
would like to share with you my thinking on this point.
• 
The  desire  for  certainty  and  control  which  seems  to  underlie  standstill  proposals  is
understandable, as it offers the promise of using less public money, and seemingly entails
less  risk  that  creditors  will  be  bailed  out  for  poor  credit  decisions.  But  the  control  and
manageability that might result may be more seeming than real.
For one, a perceived disposition to preemptively lock the door seems likely to send investors
heading  for  the  exits  all  that  much  sooner.  As  a  result  many  avoidable  crises  soon  may
become inevitable. And the problem of contagion, whereby difficulties in one case spread to
many, would seem likely to worsen.
Moreover, a perceived weakening of the international community’s commitment to voluntary,
market-oriented  approaches  and  its  support  for  honoring  contractual  commitments  would
likely create deep distrust, making it harder to encourage cooperation between debtors and
creditors in ultimately resolving the crisis.
An overly quick recourse to payment suspensions also risks discouraging precisely the types
of flows that we should wish to encourage, that is, longer maturities with better risk sharing
characteristics, such as long-term bonds and equities. In a crisis, the hottest money leaves
first—by definition. It seems counterproductive to seek to penalize those who stay.
Finally, I would suggest that preemptive attempts to "freeze markets" also undermine market
discipline of and ownership by the local authorities.
Increases  and  decreases  in  financial  flows,  and  the  fluctuations  in  pricing  that  naturally
accompany positive or negative trends in policies and economic and financial performance
are a reflection of, and act as a natural brake on the development of imbalances.
But an assertion  of control by  international community, by preemptively calling  a time out,
risks  diverting  attention  from  the  policies  of  the  local  authorities.  As  a  result,  denial  and
delay, aggravating factors in almost every crisis, may well continue and be exacerbated. And
then, as a practical matter, once market processes have been stopped, how and when do
    6
  BIS Review 35/2001
 you  get  things  started  again,  particularly  if  needed  corrective  policies  still  have  not  been
convincingly and transparently implemented?
To sum up, I believe the one size fits all disposition inherent in the standstills approach risks
making  situations  much  worse  than  they  need  to  be.  The  only  thing  that  strikes  me  as
predictable under such an approach would be that market access would be harmed across
the  board.  Just  as  bail-outs  may  encourage  too  much  risk  taking,  efforts  to  orchestrate
preemptive bail-ins may encourage too little.
A minimalist approach to payment suspensions
This is not to say that payment suspensions always can and should be avoided, or that ever-larger
bailouts are desirable or feasible. I would note that in December 1997, we at the New York Fed played
an important role in  encouraging  creditors  from  around  the  world  to  begin  working  with  the  Korean
authorities  to  find  a  solution  that  complemented  the  courageous  policy  actions  of  the  then  new
government.  This  effort,  which  began  with  commitments  to  maintain  inter-bank  credit  lines  and
culminated in a refinancing of these claims, was but one of many times we have helped borrowers and
creditors find mutually beneficial solutions.
But in such instances, when payment interruptions truly are unavoidable, experience has shown that
minimalist  approaches,  where  only  certain  payments  are  suspended  or  delayed,  and  only  where
absolutely necessary, generally offer the best prospects for minimizing spillover effects and for rapidly
restoring market access.
• 
We should not forget we are living in a world of private flows. Nor should we forget that a
crisis is not over when capital outflows have been halted and prices stop falling. Emerging
market economies depend on regular access to international capital market and bank credit,
and economic recovery and restoration of growth depend on confidence being reestablished,
so that the necessary financing, beyond emergency lending, can be obtained.
The  scope  for  a  minimalist  approach  hinges  crucially  on  the  adoption  of  strengthened
policies--fiscal,  monetary,  and  financial--to  address  the  fundamental  concerns  that  are
leading investors to pull back in the first place. In this regard, the IMF has a crucial role to
play  as  a  guardian  of  sound  policy  and  crisis  mitigator.  IMF  support  should  provide  an
unambiguous  signal  of  the  international  community’s  confidence  in  the  capacity  of  crisis-
affected countries to take the measures necessary to restore economic health.
 Concluding remarks
Underlying the suggestions that I have made is a firm belief that the success of our approaches to
crisis  management  needs  to  be  viewed  and  assessed  with  a  wide  focus.  Certainly  there  is  the
question of efficacy in containing the crisis at hand, and the balance between this and the costs, actual
and potential to the public sector. But we also must keep in mind the implications for the functioning of
the global financial system in the near and medium term. This requires consideration of prospects for
restoring  normal  market  functioning  and  access,  and  the  creation  of  appropriate  incentives.  When
difficulties  arise,  the  challenge  remains,  as  always,  to  encourage  and  work  with  countries  that  are
ready and able to implement strong corrective actions and to find financial solutions best suited to both
the specific case and the broader functioning of the global financial system. A flexible case-by-case,
managed-market approach represents the best bet—and the only realistic option—for achieving those
goals as we face a challenging future.
BIS Review 35/2001
7
