Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Update on Iceland’s economy
Address  by  Birgir  Ísleifur  Gunnarsson,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Iceland, at its Annual General Meeting, Reykjavík, 27 March 2001.
 On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland I welcome you all to the Bank's
40th  annual meeting.  This  year  marks  the  Bank's fortieth  anniversary  after  it  was  made  completely
separate  from  Landsbanki  and  transformed  into  an  independent  institution.  The  Bank's  financial
statements for the year 2000 have been ratified today by the Prime Minister. The Bank's annual report
has also been published. As usual it includes a survey of the Bank's activities and performance, along
with a detailed report on the Bank's monetary policy and  actions, the financial system and financial
markets,  and  the  main  features  of  economic  developments  in  the  course  of  last  year.  I  shall  now
address  several  aspects  of  economic  issues  and  the  present  prospects,  in  particular  those  most
closely connected with the Central Bank's field of activities.
Overheating of the economy
Iceland has distinguished itself from most other industrialised countries in recent years by the strong
economic growth it has enjoyed, or 4-5% per year. The closest comparison in this respect is with the
USA,  where  growth  is  in  fact  on  a  downward  path  now.  As  Iceland's  growth  period  progressed,
symptoms  emerged  of  the  economic  overheating  which  has  been  one  of  the  main  concerns  of  the
Central Bank in the implementation of monetary policy in recent years.
For the Icelandic economy, the period from 1990-1995 was one of stagnation, apart from 1994 when
growth shot up to  4.5%, only  to fall back to virtually  zero  the  following  year.  In  1996,  however,  the
growth phase began which we have been enjoying ever since. Over this period, the entire output gap
that  was  present  then  was  closed,  and  more  besides.  National  expenditure  has  been  growing  at  a
faster rate than national income, resulting in a large current account deficit. National expenditure rose
by more in 2000 than the preceding year, so the current account continued to widen. GDP growth was
less  than  the  year  before,  although  it  did  not  slow  down  sufficiently  to  ease  output  pressure.  In  all
likelihood,  the  overheating  that  has  characterised  the  Icelandic  economy  in  recent  years  peaked  in
2000,  since  there  were  indications  of  a  slowdown  in  domestic  demand  growth  in  the  course  of  the
year,  although  it  remained  very  strong.  The  outlook  is  for  a  substantial  reduction  in  the  rate  of
economic growth in 2001.
Clear  signs  of  overheating  were  seen  in  the  labour  market.  Seasonally  adjusted  unemployment
decreased from 1.5% in January 2000 to 1.2% in July, then remained unchanged to the end of the
year.  One  response  to  labour  shortages  was  to  bring  in  workers  from  abroad,  which  together  with
longer  working  hours  has  prevented  wage  drift  from  being  felt  on  any  great  scale.  Labour  market
surveys,  however,  show  contrasting  pictures  in  the  Greater  Reykjavík  Area  and  regional  Iceland.
There is an obvious shortage of labour in various fields in the urban southwest, while availability  of
employment declined in the regions.
Great pressure built up in the real estate market, largely reflected in a rise in real estate prices in the
Greater Reykjavík Area. Prices peaked at the beginning of 2000 after increasing by almost 24% over a
twelve-month period. This rate of increase has now begun to slow down, and by the end of December
real estate prices had risen by 13.3% over the preceding twelve months.
Credit expansion
In  the  course  of  the  growth  period,  generous  wage  agreements  were  made  which  boosted  real
disposable income. The greatest increase in real disposable income was in 1998, or 7.2%. Otherwise
it rose by 4-5% annually until last  year, when the figure was close to 2%. Over this period, Iceland
Stock  Exchange  has  gone  from  strength  to  strength.  An  important  equities  market  has  evolved  in
Iceland, and share prices followed an upward trend until last year. Greater real disposable income and
rising  share  prices,  which  at  least  for  a  while  increased  shareholders'  confidence  in  their  own
prosperity,  fuelled  growing  optimism  among  consumers  and  investors.  At  the  start  of  the  period
economic  growth  was  sustained  in  particular  by  investments  in  business  sectors  such  as  power-
BIS Review 27/2001
1
intensive  industry  and  fisheries.  This  gradually  changed  in  character  and  for  a  while  growth  was
primarily  borne  up  by  private  consumption  and  related  expenditure.  Last  year  capital  formation
increased  more  than  had  been  expected,  however,  by  an  estimated  9%  during  the  year.  Private
consumption  rose  somewhat  more  than  real  disposable  income,  and  household  debt  increased  by
14½% in real terms, and as a proportion of disposable income from 146% to 163%.
The combined impact of all these factors was to put pressure on Iceland's credit system, not least the
deposit money banks which have been lending immoderately. In the first half of 1999 the twelve-month
rate of lending growth was 35%, although it has since slowed down. DMB lending increased by just
over 26% last year, somewhat more than in 1999. Total lending by the credit system rose by 18.4%.
The largest growth was in corporate lending, or 23%, while household lending growth was slightly less
at 19%. In comparison with 1999, household lending growth increased but corporate lending growth
slowed  down  somewhat.  Excluding  exchange  rate  and  price  indexation  adjustments,  the  total
annualised  increase  in  lending  by  DMBs  during  the  second  half  of  2000  was  just  under  14%,
compared  with  22%  during  the  same  period  in  1999.  Lending  growth  has  clearly  slowed  down,
although it is still too great to be compatible with long-term stability.
Heavy lending by commercial banks swells their balance sheets and weakens their equity positions by
the same token. The combined equity ratio of the three commercial banks was 10.21% at the end of
1999, but was down to 9.35% at the end of 2000. The mandatory minimum equity ratio is 8%. In part
the equity position is maintained with subordinated loans, as authorised by law; excluding these, the
equity ratio was 7.93% at the end of 1999 and went down to 6.28% at the end of last year. This is a
cause for concern, as the Central Bank has repeatedly pointed out. It leaves the commercial banks
worse equipped to tackle tougher economic times than would otherwise be the case.
Inflation
Overheating  of  the  economy  generated  inflationary  pressures  after  spring  1999.  Inflation  gradually
climbed in 1999 and until spring last year, when the twelve-month rate of increase measured 6%. It
slowed down again as the  year  wore  on  and  measured  3.5%  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the
year. Over the twelve months until the beginning of March this year, inflation was 3.9%.
Both domestic overheating and external conditions contributed to the high inflation figure shown last
year. Three main factors were at work. Housing prices led to a 1.25% increase in the Consumer Price
Index. Petrol prices pushed the CPI up by just under 0.25%, compared with almost 1% the previous
year. Finally, market services, i.e. those not provided by the public sector, began rising soon after the
signing of the first wage agreements, which also involved the largest section of the labour force. The
effect was a 1.25% rise in the CPI. In combination, rises in housing, petrol and general service prices
explain almost seven-tenths of the CPI increase last year. Housing prices have probably reached their
peak, and the same may be said about oil prices. These factors are therefore not likely to cause a rise
in the CPI this year; if anything, they could bring it down.
Iceland's inflation rate moved some way closer to  the  levels pertaining among its  European  trading
countries in the course of the  year, as measured by the Harmonised Consumer Price Index for the
European Economic Area. At the beginning of the year, twelve-month inflation in Iceland measured by
the HCPI was 4.6%, or 2.7 percentage points higher than among main trading partner countries. By
December  the  twelve-month  rate  in  Iceland  was  down  to  3.7%,  which  was  2.3  percentage  points
above the average among main trading partners and lower than in five of the seventeen countries in
the European Economic Area that calculate the same monthly index using the same terms.
The  Central  Bank  publishes  its  inflation  forecast  four  times  a  year.  At  the  beginning  of  last  year  it
forecast a 5% rise in inflation between the years, which turned out to be the case. When the króna
depreciated,  the  Bank's  mid-year  inflation  forecast  assumed  that  the  impact  would  soon  be  felt  in
prices. This prediction did not materialise in full. During the second half of the year it seemed clear that
there  would  be  some  lag  between  the  depreciation  and  its  effect  on  the  price  level.  This  prompts
questions  about  the  correlation  between  prices  and  exchange  rate  developments.  The  short-term
relationship  of  these  factors  appears  to  have  weakened,  which  is  undoubtedly  explained  in  part  by
market  competition.  A  more  flexible  exchange  rate  policy  is  also  unquestionably  at  work.  In  earlier
times,  when  devaluations  were  made  amid  extensive  announcements,  the  change  was  in  general
rapidly  reflected  in  the  price  level,  since  it  was  fairly  certain  that  it  would  be  permanent.  After  the
exchange rate was made more flexible, it can be assumed that uncertainty about the permanence of
changes has led buyers and sellers of goods to take more short-term exchange rate risk than before,
2
BIS Review 27/2001
since  high  costs  are  involved  in  making  frequent  alterations  to  prices.  However,  it  is  imprudent  to
ignore the eventual  impact of a depreciation on prices, since research offers no support for such  a
view. This is one of the assumptions on which the Bank bases its forecast from this February, where
inflation is expected to run at 4.3% between 2000 and 2001 and 4.6% from the beginning to the end of
the year. Next year it is forecast to slow down to 2.7% from the beginning to the end of the year.
Interest rates
The main objective of the Central Bank of Iceland, like those in many other countries around the world,
is to promote price stability. An intermediate objective has been to secure the value of the króna. To
do so, the Bank applies its policy rates, namely the rates of interest that it sets for its transactions with
credit  institutions.  In  a  scenario  of  overheating  and  inflationary  risks,  the  Central  Bank  raises  its
interest rates, as it has been doing in recent times. The Bank already took such action in the second
half of 1997 and raised interest rates fairly rapidly in 1999 and 2000. Over these two years, the Central
Bank raised its interest rates seven times in all, by a total of 3.6 percentage points. The policy rate is
now  11.4%,  which  is  very  high  by  international  comparison.  However,  under  certain  circumstances
interest rates have been this high or even higher in various other industrialised countries.
Broadly  speaking,  these  interest  rate  rises  served  a  double  purpose.  Firstly,  they  were  aimed  at
influencing  the  exchange  rate  differential  with  abroad,  thereby  exerting  a  direct  impact  on  capital
inflows and supporting the exchange rate of the króna. The other purpose was to contribute towards
higher  interest  rates  at  credit  institutions  and  thereby  reduce  the  expansion  in  their  lending.
Experience shows that the impact on lending will emerge eventually. All these measures were aimed
at reducing consumption and investment. There are many signs that the Central Bank's interest rate
rises are producing results in the form of less  activity  in  the  areas  of  the  economy  which  are  most
sensitive  to  interest  rates.  Had  the  Central  Bank  not  reacted  in  this  way,  it  is  quite  certain  that
overheating  of  the  economy  would  have  produced  a  much  higher  rate  of  inflation  than  Iceland  has
known in recent years, with corresponding consequences for the economy.
The  Central  Bank's  tight  monetary  stance  has  been  quite  widely  discussed  in  Iceland.  Questions
raised  have  included  its  impact  on  the  current  account  deficit  and  whether  monetary  policy  was
actually  achieving  its  set  aims,  given  unrestricted  access  to  foreign  capital  and  the  insensitivity  of
households and businesses to interest rate changes. The Central Bank has made special studies of
the  impact  that  interest  rate  rises  have  on  the  real  exchange  rate  and  current  account  deficit.
Research suggests that, since 1996, the tighter monetary stance has led to a 2-3.5% appreciation of
the  real  exchange  rate.  At  the  same,  the  real  exchange  rate  appreciated  by  10.5%.  Studies  also
indicate that this appreciation in the real exchange rate caused the current account deficit to widen by
0.5-2%  of  GDP,  but  that  it  will  shrink  again  in  the  course  of  time.  Bearing  in  mind  that  last  year's
current account deficit was equivalent to 10% of GDP, rises in interest rates have clearly not had much
impact on it. A wide range of other obvious factors are at work there. Suffice it to mention large-scale
investment  in  power-intensive  industries  and  other  sectors  during  the  first  half  of  the  period  in
question, a major increase in real disposable income in the past few years and credit expansion which
has  been  funded  by  foreign  borrowing.  The  Central  Bank's monetary  policy  has  therefore  played  a
minor  role  in  this  development  and  its  impact  has  primarily  been  of  a  short-term  nature  and  will
eventually  be  levelled  out.  Of  course,  the  Central  Bank  is  also  aware  that  open  access  to  foreign
capital softens the impact of its monetary policy. However, it should be borne in mind that access to
foreign capital is not unlimited in the final analysis, and is neither risk-free nor available to all Icelandic
companies. Household and corporate sensitivity to interest rate changes may be low at present, but in
the long term the impact of higher interest rates cannot be avoided. The Central Bank is convinced of
the impact that its interest rate instruments have, and recent discussions about high interest rates can
be cited as precisely such evidence that their impact is being felt in full.
Furthermore,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  accused  of  basing  its  assessments  of  economic
developments on somewhat outdated data. Undoubtedly there is always scope for improvement, but
the  Central  Bank  does  compile  extensive  data  about  financial  market  developments  on  a  monthly
basis, and various other data even more frequently. Its data on the exchange rate of the króna, for
example,  cannot  be  more  up-to-date.  Naturally,  the  Bank  uses  data  supplied  by  other  agencies  as
well. It also acquires information through other channels, such as both informal and formal meetings.
For this reason it is simply wrong to claim that the Bank's resistance to easing its monetary stance is
based on outdated information.
BIS Review 27/2001
3
The Central Bank has declared that it will maintain tight money until unequivocal signs of a cooling in
the  economy  begin  to  appear.  Such  indications  have  been  emerging  recently.  For  example,  total
business turnover has decreased. Retail turnover has contracted sharply and there has also been a
decrease on the wholesale side. Turnover in manufacturing appears to be stable. However, turnover is
still rising rapidly in the construction industry and at a considerable rate in the service sector as well.
Although credit growth is still quite substantial, it has slowed down. In the Central Bank's opinion, the
economy  has  now  passed  the  most  difficult  phase  of  overheating  and  the  time  is  ripe  to  ease  the
monetary  stance  somewhat,  among  other  things  to  avoid  a  hard  landing.  The  Board  of  Governors
therefore  decided  today  to  reduce  the  rate  of  interest  on  its  repurchase  agreements  with  credit
institutions by 0.5 percentage points. This change has been made in light of next year's lower inflation
scenario  alongside  the  slowdown  in  economic  activity.  Inflation  prospects  are  within  the  reference
limits stated  in the joint  declaration on inflation target issued today by the Government  and  Central
Bank. In weighing up this decision, interest rate reductions among some of Iceland's trading countries
in recent months have also been taken into account.
Exchange rate
To  reiterate,  the  main  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  price  stability.  Since  the  exchange  rate  is  an
important  determinant  of  prices,  exchange  rate  stability  has  been  an  intermediate  objective  of
monetary policy. During the first four months of last  year the króna appreciated  somewhat,  but  this
trend was reversed in the middle of June and the currency was under pressure for most of the time
until the end of the year. It depreciated by almost 9% from the end of 1999 to the end of 2000. To
some extent the depreciation was triggered by fishing quota cutbacks and the resulting deterioration in
the economic outlook. Demand for foreign exchange also outstripped supply  because  of  last  year's
current  account  deficit,  which  is  estimated  at  ISK  68.9  billion,  as  well  as  heavy  investment  by
Icelanders in foreign securities amounting to almost ISK 40 billion net. Pension funds play the leading
role in these investments. By the end of 2000, the real exchange rate of the króna had fallen below its
average for the past twenty years.
Actions in the foreign exchange market
Under the prevailing circumstances, the Central Bank considered it necessary to take action to counter
the  depreciation  of  the  króna.  Besides  raising  its  interest  rates,  the  Bank  intervened  in  foreign
exchange  markets  thirteen  times  after  the  middle  of  2000  in  order  to  cushion  against  sharp
fluctuations.  These  actions  marked  a  turning  point,  since  the  Central  Bank  had  not  traded  in  the
interbank foreign exchange market since the middle of 1999. The Bank sold US dollars for ISK 15.6
billion over the period. So far this year the Bank has taken action in the foreign exchange market six
times, and the króna has depreciated by 2.3% based on today's rate.
There is no denying that Central Bank intervention has put pressure on the currency  reserves. The
Bank maintains a specified minimum reserves which is now ISK 34 billion. If the reserves head below
that floor, the Bank borrows to maintain it. Short-term borrowing by the Central Bank now amounts to
ISK 24.2 billion. The Central Bank has made extensive contingencies for bolstering the exchange rate
if the need arises, most recently with an agreement with a German bank on access to a new USD 250
million  credit  line.  It  should  also  be  mentioned  that  yesterday  the  Treasury  made  overtures  in  the
European market for a credit facility of 250 million euros, of which 180 million euros will be used to
refinance  debt  that  will  mature  shortly.  The  remaining  70  million  euros  (ISK  5.6  billion)  will  be
deposited  in  a  foreign  currency  account  at  the  Central  Bank  to  boost  the  currency  reserves.  Talks
have been  held  with the Minister  of Finance on more action of this kind to strengthen the currency
reserves. Most of the Central Bank's committed foreign credit facilities are still undrawn.
When the foreign exchange market was established  in May 1993, a central exchange rate  was  set
with deviation bands of 2¼% in either direction. In September 1995 these were extended to ±6%. In
February last year the bands were extended once again, to ±9%. Last year's fluctuations in the króna
used  up  all  the  scope  allowed  by  exchange  rate  policy  before  the  last  extension  of  the  fluctuation
bands.
The króna depreciated considerably after the middle of last year. The Central Bank has stated before
that it does not identify a high real exchange rate as the root cause of the current account deficit. As
pointed out earlier, the real exchange rate has now fallen below its average for the past twenty years.
Any further depreciation is unlikely to lead to a sudden improvement in the current account balance.
4
BIS Review 27/2001
On the contrary, a depreciation of the króna would entail risks for domestic companies with foreign-
denominated liabilities, especially those with no foreign revenues to match them. Thus it is very much
in the interest of these companies – and the credit institutions which have acted as intermediaries in
procuring  foreign  borrowing  –  that  the  króna  does  not  depreciate  to  any  extent.  These  viewpoints,
among others, have been borne in mind in the Bank's monetary policy. A weaker króna would have a
multiple  impact  in  the  form  of  higher  inflation,  not  least  in  the  climate  of  overheating  which  has
prevailed in Iceland recently, a resulting fall in living standards and difficulties for companies and credit
institutions.
Exchange rate policy reforms
For quite some time now the Central  Bank has been examining the option  of  abolishing  the  formal
fluctuation bands for exchange rate policy and adopting instead direct inflation targeting as the basis
of monetary policy. Articles on this topic have appeared in the Bank's publications in recent times and
international  agencies  have  recommended  serious  consideration  of  inflation  targeting  as  the  main
monetary  policy  goal.  The  fixed  exchange  rate  framework  has  gradually  been  eased  and  the
fluctuation bands have been extended in phases, as I mentioned earlier. Indeed, the extension of the
bands  in  autumn  1995  can  be  claimed  to  represent  the  first  step  towards  instituting  a  new  foreign
exchange  framework,  with  the  next  step  taken  in  February  last  year.  The  Central  Bank  sees  many
factors in favour of adopting inflation targeting, which is a logical continuation of the flexible exchange
rate policy that has been pursued. Monetary policy based on formal inflation targeting enjoys growing
support  and  has  been  adopted  by  an  increasing  number  of  countries.  Industrialised  nations  which
have  done  so  include  Australia,  the  UK,  Canada,  New  Zealand,  Switzerland  and  Sweden.  Various
other countries have also adopted such a policy, and there are good arguments for claiming that the
US Federal Reserve and the twelve members of the European Monetary Union also in effect follow
such a policy, although their monetary policies also have other characteristics.
Under this arrangement, specific targets are set and the Central Bank will keep the rate  of inflation
consistent with them within a specified timeframe. At the same time, the exchange rate is no longer
used  as  an  intermediate  target  and  the  fluctuation  bands  are  abolished.  However,  it  should  be
underlined that the exchange rate always exerts a strong price impact in an open economy. Monetary
policy will therefore continue to take exchange rate developments into account. The Central Bank will
implement the policy by producing an inflation forecast, and if this indicates that inflation is heading
beyond  the  target,  the  Bank  will  be  obliged  to  respond  by  applying  its  monetary  instruments.
Conditions for credible  implementation  of  this  policy  are  that  the  Central  Bank  must  be  granted  full
independence to apply its instruments in order to achieve the targets which have been set, monetary
policy  must  be  transparent  and  a  smooth  flow  of  information  from  the  Central  Bank  to  the  general
public  and  government  authorities  must  be  ensured.  Furthermore,  the  new  regime  makes  great
demands of the Central Bank since inflation forecasts will be a crucial tool in the formation of monetary
policy  and  it  is  vital  for  them  to  be  firmly  founded.  For  some  time  now  the  Central  Bank  has  been
preparing for these reforms, among other things by strengthening the instruments at its disposal.
Current legislation on the Central Bank assumes that exchange rate policy decisions are the joint task
of the Government and the Bank. Talks about this issue have been in progress for some time between
the  parties  involved.  A  conclusion  has  now  been  reached,  as  the  Prime  Minister  announced  in  his
preceding  address.  The  Central  Bank  welcomes  the  exchange  rate  policy  reform  decision  and  is
convinced that it will strengthen the foundation of Iceland's economy. It is vital to bear in mind that the
exchange rate has a strong impact on prices in an open economy. For this reason, monetary policy
will need to take exchange rate developments into account. I would like to draw particular attention to
the  statement  in  the  joint  announcement  by  the  Government  and  Central  Bank  that  despite  the
elimination  of  the  fluctuation  limits  for  the  króna,  the  Central  Bank  will  intervene  in  the  foreign
exchange market in order to promote the inflation objective, if it thinks that exchange rate fluctuations
might undermine financial stability.
In the past few days some unease has developed in the foreign exchange market and the króna has
slid somewhat. There is little doubt that this unease is linked to uncertainties about the exchange rate
framework  reform  and  widespread  discussion  about  the  conceivable  adoption  of  inflation  targeting.
The Central Bank does not consider that the depreciation can be justified on economic grounds and,
now that  uncertainties have been  dispelled, conditions are at  hand for restoring calm in  the  foreign
exchange market, and possibly even for the recent depreciation to be reversed.
Ladies and Gentlemen
BIS Review 27/2001
5
Three  major  decisions  involving  implementation  of  monetary  policy  have  been  announced  at  this
meeting.
The Government has agreed to present a bill to parliament proposing a new Central Bank Act which
entails  a  modernisation  of  the  legislation  on  the  Bank  and  will  strengthen  its  position  for  tackling
monetary issues. The Bank welcomes the new bill.
The  Government  and  the  Central  Bank  have  issued  a  joint  declaration  on  inflation  targets  and
exchange  rate  policy  reforms.  Experience  from  other  countries  shows  that  such  a  framework  has
established a firm basis for implementing monetary policy and contributed towards price stability.
The Central Bank has also announced its decision to reduce its policy rates by 0.5 percentage points.
This is a reflection of the Bank's assessment that the economy will begin to cool this year and that the
targets now set for inflation do not require interest rates to be as high as they have  been  recently.
Interest rates will nonetheless remain high and a tight monetary stance is still being maintained.
All of these are decisions, which hopefully will consolidate the position of Iceland's financial markets,
will contribute towards price stability and bolster the foundations for improved living standards.
I would like to end by thanking the government authorities and financial institutions for their pleasant
cooperation.
6
BIS Review 27/2001
