Eva Srejber: Competition and growth
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Swedish
Taxpayers Association, Stockholm, 21 September 2001.
 According to the Sveriges Riksbank Act, the objective of monetary policy is to safeguard the value of
money. The Riksbank has specified this in its inflation target, i.e. that CPI inflation should amount to
2 per  cent  with  a  deviation  interval  of  plus/minus  one  percentage  point.  This  means  that  when  we
formulate monetary policy, we must take into account changes in a number of areas that affect price
trends, either directly or indirectly. I thought that I would comment on one of these areas today, namely
competition, and its effects on potential growth. This is an area that we are forced to consider when we
analyse  the  economy,  as  it  is  essential  to  assess  potential  growth  when  shaping  monetary  policy.
However,  before  I  begin,  I  should  like  to  make  the  point  that  I  will  not  be  discussing  the  current
monetary policy situation.
Growth is a constant  central  feature  of  monetary  policy  discussions,  as  demand  in  the  economy  in
relation  to  production  capacity  is  crucial  for  determining  whether  inflationary  bottlenecks  arise  or
whether  we  will  underutilise  the production potential.  It  is  sometimes  claimed  that  maintaining  price
stability  limits  growth.  This  is  incorrect.  The  limits  are  determined  by  the  potential  growth  rate.  We
must  take  into  account  the  potential  growth  rate,  even  if  we  do  not  influence  this  by  means  of
monetary policy once price stability has been established. Correspondingly, we must take into account
changes in conditions for competition, as such changes can influence inflationary trends both directly
and indirectly. Any measures taken to strengthen potential growth come under other economic policy
than monetary policy. Such measures can include avoiding limits to competition that would lead to a
poorer allocation of resources.
The Swedish economy was showing very favourable growth until last winter. Today, now that growth
has slowed down, it may be worthwhile to remember that it is from this starting point that growth was
subdued. We can put it even further into perspective by comparing with the situation in the beginning
of the  1990s.  Conditions  then  were  very  difficult  and  characterised  by  rising  unemployment,  a  high
inflation rate and poor public finances. The situation was so strained that the government turned to the
academic  world  for  advice  and  a  report  from  the  Economics  Commission  was  delivered  in  spring
1993.1
This  report,  which  is  usually  referred  to  as  the  Lindbeck  Commission,  contained  no  less  than
113 proposals  –  many  of  them  were  controversial,  which  stimulated  the  debate  of  the  day.  The
Lindbeck Commission took the view that the crisis was based on problems in three fundamental areas;
stability,  efficiency  and  growth.  The  proposals  were  also  grouped  into  measures  to  create  stability,
measures  to  increase  efficiency  in  resource  utilisation  and  measures  to  increase  growth  in  the
economy.
Price and budget stability has been attained
If  one  reads  this  report  today,  one  is  struck  by  how  many  of  these  proposals  have  actually  been
implemented. When it comes to measures for attaining macroeconomic stability, most of them have
been implemented and Sweden has for several years enjoyed low inflation and sound public finances.
Progress  has  also  been  made  in  the  field  of  wage  formation. With  regard  to  measures  to  increase
efficiency  and  potential  growth,  the  result  of  a  survey  of  which  proposals  have  been  implemented
gains more mixed results. Important changes have been made in some areas;  while  in  others  very
little has happened.
If  we  look  at  developments  during  the  eight  years  that  have  passed  since  1993,  the  results  are
heartening.  The  average  growth  rate  during  this  period  has  amounted  to  3.1  per  cent.  This  is  very
different from the average growth rate of 1.8 per cent that prevailed during the previous ten years. If
developments since 1993 had been limited to this 1.8 per cent, we would currently have a GDP level
around SEK 174 billion lower than now, i.e. more than eight per cent lower, and the situation would
have  looked  radically  different  in  most  areas.  Open  unemployment  would  be  twice  as  high  if  one
                                                     
1 
"New terms for economics and politics", proposals from the Economics Commission, SOU 1993:16.
BIS Review 78/2001
1
utilises the "Okun relation" - at approximately 8 per cent rather than roughly 4 per cent. It is doubtful,
however whether the Okun relation is relevant over such a long period of time. The greatest part of the
difference would probably have resulted in lower real wages, i.e. our disposable incomes would have
been substantially lower. It is possible to make many calculations of this nature, all of which illustrate
how differences in the growth rate provide very strong effects over a number of years.
There  is  therefore  good  reason  to  discuss  which  factors  have  contributed  to  this  favourable
development. It will probably not be possible to agree on a definitive answer, but I believe it is likely
that the structural reforms implemented even before 1993 (in particular the tax reform of 1990/91) and
the proposals by the Economics Commission that were implemented have all contributed.
A more efficient economy
One interesting condition is that total factor productivity  really took off in 1993 and that  it thereafter
developed more strongly than it had during the previous decades. Total factor productivity concerns
the quality of available resources and how efficiently we utilise them, and in this respect developments
show a marked improvement. From the mid-1980s up to 1993, there was in general terms no increase
at all in factor productivity, which means that the limited increase in productivity that arose was due to
investment,  i.e.  to  an  increase  in  capital  intensity.  From  1993  onwards,  the  relationship  has  been
reversed. We have had an impressive annual increase in factor productivity of per cent2, while capital
intensity has increased by a modest 0.1%.
The  fact  that  this  change  began  in  the  same  year  that  the  Economics  Commission  presented  its
proposals is probably mainly coincidence, but the fact that a macroeconomic stabilisation has a rapid
and enduring effect on the development of productivity has been proved by the economist Easterly,
amongst  others.  That  is  to  say,  the  combination  of  price  and  budget  stability  is  an  important
explanation of developments in total factor productivity. It is probably due to stable prices providing a
better information value in relative prices, which improves the allocation of resources. The combination
of price stability and budget stability also increases willingness in the household sector and corporate
sector to make long-term decisions.
If we consider other factors that stimulate the rise in total factor productivity, there are a number of
changes  that  play  a  central  role.  In  general,  one  tends  to  seek  explanations  for  increasing  factor
productivity  among  factors  such  as  technological  developments,  education,  competence  and
incentives among the labour force, allocation of resources in society, as well as between and within
branches and companies. There is therefore a large group of possible factors, but many of these are
connected to general incentives behind the transformation and to the capacity to utilise technological
progress in the world around us.
The allocation of resources in society includes an area where important changes were implemented
mainly before the days of the Lindbeck Commission. I am referring to the deregulation of the financial
markets and the development of these in recent years. A number of international studies indicate that
a  deregulated  and  well-functioning  financial  market  clearly  stimulates  the  development  of  factor
productivity.
With regard to a more efficient use of the labour force, several changes have been implemented that
have probably stimulated development. These include reforms in the pension system, the tax system
and the social insurance system. The burden of taxation has been subdued and the economic return
on higher education has increased - in particular in technical education. In addition, wage formation
has been improved, which should have been facilitated by the monetary policy focus on price stability.
At the same time, the pressure on companies to use resources efficiently has increased during the
1990s.  Tougher  competitive  pressure  as  a  result  of  both  increased  internationalisation  and
deregulation in a number of sectors has increased the need for companies to economise with scant
resources.  Less  wastefulness  with  resources  means  that  labour  force  and  capital  are  employed  in
other areas, where they can better contribute to the national economy. The development of investment
is another factor that may have contributed, even if capital intensity has increased at a very slow rate.
One  factor  that  has  not  contributed  to  a  long-term  improvement  in  resource  allocation  is  the
development of the exchange rate. The devaluations in the 1970s and 1980s have been followed by a
floating  exchange  rate,  but  with  an  undervalued  Swedish  krona.  The  longer  the  krona  remains
                                                     
2
These calculations are based on a Cobb-Douglas production function with a constant returns to scale.
2
BIS Review 78/2001
undervalued,  the  greater  the  risk  of  bad  investments  being  made  in  domestic  businesses.  I  do  not
intend to go into these issues in greater detail here and now, but would nevertheless like to point out
that  undesirable  effects  on  business  can  arise  through  a  misaligned  currency  giving  flawed  relative
prices. Companies may make decisions regarding investment and employment on the basis of these
relative prices. The foremost risk here is that too many resources will be drawn to the export sector
and to the import competition sector before there is a return to the equilibrium exchange rate and to
corresponding  relative  prices.  At  that  point,  the  resources  overinvested  in  these  sectors  will  be
transferred to other sectors. We know from previous structural changes in, for instance, shipping, steel
manufacture and the property sector, that such a development would result in considerable costs to
the  real  economy.  One  should  not  underestimate  the  importance  for  welfare  of  a  correctly  valued
Swedish krona.
Openness is important
Factor  productivity  is  also  affected  by  a  country's  capacity  to  utilise  technological  progress  in  the
outside  world.  This  capacity  in  turn  depends  on  how  open  the  country  is  to  impulses  from  outside,
which is determined by the barriers that exist to ideas, goods, services and production factors moving
freely across the borders. A number of studies have shown that countries, which are more open have
a greater capacity to imitate technological progress. The capacity to renew regulatory frameworks and
institutions to enable the country to embrace change is an important part of this openness.
Obstacles  to  ideas,  goods,  services  and  production  factors  moving  freely  across  borders  have
declined during the 1990s, partly thanks to our membership of the EU, and it is reasonable to assume
that  this  has  had  a  positive  effect  on  factor  productivity.  For  a  small  country  like  Sweden,
internationalisation  and  increased  international  competition  are  expected  to  lead  to  particularly
favourable  productivity  effects.  Various  measures  indicate  a  marked  increase  in  the  degree  of
internationalisation in the Swedish economy. Both the import share and the export share have risen,
which  means  that  trade  and  the  degree  of  specialisation  have  increased.  Moreover,  foreign  direct
investment  in  Sweden  has  multiplied  and  it  is  mainly  direct  investment  from  EU  countries  that  has
increased.
Although the increasing international openness has been pronounced in Sweden with, for instance, a
rise of 13 percentage points in the export share of GDP during the 1990s, there are several smaller
countries  that  have  shown  an  even  more  rapid  increase  in  the  equivalent  figures.  This  reflects  the
globalised  world  in  which  we  live,  and  does  not  reduce  the  significance  of  openness  for  the
development of factor productivity.
Internationalisation  has  thus  contributed  to  ensuring  that  an  increasing  percentage  of  trade  and
industry is exposed to competition. Increased competition means that companies must become more
efficient and cost-conscious, which in turn should have a positive effect on productivity. In addition, a
new  competition  act  came  into  force  in  Sweden  in  1993,  containing  an  expressed  prohibition  of
co-operation between companies that limits competition, as well as a ban on the misuse of a dominant
position.  There  has  also  been  deregulation  in  a  number  of  areas.  For  instance,  government
monopolies  have  been  abolished  and  freedom  to  establish  businesses  has  been  introduced  with
regard to, for instance, transport, communication and energy.
Changed  conditions  for  competition  thus  affect  productivity  growth,  but  they  can  also  affect  price
trends in a more direct manner. Despite the fact that we gained much tougher competition legislation
in 1993, it appears that developments in this field are moving rather slowly. Swedish prices continue to
lie at a higher level than those in other countries in most areas, without this being fully explained by
differences in VAT rates and wages. Increased competition could contribute to a convergence of price
levels.
High food prices
Swedish food prices were, for instance, more than 18 per cent higher than the average prices in the
EU in 19983. The difference has declined somewhat since then, but apparently at a very slow rate. If
one regards 1998 prices in current terms with the aid of HICP development since then, one finds that
                                                     
3
Eurostat's survey of the price level index for 1998, published in 2000.
BIS Review 78/2001
3
we probably still have approximately 17.5 percentage points of the 18 percentage point difference in
food prices.
Another field in which competition appears to be weak is the construction sector, and in particular the
construction  materials  sector.  This  area  is  characterised  by  a  high  company  concentration  with
considerable entry barriers to new companies and weak import competition. With regard to prices for
construction  materials,  one  can  also  see  a  much  more  rapid  price  rise  than  for  other  industrial
products over a number of years, which may indicate rising profit margins or considerable inefficiency
in resource utilisation.
In  some  further  fields,  such  as  telecommunications  services  and  electricity,  deregulation  had  a
pronounced dampening effect on price development for some time. This is no longer the case. The
most recent statistics available indicate price increases of 7 per cent and 20 per cent respectively for
these  areas.  In  addition,  Telia  has  announced  a  large  rise  in  its  subscriber  fees  with  effect  from
October.  I  therefore  see  it  as  natural  that  there  are  investigations  underway  and  planned  into
competition conditions in these markets.
Vested interests versus consumer interests
Although we have thus achieved improvements in certain areas, it appears to me that the description
in the Economics Commission's report of 1993 (page 10) still applies to large parts of the economy.
"It is evident that a number of important markets in the Swedish economy function poorly and that this
leads to considerable wastefulness with resources and to large costs for the national economy. The
Commission's assessment is that the fundamental reason is the lack of competition in Swedish trade
and industry. One indicator of the lack of competition is that prices on a large number of goods are
much higher in Sweden than in other countries. Other indicators are the many public regulations of the
market,  the  agreements  between  companies  that  limit  competition  and  the  monopoly-like  market
structure in many sectors. The limitations to competition are a clear example of how vested interests
dominate over general consumer interests."
More  recently,  this  type  of  question  has  arisen  with  regard,  for  instance,  to  the  EU  Commission's
revelations of price collaboration between the airline companies SAS and Maersk. From an economic
perspective, these are important questions that motivate a broad discussion. From a monetary policy
perspective,  an  influence  on  price  developments  from changed  conditions  for  competition  is  one  of
several important areas that we at the Riksbank must consider, as the potential growth rate depends
on how effectively resources are allocated.
To  summarise,  there  has  been  considerable  change  in  the  Swedish  economy  in  recent  times.  The
external  framework  is  currently  characterised  by  significant  fiscal  and  monetary  stability,  which
facilitates  planning  and  decision-making  by  both  households  and  companies.  These  fundamental
conditions, together with a pronounced increase in openness towards the outside world give reason to
expect a continued favourable development in productivity.
At the same time, one should remember that several markets in Sweden still show clear signs of poor
competition. This involves considerable cost. The various parts of the economy are connected, which
often means that a strengthening of the  weaker parts is even more important to the economy  as a
whole than to the effects on a particular branch or sector. It is exactly this – the complementarity of the
economy4 – which makes it particularly important to deal with our weak links and to listen with humility
to the proposals of the OECD and IMF, for instance. It is often easier to identify problems if one can
see things  with  a little  perspective. I believe that the Swedish economy has considerable  unutilised
potential for a strong growth  if we  concentrate  on  it,  if  we  all  work  together  to  make  our  joint  cake
grow.
                                                     
4
The significance of a complementarity in economic policy has been demonstrated by, for instance, Aziz and Wescott 1997 in
"Policy Complementarities and the Washington Consensus".
4
BIS Review 78/2001
