William J McDonough: Toward greater financial stability
Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Bank of Thailand, Bangkok, 5 February 2001.
 It is my pleasure to accept the invitation of the Bank of Thailand to speak to you tonight on how we
can promote greater financial stability.
In  the  wake  of  the  Asian  crisis,  authorities  in  the  region  have  done  much  to  promote  increased
financial  stability,  through  a  variety  of  measures  to  strengthen  domestic  banking  systems  and
corporate sectors, and institute broader improvement in accounting, legal, and supervisory systems.
Thailand  has  taken  a  number  of  such  actions,  including  efforts,  among  others,  to  close  troubled
financial institutions, attract significant private sector capital (including foreign capital) into the banking
system, and improve the legal framework. Macroeconomic policy adjustments, including the move to
flexible  exchange  rates,  have  also  furthered  greater  stability.  These  actions  have  helped  countries
recover from large-scale banking crises, and restore solid growth generally.
That said, in Thailand and elsewhere, the recovery is not yet complete, and much remains to be done.
Moreover,  the  restructuring  and  reform  agenda  will  be  challenged  by  slowing  global  and  regional
growth, which may contribute to already apparent signs of increasing reform fatigue within the region.
In my view, Asia stands at an important policy crossroads, involving a choice between pushing forward
market-based reforms that are the only  way  toward long-term financial stability, or pursuing  actions
that provide short-term relief at the risk of threatening the hard-won gains of the last three years.
The recognition that we have entered a new international financial environment has set in motion a
range  of  efforts  dedicated  to  strengthening  the  new  international  financial  architecture.  My  remarks
today will focus on what I believe can be done, from my perspective, to enhance domestic financial
resiliency,  within the context of these  international efforts,  and  particularly  on  two  essential  building
blocks: a strong financial system and a sound and stable macroeconomic environment. My comments
reference the experience of East Asia, but reflect lessons that are more broadly applicable.
Overview of recent recovery
Given the depth of the problem a little more than three years ago, the Asian recovery on the whole has
been remarkable, and has largely defied initial expectations that the crisis would cast a long shadow
over  regional  growth  prospects.  The  regional  recovery  has  exhibited  a  solid  "V"  shaped  trajectory
supported by strong performance in the external accounts, and a pickup in domestic demand. Banking
sectors – faced with unprecedented crisis three years ago – have been shored up through substantial
capital  injections  and  problem  asset  carve-outs.  Corporate  sector  conditions  also  appear  to  have
improved notably with the advent of recovery and debt restructuring efforts.
At the  same  time,  authorities  in  a  number  of  Asian  countries  initiated  a  wide  range  of  fundamental
enhancements  to  financial  system  infrastructure,  including  strengthening  prudential  regulation  and
supervision,  bolstering  bankruptcy  and  collateral  recovery  processes,  and  improving  disclosure
requirements.  With  the  full  implementation  of  these  measures,  standards  in  Asia  will  closely
approximate international norms.
Reform fatigue
But with the pace of growth slowing, reform fatigue represents a significant risk to sustained recovery.
Crises entail wrenching change and costly solutions that are difficult to bear over a long period. The
desire  for  a  return  to  "normalcy"  is  strong.  Under  these  conditions,  it  is  human  nature  to
overemphasize positive information, tire of reform, declare victory and move on. These impulses might
be expected to be particularly powerful against the backdrop of years of strong and unbroken Asian
economic growth.
It is no wonder therefore that governments the world over initially tend to underestimate the size  of
problems, underfund solutions, and postpone loss recognition. It also is not surprising that, given the
BIS Review 10/2001
1
many obstacles involved, authorities may be tempted to prematurely mark a case closed, particularly
with the advent of economic recovery.
In the new international financial landscape, a government’s perceived ability to deliver on the policy
front is crucial, preferably based on coherent, comprehensive, and achievable objectives. Confidence
in a government’s ability to deliver is nurtured both by actions and by communication. Complacency
and reform backsliding, however, create the dangerous potential for a shift in expectations.
Vulnerabilities
On  a  microeconomic  level,  the  still-fragile  condition  of  regional  financial  and  corporate  sector
institutions remains a real threat to medium-term stability.
Notwithstanding significant official rescue efforts, regional financial sectors remain burdened by a high
level of problem loans, and require further substantive bolstering of capital and reserves. Authorities,
by and large, have yet to articulate a program for reprivatizing banks and liquidating purchased assets.
Improvements  in  the  financial  system  infrastructure  depend  critically  on  follow-through  on  these
issues, a long-term process.
Corporate sectors similarly remain fragile: recent debt restructurings have involved a high degree of
debt rescheduling, and firms across the region remain burdened with significant amounts of debt. The
relatively limited restructuring of corporate operations to date across the region raises questions about
the medium-term sustainability of recent improvements in bank asset quality.
The  relative  lack  of  breadth  in  the  region’s  recovery  also  creates  vulnerabilities.  Asia’s  export
orientation has long been a key focal point of strength, to which the recent recovery attests. However,
too great a dependence on export-driven growth brings increased vulnerability to external shocks.
Asia, in particular, will feel the negative effects of a worldwide slowing from last year’s strong rate of
growth.  Moreover,  domestic  demand  has  not  recovered  sufficiently  from  the  crisis  to  sustain  the
region’s  economies.  With  fiscal  policy  constrained  to  varying  degrees  by  heavy  public  sector  debt
burdens, regional central banks, in some cases with new-found independence, will need to maintain
their stimulative policies to support the recovery.
Unfinished business
While  important  progress  has  been  made  in  rehabilitating  Asia’s  financial  systems,  a  great  deal
remains to be done to continue the strengthening of weakened financial and corporate sectors, and
improve the region’s resistance to future problems.
I  am  well  aware  that  universal  policy  prescriptions  are  difficult  to  draw,  given  the  wide  range  of
experience  and  initial  conditions.  Indeed,  individual  countries  in  Asia  have  followed  differing  reform
strategies, and the results of these efforts will help to inform the ongoing debate. Nonetheless, I am
fond of citing a few of the cautionary lessons from recent international experience with financial sector
reform:
•  Restructuring and reform must adequately address both the current "stock" of problem assets, as
well  as  the  potential  "flow"  of  new  problems  attributable  to  deficiencies  in  the  broader
financial  system  infrastructure.  Lack  of  adequate  action  on  either  front  can  lead  to  a
continuation of the substantial costs of weak  banking  sectors,  sometimes  well  beyond  the
immediate crisis itself.
•  Clean-up efforts must be sufficient to the task. Half-done measures that leave financial institutions
with  significant  levels  of  impaired  assets  at  best  postpone  the  reckoning  and  potentially
create incentives for excessive risk-taking.
•  Fundamental improvements in bank corporate governance are critical. Just as risk management
and internal control processes usually need to be thoroughly overhauled in weak institutions,
more often than not, so too does management.
•  Protracted  forbearance  to  preserve  the  appearance  of  solvency  is  not  a  solution.  While  some
degree of forbearance may be unavoidable and even appropriate under the right conditions,
it is at best a temporary measure. It is critical that forbearance not become institutionalized,
2
BIS Review 10/2001
but  be  tied  directly  to  actions  by  both  bankers  and  supervisors  to  address  underlying
problems.
•  Governments are not good long-term asset managers. Prolonged government holding of impaired
assets is not likely to enhance their value, nor aid in the restoration of market liquidity.
•  Governments  are  not  good  commercial  bankers.  Delayed  privatization  of  nationalized  banks
always means higher future costs, and usually inhibits fundamental reform.
•  Government-directed  lending  means  future  fiscal  losses.  Similarly,  efforts  to  stimulate  credit
growth  by  nonmarket  forces  in  the  context  of  a  banking  crisis  at  best  buy  additional  time,  and
usually dig a deeper hole.
•  Foreign  investment  in  domestic  financial  sectors  can  yield  important  benefits.  Foreign  direct
investment  in  the  banking  sector  can  provide  much-needed  capital  resources,  technology  and
knowledge  transfer,  and  a  more  diversified  capital  and  funding  base  in  the  event  of  future
economic instability.
•  Financial sectors are only as healthy as their borrowers. Without corresponding corporate sector
restructuring, financial sector rescue efforts are likely to be necessary in the future.
•  Strong  financial  systems  depend  on  a  reliable  and  credible  legal  system.  In  the  absence  of  a
strong legal system, borrowers lack appropriate incentives to repay.
•  There are no "quick fixes" to financial sector problems. Remedial actions need to be evaluated in
terms of their short-term efficacy as well as their longer-term implications.
•  Unbalanced financial systems create vulnerabilities. Financial systems that are unduly reliant on
banks for financial intermediation are likely to be more vulnerable and slower to recover from the
onset of  weakness. Shallow capital markets limit lending  alternatives and  delay  the  recovery  of
financing to the real sector.
The challenges can be daunting, but recent experience both within and beyond Asia confirms that a
dedicated  commitment  to  financial  reform  contributes  to  sustainable  recoveries  and  greater  crisis-
resilience. Just as strong financial systems act as stabilizers when a domestic economy is battered,
weak financial systems amplify the scope and reach of the problems, making bad situations worse.
sound leadership at the firm level;
Longer-term financial stability
While  financial  sector  rehabilitation  will  remain  a  key  priority  for  authorities  in  Asia,  longer-term
measures  need  to  be  put  in  place  to  deal  adequately  with  the  increasingly  complex  and  dynamic
international  financial  marketplace  of  the  twenty-first  century.  The  threats  to  financial  stability  are
many,  and  no  one  set  of  measures  can  be  expected  to  ensure  against  the  recurrence  of  future
problems. Financial intermediation is a constantly evolving activity, involving new risks, instruments,
and control challenges. Financial institutions and policymakers alike should continue to upgrade their
processes to remain in command of these risks.
Stability ultimately can be served only by the collective interaction of the three pillars of:
• 
•  effective market discipline;
•  and strong prudential regulation and supervision.
Sound leadership at the firm level is the first bulwark against financial system instability, and begins
with capable and experienced directors and management, a coherent strategy and business plan, and
clear lines of responsibility and accountability. The execution of overall objectives must be supported
by rigorous internal controls and effective risk management. The importance of a strong institutional
credit culture cannot be stressed enough.
The  second  line  of  defense  is  effective  market  discipline,  an  increasingly  important  ally  of
policymakers in a global marketplace. Of course, market discipline must be supported by substantial
disclosure, sound accounting standards, and an efficient and credible legal framework.
While effective bank-level management and meaningful market discipline are crucial elements of an
overall strategy for promoting  and preserving financial stability, neither can substitute for the critical
BIS Review 10/2001
3
role played by official supervision. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which I chair, has
identified the necessary ingredients of sound supervision, and these principles must be applied to all
internationally active banks within a more dynamic, risk-based, and process-oriented framework.
Strong  regulation  and  supervision  is  a  crucial  part  of  achieving  financial  market  stability  and  the
proposed  revisions  to  the  International  Capital  Accord  that  were  released  in  January  by  the  Basel
Committee will set the standard for banks around the world.
Recognizing the clear need for a more risk-sensitive and flexible Basel Accord, the new framework is
intended  to  more  closely  align  regulatory  capital  requirements  with  underlying  risks,  and  to  provide
banks and their supervisors with a range of options for the assessment of capital adequacy.
There  is  more  emphasis  on  banks’  own  internal  methodologies  as  well  as  other  elements  that  are
critical  to  ensuring  the  capital  adequacy  of  banks,  such  as  strong  risk  management  and  sufficient
public disclosure of information. The Committee has also discarded the one-size-fits-all framework for
the calculation of minimum capital requirements. Instead, the proposed framework provides a menu
from  which  banks  can  choose,  with  the  authorization  of  their  supervisor  and  depending  on  the
complexity of their business as well as the quality of their risk management.
The Basel Committee is seeking comments on the proposed framework until the end of May and plans
to  finalize  the  new  Accord  well  before  the  end  of  this  year,  during  which  time  the  Committee  will
pursue an active dialogue with non-G10 supervisors. It is envisioned that the revised Accord will be
implemented in 2004.
The role of a sound and stable macroeconomic environment
A  sound  and  stable  macroeconomic  environment  is  also  crucial  for  financial  stability,  and  more
generally  for  promoting  sustainable  growth.  The  converse--macroeconomic  overheating--raises  the
likelihood of an eventual crisis, first by promoting excessive, and  eventually  unsustainable,  external
and internal borrowing. The next step inevitably is the correction to the real economy, interest rates
and/or  the  exchange  rate,  that  can  sharply  worsen  asset  quality  and  expose  the  accumulated
weaknesses in the financial system.
Role of central banks in promoting stability and growth
A central bank’s most important role in achieving  stable,  long-term  growth  involves  promoting  price
stability.  Achieving  long-run  price  stability  is  a  difficult  and  continuous  challenge,  as  it  requires
constant efforts first to detect, and then to correct the building up of internal and external imbalances.
Moreover,  because  of  time  lags  in  policy  effectiveness,  authorities  often  have  to  take  action  based
only  on  partial  evidence,  well  before  adverse  symptoms  are  fully  evident.  The  principal  reward  for
forward-looking  policy  is  that  changes  in  policy,  and  the  associated  stresses  they  engender,  are
generally  smaller  and  more  easily  assimilated  by  markets.  The  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy
naturally brings us to the question of monetary and exchange rate regimes.
A  great  deal  has  been  said  in  various  forums  about  the  choice  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate
regimes. I believe it is crucial that there be consistency between a country’s choice of currency regime
and  its  other  policies.  There  is  no  "right"  regime  that  applies  to  all  cases  and  all  points  in  time.
Experience  has  shown  that  no  currency  arrangement  can  compensate  indefinitely  for  imperfections
elsewhere in an economy, such as weaknesses in financial supervision,  an  excessively  loose fiscal
stance, or inflexible wages and prices. Furthermore, no exchange rate regime can offer full insulation
from cross-market spillovers, particularly where the free movement of capital is allowed. Nevertheless,
certain policy combinations can make things far more dangerous. Fixed, but adjustable, regimes look
to  be  particularly  fraught  with  perils  when  combined  with  shortcomings  elsewhere,  not  the  least  of
which are the severe after-effects that always seem to follow their forced abandonment.
As you are aware, much of the emerging world has moved toward floating rates in recent years. For
Thailand and the other countries that have made the change in East Asia,  it  would appear that the
new  monetary/exchange  regimes,  despite  their  very  difficult  starts  under  the  most  inauspicious  of
circumstances, now appear to be serving countries well. Inflation is in the very low single-digit range in
most of the newly floating economies, and in many instances the successful effort to bolster monetary
credibility has been reflected in short-term interest rates that have declined to historically low levels.
4
BIS Review 10/2001
Moreover,  authorities  have  gained  new  degrees  of  freedom  to  manage  their  economies  and  to
respond to changing internal and external circumstances.
But if the promised benefits of monetary discretion are to be fully realized going forward, markets need
to understand the objectives and the framework by which the monetary authorities will decide future
policy actions.
In this regard, I would note that some countries, including Thailand, have looked to inflation targeting
as a framework to accomplish that end. And indeed, inflation targeting would seem to have much to
recommend it, provided that it is approached not as a panacea, but rather as a pragmatic organizing
framework for policy. In other words, policy frameworks such as inflation targeting can be useful where
they signal a disposition towards continuous and predictable communication, and a forward-looking,
informative  policy  approach.  But  as  I  said,  inflation  targeting  per  se  is  not  a  sure-fire  solution  –  for
example, the costs of disinflation do not appear to be lower in inflation-targeting countries – nor is it a
prerequisite for effective communication and ultimately effective policy.
Role of fiscal policy
Clearly, crisis prevention through promoting stable and sustainable conditions in the macro-economy
is  not  solely  the  province  of  central  banks.  Sound  fiscal  policies  are  needed  to  complement  the
effectiveness  of  even  the  soundest  monetary  policies.  Chronically  loose  fiscal  policy  is  a  persistent
threat to macroeconomic stability, through the build-up of internal and/or external  debts that can be
devastating.
For the countries of East Asia, the public sector’s generally low initial indebtedness provided important
latitude  for  dealing  with  the  recent  crises.  Governments  had  room  to  stimulate  aggregate  demand
recovery through fiscal ease; moreover, extensions of public guarantees and capital helped to contain
the banking crises.
However, while initially strong fiscal positions provided flexibility to address financial sector problems
and aid recovery, public debt has since risen to high levels in a number of countries, and contingent
liabilities often remain significant, raising some concern about potential future debt growth.
Thus, governments now face the challenge of moving to retighten fiscal policy in the face of slowing
economies,  and  over  the  longer  term,  gradually  restoring  their  earlier  prudent  levels  of  net
indebtedness.  These  considerations  further  underscore  the  importance  of  quickly  completing  the
process of banking sector rehabilitation and of attracting new sources of capital. Such decisive action
would allow the banking sector to again  be  an  engine  of  growth,  capable  of  offsetting  the  eventual
withdrawal of fiscal stimulus.
Conclusion
In closing, the recovery in Asia has been impressive indeed, and owes much to the energy and hard
work  of  its  people,  enlightened  political  leadership,  and  the  substantial  and  focused  efforts  of
policymakers  to  implement  sound  macroeconomic  and  financial  policy.  But  the  recovery  is  not  yet
complete and much remains to be done.
While the crisis did substantial damage, it has not fundamentally affected Asia’s prodigious economic
strengths.  But  if  Asia  is  to  realize  its  potential,  it  is  critical  that  authorities  attend  to  the  unfinished
business  that  remains  while  continuing  to  put  in  place  longer-term  measures  to  promote  financial
resilience, ensure the sustainability of public sector debt burdens, and encourage sustainable growth.
Asia is at an important crossroads and there is now a unique opportunity to consolidate recent reforms
and implement lasting change that will pay dividends for years to come.
Thank  you  for  your  kind  invitation  and  attention.  I  would  be  happy  to  take  any  questions  you  may
have.
BIS Review 10/2001
5
