Urban  Bäckström:  Monetary  policy  in  a  small  open  technology-oriented
economy outside the major currency blocs
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Conference  on  New
Challenges for Credit Markets and Monetary Policy, hosted by Handelsbanken and held in Stockholm,
18 May 2001.
 Thank you for inviting me to this conference and to discuss the Swedish economy and monetary policy
with  such  a  distinguished  group  of  people.  Today  I  intend  to  begin  by  looking  back  at  economic
developments  in  recent  years  in  Sweden.  That  should  help  to  put  the  current  discussion  about  the
Swedish economy in perspective. After that I shall be saying something about the economy's recent
cyclical path and how I assess the future in the light of the information that is presently available.
Economic policy realignment in the early 1990s
The  direction  of  Sweden's  economic  performance  during  the  1990s  contrasts  sharply  with  the
unstable, inflationary path we experienced in the 1970s and '80s. That stop-go policy contributed to
the recession in the early '90s, which was the worst for over sixty years. The 1970s and '80s illustrate
how a long period of high and variable inflation creates an atmosphere of uncertainty and instability.
Slowly but surely, long-term conditions for production deteriorate.
It was partly in the light of these experiences that Swedish economic policy was realigned in the early
1990s. Since then, the focus on price stability has gained broad support in our society.
However,  because  of  the  severe  economic  problems  in  the  early  1990s,  with  inflation  expectations
based  on  our  historical  record  and  a  massive  budget  deficit,  it  took  quite  some  time  for  the  new
direction of economic policy to acquire credibility. Financial market developments can be regarded as
an  indicator  of  the  prevailing  degree  of  confidence  in  the  determination  and  ability  to  conduct  an
economic policy that  is consistent and oriented  towards stability. With the free movement of capital
and  the  globalisation  of  financial  markets,  economic  policy  decision-makers  need  to  be  highly
disciplined. Experience from other countries, where the policy realignment had already been made in
the early 1980s, indicates that the creation of a low inflation regime's credibility takes time. But it also
shows that after a while, such a process does ultimately yield a favourable economic development.
The price stability target
In the past decade a growing number of countries have chosen to conduct monetary policy with an
explicit target  for  inflation.  One  reason  behind  this  choice  has  no  doubt  been  these  countries'  poor
experience with a fixed, but adjustable, exchange rate regime.
The first country to formally adopt a policy of targeting inflation was New Zealand in 1990. Canada did
the same in 1991, followed by the United Kingdom, Sweden and Australia. Other industrial countries
have  also  introduced  some  variant  of  inflation  targeting  since  then,  most  recently  two  other  Nordic
countries, namely Norway and Iceland.
It is interesting to note that before the 1990s the predominant view was that a floating exchange rate
regime  is  not  suitable  for  a  small  open  economy.  Today,  I  believe  that  experience  has  been
exceptionally good among those countries that are explicitly targeting a low rate of inflation. In fact,
some emerging market countries are now building the same kind of regime. In recent years countries
such  as  South  Africa,  Brazil,  the  Czech  Republic,  Poland  and  Thailand  have  been  inspired  to
introduce a similar strategy.  Consequently,  explicit  inflation  targets  have  been  introduced  in  quite  a
number of countries.
The  challenge  during  the  1990s  for  the  inflation  targeting  countries  has  been  to  build  a  rigorous
analytical framework around the new regime. Questions such as the choice of rate and index to be
targeted, the usefulness of tolerance intervals around the target and the degree of transparency in the
monetary  process  all  needed  to  be  answered.  It  has  also  been  important  to  formulate  a  monetary
policy  reaction  function;  in  particular,  to  define  the  balance  between  inflation  variability  and  output
BIS Review 42/2001
1
variability. The reason why central banks do not aim for maximum short-term stability in either inflation
or output is that attaining only one of the targets would be costly for the economy. On the one hand,
the central bank's legitimacy among the general public could suffer if short-term interest rates have to
move  sharply,  causing  output  to  fluctuate  widely  while  inflation  is  held  stable  and  exactly  on  the
target. Maximum stability in output could, on the other hand, result in sharp fluctuations in the rate
of inflation and erode the credibility of the monetary regime. A point somewhere midway between the
two extremes must therefore be found. Consequently we cannot be called "inflation nutters" as Mervyn
King, deputy governor of the Bank of England, once said.
Let me also stress the importance of central bank independence. In order to be successful with the
implementation of an inflation target approach, the central bank needs to be able to act independently
of day-to-day party politics and to set  interest rates continuously  according to the specified inflation
target.  Otherwise  a  credibility  problem  may  arise  because  it  would  be  hard  for  policymakers  to
convince the general public of monetary policy's long-term nature.
Following the changeover to a flexible exchange rate in 1992, monetary policy in Sweden was directed
towards an explicit and quantified inflation target. The decision rule by which our monetary policy is
usually guided is in fact quite simple. It states that if the forecast rate of inflation 1-2 years ahead is
above 2 per cent, then normally the repo rate should be raised and vice versa. The reason why we
chose  this  target  horizon  is  that  an  adjustment  of  the  monetary  stance  takes  time  to  exert  its  full
impact on inflation and the macro economy in general. Although we are also able to influence inflation
in the shorter run, doing so is normally inappropriate because it is liable to result in large fluctuations in
production and employment.
Of course the rule is not applied mechanically. The basic intention is to stabilise inflation around the
target and at the same time avoid unduly large fluctuations in production and employment. We tend to
disregard  economic  shocks  with  effects  on  inflation  that  can  be  assumed  to  be  only  transitory.
Moreover, there may be grounds for heeding the expected course of events beyond the regular target
horizon.  There  may  be  a  case  for  adjusting  the  repo  rate  immediately  if  there  are  already  strong
reasons for expecting a marked increase or decrease in inflation directly after the two-year horizon.
Another  point  to  remember  is  the  Riksbank's  mandate  to  promote  a  safe  and  efficient  payment
system; problems in this context may call for interest rate adjustments even though the inflation target
is not threatened. Such adjustments may be needed both to prevent potential risks from building up in
the payment system and to moderate effects of problems that have already arisen.
However, departures of this type from the normal decision rule should be made restrictively. Moreover,
deviations should be stated clearly, and carefully justified.
Favourable economic development over several years
Under the new regime the Swedish economy has experienced several years of strong growth. Since
the upturn  began  in  the summer of 1993, the annual  GDP  growth  rate  has  averaged  around  3  per
cent.  Not  since  the  period  in  the  late  1960s  and  early  '70s  has  our  economy  experienced  growth
figures  like  this.  The  favourable  trend  has  contributed  to  rapidly  rising  employment  and  decreased
unemployment.  A  look  at  the  statistics  shows  that  this  expansion  of  employment  is  the  strongest
Sweden  has  experienced  since  the  labour  force  surveys  were  first  published  in  the  early  '60s.  The
markedly favourable trend is not confined to growth, employment and unemployment. Both the current
account and the public finances are generating surpluses. Another aspect of the good situation is that
inflation has remained moderate. In recent years the rate of inflation, as measured by the consumer
price index, has been under 1.5 per cent. This has paved the way for real wage increases on a scale
we have not seen since the 1960s.
In  the  light  of  all  these  factors  –  rapid  economic  growth,  rising  employment,  falling  unemployment,
internal and external surpluses, low inflation and favourable real wage increases – the picture of the
Swedish economy has indeed been very bright. What, then, is the explanation for this advantageous
course of events? As always, it has to do with a combination of factors.
The economic crisis in Sweden in the early 1990s clearly meant that resources were available when
activity subsequently recovered. That reduced the risk of production quickly reaching its ceiling.
At the same time, the Swedish economy has been performing more efficiently, particularly compared
with the previous quarter-century, when even relatively low growth rates tended to generate inflation.
During the 1990s we have experienced an upward shift in the rate of productivity growth. However,
2
BIS Review 42/2001
productivity growth has not accelerated as in the United States. One explanation behind the shift in
Sweden's  productivity  growth  probably  lies  in  the  realignment  of  economic  policy  towards  sound
government finances and price stability. Today we can say that the credibility of the inflation target is
high and it functions as a clear benchmark for price- and wage-setting decisions, thereby promoting a
longer planning horizon in the business sector.
Transformations  have  also  been  achieved  by  new  companies,  not  least  in  the  IT  sector.  Financial
markets have been deregulated, the tax system has been reformed, the system of social transfers has
been modified and competitive pressure has increased. All this has helped to improve the workings of
our economy and thereby kept inflation in check, making a strong expansion of demand feasible.
Sooner  or  later,  however,  an  excessively  rapid  increase  in  demand  that  is  allowed  to  continue  will
result in an unbalanced economy with tensions between supply and demand and an acceleration of
wage and price inflation. Even in the best of worlds, an economy cannot disregard the fundamental
laws by which it functions.
What, then, is the level of this potential growth rate? According to a common, though not very precise
estimate, the Swedish economy's sustainable annual growth rate has shifted upwards from 1.5-2.0 per
cent in the 1980s to somewhere between 2 and 2.5 per cent. In view of the high growth rates in recent
years  and  considering  that  we  had  moved  towards  a  situation  where  resources  were  becoming
increasingly strained, we in the central bank concluded last autumn that  it  would be healthy for the
Swedish economy if activity were to slow down somewhat to a more sustainable rate.
In  principle,  an  economic  slowdown  to  a  more  sustainable  growth  rate  can  happen  either  as  a
spontaneous  slackening  of  activity,  for  instance  coming  from  an  international  disturbance,  or  via  a
monetary policy adjustment, or from a combination of the two.
For a while now there have been clear signs of a slowdown in the U.S. economy. In the Euro area,
too, activity has been somewhat weaker than expected. In Japan it looks as though a recovery will be
further  delayed  on  account  of  the  problems  that  have  already  beset  the  country  for  a  long  time.
Moreover,  the  weaker  growth  in  the  United  States  may  have  a  regional  effect  on  Southeast  Asia.
Accordingly,  it  is  now  becoming  increasingly  clear  that  a  global  economic  slowdown  is  tending  to
adjust the expansion of demand in the Swedish economy towards a more sustainable growth path.
However,  it  remains  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  the  international  slowdown  will  sufficiently
dampen the previous unduly rapid expansion in the Swedish economy. On the other hand, it cannot
be ruled out that the downturn in the U.S. economy will be more pronounced than various observers
count on at present. In such a scenario the Swedish economy could experience a more pronounced
slow-down.
Focus on the U.S. economy…
During  the  1990s  the  United  States  experienced  its  longest  economic  upswing  ever  without  any
serious signs of accelerating price inflation. A more productive economy, with strong competition and
more  efficient  product  and  labour  markets,  accompanied  by  advances  in  computer  and  telecom
technology, are said to have contributed to a higher rate of potential growth. Even so – or perhaps as
a consequence of this – the euphoria led to growing imbalances. The rapidly rising stock markets in
the late 1990s seem to have stemmed from unduly high expectations of future profits and incomes.
Partly in view of the booming stock market, households stepped up their expenditure on consumption
in  excess  of  current  income.  Corporate  investment  expanded  rapidly  to  meet  the  growing  demand.
High share prices stimulated the procurement of venture capital and generated a plentiful supply.
The growth of demand in relation to the expansion of the U.S. economy's supply side was proceeding
at  a  rate  that  was  based  on  expectations  that  simply  could  not  be  fulfilled.  American  households
pledged future incomes for current consumption to such an extent that their savings no longer sufficed
to finance corporate investment. The saving deficit in the private sector grew, as could be seen from
the  rising  deficits  on  the  current  account,  and  large  amounts  of  capital  had  to  be  imported.  The
apparently unending increase in expectations of rising share prices on U.S. stock markets stimulated
the capital imports, which continued to such an extent that the dollar rose to high levels against other
currencies. Together with large investments in the real capital stock, which led to a capital-deepening
process  and  hence  an  acceleration  of  productivity,  the  dollar's  appreciation  held  back  the  price
impulses that normally accompany growing pressure from wage costs.
BIS Review 42/2001
3
It is not yet possible to tell to what extent the U.S. economy will experience a lengthy, more difficult
process  of  adjustment.  That  is  probably  the  background  to  how  the  Federal  Reserve  has  acted  in
recent years. A series of interest rate hikes during 1999 and 2000 was presumably intended to restrain
the euphoria and excessive expansion. When a downturn then became evident, it seemed desirable to
try to limit the mood swing by means of the marked interest rate cuts we have seen this year.
It  is  precisely  the  Federal  Reserve's  vigorous  action  that  underlies  certain  analysts'  view  that  the
current economic slowdown will be fairly mild and brief.
…and the tensions between supply and demand in Sweden
Since  the  previous  inflation  report,  demand  in  the  Swedish  economy  has  slowed  down  somewhat.
This  is  true  in  particular  for  industry.  Incoming  statistics  also  indicate  a  slightly  weaker  growth  in
household  sector  consumption.  Employment,  on  the  other  hand,  remains  strong  even  though  more
forward indicators of the labour market are signalling slower growth later this year.
If international activity were to move into a recovery, most things suggest that demand in the Swedish
economy  would  start  rising  more  rapidly  again  from  a  level  of  resource  utilisation  that  is  already
relatively high. The earlier restrictions would then be back on the agenda, with the attendant risk of
higher inflation.
During the past week, new statistics on prices have been published and show that the rate of inflation
has picked up more than expected. Although higher than expected inflation figures should be taken
seriously, it is nevertheless important not to overemphasise them. The recent pick-up in inflation is to a
large extent a consequence of a few very special factors that could prove to be temporary. The price
increases  for  petrol,  electricity,  and  meat  could  be  examples  of  this.  At  the  same  time,  resource
utilisation in the Swedish economy is at a high level and there is thus reason to closely monitor the
trend  rate  of  inflation  (i.e.  excluding  the  mentioned  special  factors),  which  has  been  slowly  moving
upwards from last year's very low levels.
If the storm clouds in the international economic skies were to disperse and growth were to improve,
there is a risk of tensions arising that could require a tightening of monetary policy.
On  the  other  hand,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  the  downturn  in  the  U.S.  economy  will  be  more
pronounced.  In  such  a  scenario  the  Swedish  economy  could  experience  a  more  pronounced
slowdown,  stemming  through  various  channels  from  weaker  exports,  investments  and  private
consumption. In that case the Swedish repo rate is more likely to be lowered somewhat.
My  conclusion  is  that  the  future  path  of  the  U.S.  economy  is  highly  important  for  economic
developments in Sweden. The situation is difficult to assess and the appraisals our Executive Board
has to make are more difficult than usual. Probably the only way to arrive at a clear assessment of the
balance of risks is to wait a while and see in which direction developments appear to be moving.
4
BIS Review 42/2001
