Antonio Fazio: Finance and recovery in the world economy
Address  by  the  Mr  Antonio  Fazio,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  AIAF  –  ASSIOM  –  ATIC  –
ACIFOREX, Trieste, 3 February 2001.
 Globally, the growth in the money supply and the value of financial assets reached a peak last spring.
The NASDAQ index has subsequently fallen by one half; the S&P 500 index first stopped rising and
then,  in  September,  began  to  decline.  The  performance  of  technology  shares  in  Europe  has  been
similar to that of the US market.
All the European stock exchange indexes peaked towards the middle of 2000; they have followed a
downward trend since the last few months of last year.
At  the  beginning  of  2000  equities  in  all  the  main  industrial  countries  except  Japan  appeared
substantially overvalued in relation to the expected growth in earnings and the risk premium implicit in
valuations. A year ago we called for a "virtuous" realignment of the financial market's valuation of firms
with the performance of the real economy, to be achieved through robust economic growth.
The  increasing  divergence  in  the  second  half  of  the  nineties  between  stock  market  prices  and  the
actual and expected expansion in output was due to the world money supply having grown faster than
the economy and to the rise in the velocity of circulation of liquid balances owing to the rapid increase
in financial derivatives.
One of the features of the second half of the nineties was the pace of productivity gains in the United
States  deriving  from  the  spread  of  new  technologies;  producer  prices  and  world  commodity  prices
remained stable.
The  monetary  policies  of  the  leading  central  banks  and  the  interventions  of  the  international
institutions  had  to  cope  with  the  succession  of  financial  crises  in  Mexico,  Asia,  Russia  and  Latin
America. The spread of these crises was averted; the worst effects of exchange rate instability and
bank failures were kept within limits.
Monetary policies and the expansion in the assets of the financial intermediaries active in international
markets brought a steady decline in bond yields; the excess of liquidity was reflected primarily in the
rise in share prices.
The  abundance  of  funds  and  the  ensuing  large  fall  in  the  cost  of  capital  fueled  the  prolonged
expansion  in  US  domestic  demand  and  fostered  the  recovery  in  1999  in  output  and  investment  in
Asia, Europe and Latin America.
The recovery increased the demand for oil and energy products. From the middle of 2000 onwards the
ensuing  rise  in  the  oil  price  caused  consumption  to  slow  down  in  the  industrial  and  oil-importing
emerging countries.
We  had  drawn  attention  to  the  danger  of  not  taking  advantage  of  the  opportunity  offered  by  the
improvement in economic conditions to press ahead, in Italy and in Europe, with structural reforms so
as to transform the cyclical recovery into a new phase of sustained growth.
Recent economic developments
In the United States economic activity accelerated in the second half of 1999; the expansion continued
in the first half of 2000 at a pace well in excess of the economy's potential growth rate.
Inflation  picked  up  significantly.  The  tightening  of  monetary  conditions  begun  in  June  1999  was
intensified during 2000. The federal funds target rate was raised by 1.75 percentage points between
the middle of 1999 and the middle of 2000.
As in the other industrial countries, economic activity slackened in the second half of 2000. In the first
half the economy's growth rate was nearly 6 per cent; in the third quarter it fell to 2.2 per cent. The rate
of expansion in private investment has fallen from 13 per cent in the first half of last year to 3 per cent.
For the first time since the end of 1998 pre-tax corporate earnings have declined.
BIS Review 9/2001
1
In  the  last  quarter  of  2000  there  was  a  further  slowdown  in  economic  growth:  GDP  growth  on  an
annual  basis dropped to 1.4  per  cent,  reflecting  the  slowdown  in  consumption  and  a  contraction  of
nearly 2 per cent in investment.
The  economic  recovery  in  Japan,  which  had  been  fueled  in  part  by  the  expansion  of  public
expenditure, proved uncertain. The positive performance of private investment, which expanded by 4.5
per  cent  in  the  first  nine  months  of  2000  after  contracting  in  1999,  contrasted  with  stagnant
consumption.  In  the  third  quarter  net  foreign  demand's  contribution  to  growth  turned  negative  as  a
consequence  of  the  sharp  slowdown  in  exports;  sales  of  capital  goods  to  emerging  markets  in  the
region contracted.
There continue to be deflationary pressures on both consumer and producer prices.
In the other Asian countries, and especially those most dependent on the international cycle, the rate
of growth declined in the second half of 2000, although it remained relatively high.
In Latin  America  the  economies  of  the  countries  with  the  closest  trade  links  with  the  United  States
performed well. Output in Mexico increased by 7 per cent in 2000, as against 3.7 per cent in 1999.
Brazil recorded an increase of 4 per cent last year, up from 0.8 per cent the year before.
In  Argentina,  by  contrast,  the  economic  situation  deteriorated  last  summer;  the  appreciation  of  the
dollar, to  which the peso is rigidly pegged, resulted  in  a  further  loss  of  competitiveness  in  2000,  of
about 5 per cent.
In  Europe  the  growth  in  exports,  investment  and  sales  of  consumer  durables  had  brought  a  sharp
acceleration in production and job creation in the middle of 1999.
The expansion, which was still strong in the first half of 2000, weakened over the summer. The upturn
in inflation diminished households' disposable income.
The repercussions of the rise in the price of oil were more severe in Italy than elsewhere. The impact
on production of the slowdown in consumption was partly offset by an acceleration in investment and a
build-up of stocks of finished products. The cyclical indicators for the fourth quarter of 2000 confirm the
slowdown in growth in Europe and Italy compared with the first half of the year.
The year-on-year increase in GIDP of the euro-area countries in 2000 is estimated to have been 3.4
per cent, one percentage point more than in 1999. The acceleration was due to the strong growth in
world trade and a recovery in market shares. The growth in Italian exports continues to lag behind that
in world trade.
Inflation in the euro area averaged 2.3 per cent in 2000. The core rate, excluding energy and food
products, was 1.3 per cent. In Italy the overall rate was 2.6 per cent and the core rate 2 per cent.
The net outflow of private capital from Italy and Europe for direct and portfolio investment continued; it
was greatest during the summer months. The capital exports of euro-area residents went primarily to
the United States, thus helping to finance its substantial external current account deficit.
Banking systems and financial markets
With today's institutional arrangements, the currencies of the leading countries provide the basis for
the multiplication of credit in international markets. The stock of money and liquid assets is difficult to
control  at  world  level;  its  expansion  is  limited  only  by  the  risks  and  the  occurrence  of  instability  in
intermediaries or financial systems.
In  a  crisis  the  costs  imposed  by  the  destruction  of  savings  and  the  contraction  of  credit,  with  the
economies  directly  involved  bearing  the  brunt,  are  much  greater  than  the  benefits  reaped  in  the
expansionary phase.
The use of derivatives has increased the scope for hedging, but it has also multiplied the volume of
speculative positions.
The increase over the last ten years in the size of intermediaries and their internationalization are a
response  to  the  increasingly  keen  competition  in  domestic  and  international  markets.  Advanced
2
BIS Review 9/2001
methods are required to manage the risks inherent in organizations which have become more complex
and are operating in more open and unstable markets.
Recent studies conducted under the aegis of the finance ministers and central bank governors of the
Group of Ten indicate that a further increase in the size of intermediaries as a result of mergers and
acquisitions  would  not  necessarily  enhance  stability.  Moreover,  in  domestic  markets  concentrations
involving large banks may pose problems for competition, with adverse repercussions especially for
individuals and small businesses.
in  credit  quality.  The  more  selective  approach 
In  the  United  States  rapid  economic  growth,  the  development  of  the  capital  markets  and  extensive
activity  in  foreign  markets  providing  high  returns  have  enabled  banks  to make  substantial  profits  in
recent years.
Lending  to  all  categories  of  borrowers  has  increased  rapidly.  Bankers  appear  to  have  shared  the
optimism  prevailing  in  equity  markets,  leading  in  some  cases  to  not  entirely  realistic  estimates  of
customers' creditworthiness.
Corporate indebtedness, the level of share prices and the sizable exposure to emerging countries may
aggravate the difficulties of the economy. Banks have adopted more prudent credit policies in parallel
with the slowdown in the United States and the international economy.
The  Federal  Reserve's  recent  survey  of  leading  banks  has  revealed  a  larger-than-expected
deterioration 
lending  primarily  concerns
medium-sized and large firms and finance for mergers and acquisitions. The banks reported that they
were also being more cautious in granting lines of credit to new customers.
The fall in the prices of shares in high-tech. sectors has dried up a major source of fee income for
intermediaries.
The economic slowdown has also had repercussions on the bond market. The risk premium for bonds
issued by firms with a high credit rating widened by about one percentage point in 2000 to 1.3 points;
that for bonds with a low rating nearly doubled to 4.3 points.
The premiums have narrowed following the reduction in official rates in January.
Within the euro area, private enterprises intensified their borrowings on the international capital market
in  2000.  Corporate  bond  issues  exceeded  350  billion  euros;  syndicated  loans  to  the  private  sector
increased to 230 billion euros. Recourse to the market was led by telecommunications companies.
The growth of the bond market was accompanied by an appreciable widening of yield spreads with
respect  to  government  securities.  For  bonds  issued  by  telecommunications  companies,  the  risk
premium had risen to 164 basis points at the end of 2000.
to 
In the Asian emerging countries, where technology companies account for a high proportion of market
capitalization,  share  prices  have  fallen  sharply  since  March  2000,  by  40  per  cent  in  Indonesia  and
Taiwan, 30 per cent in Korea and Malaysia, and 20 per cent in Thailand.
The  increase  in  corporate  indebtedness  and  greater  financial  fragility  of  these  countries  have
undermined  the  confidence  of  international  investors.  This  has  led  to  a  substantial  widening  of  the
yield differentials between dollar-denominated bonds issued by these countries and US Treasuries.
Equity markets have also declined sharply in Latin America, with falls of 20 per cent in Mexico and 30
per  cent  in  Argentina.  Financial  market  tensions  in  the  latter  heightened  in  the  last  two  months  of
2000.  The  yield  differential  between  dollar-denominated  Argentine  government  securities  and  US
Treasuries has widened.
Turkey  has  experienced  serious  episodes  of  financial  instability  in  conjunction  with  the  crisis  of  its
banking  system;  there  have  been  adverse  repercussions  on  equity  prices,  interest  rates  and  the
exchange  rate.  The  crisis  was  sparked  when  international  banks  cut  back  their  lines  of  credit  to
Turkish banks, which were highly exposed to exchange rate risk.
The turbulence in Argentina and Turkey subsided following support interventions coordinated by the
International Monetary Fund and marked by the significant participation of the private sector.
BIS Review 9/2001
3
The Italian banking system has undergone a wave of mergers and far-reaching restructuring in the last
ten  years  that,  starting  from  a  situation  marked  by  low  concentration  and  mainly  small  banks,  has
permitted the creation of groups better equipped to face international competition. The liberalization of
banking activity and privatizations have helped to increase competition in domestic markets.
The  groups  that  have  emerged  have  improved  their  profitability  by  expanding  asset  management
business and reducing staff.
It is now necessary for the leading groups to strengthen their organizational structures and make the
improvements competition demands.
They will need to simplify their group and productive structures, rationalize their distribution networks,
integrate  their  information  and  riskmanagement  systems,  and  expand  their  innovative  lines  of
business, especially in services.
In the last three years banks' profitability has already benefited from action to contain labour costs, the
reduction in bad debts and higher revenues from asset management services. In the first half of 2000
banks' return on equity was 12.4 per cent on an annual basis. Figures for the first three quarters and
preliminary data for the fourth confirm the promising outlook for the year as a whole.
Lending continued to expand rapidly in 2000. Exposure to companies operating in high-tech sectors,
at  interest  rates  below  the  average  for  nonfinancial  firms,  more  than  doubled.  Including  banks'
holdings  of  bonds  and  shares  and  the  guarantees  they  have  issued,  the  total  exposure  to  these
sectors is on the order of 83 trillion lire. The loans granted by the Italian banks that have financed such
companies are equal to 30 per cent of their consolidated capital.
The average solvency ratio for the Italian banking system in June 2000 was 10.5 per cent, basically
unchanged compared with twelve months earlier. In December 1999 the average value of the ratio for
internationally active Italian groups was 9.6 per cent, compared with 12 per cent for competitors in the
Group of Ten countries.
The introduction,  with  the  1988  Basle  Capital  Accord,  of  capital  requirements  related  to  risk  assets
fostered a strengthening of banks' capital bases.
Although the Accord was initially aimed at internationally active banks, the simplicity of its rules has led
to its adoption in more than 100 countries.
Extensive  revision  of  the  original  Accord  by  the  supervisory  authorities  of  the  leading  countries
culminated on 16 January 2001 in the publication of a new capital framework for banks that will come
into force in 2004.
The  new  rules  provide  for  new  valuation  methods  and  a  more  diversified  classification  of  the  risks
assumed  by  banks.  The  capital  requirement  for  credit  risk  will  be  based  on  the  assessments  of
borrowers made by rating agencies or those produced by banks themselves on the basis of their own
information. It will take greater account of banks' use of credit risk mitigation techniques. A new charge
will be introduced for operational risk.
Supervisors will ensure that banks have systems for managing and monitoring capital adequacy that
are appropriate to their overall risk profile; this action will be complemented by market scrutiny on the
basis of more extensive disclosure requirements for banks.
The importance of large banks for the stability of the financial system means that they must set aside
more capital than the minimum requirements under prudential rules. Especially for intermediaries that
borrow in the international markets, high levels of capital strengthen market confidence, inter alia with
beneficial effects on the cost of funds.
The outlook for the world economy
According to the IMF, the world economy's rate of growth could decline to 3.5 per cent this year, from
4.8 per cent in 2000.
Current forecasts are considerably lower than those published last September.
4
BIS Review 9/2001
The very nature of the recovery that began in 1999 and the persistence of deep structural imbalances
in some areas had suggested that the rapid pace of world economic expansion would probably not be
sustainable.
The  plentiful  supply  of  international  liquidity  made  it  possible  to  continue  to  finance  the  external
imbalances of the United States and the Latin American countries while also fueling the growth of the
world economy. However, the rapid increase in demand eventually pushed up energy prices, thereby
contributing to the economic slowdown in the United States, Europe and several emerging countries.
In Europe the recovery has been driven by exports. It is necessary to create conditions that will allow
domestic demand to grow vigorously.
The return towards more realistic share prices and the adoption of greater prudence in lending by the
banking systems most exposed to the emerging countries heighten the need to make the adjustments
whose urgency was not recognized in full owing to the cyclical upswing.
In the  world's leading  economy the spread of innovation is still  in  progress. The potential growth  in
output remains high in the long term.
After rising to 5 per cent in 2000, growth in GDP this year may not reach 2.5 per cent. In December
the  business  confidence  index  fell  for  the  third  consecutive  month;  in  January  there  was  also  a
significant erosion of household confidence.
Both the timing and the extent of the easing of monetary conditions at the beginning of January took
the  market  by  surprise;  it  has  presumably  served  to  avoid  a  collapse  in  share  prices  in  the  United
States.
The  risk  of  recession  has  determined  the  decidedly  expansionary  stance  of  monetary  policy.  The
additional half-point cut in official rates just a few days ago, the possibility of further reductions and
especially the clearer intention of using fiscal policy are capable of reviving positive expectations and
thus creating the conditions for an upturn.
The sustained expansion in economic activity in the nineties helped to generate the  budget surplus
and reduce the public debt. In the 2000 fiscal  year the federal budget surplus was equal to 2.4 per
cent of GDP.
There remains the need to ensure the orderly financing of America's external imbalance. Net inflows of
foreign direct investment - more than $250 billion in the three-year period 1998-2000 - make a sudden
massive outflow of capital unlikely and attenuate the risk of sharp fluctuations in the value of the dollar.
A rapid recovery of the US economy is essential for the stability of the world's financial markets and
the expansion of the global economy.
In Japan the restructuring under way in the major industrial groups, aimed at cutting excess capacity,
has  permitted  their  return  to  profitability  and  a  revival  of  investment,  but  it  has  failed  to  put  the
economy back on a path of rapid growth.
Business  confidence,  which  had  been  recovering  strongly,  worsened  again  in  December.  The  high
levels  reached  by  the  public  debt  and  the  budget  deficit  in  2000  leave  little  leeway  for  the  use  of
budgetary policy to boost the economy. The scope for monetary policy support remains limited.
GDP growth is likely to remain close to last year's low figure of 1.6 per cent. Measures to safeguard
the  stability  of  the  banking  system  and  improve  the  outlook  for  growth  appear  necessary  and  are
under study.
In the euro area the rate of GDP growth in 2001 is expected to be more than half a percentage point
lower than in 2000. The outcome will depend on international cyclical developments.
Domestic  demand  is  becoming  the  crucial  factor  in  sustaining  growth.  The  budgetary  measures
adopted in several countries with a view to reducing the tax burden on a permanent basis are a step in
the  right  direction  only  if  they  are  accompanied  by  a  curbing  of  current  expenditure  and  a
strengthening of capital expenditure. Budgetary balance and debt reduction, where appropriate, must
be assured.
Taking  a  broader  view,  an  additional  stimulus  to  growth  in  European  countries  will  come,  under
appropriate conditions, from the enlargement of the Union to include central and eastern Europe and
some Mediterranean countries.
BIS Review 9/2001
5
Over  100  million  people  would  be  involved,  about  one  quarter  of  the  area's  present  population.
Average per capita income in the twelve candidate countries is very low, approximately 40 per cent of
the  average  for  the  Union.  Standards  of  living  in  these  countries  vary  widely:  whereas  per  capita
income is between 20 and 30 per cent of the EU average in Bulgaria, Romania, Latvia and Lithuania,
it is close to 70 per cent in Slovenia and is 80 per cent in Cyprus.
All the candidate countries made progress during the nineties in bringing down inflation, which fell from
the very high values of the beginning of the decade to 12 per cent in 2000.
Commercial  and  financial  ties  with  the  EU  countries  have  strengthened  considerably.  In  1999  the
exports to the European Union of the twelve countries in question accounted for about 70 per cent of
their total exports and consisted mostly of labour-intensive manufactures. In the same year net direct
investment in these countries, mostly by EU countries, was equal to almost 5 per cent of their GIDP.
Foreign investment has fostered the European Union's exports of technologically advanced products
and services; at the same time it has helped the beneficiary countries to modernize their capital stock,
introduce new technologies and develop management skills.
The entry of these countries into the European Union will intensify the flows of immigrants. The failing
birth rates in the countries currently making up the Union call for the entry of additional labour in the
medium term. With the support of adequate integration policies, workers coming from the candidate
countries, who are relatively well qualified, can be fully inserted into the productive structure and help
to sustain growth.
Structural  reforms  in  Italy  and  other  EU  countries  to  increase  technological  innovation  and  shift
production  towards  more  advanced  sectors  will  prevent  "crowding  out"  and  make  it  possible  to
reconcile the integration of the new members with increased prosperity throughout the Community.
Conclusions
The price-earnings ratio of the companies of the S&P 500 was 31 at the end of 1999; it declined to 25
in 2000. The expected real rate of return on investment in shares rose from 3.3 to 4 per cent.
In Germany and France the price-earnings ratio dropped from 26 and 25 respectively in 1999 to 21
and 19 in 2000.
In Italy the ratio dropped in the same period from 29 to 23.
In all four markets the price-earnings ratios remain higher than the long-term values that prevailed up
to 1995. They may reflect a reduction in the risk premium associated with equity investment.
Other conditions being equal, the greater liquidity of share markets tends to attenuate the fluctuations
in  the  value  of  individual  shares  and  of  portfolios.  Savers  can  diversify  their  investments  widely  by
using the services of professional asset managers. The depth and resiliency of the markets reduce the
risk of loss on the sudden liquidation of portfolios.
Recourse to professionals lowers the costs of investment selection and reassures savers. It is always
necessary to correspond to this trust in terms of professional conduct and disclosure to investors.
It is necessary to overcome the slowdown of the international economy and the risks of a worldwide
recession. Adverse repercussions on the expected returns on investments must be avoided.
The potential for growth remains high  in the  largest  industrial economy,  on  whose  performance the
international cycle depends crucially. It is estimated at around 4 per cent. The diffusion of new forms of
organization of production, made possible by information technology and by new technologies, have
involved only a part of the economic system; the process can continue in the years ahead.
The  expansionary  stance  of monetary  policy  and  the  use  of  fiscal  policy  to  support  demand  in  the
short term and foster investment in the longer run can restart the engine of growth.
For  the  economies  of  Latin  America,  the  contribution  of  North  American  demand  and  financing
remains fundamental.
In  Japan,  more  resolute  deregulation  of  the  economy,  the  restructuring  of  production,  a  greater
opening  up  to  foreign  businesses  and  trade  with  the  new  industrial  economies  of  the  region  can
6
BIS Review 9/2001
increase productivity. Domestic demand, influenced by low demographic growth and the ageing of the
population, needs to be supported.
Intermediaries and large banks that operate in international markets are seeking new configurations
following  the  strong  growth  of  the  nineties.  The  banking  systems  of  the  countries  of  the  European
Union are solid; after the rapid expansion in lending in the past years, a re-examination of the criteria
for measuring risk and of the structure and level of capital is necessary.
The potential growth rate of the European economy remains limited by the as yet scant application of
new  technologies  and  the  slow  progress  of  structural  reforms. The  expansion  will  continue,  even  if
more slowly than in 2000, thereby contributing to the stability of the world economy.
An  increase  in  domestic  demand  can  also  come  from  more  intense  infrastructure  investment.  It  is
necessary to press ahead with the steps already taken to remove the rigidities and imbalances that
are  still  present  in  the  labour  market,  the  social  security  systems  and  the  structure  of  government
budgets. Scope for sustained growth can come from the integration of the economies of central and
eastern Europe.
In Italy there is a wide gap between achievable and actual growth.
In 2000 GDP is estimated to have expanded by 2.7 per cent. From the middle of the  year onwards
consumption was held back by the increase in energy prices; this reduced private sector disposable
income significantly, by more than 1 per cent of GDR Inflation was marginally higher than in the other
European countries, but the latest data suggest that a gap could re-open.
Last year exports again expanded less than world trade and the exports of the other EU countries; the
increase  in sales  within  Europe  was  especially  small.  Non-price  factors  continue  to  influence  Italy's
export performance and to contribute to the rise in imports.
The increase in employment has been considerable thanks to the innovations in the labour market and
the  upturn  in  economic  activity.  The  size  of  the  underground  economy  has  remained  basically
unchanged and abnormally large by international standards.
Further  reform  of  ltaly's  labour  laws  and  the  agreements  between  employers  and  trade  unions  will
have  to  permit  a  more  flexible  adjustment  of  costs  to  reflect  productivity  and  individual  companies'
situations, with account also being taken of the sectors and geographical areas in which they operate.
The  recent  efforts  to  raise  the  volume  of  public  works  must  be  continued,  both  because  of  the
contribution they make to domestic demand and employment and in order to reduce the infrastructure
shortfall in large parts of the country and to increase the efficiency of the economy as a whole.
This  raises  the  issue  of  the  need  to  improve  the  functionality  of  local  authorities,  to  enhance  their
project development and execution capabilities. Changes must be made to the legal system in order to
eliminate  regulations  and  divisions  of  responsibility  that  make  it  hard  to  bring  public  works  to  the
starting gate and then through to the finish line. The action already taken to improve the efficiency of
government must be followed up.
The  improvement  in  the  public  finances  was  interrupted  in  2000.  The  state  sector  borrowing
requirement, net of settlements of past debts and privatization receipts, rose back to 2.2 per cent of
GDP, from 1.5 per cent the year before. The overshoot with respect to the estimates included in the
Economic and Financial Planning Document was equal to 1 per cent of GDP.
In  December  the  Government  presented  the  update  of  the  Stability  Programme  for  Italy  to  the
European Council and Commission. The target for net borrowing of 0.8 per cent of GDP in 2001 was
confirmed.
The results for the borrowing requirement for 2000 make that objective more difficult. Immediate and
resolute action is necessary to ensure that it is achieved. The situation of the public finances must be
checked  month  by  month.  Any  overshoots  must  be  corrected.  Unfavourable  trends  in  receipts  will
have to be offset with curbs on disbursements; careful controls on spending are essential in order to
avoid having to introduce revenue-side measures.
The growth in GDP in 2001 could be on the order of 2.5 per cent.
The planned reduction in the tax burden will have beneficial effects on domestic demand and growth.
BIS Review 9/2001
7
Adjustments  in  the  pension  system  are  necessary  in  order  to  ensure  its  equilibrium  in  the  medium
term. More stringent budgetary rules need to be introduced for local authorities.
The planned reduction in the tax burden over the coming years must be credible; it must become part
of economic agents' expectations.
Certainty  of  a  reduction  in  taxation  encourages  investment  and  consumption,  reduces  the
disincentives to work and increases our economy's potential rate of growth.
We must put  all  the  time  available  to  us  to  good  use;  create  the  conditions  for  inserting  the  Italian
economy into the  world recovery; strengthen the country's economic and civil development and the
prospects of wellbeing for the younger generations and for families.
 8
BIS Review 9/2001
