Arnold Schilder: Banking in the new economy: a supervisory perspective
Speech  by  Mr  A.  Schilder,  Executive  Director  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  N.V.,  at  the  Take  Off
Conference ‘Information Battle: Consequences of the New Economy on Economic and Business Life’,
University of Maastricht, 14 February 2001.
 Introduction
The  new  economy  affects  the  almost  two-hundred-year-old  Nederlandsche  Bank  in  many  ways.
Today, I will focus on the implications of the new economy for banks and for banking supervision. The
subject therefore is: e-banking supervision.
Electronic banking
First, what is e-banking? E-banking is the provision of banking services by means of electronic data
transfer between participants. The information is transferred via a network, which may be a computer
network such as the Internet, or a telecommunications network. Rabobank’s Random Access Banking
is  an  example  of  e-banking.  By  that,  customers  can  make  payments,  deposit  savings,  and  make
investments over the Internet or by telephone. In addition, when people shop in  a Dutch cybermall,
such as Davista (www.davista.nl), Random Access Banking mostly offers the possibility to pay using
Rabo  Direct.  This  last  application  could  be  described  as  using  your  PIN  code  over  the  Internet.
Another  recent  example  of  e-banking  is  Wellowell,  owned  by  ING.  This  is  an  on-line  marketplace.
Customers  can  compare  insurance  offers  and  banking  products  from  various  providers  here,  and
close the deal there and then. Examples are a car insurance or a savings account. In this way, ING
offers its own products, as well as those of its competitors.
What  does  the  advent  of  electronic  media  mean  for  banks?  I  would  like  to  mention  three
consequences. One is that the Internet makes the market more transparent. Consumers can compare
products and services from different providers more easily, and shop around for the best offers. This is
particularly  the  case  for  standard  products  like  consumer  credit,  where  price  is  the  key  factor
determining the customers’ selection. In addition, the costs of switching suppliers are lower in the case
of  electronic  banking.  Combined  with  the  increased  comparability  of  products,  this  could  reduce
customer loyalty. This in turn means fiercer competition for banks.
A  second  consequence  of  the  new  information  and  communication  technologies  is  that  the
organisational  structure  of  banks  will  be  affected.  Banks  have  a  very  integrated  value  chain,
horizontally  as  well  as  vertically.  This  means  that  all  elements  of  their  service  are  provided  by  the
same organisation. Examples are account management, product development and infrastructure. The
Internet  puts  pressure  on  this  integrated  organisational  structure.  An  important  aspect  of  Internet
technology is that its development requires very high initial investment, but that the marginal costs of
use are  low.  This  raises  the  possibility  that  new,  specialised  suppliers  are  able  to  carry  out  certain
specific activities more efficiently than the banks themselves. On the one hand, this situation offers the
banks the option to outsource some of their operations to others, thus achieving cost reductions. On
the other hand, it could bring unwanted pressure on parts of the  banks’ value chain,  and ultimately
lead  to  deconstruction  of  the  chain  itself.  A  practical  consequence  of  this  trend  is  that  banks  are
developing into network organisations by way of alliances and cooperation with both financial and non-
financial  institutions.  For  example  the  cooperation  between  ABN  AMRO  and  KPN  in  relation  to  the
launch of the ‘Money Planet’ Internet site.
A  third  consequence  is  that  new  suppliers  can  enter  the  market  more  easily.  In  the  virtual  world,
barriers  to  entry  are  significantly  lower.  There  is  no  longer  a  need  for  an  extensive  branch  office
network,  for  example.  Lower  entry  barriers  mean  more  suppliers  in  the  market,  which  intensifies
competition. These suppliers may take different forms. They may be existing banks originating from
other countries. These banks can use the Internet to bring about a rapid internationalisation of their
activities. Various institutions have already set up electronic subsidiaries, which offer banking services
on an international scale under a new brand name or under the name of the parent bank. Examples
BIS Review 16/2001
1
include the Bank of Scotland’s electronic subsidiary Eubos, which offers mortgages on the Internet in
this country, or ING Direct, ING’s electronic offshoot, which is active in Canada and elsewhere.
New  suppliers  can  also  be  pure  electronic  banks,  or  institutions  from  the  non-banking  sector.  Pure
electronic banks are not linked to an existing physical bank. Although they do not have the high fixed
costs of a branch network, they do have to invest heavily in building up their reputation. It is interesting
to note that the current market share held by such banks is still very small. The principal reasons for
this are probably the lack of confidence resulting from the lack of a physical presence and the high
cost  of  marketing  the  brand  name.  Newcomers  from  the  non-banking  sectors  can  be  existing
non-financial  institutions  that  offer  a  limited  range  of  financial  services  through  electronic  channels.
Volkswagen  in  Germany  is  one  example.  They  offer  consumer  credit.  Also  companies  which
specialize in payment systems are part of the non-banking category. Right now I am talking, they offer
you the possibility to make payments over your mobile telephone. This sevice is already available in
the United States. Other non-banking  institutions  include consumer comparison sites like Wellowell,
portals and personal agents.
The implications of e-banking for supervision
So far I have described some consequences of electronic media for the banking system. But what are
the  implications  for  banking  supervision?  Let  me  discuss  some  recent  activities  undertaken  by
supervisors.
First,  the  Nederlandsche  Bank  supervises  the  banking  system  in  accordance  with  the  Dutch  Credit
Systems Supervision Act. The Policy Regulations for the Media (Beleidsregels Media) were formulated
to indicate how this Act should be applied where financial services are offered via electronic media.
Briefly put, these Regulations state that it makes no difference whether banking services are provided
via  traditional  channels  such  as  branch  offices,  or  over  the  Internet.  In  both  cases  the  institution
concerned  is  required  to  hold  a  banking  license.  For  example,  an  institution  established  in  the
Netherlands which provides banking services over the Internet comes under the supervision of DNB.
However, a provider which is established abroad but via the Internet is active in the Dutch market is
also  subject  to  DNB  supervision.  Several  indicators  play  a  part  in  deciding  whether  activities  are
considered to be directed at the Dutch market, like the use of the Dutch language, contact points in
the Netherlands, and the addressees of the media used. The existing regulatory legislation is therefore
adequate for proper banking supervision, also with the advent of e-banking. E-banking has however
made the regulator’s task more complicated. How do we check that all providers that are active over
the  Internet  in  the  Dutch  market  do  indeed  comply  with  regulatory  legislation?  This  brings  me  to  a
recent DNB initiative.
Second, in combination with its fellow regulators the Dutch Insurance Board and the Securities Board
of the Netherlands, the DNB has entered into a co-operative agreement with the Dutch National Police
Agency  (Korps  Landelijke  Politiediensten,  or  KLPD)  and  the  Dutch  Economic  Investigation  Service
(Economische  Controle  Dienst,  or  ECD).  We  are  working  together  on  developing  new  tracking
methods.  The  objective  is  that  those  whose  actions  on  the  Internet  are  in  breach  of  the  regulatory
legislation can be traced.
A third initiative is the introduction of the internet officer. The digital detective, or cybercop, is already a
familiar  phenomenon  in  police  circles.  From  the  beginning,  the  use  of  cybercops  has  induced
investigation authorities to develop techniques to discover the identity of those who are in breach of
the  law. The regulators  want to use  this  technology  in  their  supervision  of  the  financial  sector.  The
DNB  now  has  one  internet  officer,  which  like  the  digital  detectives  is  engaged  in  tracing  financial
offenders.  So  far,  several  indications  of  offences  on  the  internet  have  been  found.  For  example
institutions that offer banking services over the internet without having a banking license. Also some
so-called  ‘study  investment  associations’  (studiebeleggingsclubs)  were  in  breach  of  the  regulatory
legislation. These investment funds, founded by students, operated over the internet without a license
of DNB.
A fourth  initiative to  protect  consumers  against  unauthorised  banking  services  is  the  introduction  of
so-called hyperlinks. This possibility is currently being investigated. Every financial services provider
using  e-commerce  would  be  required  to  place  a  hyperlink  on  its  website  referring  to  the  relevant
regulator.  By clicking on  this  hyperlink,  consumers  would  access  a  list  of  providers  licensed  by  the
regulator, and could easily see whether a provider is on the list, and therefore is trustworthy. Another
possibility  being  considered  is  a  regulator’s  ‘black  list’,  which  would  be  a  special  page  on  the
2
BIS Review 16/2001
regulator’s  website  listing  financial  services  providers  that  are  operating  without  a  license  and
therefore not trustworthy.
So we work together with fellow regulators, the police and investigation services. However, the Bank
has  a  separate  unit  concerned  with  the  supervision  of  banks  and  information  technology  within  its
Supervision  department.  The  fact  is  that  e-banking  involves  several  specific  operational  risks.  One
operational  risk  mainly  relates  to  the  security  of  systems  and  transactions,  including  data
confidentiality  and  authentication  of  the  parties  involved.  Another  operational  risk  refers  to  the
continuous availability of the Internet as a medium for financial transactions. This availability is prone
to serious hazards, such  as computer viruses  and hackers. Think for example of the Homebanking
application of ABNAMRO, that was subject to an attack of hackers in September last year. Such an
incident  may  damage  the  reputation  of  the  internet  as  a  means  of  payment.  It  is  therefore  very
important for banks to ensure the safety of e-banking. The regulators at our IT- unit monitor whether
this  is  sufficiently  done.  To  that  end,  they  have  conversations  with  the  banks  to  gain  insight  in  the
controls, the  legal  implications and  particularly  the  security  of  e-banking.  Furthermore,  they  retrieve
documentation, such as the banks’ risk analysis, an independent EDP audit report and the results of a
penetration test. This test is a legal attempt to hack, conducted by an external organisation.
As well as the national initiatives I just mentioned, there are international activities under way in the
e-banking area. A good example of this is the work of the Electronic Banking Group, or EBG, which is
a working group of the so-called Basel Committee of Banking Supervision. This group is engaged in
formulating international guidance and principles regarding e-banking. The EBG recently published its
principles for risk management in electronic banking, which also include issues relating to consumer
protection. One example is a principle that concerns appropriate disclosures for e-banking services.
This  principle  states  that  banking  organisations  should  provide  on  their  websites  some  core
information  in  order  to  assist  customers  in  making  informed  choices.  Examples  of  such  disclosed
information could include contact details for the supervisory authority responsible for the supervision of
the bank’s head office as well as details of access to national compensation or insurance schemes.
The  risk  management  principles  for  e-banking  are  currently  presented  to  the  banking  sector  for
consultation. It is expected that the final version will be presented to the Basel Committee next month.
Around  April,  the  principles  will  be  published  at  the  website  of  the  BIS  (www.bis.org).  Beside  the
publications at our own website (www.dnb.nl), such as this speech, you also find a link to the site of
the BIS.
Besides the work of the Basel Committee that applies specifically to the banking sector, there is more
general  legislation  in  the  form  of  EU  directives.  These  affect  e-banking  as  well.  For  example  the
Directive on electronic commerce, which requires providers of electronic services to make information
on prices and conditions accessible for consumers. Another relevant directive for e-banking is that on
the remote provision of financial services. This states for example that consumers have the right  to
recall an agreement if a supplier did not provide them with the terms of delivery, like prices,  before
entering into a transaction.
Conclusion
To summarize: e-banking is a phenomenon which affects both banks and regulators. I  hope I have
made clear that this subject has the regulators’ full attention,  both  nationally  and  internationally.  As
well  as  participating  in  international  discussions  on  e-banking,  the  Bank  has  undertaken  various
initiatives to include e-banking in its supervisory policy. This does not mean that we can afford to be
complacent. Developments are proceeding rapidly, and the DNB is closely monitoring developments
to ensure a timely response. In various ways we keep up our know-how on an continuous basis. By
means of courses and self-study, for example. But also by benchmarking through third parties, as it is
relevant to review one’s own organization from time to time. Finally, a very important way for keeping
up  our  know-how  is  by  recruiting  new  staff.  So  if  the  supervision  of  e-banking  has  aroused  your
interest, DNB is probably something for you.
BIS Review 16/2001
3
