Otmar Issing: The euro - a stable currency for Europe
Speech by Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
Euromoney Institutional Investor Plc, London, 21 February 2001.
 Introduction
Slightly  more  than  two  years  ago  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  assumed  responsibility  for  the
second largest economic area in the world after the United States. The euro is now the currency for
300 million people. The transfer of monetary policy competence from 11 national central banks, many
of them characterised by a long history and impressive monetary policy results, was met with a great
deal of scepticism. All  the more so, because the asymmetry between a  self-contained  central  bank
and - in the meantime 12 - national governments brought with it an historically unique situation.
The  single  monetary  policy  has  not  experienced  any  significant  accident  so  far  in  its  short  life:  the
transition to the single currency has been quite smooth and the Governing Council of the ECB was
successful  in  fulfilling  its  mandate,  namely  in  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the
medium term. Clearly, we are not satisfied with HICP inflation above 2 %, as we have seen since the
middle of last year. However, we have announced before we started to conduct our monetary policy
that the ECB could not precisely control inflation in the short-term and would not try to as, for example,
in  the  case  of  an  oil  price  shock.  But  we  have  good  reasons  to  expect  that,  if  nothing  comparable
happens again, HICP inflation in the euro area will fall back to below 2% in the course of this year.
You may ask why I am so confident about this. There are three main reasons. First, the institutional
set-up on which the ECB and the euro have been built is very sound. Second, the Governing Council
of the ECB managed to set up an efficient framework both as regards the monetary policy strategy as
well as monetary  policy  instruments.  Finally,  monetary  policy  in  the  last  two  years  has  rightly  been
perceived  by  most  observers  as  having  been  appropriate  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  medium
term.  All  this  is  reflected  in  a  high  degree  of  credibility  of  the  ECB,  as  evidenced  by  low  inflation
expectations.
The institutional design
Let me start with the institutional design. The Treaty establishing the European Community - which I
will refer to as the "Treaty" - and the mandate of the ECB provide a sound basis both for an effective
monetary policy and for the establishment and development of a good reputation and a high degree of
credibility for the ECB.
I will focus my attention on four aspects of institutional design which are of the utmost importance for
the ECB's reputation and credibility: (1) its mandate; (2) its independence from political interference;
(3) its transparency; and (4) provisions that contribute to fiscal discipline.
First,  the  Treaty  establishes  a  clear  hierarchy  of  objectives  for  the  single  monetary  policy,  giving
overriding priority to the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. This reflects the fact that the
best contribution that the ECB can make to long run sustained economic growth, employment creation
and  raising  standards  of  living,  is  maintaining  price  stability.  The  clear  priority  given  to  the  price
stability objective also  highlights the fact that the  ECB itself does not have either the means or the
responsibility for ensuring a high level of employment and real growth, beyond the positive impact of
price stability just mentioned. Such a clear allocation of task and objective to different policy-makers
ensures efficiency, transparency and accountability.
Second, the Treaty has made the ECB one of the most independent central banks in the world. In this
way, political pressures can be avoided and European citizens can be assured that a long-term euro-
area wide perspective will be taken by the central bank in pursuing its mandate of maintaining price
stability.
BIS Review 15/2001
1
Third,  the  Treaty  recognises  that  the  assignment  of  an  important  policy  responsibility  to  an
independent  institution  has  to  be  accompanied  by  transparent  and  accountable  policy  design  and
implementation.  Transparency  and  the  accountability  of  the  central  bank  add  to  its  credibility  by
imposing  discipline  on  policy-makers.  For  these  reasons,  the  ECB  went  significantly  beyond  the
statutory requirements regarding transparency.
Finally,  let  me  emphasise  that  the  Treaty,  reinforced  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  contains
important  provisions  to  facilitate  the  co-ordination  of  economic  policies  and  ensure  sound  public
finances. The EU countries must regard their economic policies as a matter of common concern. The
ECOFIN Council  is required  to formulate broad guidelines for the economic policies of the  Member
States  and  to  monitor  economic  developments  within  a  multilateral  surveillance  framework.  EU
governments are also subject to a common code of conduct in fiscal matters, in particular imposing
limits on government deficits, as laid down in the Treaty. The Stability and Growth Pact, together with
the "no-bail-out clause" and other Treaty provisions, contributes to maintaining fiscal policy discipline.
In fact, fiscal discipline makes it easier for the central bank to maintain price stability and thus indirectly
contributes to keeping inflation expectations low.
To summarise, the institutional design of Economic and Monetary Union directly addresses the main
problems that a new central bank may face in establishing its credibility: overriding priority is given to
maintaining price stability, central bank independence is assured and various provisions go a long way
towards ensuring sound public finances. History has taught us that in these institutional features we
have laid the foundations of a safe currency.
Setting up a new central bank
Let me now make a few remarks about the experience we have gained in the first two and a half years
of setting up a new central bank, both in general terms and in particular with regard to the instruments
and monetary policy strategy.
It came, I suppose, as a surprise to those who had been very sceptical about the euro that the birth of
the  new  currency  proceeded  as  smoothly  as  anyone  could  have  hoped  for.  Indeed,  it  was  a
resounding success. The process of the changeover to the euro was virtually free of technical faults.
Almost  overnight  a  unified  money  market  was  created,  which  -  notwithstanding  a  formidable
transactions  overload  -  functioned  from  the  very  start  without  any  major  complications.  Short-term
interest  rate  volatility  remained  well  contained,  and  the  main  refinancing  operations,  along  with  the
standing  facilities  and  the  reserve  requirement  system  with  its  averaging  provisions,  have  since
guaranteed money market developments closely in line with the ECB's intentions.
The  operational  framework  of  the  ECB  is  very  market  oriented,  i.e.  it  relies  on  tender  procedures,
leaving the  initiative to  banks, and  lets automatic stabilisers, through the  averaging  provision  in  the
reserve requirements system, work. While the ECB sets the framework and the rules, it is up to banks
to best exploit the incentives set under this framework.
On this issue, let me add a few remarks on the increase in money market rates which has occurred
over  the  past  few  days.  These  developments  have  occurred  following  the  low  amount  of  bids
submitted  in  the  main  refinancing  operation  of  13  February.  The  recent  increase  in  money  market
rates should not be seen as reflecting a change in the stance of monetary policy, which continues to
be signalled by the minimum bid rate.
Also the monetary policy strategy of the ECB has proven successful from the start. The recognition
that monetary policy will always have to cope with a changing and imperfectly known world has been a
key consideration in the design of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. In addition, we had to bear in
mind the fact that the mere establishment of the ECB as a totally new institution marked a historical
discontinuity, with potentially profound implications for economic behaviour and measured structural
relationships.
In these circumstances, the Governing Council chose to equip itself with an internally consistent and at
the same time comprehensive and appropriately flexible approach to policy analysis. It was decided
that the best way we could serve the lasting objective of guaranteeing a stable measure of value in a
non-discretionary manner was to adopt a robust analytical framework well-suited to informing policy-
makers in a changing world. Developing and refining this framework was our main challenge.
2
BIS Review 15/2001
This tension was resolved - and in my view this is the optimal solution - by announcing a quantitative
definition  of  price  stability  and  by  adopting  an  encompassing  approach  to  analysing  and  assessing
information relevant to detect risks to price stability.
Defining price stability as  "a  year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index  of Consumer Prices of
below 2%", along with the emphasis on the medium term, was designed to enhance clarity, to anchor
expectations and to provide a yardstick against which the new independent institution could be held
accountable.
Likewise, the eclectic but systematic approach to the processing of information relevant for assessing
risks  to  price  stability,  which  we  call  our  two-pillar  strategy  of  monetary  policy,  was  intended  to
guarantee that no piece of evidence relevant to policy decision-making would be excluded from the
Governing Council's information set. The prominent role assigned to money, as the first pillar of our
strategy, ensures that monetary developments are always part of the picture, and receive the attention
that they deserve, given the monetary nature of inflation beyond the immediate horizon. In parallel, the
second  pillar  of  the  strategy  ensures  that  other  forms  of  analysis,  such  as  the  investigation  of  the
interplay between supply and demand and cost-push dynamics, are also incorporated into the policy
process. Together, the two pillars ensure that information and analysis produced on the basis of one
methodological perspective are always cross-checked against information and analysis produced on
the basis of the other.
Analysis under the two pillars provides the Governing Council with all crucial information regarding the
nature  of  the  shocks  within  the  euro  area  economy  and  the  resulting  risks  to  price  stability.  The
complementing viewpoints of the two pillars have served us well as a comprehensive framework for
analysis  in  the  past  two  years.  The  strategy  has  provided  the  basis  for  a  thorough  and  timely
explanation of monetary policy decisions to the general public.
The current situation
Since November 1999, the Governing Council raised the main ECB  interest rates by  a total  of  225
basis  points  in  reaction  to  a  perspective  of  upward  risks  to  price  stability.  These  rises  have  been
appropriate.  Recent  developments  point  towards  increasingly  balanced  risks  to  price  stability  in  the
medium term. However, the analysis of the information relating to the two pillars of the monetary policy
strategy showed that there are still factors which might pose upward risks to price stability and as such
will need to continue to be closely monitored.
Starting with the first pillar, monetary and credit growth have slowed down in the course of 2000. The
growth of M3 has gradually approached the reference value of 4 1/2% confirming that the risks to price
stability stemming from the monetary side have become more balanced in comparison to the situation
in early 2000. In fact, the short term dynamics of M3 growth in the second half of 2000 were clearly
weaker than in the first half of 2000. This will become visible in the annual growth rate of M3 in the
coming months which will be affected downwards by base effects resulting from the strong growth of
M3 in the first quarter of 2000.
Turning to the second pillar, several developments have recently changed somewhat the outlook for
the  euro  area.  Most  notably,  the  slowdown  in  the  US  economy  and  recent  developments  in  Japan
have  increased  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  prospects  for  world  growth.  It  is  now  clear  that  the
international  outlook  is  no  longer  as  positive  as  it  has  been  for  almost  two  years.  World  real  GDP
growth, which in 2000 posted its strongest performance for many years, may moderate in 2001, but is
expected to remain solid.
However,  whereas  the  euro  area  is  not  immune  to  external  developments,  it  is  a  relatively  closed
economy. While the more moderate prospects for world growth might end up being associated with
some  further  slowdown  in  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area,  the  dynamics  of  domestic  demand
suggest 
for  sustained  euro  area  growth  remains  positive.  This
notwithstanding,  real  GDP  growth  in  2001  might  turn  out  somewhat  lower  than  expected  earlier.
However, all in all, realistic optimism is justified.
Turning to consumer price developments, the euro area has seen HICP inflation above 2% for some
months now. This was mainly due to the unexpected increases in oil prices and the depreciation of the
euro.  In  December  2000  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in  the  HICP  declined  to  2.6%,  from  2.9%  in
November. It is expected that this trend continues in this year although it may take some time for HICP
inflation to fall again below 2%. The moderation in oil prices and the appreciation of the euro exchange
that,  overall, 
the  outlook 
BIS Review 15/2001
3
rate would, if sustained, contribute to a faster decline in overall HICP inflation over the course of this
year.
The evolution of external inflation forecasts and of inflation expectations as derived from the analysis
of  long-term  interest  rates  is  reassuring.  It  suggests  that  financial  markets  and  economists  expect
price developments in the medium to long term to be in line with the ECB's definition of price stability.
In spite of the assessment that the risks to price stability in the medium term are now more balanced,
there are still factors posing upside risks which require continued attention. One risk is related to the
evolution of wages in the period ahead. It is important that wage moderation continues. This should be
facilitated  by  the  decline  in  consumer  price  inflation  which  is  expected  to  occur  over  the  coming
months.  However,  the  increase  in  some  labour  cost  indicators  in  2000  warrants  close  scrutiny.  A
second important factor will be fiscal policy in the euro area. The relaxation of consolidation efforts at
this juncture will lead to an undesirable pro-cyclical impact. In order not to  threaten the  progress in
fiscal consolidation, the reduction in the tax burden has to be accompanied by a structural reduction of
expenditure.
When  evaluating  the  current  situation,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  obvious,  namely  that  the
monetary policy decisions of the ECB are based on the assessment formulated under both pillars of
the monetary policy strategy of the ECB and nothing else. The outcome of this assessment is not least
reflected in the level  of the minimum bid rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations.  This  assessment
which  is  transmitted  to  the  public  by  the  ECB's  well-known  instruments  of  communication,  and  not
short-term  oriented  expectations  in  financial  markets  on  decisions  in  the  next  meeting  of  the
Governing Council, is decisive for the monetary policy stance of the ECB.
Challenges for the euro area
In  the  context  of  the  recent  US  slowdown,  the  following  question  is  often  raised:  Who  might  take
responsibility over from the United  States for "global  growth"?  I  would  contend  that  this  question  is
misleading from the outset. Indeed, the US economic policy has, in my view, always been conducted,
and rightly so, with a clear focus on domestic objectives. It is important to note in this regard that the
periods  of  success  of  the  US  economic  policy  from  a  domestic  point  of  view,  i.e.  the  periods  of
sustainable  non-inflationary  growth  in  the  US,  have  actually  coincided  with  the  periods  when
significant contributions to both growth and stability in the whole world were made by the US.
In principle, the same logic should also hold for the euro area. The euro area is the second largest
economic  area  in  the  world.  Therefore  economic  developments  in  the  euro  area  are  significant  for
developments and prospects elsewhere. The mandate of the ECB clearly states that price stability in
the euro area is its primary objective. Price stability is indeed a key element of an overall environment
leading to sustained growth at domestic level.
In  such  a  context,  the  best  contribution  which  a  large  economy  as  the  euro  area  can  provide  to
support  sustainable  non-inflationary  growth  in  the  world  economy  is  to  pursue  policies  maintaining
price stability "at home". This is the only reasonable allocation of responsibilities across world policy-
makers.  Anything  else  risks  blurring  responsibilities  and  diluting  accountability.  This,  in  turn,  would
distort incentives in a perverse way.
It  goes  without  saying  that  exchange  of  information  and  views,  for  instance  in  the  context  of
international fora, may in such a context further help the policy-makers of large economies assume
their  global  responsibilities  by  providing  them  with  a  better  understanding  of  the  economic
environment.
Notwithstanding the clearly positive outlook for the euro area, a lot has still to be done. While monetary
policy will have to remain focused on its commitment to maintain price stability -thereby providing a
credible anchor for expectations, the challenge for the euro area will be to best exploit and enlarge its
growth potential in the coming years.
Structural  reforms  have  taken  place  but  are  far  from  being  satisfactory  in  most  countries.  Their
implementation is of crucial importance to foster the supply of labour and capital and the innovation
and  diffusion  of  new  technologies  and  production  methods.  More  flexibility  in  labour  markets  and
reforms aiming to encourage labour force participation are necessary to offset the low growth in the
working age population. Fostering a knowledge-driven economy, removing barriers to investment and
creating the institutional structures needed for a rapid and efficient adoption of new technologies, will
strengthen  the  process  of  capital  accumulation.  The  ongoing  current  regulatory  reform  process  will
4
BIS Review 15/2001
create the conditions to enhance competition and is expected to have important  economic benefits.
Overall,  sound  economic  policies  designed  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  economic  imbalances  and
structural  reforms  will  allow  the  euro  area  to  better  exploit  its  growth  potential,  thereby  also
contributing to growth and economic stability worldwide.
Conclusion
To conclude, let me recall what I said at the beginning of my address. While I am not satisfied with
HICP inflation of above 2% as we have at present, price stability will be maintained over the medium
term. What I regard as most important is the fact that medium-term inflation expectations are still in
line  with  price  stability  and,  in  my  view,  rightly  so. We  are  convinced  that  we  are  well  equipped  to
pursue a stability-oriented monetary policy and thus gain the trust of the public. The euro has proven
to be a stable currency for Europe and the world economy, and the best contribution the ECB can do
to sustain this achievement is to maintain price stability in the euro area.
BIS Review 15/2001
5
