Roderick Carr: Banking on capital punishment
Speech by Dr Roderick M Carr, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the New
Zealand Association of Economists, Christchurch, New Zealand, 27 June 2001.
 Introduction
It gives me great pleasure to address the annual gathering of the best and the brightest economists in
the  country.  Today  I  am  not  going  to  talk  to  you  about  the  state  of  the  economy  or  its  immediate
prospects;  these  are  matters  on  which  you  are  well  informed.  Indeed  the  transparency  which
surrounds the conduct of monetary policy in this country leaves little private information in the hands of
the  central  bank.  Further,  with  both  a  single  decision-maker  structure  and  long  serving  incumbent
Governor, there is little new information to reveal about how the Bank goes about managing monetary
policy.  In  fact  as  the  Bank  has  served  as  training  ground  for  many  commentators  and  market
economists, not only are we transparent but reassuringly predictable. I want to take my time today to
stimulate your minds with a different set of issues.
At the heart of capitalism lies capital. Limited  liability  corporations  have  facilitated  the  accumulation
and  mobilisation  of  capital  to  rival  church  and  state  but  as  we  will  see  the  asymmetry  of  payoffs
inherent in limited liability may induce excessive risk-taking. The provision of financial intermediation
services,  particularly  banking,  has  given  rise  to  an  extensive  theoretical  and  empirical  literature  in
economics.  By  banking  I  mean  the  provision  of  two  particular  services,  liquidity  transformation  and
credit origination. The efficient provision of these services is essential to the growth and prosperity of
market-based  economies.  Virtually  all  banking  services  are  now  provided  through  limited  liability
corporations  and  the  question  of  how  much  capital  should  be  held  has  become  the  subject  of
international debate.
Of all the interesting topics we could discuss, today I want to focus on the issue of bank regulation in
general  and,  in  particular,  bank  capital.  I  want  to  update  you  on  recent  international  initiatives
concerning bank regulation and outline both the case for capital regulation and the risks we take when
regulators go too far. I want to highlight why it is essential to the efficient allocation of resources that
providers of bank capital and even bank creditors must stand ready  to take their  punishment  when
things go wrong and the unexpected happens. I  want  to highlight the distinction  between economic
capital, rating capital and regulatory capital. I want to promote an antidote to the moral hazard created
by asymmetric payoffs, implicit or explicit deposit insurance and regulatory capture. Finally I want to
summarise recent policy initiatives  we  have taken to enhance the value  of  disclosure  and  underpin
market discipline.
The New Zealand regime in brief
Let me briefly remind you of New Zealand's approach to banking supervision. Our regime relies on self
discipline, market discipline, and regulatory discipline. Any organisation  wishing  to  call  itself  a  bank
while  carrying  on  business  in  New  Zealand  must  obtain  a  registration  from  the  Reserve  Bank.  Our
conditions of registration prescribe minimum levels of capital in line with international standards known
as the Basel Accord. We also require mandatory levels of public disclosure. Directors are required to
provide regular public attestations as to the soundness of the bank, the robustness of its systems and
its  exposure  to  risk.  We  monitor  these  disclosures  and  meet  with  all  registered  banks  annually  to
discuss strategy and any emerging issues. We rely on external auditors to verify financial statements.
By year-end, all registered banks will be required to have and publish a credit rating from an approved
rating  agency.  Where  we  depart  somewhat  from  traditional  supervisory  approaches  is  in  our
reluctance to validate what the directors of the bank are accountable for. We weigh more heavily than
most  the  moral  hazard  arising  from  the  regulator  approving  specific  actions  of  the  board  and
management of the bank. It is the role of the board and depositors to be satisfied as to the condition
and conduct of the bank, not to rely on the supervisor's ability to constrain bank risk-taking. But let me
be  clear  –  New  Zealand  does  not  deny  there  is  a  case  for  bank  regulation.  But  as  they  say  –  the
devil's in the detail.
BIS Review 60/2001
1
Global trends in bank regulation
The draft proposals for the regulation of bank capital  recently  released  by  the  Basel  Committee  on
Banking Supervision, often referred to as Basel 2, run to nearly 800 pages. These must be one of the
most extensive, most prescriptive, transnational regulatory proposals ever conceived. Yet in a recent
extensive  review  of  the  academic  literature  Joao  Santos  of  New  York  University's  Solomon  Center
concluded:
"The justification for any regulation usually stems from a market failure such as externalities, market
power or asymmetry of information between buyers and sellers. In the case of banking, there is still no
consensus on whether banks need to be regulated and if so, how they should be regulated."
While  this  conclusion  would  not  go  unchallenged,  not  least  by  the  tens  of  thousands  of  people
employed as bank regulators around the world, it serves to highlight the wide range of views which
exist about the issue of bank regulation and the extent to which current problems are the result of past
poor regulation. Let me explain.
The 1988 Basel Accord and the new proposals
In 1988, G10 countries reached a consensus on minimum capital standards for internationally active
banks. The Accord can be summarised in a couple of pages. In essence, it states that for every $100
of loans, a bank should have at least $8 of capital, of which at least $4 must be permanent equity.
Because loans secured over residential property were seen to be less risky than other loans, they only
had to have 50% as much capital. Loans to banks from OECD countries were seen to be less risky
still, so they only had to have 20% as much capital, and loans to governments denominated in their
local  currency  0%.  There  were  several  other  categories  and  treatment  for  off-balance-sheet
exposures.
In my view, the 1988 Basel Accord arose mainly from a desire to promote competitive neutrality and to
avoid  arbitrage  between  differing  national  capital  requirements  for  banks,  as  it  did  not  seek  to
determine a socially optimal level of bank capital. In the 1980s, highly leveraged Japanese banks had
been aggressive participants in the previously lucrative US municipal bond underwriting market. US
banks  responded  to  what  they  saw  as  unfair  competition  by  pressing  for  an  internationally  agreed
definition  of  capital  standards  for  credit  risk  and  a  uniform  methodology  for  the  measurement  of
capital. While the 1988 agreement addressed the issue of minimum bank capital, it created a whole
new 
in  arbitraging  between  bank  and  non-bank  capital  requirements.  Widespread
securitisation  of  bank  assets  is  perhaps  the  best  example.  Today  the  case  is  made  that  the  1988
Accord  promotes  regulatory  arbitrage  of  this  type,  rewarding  risk-shifting  which  may  undermine  the
soundness  of  financial  systems  around  the  world.  The  solution,  Basel  2,  proposes  to  more  closely
align bank capital with the riskiness of the bank's assets and operations. Subject to signoff by bank
regulators,  banks  may  adopt  their  own  models  for  determining  how  much  capital  to  hold.  In  the
absence  of  approval,  a  standardised,  but  more  flexible  than  Basel  1,  model  is  proposed.  Market
discipline is to be enlisted by requiring greater disclosure of risks facing a bank. While Basel 1 was a
Capital Accord, Basel 2 is an accord having three pillars – capital requirements, regulatory validation
and market discipline. The real question remains unanswered. Is the closer alignment  of  regulatory
capital with economic capital good public policy? In validating a particular capital allocation model, do
regulators  let  bank  management,  bank  directors  and  bank  creditors  off  the  hook  by,  in  essence,
providing  a  warrant  of  fitness  for  the  model  and  the  bank?  In  order  to  evaluate  the  proposals,  we
should go back to first principles.
industry 
The case for regulating bank capital
Is there a case for a country to specify minimum levels of capital which banks should hold? No such
requirements exist for pharmaceutical companies, software vendors or telecommunications providers,
where failure might impose externalities which would actually be life threatening. The fact that banks
are risky ventures that go bust from time to time does not alone justify that minimum capital standards
should be imposed.
The traditional case for regulating banks in order to reduce the probability that they might bust is that
when depositors see a bank go bust they act in fear and ignorance as to the true condition of all other
banks. They run to their own bank to be first in line to withdraw deposits and in so doing may force a
perfectly  sound  bank  to  run  out  of  liquid  assets,  sell  sound  assets  at  a  discount  and  so  become
2
BIS Review 60/2001
insolvent. The combination of asymmetric  information  about  the  credits  created  (depositors  can  not
know the state of the bank's borrowers), the sequential service constraint (all on demand deposits can
be withdrawn in full), and the liquidity transformation services provided by banks (short term deposits
finance long term loans) makes banks inherently vulnerable  to a  loss of confidence. Further,  banks
often  borrow  from  and  lend  to  each  other  both  in  the  short-term  money  markets  and  through  the
payment system. Thus, the failure of one bank may indeed pose a threat to the solvency of another,
even absent a run by depositors.
Banks will hold liquid assets and capital at levels high enough to meet some subjective assessment of
the probability of runs and counterparty failures.
An alternative argument used to justify bank regulation is that  in  a system where central  banks are
called on to provide lender of last resort facilities to solvent but illiquid banks, in order to distinguish
solvent from insolvent banks the central bank should undertake on-site examinations to establish the
state of each institution. The prospect of system-wide contagion, in which society is denied the liquidity
transformation and credit origination services of the banking industry, provides the soundest basis for
regulating  banks  and  socialising  the  costs  of  individual  bank  failures.  The  objective  in  socialising
losses is to preserve services for future savers, borrowers and transactors, but the consequence is to
protect current depositors from facing losses and to allow bank shareholders to earn excess returns if
the bank holds less than the socially-optimum level of capital.
So  the  model  of  public  policy  for  banking  in  many  countries  is  something  like  this.  Protect  the
depositors to stop the run. Stop the run to stop the contagion. Stop the contagion to ensure society
continues to get banking services.
However, once the probability of bank runs has been reduced, banks will hold less liquid assets and
less capital than would otherwise be the case. Indeed capital ratios have been declining relentlessly
during the past 150 years, from 35% in the 1860s to 4% by the mid 1980s. The banks became more
‘efficient’ intermediaries but, to the extent the risk of failure has increased because of lack of depositor
discipline on the banks and risk has been moved elsewhere (to taxpayers or deposit insurance funds),
efficiency  gains  are  more  apparent  than  real.  The  predisposition  of  governments  to  bail-out  the
creditors  of  failed  banks  makes  all  the  difference  to  both  the  sign  and  magnitude  of  the  impact  of
regulation on the efficiency of liquidity transformation and credit origination in the economy.
Bailing out banks
Perhaps  the  earliest  recorded  example  of  a  government  bail-out  of  bankers  was  the  action  by  the
Roman  Emperor  Tiberius  Caesar  who  in  33  AD  provided  support  to  "reliable  bankers"  after  fraud,
defaults on foreign debt, liquidity  draining  government policies, sinking  of uninsured cargoes, and a
slave  revolt  precipitated  a  banking  crisis.  However,  government  safety  nets  were  rare  before  the
twentieth century.
In  the  era  of  free  banking,  market  forces  prevailed.  Bank  failures  in  the  nineteenth  century  were
relatively  frequent  but  smaller  in  scale,  and  self-correcting  in  comparison  to  the  experience  in  the
twentieth century.
Banks today are playing a larger role in the economy than a century ago. Bank assets in New Zealand
represent 180% of GDP. Payments made every day via the banking system amount to 35% of GDP.
Virtually every adult member of society has a bank account, a credit card, and a debit card to facilitate
non-cash  payments.  Many  households  rely  on  credit  services  to  smooth  consumption.  Banks  also
provide  working  capital  to  small  and  medium  size  enterprises  and  facilitate  payments  both
domestically and internationally. Arguably, the externalities associated with the failure of a single bank
have increased in the last quarter century.
In the last quarter of the 20th century around the world there have been over 100 separate incidents of
banking systems facing a crisis. In some cases, losses have exceeded 40% of annual GDP (Thailand)
and losses of 10-20% of GDP have been common. It has been very rare for bank creditors to bear
losses and in some cases even shareholders have been saved with public money. So what is going
on?
Has the market failed or simply not been allowed to operate? The international consensus, not without
dissenters, is that markets have failed or could be expected to fail, that oversight by regulators and
prescribed minimum levels of capital are essential if banking systems are to be sound. Some countries
have  concluded  that,  because  depositors  rightly  perceive  that  banks  will  still  fail  and  therefore
BIS Review 60/2001
3
depositors might run from solvent  banks, deposit insurance  is necessary to  prevent runs. However,
given  the  focus  of  deposit  insurance  on  small  deposits,  and  the  extent  of  wholesale  (uninsured)
deposits  in  many  banks  today,  deposit  insurance  is  now  often  justified  on  the  grounds  it  makes  it
politically acceptable to fail banks which should be failed and to limit the extent of taxpayer liability to
insured deposits only.
The contemporary case for bank regulation runs something like this. Once the state is exposed to the
underwriting risk and moral hazard of a deposit insurance scheme (implicit or explicit), it must monitor
the banks to reduce the probability of failure. With an implicit guarantee or explicit deposit insurance
scheme  in  place  and  the  regulator  deeply  implicated  with  any  bank  failure,  markets  assess  the
probability of loss given default to be lower than otherwise, making them more willing to take risks with
banks. This reduced risk aversion translates into holdings of lower levels of bank capital than would
otherwise  be  required  to  underpin  a  portfolio  of  risky  loans.  In  this,  our  current  world,  the  privately
optimal  level  of  capital  in  banks  could  well  diverge  from  the  socially  optimal  level.  I  say  "could"
because we cannot rule out the possibility that at some very low probability of failure it may be efficient
for society to underwrite banks rather than have them each carry the higher capital and liquidity levels
necessary to withstand a once in a 500 year incident of general loss of confidence.
While some regulators agree there is a role for market discipline, many believe the market may not
know  what  information  to  ask  for,  or  banks  may  be  reluctant  to  supply  it.  Consequently  even
advocates of market discipline agree there is a role for the regulator in prescribing what information
should be provided. Proponents of market discipline believe it is then more efficient for bank creditors,
through their agents, to monitor the bank rather than to rely on the judgement of a bureaucrat.
Determining the optimal level of bank capital
Let us set aside the issues facing the solvent but  illiquid bank by assuming a central bank has the
capacity to act as lender of last resort. This presumes the central bank will be able to distinguish an
illiquid but solvent bank from an illiquid and insolvent one.  Let us focus on:
 
 
how banks might determine the privately optimal amount of capital to hold;
some factors which might cause the socially optimal amount of bank capital to diverge from
the private optimum; and
strategies  to  cause  convergence  between  the  socially  and  the  privately  optimal  level  of
capital.
 Because  bank  management  might  have  misjudged  the  quality  of  its  borrowers,  because  economic
circumstances may cause once sound borrowers to fail and because depositors might withdraw funds
earlier  than  expected,  necessitating  asset  liquidations  at  discount  rates  above  expected  yield  to
maturity,  bank  management  (wishing  to  preserve  their  jobs)  and  bank  shareholders  (wishing  to
preserve  the  franchise  value  of  their  business),  will  find  it  optimal  to  hold  some  capital.  That  is,  to
retain within the bank assets with an expected net present value in excess of the net present value of
liabilities. But by how much?
If too little capital is held, the probability of failure is too high; if too much capital is held, the rate of
return on equity is less than it might be. Surely this is an equilibrating mechanism where depositors'
interests are protected by shareholder and management incentives to preserve the bank? Those who
advocate a return to free banking would argue so. And did not Modigliani and Miller show nearly 50
years ago that  debt/equity ratios  do  not  influence  the  value  of  the  firm? Well  at  least  in  frictionless
markets with complete information and no taxes.
Let  us  set  aside  the  traditional  argument  in  favour  of  bank  regulation  –  that  banks  are  opaque,
depositors need agents to monitor the bank on their behalf, and regulators can do this cost effectively.
Let us set aside  the  strongest  argument  for  regulation  –  the  prospect  of  contagion.  Let  us  assume
complete  markets  and  symmetric 
that  depositors,  shareholders  and  bank
management seek to maximise the expected value of their interests. In this world, let us assume there
is  an  unnatural  person  with  full  contractual  capacity  and  limited  liability.  That  is,  payoffs  are
asymmetric. This unnatural person is a bank and I contend it will seek to hold less than the socially
optimal level of capital.
Depositors earn high rates of interest, shareholders earn high dividends and management takes high
salaries in the good times when the net present value of claims owned by the bank exceeds the net
information  and 
4
BIS Review 60/2001
present value of the obligations of the bank. In the bad times, depositors do not expect to face losses,
shareholders  liability  is  limited  to  the  capital  invested  and  management  can  withdraw  and  retire  on
prior period earnings or exit the industry.
Of  course,  this  is  a  highly  simplified  model.  To  ensure  its  investment  in  people,  processes  and
proprietary information is protected and because of the costs of bank failure in terms of reputation and
potential litigation, owners and managers will choose to hold some capital.
The ability of the shareholders to put the bank to the bank's creditors arises from limited liability. The
ability  of  the  creditors  to  put  the  bank  to  the  government  (taxpayers)  arises  if  the  externalities
associated  with failing  the  bank  are  expected  to  exceed  the  cost  of  recapitalising  the  bank. This  is
most likely if the bank is assessed to be systemically or politically important. Each of the major banks
operating  in  New  Zealand  has  a  significant  share  of  system  assets  and  hundreds  of  thousands  of
personal  customers.  They  would  seem  to  meet  any  reasonable  threshold  of  systemic  or  political
importance. While failing a bank might mean liquidation, it is almost certain to involve loss of credit
origination capacity and disruption to the payment system.
"Too big to fail" (not failing a bank because of its size) need not mean all bank creditors should escape
without  loss.  I  would  be  the  first  to  concede  that  our  large  banks  are  too  big  to  liquidate  or  to
indefinitely  suspend  withdrawals,  but  it  would  be  foolish  for  bank  creditors,  including  depositors,  to
assume that they will necessarily be made whole. Of course, bank shareholders would have lost all
their investment before creditors suffer any loss.
Yes, this is another one of those occasions when the Reserve Bank takes the opportunity to state on
the public record that neither the Bank, nor the government, guarantees any  of the deposits of any
registered bank.
Nevertheless, limited liability, systemic impact, and political voice underpin expectations of asymmetric
payoffs  for  shareholders  and  bank  creditors,  and  together  these  suggest  that  the  privately  optimal
level  of  bank  capital  to  cover  expected  losses  might  lie  below  the  socially  optimal  level  of  capital
required to meet both expected and unexpected losses. Let us call the former "economic capital" and
the latter "regulatory capital".
Economic capital is optimal for shareholders; regulatory capital is optimal for taxpayers. There is also
a level of capital necessary to sustain a given credit rating from an independent rating agent. Let us
call  "optimal  rating  capital"  that  level  of  capital  optimal  for  depositors,  given  the  premium  over  the
risk-free  rate  paid  by  the  bank  to  attract  deposits  allowing  for  the  value  of  the  option  debt  holders
presume they have to put their deposits to the government.
Bank management has an interesting role. On the one hand, they want the shareholders to assess
their  expected  rate  of  return  to  be  high  so  the  bank  can  access  additional  capital  at  the  lowest
marginal cost. On the other hand, bank management, on behalf of shareholders, want to convince the
rating agency that their risks are well controlled so that they may be able to access deposits at the
lowest  possible  cost  for  a  given  level  of  capital.  Bank  management  face  an  incentive  to  convince
regulators that the level of capital consistent with that demanded by depositors to protect them (rating
capital)  is  also  the  socially  optimal  level  of  capital.  Enter  the  so-called  hybrid  or  innovative  capital
instruments that the market prices as debt and regulators often count as capital. This device seeks to
provide regulatory capital at levels above economic capital. What makes capital "capital" is something
we will come to shortly.
Let us return to consider the gap which, if it exists, should  be of interest. That  is, the gap between
optimal economic (private) and optimal regulatory (social) capital.
The draft Basel 2 Accord is based on the assumption that under the 1988 Accord there was such a
gap and that it was material. The implication in the draft Pillar one of the Basel 2 Accord concerning
bank capital is that the total amount of regulatory capital should remain unchanged and that economic
capital  was being  eroded and should be augmented. More closely tying capital  to the  probability  of
default on loans and the expected loss given default, together with an explicit charge for operational
risk and the retention of a charge for market risk on the trading book, are the essential elements of
Pillar one of Basel 2, which seeks to better align economic and regulatory capital. The alignment of
regulatory capital is seen as good and the complexity of the proposed calculation of regulatory capital
is in part justified as a way of making regulatory capital mimic economic capital, which is presumed to
be the level of capital the market would demand.
BIS Review 60/2001
5
Optimal economic capital may fall short of optimal social capital
Asymmetric  payoffs  to  shareholders  and  depositors  mean  the  privately  optimal  level  of  capital  lies
below the socially optimal level of capital given the full distribution of returns to all stakeholders from
the  portfolio  of  risky  loans  originated  by  the  bank's  management  but  underwritten  by  shareholders,
depositors  and  ultimately  taxpayers  in  the  case  of  systemically  significant  banks.  In  my  view,
alignment of economic and regulatory capital leads to an inherently undercapitalised privately owned
banking  system.  In  the  absence  of  market  discipline,  it  would  be  a  mistake  for  the  regulator  to  go
along with whatever capital banks determine to be privately optimal. But recall it may still be efficient to
socially  insure,  rather  than  capitalise  the  banks  to  absorb  the  most  extreme  unexpected  losses.
However,  most  safety  nets  have  been  slung  to  underwrite  much  more  common  events  yet  fail  to
ensure  the  preservation  of  the  credit  origination,  liquidity  transformation,  and  payment  service
capability of the institution. The analysis is made more complicated if the shareholders, depositors and
taxpayers  come  from  different  nation  states.  Any  idea  of  a  utility  maximising  objective  function  to
determine socially optimal bank capital needs to recognise the segmentation which occurs when the
three sets of stakeholders cannot be presumed to be in a continuing relationship after a bank failure.
But  that  is  not  the  full  extent  of  the  gap.  Economic  capital  is  calculated  on  the  basis  of  expected
losses.  To  the  extent  minimum  capital  requirements  are  set  consistent  with  economic  capital,
unexpected losses will not be borne by bank shareholders. Unexpected losses must be borne by bank
creditors,  a  deposit  insurance  fund,  an  ex  post  levy  on  surviving  banks  or  socialised  via  taxpayer
support arising from implicit deposit insurance. Losses which are unexpected to an individual bank are
not  necessarily  unexpected  to  a  banking  system.  The  question  is  to  what  extent  should  banks'
shareholders put up capital to underpin not only each institution but also the banking system? Does
not deposit insurance seek to do just that?
Deposit insurance, moral hazard and undercapitalised banks
The arguments against deposit insurance (whether explicit or implicit) are well rehearsed. Depositors
and banks take more risk (incur moral hazard). Banks make more risky loans, which crowd out safe
loans. Small scale and inefficient banks are protected. Regulatory capture and regulatory forbearance
increase the loss given default. Credible deposit insurance may reduce the probability of bank runs as
a cause of bank failure and increase the political acceptability of failing insolvent banks, but it does so
at the risk of increasing the probability of failure, risks increasing losses given failure and appears to
increase fragmentation and inefficiency in the intermediation process. Increased competition may be
associated with more participants and industry profitability may be reduced. However, it is more likely
that profits are reduced because costs are higher than because fees and margins are lower. A less
profitable banking industry may simply reflect a less efficient one.
To  mitigate  the  moral  hazard  of  insured  depositors  tolerating  excessive  risk-taking  by  bank
management on behalf of shareholders, advocates of deposit  insurance promote schemes with: (a)
caps (only a small limited amount of deposits are insured for each depositor); (b) co-insurance (only
pay a percentage of losses); and (c) deposit insurance premiums based on the riskiness of the bank.
However,  experience  is  that  coverage  provided  by  deposit  insurance  is  extended  over  time  and  by
circumstances. To the extent that deposit insurance makes credible the threat that some depositors
may  face  some  losses  by  making  it  clear  that  small  retail  depositors  with  political  voice  will  be
protected, but no others will be, the case is made that deposit insurance adds to market discipline. Of
course, that presumes that the uninsured depositors will discipline the bank but what of the bank that
raises only insured deposits, or of the systemically important bank with material externalities? There
may be little market discipline on such banks and the deposit insurer or regulator must constrain the
rationally excessive risk appetite of the bank. As the regulator becomes ever more prescriptive  and
fixed  with  knowledge  (or  blamed  for  the  lack  of  it),  so  the  chances  of  a  bail-out  increase,  market
discipline  weakens  further  and  regulators  get  drawn  in  further.  In  my  opinion,  public  sector
bureaucracies  find  risk  management  extremely  difficult.  Rarely  are  the  payoffs  for  taking  more  risk
commensurate  with  the  incentives  facing  individual  decision  makers.  Consequently  bureaucrats  are
too risk averse most of the time and not risk averse enough when confronted with the high probability
of a bad outcome becoming even worse.
Is there a better model – one in which there is a realistic prospect that shareholders, having put up
something close to the socially optimal amount of capital, are at risk, and depositors, facing a credible
threat of loss, insist on that level of capital being sustained? Capital needs to stand ready to take its
punishment for being associated with risky ventures that go bad, whether expected or not.
6
BIS Review 60/2001
permanent;
available at the time of insolvency;
accessible in the jurisdiction of the obligations of the bank; and
under no obligations to its holders that rank ahead of any other obligations.
For capital to be punished, it needs to be:
 
 
 
 
To  constitute  bank  capital,  rights  accorded  to  owners  must  be  capable  of  being  irrevocably,
completely, unilaterally, and immediately cancelled in the event all other obligations are not expected
to be settled in full.
reasonably expected even if extremely improbable;
politically acceptable;
quickly determined; and
promptly administered.
An antidote to moral hazard
For bank creditors (all senior unsecured creditors) to have incentives to monitor the soundness of the
bank, they must face the prospect of a loss of some or all of their investment. Such a loss must be:
 
 
 
 
A  "haircut"  is  a  process  involving  a  reduction  in  the  face  value  of  an  obligation  of  the  bank.  The
amount of the reduction may reflect the negative equity of an insolvent bank which has been liquidated
(a dead haircut), or the amount necessary to recapitalise a bank in order for it to continue in business.
It is the latter case I wish to focus on. It is the case where bank creditors recapitalise the bank. The
creditor  recapitalisation  option  is  far  from  a  done  deal  but  we  continue  to  explore  the  feasibility  of
adding it to the options for managing a bank crisis. In the bank creditor recapitalisation case, creditors
may recover some or all  of their  haircut from  the  subsequent  sale  of  the  bank.  To  the  extent  bank
creditors have become the shareholders of the recapitalised bank, they might have all the  rights  of
ordinary shareholders and indeed might sell their shares at a profit. Of course, by taking more of the
creditors' money than is necessary to cover losses, creditors are being required to meet a social policy
objective  but  they  are  the  primary  beneficiaries  of  that  policy  –  gaining  immediate  access  to  a
substantial  proportion  of  their  deposits,  avoiding  costly  and  drawn  out  liquidation  proceedings  and
preserving access to the payment system. The alternative is most often the nationalisation of the bank
at the expense of taxpayers.
In most parts of the world, regulators faced with a failing bank with a large number of depositors are
confronted with advising governments to nationalise or liquidate the bank.
Confronted with this choice, liquidation is likely to be an unacceptable option for all but the smallest of
banks. A credible regime to recapitalise the bank using depositors' and other creditors' money possibly
offers a policy option that might be preferable to nationalisation.
The key features of a bank creditor recapitalisation might include the rapid assessment of the rough
order  of  magnitude  of  the  negative  equity,  placing  the  bank  into  statutory  management,  freezing
withdrawals for a short period, deduction of a proportion of all obligations of an immediate nature and
recording deductions against the name of the obligatee in a memorandum account, guaranteeing the
residual obligations  of  the  institution,  if  not  the  entire  institution,  and  reopening  the  institution.  Over
time, the application  of  partial  equity  conversions  to  other  time  obligations  as  they  fall  due  and  the
conversion  of creditor obligations into equity could take  place. While  avoiding  the  complexity,  costs
and moral hazard of deposit  insurance,  ex  ante  the  prospect  of  bank  creditor  recapitalisations  may
provide creditors with an incentive to monitor their bank and insist on  levels of capital closer to the
socially optimal level. A credible creditor recapitalisation option may avoid the need for and inefficiency
induced  by  a  deposit  insurance  regime.  It  may  avoid  the  need  for  intrusive  regulatory  oversight.  It
seeks to protect the taxpayers interest. It may significantly reduce the public subsidy to depositors and
other bank creditors arising from the put option they have not paid for and reduce the excess returns
to  bank  shareholders  from  running  an  undercapitalised  bank.  It  would  appear  to  impose  few
administrative  costs  on  banks  to  counter  what  is  perceived  to  be  a  very  low  probability  event.  Of
course,  it  is  possible  to  consider  a  world  of  deposit  insurance  for  small  depositors  and  haircuts  for
other bank creditors or for a bank creditor recapitalisation scheme that distinguished between small
BIS Review 60/2001
7
and large creditors. Of course, a deposit insurance scheme does not provide a solution to the question
of how a systemically important bank should be recapitalised.
What is envisaged is a regime that requires pre-positioning of creditor recapitalisation capability within
registered  banks,  and  thereby  offers  the  prospect  of  preserving  the  credit  origination,  liquidity
transformation, and payment facilitation services while avoiding the worst liquidity impacts of a bank
failure.  By  ‘pre-positioning'  I  mean  that  as  part  of  their  Business  Continuity  Plans  banks  might  be
required to confirm they had the systems capability to implement a creditor recapitalisation within  a
specified  number  of  business  days  and  banks  could  confirm  their  ability  to  ‘reconnect'  with  a  bank
which had been recapitalised with bank creditors' funds.
Politicians and  regulators  would  no  doubt  wish  to  retain  the  flexibility  to  nationalise,  recapitalise,  or
liquidate a failing bank.
Crisis management and organisational form
For creditor recapitalisation to be a viable alternative to nationalisation or liquidation, it is essential that
a bank's assets can quickly be identified. That requires legal certainty as to the owner of the claim to
future cash flows. Such legal certainty does not exist if there is doubt as to the jurisdiction in which
assets  are  located.  In  the  absence  of  a  global  insolvency  regime,  at  the  point  of  failure  of  a
transnational bank the world is destined to have a rerun of the BCCI fiasco when national regulators
laid claim to assets in their jurisdiction.  Years passed  in some cases before  rightful  ownership  was
determined.
As the world moves to embrace first transnational and ultimately global retail banking, as banks seek
efficiency  from  cross-border  outsourcing,  as  competitive  pressures  drive  aggregation  and  more
countries  play  host  to  foreign  banks  which  are  systemically  important,  the  more  apparent  it  will
become  that  not  all  depositors  in  a  bank  are  equal.  The  location  of  assets  is  far  from  certain  and
outcomes on failure  are unpredictable, arbitrary  and  potentially  unfair.  Predatory  national  regulatory
practices,  such  as  preferring  home  country  depositors  over  foreign  depositors  within  the  same
corporate entity or designing deposit insurance regimes as barriers to competition or as a device for
unfair  competition,  may  become  a  source  of  increasing  friction.  Both  the  USA  and  Australia  have
depositor preferences and the European Union is confronting potentially competitive national deposit
insurance regimes given the flexibility allowed under the EU directive.
New Zealand bank regulation and organisational form
Some of you may be aware that starting about eighteen months ago the Reserve Bank began to focus
on managing a bank failure in a system dominated by foreign owned banks. To date, we have been
agnostic about the matter of organisational form. We were relatively indifferent to whether a foreign
bank branched into New Zealand or operated via a locally incorporated entity. In a banking regime in
which public disclosure and market discipline play a central role, along with the accountability of bank
directors  for  the  sound  operation  of  the  bank,  we  became  concerned  about  some  aspects  of  the
unincorporated or branch form of organisation.
Firstly, the notion of ‘branch capital' in a world where assets can be moved cross border quickly and at
low cost, where  the very notion  of a ‘New Zealand' asset  is losing definition  and foreign depositors
may  be  given  priority  in  the  event  of  liquidation,  made  the  branch  balance  sheet  increasingly
meaningless as a guide to assets and liabilities  which were likely  to  exist  at  a  point  of  failure.  In  a
regime based on disclosure, unexpected, unpredictable and arbitrary outcomes would not be seen as
a ‘fair game'. Further, the more we looked at the issues the more we, the regulator, became fixed with
knowledge as to the inadequacies of branch-based disclosure.
Secondly, disclosure regimes  differ markedly  between  countries.  In  some  cases,  the  level  of  public
disclosure  by  banks branching  into New Zealand  would be inadequate  to  found  a  presumption  that
depositors  could  be  informed  as  to  the  condition  of  the  bank.  Indeed  branch  accounts  built  on  the
notion of branch capital can be inherently misleading.
Thirdly,  the  lack  of  local  directors  mitigates  against  the  incentive  effects  of  the  full  force  of  legal
sanctions.
Finally,  placing  a  branch  into  statutory  management  is  inherently  more  complex,  slower,  and  more
uncertain than taking action against a locally incorporated entity.
8
BIS Review 60/2001
For these reasons, the Reserve Bank concluded that in certain cases it was likely to require that retail
banking business above  NZ$200 million  of deposits should  be  conducted  via  a  locally  incorporated
subsidiary. Where the bank is systemically important, or comes from a jurisdiction which prefers home
country  depositors  or  from  a  jurisdiction  where  the  level  of  public  disclosure  is  inadequate,  local
incorporation of retail deposit-taking may be required. We continue to discuss the implementation of
the policy  with the banks directly  affected. It is  worth  noting  that  our  concerns  about  organisational
form were aroused well before our thinking on creditor recapitalisation as a means of resolving a failed
bank  had  been  developed.  The  case  for  local  incorporation  stands  irrespective  of  whether  a  failed
bank is nationalised, recapitalised, or liquidated.
It is implausible to believe that New Zealand  will  never  again  face  the  prospect  of  a  major  bank  in
distress.  Our  banking  system  is  presently  one  of  the  soundest  in  the  world.  On  the  basis  of  the
weighted  average  credit  rating  of  the  banks  operating  in  New  Zealand  today,  Moody's  Investor
Services rates New Zealand as the third soundest banking system in the world. We also have one of
the  highest  levels  of  foreign  ownership  and,  among  privately  owned  systems,  one  of  the  most
concentrated.  By  their  nature,  banks  are  exposed  to  risks  which  they  seek  to  manage.  It  is  by
absorbing  and  managing  those  risks  that  banks  contribute  to  our  economic  growth  and  prosperity.
They  transform  short-term  liquid  deposits  into  long  term,  difficult  to  monitor  assets.  Liquidity
transformation and credit origination services have volatile expected future cash flows and changing
discount rates. Bank capital is the buffer that enables a bank to meet its obligations to  others even
when its claims on others fail to materialise as expected. Bank management does not seek to break
the bank but neither do motor vehicle drivers usually seek to have accidents.
New Zealand's position in respect of banking supervision
So where does that leave New Zealand in terms of banking supervision? There is a case for regulating
banks given the prospect of contagion. However,  bank regulation  and supervision  taken  too  far,  by
which I mean supervision which displaces the paramount role of directors and depositors in monitoring
the  bank,  run  major  risks  of  weakening  market  discipline  by  reducing  the  incentives  for  sound  risk
management, including the holding of liquid assets and adequate capital.
It  is  my  belief  that  part  of  the  reason  why  we  have  seen  a  fall  in  bank  capital  ratios  over  the  last
century has been because of a weakening of market discipline. While some reduction may have been
a true gain in welfare to the community through more efficient risk transfer, carried too far, inadequate
capital simply allows bank shareholders and depositors to earn excess rates of return at the expense
of future taxpayers.
So what?
It is therefore important to take all reasonable steps to strengthen self discipline and market discipline
on the banking sector, including by:
 
 
 
 
 
applying high standards of corporate governance;
ensuring high standards of public disclosure;
defining and applying accounting and auditing standards;
having a credible crisis management strategy;
avoiding  deposit  insurance  if  at  all  possible  and  in  particular  avoiding  unlimited  and
inappropriately priced schemes;
minimising the extent to  which depositors, perceiving banks to be too big to fail, conclude
they are not at risk at all; and  minimising the amount of private information regulators hold or
are believed to hold so as to limit the extent to which regulators and taxpayers are implicated
in practices which are found to be unsound leading to taxpayer bail-outs.
 Creditor  recapitalisation  is  one  possible  mechanism  for  making  credible  a  non-zero  probability  that
bank creditors, even at the biggest banks, might not be made whole in the event of a bank failure.
We are currently  working on the bank creditor recapitalisation proposal and  would encourage  other
supervisors  to  do  so.  However,  we  acknowledge  there  may  be  circumstances  where  creditor
recapitalisation  is  not  feasible  and,  even  if  feasible,  may  not  be  optimal.  So  our  case  is  one  for
BIS Review 60/2001
9
exploring  alternatives  to  ever  more  intrusive  and  prescriptive  regulation  of  the  risk  management
process which lies at the heart of financial intermediation.
The socially optimal level of capital in a national banking system will exceed the privately optimal level,
being  the  aggregate  of  individual  bank's  assessed  economic  capital,  if  taxpayers  in  each  national
jurisdiction  are  expected  to  bear  losses  which,  although  unexpected  to  each  bank,  are  ‘expected'
across a portfolio of banks. This is because the expectation of the socialisation of losses changes the
behaviour of banks ex ante. Whether taxpayers should in fact bear losses, given a failure, is a different
issue. That is determined by the costs of the bail-out and future costs of moral hazard, including the
cost  to  future  taxpayers.  These  costs  to  future  taxpayers  include  the  dead-weight  costs  of  the
additional tax burden to finance future bail-outs. These expected costs must be weighed against the
potential costs and losses taxpayers face from the loss of liquidity transformation and credit origination
services that may accompany the loss of confidence associated with depositors taking losses.
Conclusion
By making credible the policy option that the bank creditors in the national jurisdiction will bear losses,
the  expectation  of  a  bail-out  is  reduced  and  the  privately  optimal  level  of  bank  capital  held  in  the
jurisdiction converges toward the level of capital which is socially optimal.
If  banks  operate  in  widely  diverse  international  markets,  if  significant  numbers  of  depositors  are
expected to bear losses and are treated pari passu, there is reason to hope that the privately optimal
level of bank capital globally will converge to the socially optimal level. In such a world, shareholders
bear expected losses while bank creditors bear unexpected losses. In such a  world, the role of the
regulator is to protect taxpayers, current and future, from being exploited by bank shareholders and
depositors. This is a role not dissimilar to the role independent central banks have in protecting savers
from  unexpected  losses  arising  from  unexpected  inflation.  Time  inconsistency,  which  explains
politicians' predisposition to excessively easy monetary policy, also explains their readiness to bail-out
failing  financial  institutions.  Anchoring  inflation  expectations  contributes  greatly  to  the  efficient
allocation of resources, so does managing expectations about who bears the risks of associating with
risky banking ventures.
The Reserve Bank is continuing its policy research and consultation on bank crisis management. Our
banking supervision regime is based on the three disciplines – self-discipline, market discipline, and
regulatory discipline. The credibility of our regime hinges in no small part on having a credible range of
options  as  to  how  we  would  deal  with  a  banking  crisis.  We  are  reluctant  to  engage  in  forms  of
regulation and supervision that undermine incentives for banks and markets to deliver socially optimal
outcomes.
In summary, what we support is a regime in which banks face incentives to hold sufficient capital to
ensure the probability of failure is reduced because bank management and shareholders are aware
that imprudence by them will mean at-risk depositors might run. The capital willingly held by the bank
should be sufficient to  align  incentives  of shareholders with those  of regulators by ensuring  the  put
option depositors perceive they hold is a long way out of the money. The level of bank capital needs to
go beyond that necessary merely to absorb expected losses. Bank capital needs to  be sufficient to
absorb all but the most improbable unexpected losses.
In  my  view,  incentive-compatible  regulation  does  not  mean  setting  regulatory  capital  equal  to
economic capital. Even when depositors and shareholders bear all the costs of a bank failure via risk-
based premiums paid to a deposit insurance scheme, unless there is agreement on when it is optimal
to socialise the cost of systemic failure, economic capital and regulatory capital  will diverge. This is
even  more  likely  to  be  the  case  when  shareholders  and  taxpayers  are  in  different  national
communities. It is my contention that bank shareholders and bank creditors should bear a very large
proportion of the systemic risk currently laid at the feet of future taxpayers. To shift this risk requires
new  instruments  such  as  local  incorporation  and  plans  to  recapitalise  failing  banks  with  creditors'
money. It is necessary to ensure that capital is really available to absorb losses, and is of sufficient
quality  and  held  in  sufficient  quantity.  Banks  should  face  incentives  to  hold  closer  to  the  socially
optimal level of capital.
10
BIS Review 60/2001
