Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Regulating the capital markets: making market
discipline work
Speech  by  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of
Singapore  at  the  StanChart-Reuters-Business  Times  Investment  Awards  ceremony,  Singapore,
16 Feb 2001
 The  capital  markets  are  undergoing  a  sea  change.  Technology  and  the  Internet  have  opened  new
channels for investors to access a wide range of investment information and to transact in securities,
often without advice or assistance from market intermediaries. Market intermediaries themselves are
consolidating, and exploring new business models to capture clients and add value to their decisions.
It is a more competitive environment all round, and the margins from traditional financial intermediation
have thinned.
Regulators are having to rethink their approaches towards the oversight of the markets in this new and
rapidly  changing  environment.  The  objectives  have  not  changed  to  preserve  confidence  by
maintaining fair, transparent and efficient markets, and to minimise the risk of disruptions that threaten
the stability of the system. But the methods of achieving these objectives are being refashioned. It is
no longer possible for the regulator to root out all that is evil, dangerous or vaguely suspicious before
they get to the market. Greater emphasis is therefore being placed on discipline being exercised within
the market, and by the market.
Making market discipline work
We have embarked over the last three years on a shift in our approach to regulating the markets from
what is loosely called a merit-based regime, under which the regulator judged the appropriateness of
securities being made available to the public, toward to a market-driven, disclosure-based regime of
regulation.  It  is  aimed  at  allowing  market  participants  greater  choice  and  the  free  play  to  take
calculated risks. We have made it clear that the shift in approach will not compromise our reputation
internationally as one of the most open, transparent and well-regulated markets in Asia. Market-based
regulation  will  indeed  raise  standards  of  business  conduct,  as  is  necessary  for  a  more  open,
competitive and innovative market environment.
Market  discipline  will  not  simply  be  a  matter  of  'caveat  emptor'.  The  buyer  cannot  be  expected  to
beware  if  he  is  not  provided  with  accurate  and  accessible  information  so  as  to  make  a  reasonable
judgement of prospective risks and returns. Neither can he do so if the market is rigged without his
knowledge.  It  follows  that  market  discipline  requires  a  system  of  laws,  rules  and  standards  to
discriminate in favour of companies with high standards of corporate governance and disclosure, and
to exact penalties on those who manipulate the market.
Making market discipline work is therefore the responsibility of all participants in the system.
Let me briefly outline some of these roles:
• 
The MAS, as the statutory regulator, will monitor compliance with the laws and regulations
that  govern  the  integrity  of  the  markets,  seek  enforcement  of  the  laws,  and  propose
amendments  in  order  to  keep  them  relevant  in  a  changing  market  environment.  We  have
undertaken a substantial review of our securities laws in the last year. Insider trading is now
both  a  criminal  and  civil  offence,  and  we  have  recently  proposed  to  amend  the  laws  to
capture  a  wider  pool  of  persons  who  seek  to  take  advantage  of  inside  information.  The
proposed new Securities and Futures Act (SFA), to be put to Parliament later this year, will
contain  other  substantial  changes.  I  will  elaborate  on  one  of  these,  concerning  the
prospectus registration regime later in the speech.1
The Singapore Exchange (SGX), with its frontline interface with the industry and markets,
plays a key role in  preserving fair  and transparent markets. It is responsible for the listing
                                                      
1  The SFA would also incorporate the provisions concerning the raising of capital that are presently found in the Companies
Act, thereby creating a single compendium of laws governing the securities industry.
BIS Review 14/2001
1
   rules for companies that raise capital  and have  their shares traded  on  the  exchange.  It  is
also responsible for ensuring that conditions exist for orderly trading of listed securities.
The conduct of issuers themselves is at the core of a system of market discipline. Issuers
must take it upon themselves to make full and prompt disclosure of material information. It is
not just a matter of meeting the requirements of the law and SGX's rules. It is increasingly in
the interests of companies to go beyond the minimum in disclosure standards, as investors
become more discerning to the quality of information available to them. A number of studies
have  shown  that  the  markets  have  attached  an  increased  premium  in  recent  years  to
companies which demonstrate sound corporate governance and who are more forthcoming
and  open  with  information  on  their  businesses.  The  so-called  'corporate  governance
dividend', previously not easily discerned in Asian markets in particular, is now fully visible.
Market intermediaries play an important supporting role. Investment banks, accountants,
lawyers  and  other  professionals  who  advise  issuers  have  a  duty  to  provide  high
standards  of  professional  advice,  and  to  exercise  thorough  due  diligence  to  ensure  that
issuers comply with laws and rules, as well as adopt high standards of disclosure. Brokers
and  investment  advisers  likewise,  have  a  duty  to  provide  their  investing  clients  with
objective advice that is in their clients' best interests.
Finally, it is for investors themselves to take advantage of higher standards of disclosure in
making their decisions. Investors and the media also contribute to effective market discipline
by  calling  for  more  and  better  quality  information  from  listed  companies.  Institutional
investors such as fund managers play an  important role in this regard. They  have greater
resources to monitor and analyse information, and typically greater leverage on companies
to encourage them to improve on standards of corporate governance and disclosure.
The move towards market-based regulation will be given a significant push by the recommendations of
two private sector-led committees that were appointed by the Government last  year - the Corporate
Governance  Committee  and  the  Disclosure  and  Accounting  Standards  Committee.  The  committees
have recently completed an exercise of public consultation on their preliminary recommendations, and
aim to publish their final reports by April.
The development of a market-driven, disclosure-based regime is in progress. It will be naïve to expect
an effective system of market discipline to have arrived in a day, or in three years. The transition will
cause some uncertainties initially, and even the occasional revanchist call for a return to the regime of
the  past.  Market  participants  will  take  time  to  develop  high  standards  of  corporate  conduct  and
disclosure, and to discover the new boundaries. We can expect some of them to test the boundaries in
the process, either wittingly or otherwise. But the boundaries of what is permissible to preserve fair
and transparent markets should become quite apparent through a few salutary cases, which will help
define the new dispensation.
The  MAS  and  SGX  themselves  have  reviewed  their  respective  roles  in  the  new  regulatory
environment. I will touch now on a number of issues concerning the regulatory functions of the SGX as
a demutualised, profit-oriented and listed exchange, and its relationship with the MAS as the statutory
regulator.
Can a demutualised, listed exchange regulate the market?
As a focal point  of  market  activity,  exchanges  have  traditionally  been  accorded  the  role  of  frontline
regulator of the securities markets. With the demutualisation and public offering of shares by a growing
number  of  exchanges  -  most  recently  the  Deutsche  Borse  -  questions  arise  as  to  whether  a  listed
for-profit exchange is able to discharge its role as frontline regulator competently and effectively.
Conflicts  of  interest  in  the  regulatory  functions  of  an  exchange  are  not  new  however.  They  existed
before demutualisation. Members of the former Stock Exchange of Singapore (SES), a mutual body,
had  to  set  and  enforce  rules  in  the  public  interest  that  could  negatively  affect  their  commercial
interests.  The  exchange  was  also  expected  to  conduct  effective  and  impartial  supervision  of  its
member-owners. The potential conflicts of interest in these respects were mitigated by the fact that the
SES had only a small number of members, accentuating the financial risks that they each faced from a
failure of the exchange to properly regulate.
2
BIS Review 14/2001
More  importantly,  the  potential  conflicts  of  interest  made  it  necessary  for  the  MAS  to  take  a  heavy
hand  in  the  affairs  of  the  exchange.  The  folklore  sometimes  exaggerated  this,  so  much  that  some
observers attributed every  decision of the  SES to the mysterious  ways of the MAS. But the  hidden
hand of the regulator was not ideal for developing a mature and dynamic capital market.
Now that the  SGX  has  been  demutualised  and  listed,  a  new  set  of  potential  conflicts  arises. While
profits  were  never  irrelevant  to  the  SES,  they  are  the  primary  motive  for  shareholders  of  the  listed
SGX. Share  values and  dividends  also  give  greater  transparency  to  the  business  performance  and
prospects of the SGX, providing the management with greater incentive to raise operational efficiency,
and  seek  competitive  advantage.  This  is  as  it  should  be,  and  is  indeed  a  principle  benefit  of
demutualising and listing the SGX. There will however be concern from time to time as to whether the
greater  drive  for  commercial  success  will  reduce  the  commitment  and  resources  deployed  by  the
exchange to fulfill its responsibility to regulate in the public interest.
The MAS believes that the interests of the SGX are more aligned than divergent with public interest as
represented  by  users  of  the  exchange.  A  fair,  transparent  and  efficiently-regulated  market  is
indispensable to the vibrancy and sustained business success of the SGX. Serious investors will
not trade on an exchange  that does not  have  internationally acceptable rules of listing,  trading  and
settlement, or does not enforce the rules fairly and effectively. The examples of exchanges that have
failed to meet such standards and suffered the consequences of investor shunning their markets are
well-known. Without the interest and liquidity provided by investors, no exchange will find it  easy  to
attract issuers and to build its business.
Credibility  in  regulation  is  therefore  a  vital  commercial  asset  for  the  SGX.  The  board  and
management of the SGX recognise this fully. Corporate governance  of  the  SGX  is  not  designed  to
favour  short-term  revenue  objectives  at  the  expense  of  long-term  gains.  Shareholders  of  SGX
themselves have it in their interests to hold the exchange to high standards of market regulation, so as
to achieve sustained returns on their investments.
MAS-SGX Regulatory Relationship
A demutualised, listed exchange however requires an enhanced role for the MAS in some respects,
even  as  the  functions  of  the  SGX  and  the  MAS  are  more  clearly  delineated  than  in  the  past.  The
Exchanges (Demutualisation and Merger) Act passed in 1999 was drafted to give MAS the power to
issue directives to SGX in the interest of ensuring fair and orderly securities and futures markets, and
the proper management of systemic risks. The MAS is the backstop. It is in the position to put things
right, where any potential conflicts of interest become real.
The regulatory relationship between MAS and SGX may be broadly defined as follows. MAS, as the
statutory regulator, will administer the corpus of statutory law regulating the capital markets. We also
maintain oversight of SGX's regulatory responsibilities and seek to ensure that there are no gaps in
the overall regulatory framework. The SGX has direct and frontline regulatory responsibilities of the
securities  and  futures  markets,  and  over  the  broker-dealers  who  trade  on  the  exchange.  This
MAS-SGX regulatory relationship applies to all the major areas of regulation:
a.
• 
 b.
• 
Regulation of capital raising
SGX defines and enforces the rules that apply to companies that seek to raise capital on the
exchange through primary or secondary issues.
MAS' approval must be sought for any changes to SGX's listing rules. Under the proposed
SFA,  the  SGX  will  have  to  notify  the  MAS  of  any  rule  changes  21  days  before  its
announcement.  MAS  will  be  able  to  approve,  alter  or  stop  any  rule  change  during  that
21-day period.
Continuous listing and disclosure requirements
SGX  enforces  the  continuous  listing  requirements  on  companies,  to  see  to  it  that  listed
companies  maintain  timely  and  adequate  disclosure  of  material  information.  SGX  has  the
power to suspend and even de-list a counter if a company fails to meet the standards set out
in the listing rules.
BIS Review 14/2001
3
 c.
• 
  d.
• 
 Continuous disclosure by listed companies will also become a statutory obligation under the
proposed SFA. This means that non-disclosure or late disclosure of material information will
be a breach of the law, not just a breach of SGX's listing requirements, and carry either civil
or criminal penalty.
Market surveillance
SGX  carries  out  market  surveillance  to  detect  unusual  trading  activities  that  could  reflect
attempts to manipulate the market. Such surveillance efforts could also lead to discovery of
parties trading on privileged insider information. SGX has the power to suspend or de-list a
counter if conditions for orderly trading are found to be absent.
MAS  will  carry  out  independent  surveillance  on  a  selective  basis,  to  ensure  that  SGX  is
performing its responsibilities effectively.
The MAS will have the power under the proposed SFA to pursue civil prosecution of listed
companies  which  fail  to  make  timely  disclosure  of  material  information,  and  of  any
participants suspected of market misconduct. The recently introduced civil remedy regime
for  insider  trading  will  be  extended  to  cover  other  forms  of  market  misconduct  such  as
market manipulation, or the employment of fraud and deceit in dealing. Civil remedy, which
lowers  the  burden  of  proof  against  offenders,  will  complement  the  present  framework  of
criminal remedy for offences under securities law.
Supervision of brokers
SGX  supervises  and  inspects  brokers  to  ensure  that  they  comply  with  SGX's  rules,  are
prudentially sound, and uphold high standards of market integrity. SGX has to act swiftly and
firmly to deal with any unprofessional conduct by brokers and their representatives.
MAS conducts continuous off-site review of brokers' operations to check if they comply with
statutory  licensing  requirements.  Such  off-site  reviews  will  be  complemented  by  MAS'
selective, on-site inspection of brokers to assure itself of the competence and effectiveness
of SGX's supervision.
Regulation of SGX as a self-listed entity
When the SGX was listed on itself (on  its Securities Trading subsidiary), MAS  assumed the role of
frontline  regulator  for  the  listing  and  trading  of  SGX's  shares.  MAS  was  the  approving  authority  for
SGX's  listing,  and  was  directly  responsible  for  vetting  SGX's  prospectus.  We  are  also  conducting
surveillance  of  trading  in  SGX's  shares,  and  monitoring  the  continuous  disclosure  of  material
information  by  SGX.  MAS  has  powers  under  the  Exchanges  (Demutualisation  and  Merger)  Act  to
issue directives to SGX to resolve any conflicts of interest arising from its self-listing. Such conflicts are
also addressed in a Deed of Undertaking to the MAS. In keeping with the Deed, SGX has appointed a
Conflicts Committee to deal with such issues, and MAS is the approving authority for the composition
of the Committee.
Revisiting the regulatory structure will be necessary
The relationship between  the regulator and the exchange  is evolving internationally. Regulators are
monitoring the  effectiveness of self-regulation by  the  exchanges,  and  the  division  of  responsibilities
between regulators and exchanges. No single model has gained universal acceptance, and no model
is regarded as good for all time in any jurisdiction.
The present MAS-SGX regulatory arrangement has major elements in common with that in the major
jurisdictions  which  have  seen  the  exchanges  demutualised,  and  in  particular  with  arrangements  in
Australia.  The  UK  approach  is  also  similar,  except  that  the  Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA)  has
taken over the listing authority from the London Stock Exchange (LSE). That decision was shaped by
the inappropriateness of leaving the listing authority with the LSE when other competing exchanges
are emerging in the UK.
We believe that the current arrangements for the regulation and supervision of the securities
markets between the MAS and SGX, with an enhanced oversight responsibility for the MAS and
4
BIS Review 14/2001
powers  to  pursue  civil  prosecution,  will  prove  robust.  But  we  will  continually  review  the
arrangement, keep in touch with international practices, and re-calibrate the roles of MAS and SGX
where necessary to ensure effective oversight of the local markets.
I  would  now  like  to  touch  on  two  features  of  the  regulatory  arrangement  that  we  have  recently
reviewed.  The  first  concerns  the  approval  of  substantial  shareholdings  in  the  SGX;  the  second,
proposed changes in the prospectus registration regime.
Approval of substantial shareholdings in the SGX
The Exchanges (Demutualisation and Merger) Act requires anyone who wishes to acquire 5% or more
of SGX to seek prior approval from MAS. This provision recognises the unique and important role of
SGX  in  providing  the  infrastructure  and  marketplace  for  the  trading,  clearing  and  settlement  of
securities and derivatives in Singapore.
Strategic investors
As announced previously, MAS will allow suitable strategic investors who can promote SGX's growth
and  development  to  acquire  substantial  stakes  of  5%  or  more  in  SGX.  How  large  a  stake  these
strategic  investors  will  be  allowed  to  take  will  depend  on  what  they  are  able  to  contribute  to  the
exchange  in  terms  of  business  alliances,  technology  or  other  ways  of  supporting  the  business  and
infrastructure of the exchange.
Fund managers
In  addition,  SGX  has  received  indications  from  fund  managers  that  they  would  like  to  hold  more
significant  stakes  in  SGX  than  is  currently  permissible  under  the  5%  cap.  Fund  managers  are  key
institutional  players  on  the  buy-side  of  the  capital  markets,  and  will,  as  shareholders,  add  to  the
diverse range of groups with an interest in SGX's business. MAS will therefore generally allow fund
managers who invest pools of customer funds to hold SGX's shares beyond the 5% limit. They
will have to apply to MAS for approval first. The combined holdings of such a fund manager will be
capped  at  10%.  A  fund  manager,  however,  cannot  expect  to  be  represented  on  the  SGX  Board
unless it has a substantive, strategic relationship with the Exchange.
Proposed changes to the prospectus registration regime
The  Companies  Act  requires  every  company  seeking  to  raise  funds  via  a  public  offer  to  issue  a
prospectus to inform potential investors of the financial status of the company, its business plans, the
risks of investing in the company, and all other material information which will enable them to make
informed investment decisions. Currently, companies submit their draft prospectuses to the Registry of
Companies and Businesses (RCB) to be vetted for compliance with the Companies Act. Companies
applying to list on the SGX will also send their draft prospectuses to the exchange for vetting to ensure
that they meet SGX's disclosure requirements.
When the capital-raising  provisions in the Companies  Act are  transferred  to  the  new  SFA  later  this
year,  MAS  will  take  over  from  RCB  as  statutory  regulator  for  prospectus  registration.  We  are  now
reviewing  the  prospectus  registration  regime  with  a  view  to  enhancing  market  accountability,  and
raising the standards of prospectus disclosure.
Under the proposed regime, MAS will register a prospectus not earlier than 14 days and not later than
28  days  after  an  issuer  has  lodged  the  prospectus  with  MAS.  This  period  will  allow  for  both
regulatory review by the MAS and SGX, and public scrutiny and comment. (Currently, there is no
public scrutiny before a prospectus is registered.) The prospectus will be published on the Internet to
give investors the opportunity to scrutinise the prospectus prior to its distribution, and raise any issues
of concern. This model is similar to that which has been introduced in the Australian markets.
There will be a more measured approach to prospectus review by the regulator. I was told that SGX
currently vets an average of five  drafts for every  prospectus that  gets published. This is clearly  not
desirable going forward. The review of prospectuses by the MAS and SGX will focus, respectively, on
compliance with laws and SGX's listing requirements on prospectus disclosure. MAS and SGX will no
longer vet prospectuses with a view to determining if they contain inaccuracies in information or factual
BIS Review 14/2001
5
errors.  Issuers  and  their  advisers  have  to  bear  greater  responsibility  for  ensuring  accurate  and
adequate disclosure.
After a prospectus has been registered, it is proposed that MAS be empowered to issue a stop order
and  prevent  further  issues  of  securities  if  a  prospectus  is  found  to  contain  misleading  or  incorrect
statements, or to have omitted material information. Investors who have subscribed for securities on
the basis of the deficient prospectus can withdraw their applications and have their monies refunded.
The new prospectus registration regime is aimed at placing greater responsibility on issuers and their
advisers to  meet  the  high  standards  of  disclosure  necessary  for  the  development  of more  effective
market discipline, and a more mature capital market environment. MAS will be seeking feedback on
the  proposed  prospectus  registration  regime  shortly,  as  part  of  our  public  consultation  on  the  draft
SFA.
Conclusion
Approaches  to  regulation  worldwide  are  evolving  with  the  times.  An  effective  system  of  market
discipline  is  necessary  to  sustain  and  promote  the  growth  of  open,  transparent  and  competitive
markets.  Singapore  is  making  substantial  changes  to  its  laws,  rules  and  standards  to  support
enhanced  market  discipline.  It  will  be  a  process  of  evolution,  but  we  have  made  good  progress.
Succeeding  in  this  endeavour  will  require  effort  by  both  the  regulator  and  all  market  participants,
including issuers, their advisers and investors themselves. It is an indispensable part of our efforts to
make Singapore a premier financial hub in Asia, and we have every confidence in getting there.
6
BIS Review 14/2001
