Süreyya Serdengeçti: Recent developments in the Turkish economy
Speech by Süreyya Serdengeçti, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, made at the
69th Shareholders' Ordinary General Meeting of the Central Bank, Ankara, 24 April 2001.
 Dear Shareholders, Distinguished Guests and Valuable Press Members;
I would first like to  welcome  you to the 69th Shareholders’ Ordinary General  Meeting of the Central
Bank of the Republic of Turkey.
As you know, the year 2000 differed widely from the previous years for the Central Bank of Turkey and
for  the  Turkish  economy  as  well.  The  Disinflation  Program,  which  had  been  initiated  in  December
1999,  was  the  most  important  element  that  shaped  the  economic  developments  in  2000.  In  the
medium-term, the program had aimed to bring down inflation to single digits in three years, to reduce
real  interest  rates  to  reasonable  levels,  to  increase  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy,  and  to
provide a more efficient resource allocation in the economy.
The main pillars of the  Program were; tight  fiscal  policy  focusing  on  improving  the  primary  surplus;
speeding  up  the  structural  reforms  and  privatization  efforts;  an  incomes  policy  geared  to  targeted
inflation;  and  a  pre-announced  exchange  rate  basket.  The  specifics  of  the  program  and  extensive
analyses of economic developments of last year have been elaborated in our 2000 Annual Report.
In  2000,  although  the  inflation  targets  that  were  envisaged  in  the  program  could  not  be  reached,
significant progress was made in the fight against inflation, which reached its lowest level ever in the
last 14 years. In addition, the fiscal balance improved considerably, and the structural reforms were
underway.
Interest rates came substantially down in 2000 as a result of the decreased exchange rate risk and the
improved  foresight  of  public.  Declining  interest  rates  reduced  the  cost  of  the  Treasury’s  domestic
borrowing. Rising domestic debt stock was put under control.
After  the  recession  in  the  economy  in  1999,  falling  interest  rates  boosted  the  deferred  consumer
demand, particularly for durable goods. Moreover, increased demand for credit, driven by the banks’
favorable  consumer  loans,  put  the  economy  back  on  the  growth  track.  Besides  the  decreasing
tendency  in  interest  rates,  the  stable  exchange  rates  and  the  private  sector’s  renewal  investments,
directed to productivity increase, also contributed to the growth in the economy. As a result, the GNP
grew by 6.1 percent in 2000.
However, the economic expectations became confused in the second half of 2000. Starting from May
2000, the gap between the optimists and pessimists in the CBRT’s Business Tendency Survey began
to decrease and in November, the pessimist expectations started to gain ground. It is observed in this
survey  that  also  the  expectations  for  inflation,  employment  and  exports  began  to  deteriorate  in  the
same  period.  The  propensity  for  investments  started  to  decline  during  the  summer  of  2000  and
continued to do so at an accelerating rate later on.
Keeping  public  expenditures  under  control  and  rising  tax  revenue  due  to  supplementary  tax
adjustments led the primary surplus to pick up significantly. However, the growth in domestic demand,
the price hikes in energy sector, especially in crude oil, and the real appreciation of Turkish lira were
all the factors that caused the imports to grow rapidly and this, in turn, led to deterioration in current
account  balance.  In  addition,  the  depreciation  of  the  euro  against  the  US  dollar  by  an  average  13
percent  in  2000  raised  Turkey’s  imports  from  the  EU  countries,  while  Turkey’s  exports  to  the  EU
countries were negatively affected. As a result, the external current account deficit in 2000 grew by 4.8
percent of the GNP.
While the current account deteriorated rapidly, delays in privatization and structural reform agenda in
the  second  half  of  2000  adversely  affected  the  capital  movements  and  interest  rates  starting  from
August, arousing concerns in domestic and international markets. The increase in the interest rates,
on which the monetary policy similar to a currency board regime is ineffective, resulted in deterioration
BIS Review 35/2001
1
intensifying 
in  overnight 
transactions,  also  residents  preferred  short-term 
of  the  financial  structure  of  the  banks  which  held  large  amount  of  government  securities  in  their
portfolios. This further weakened the confidence in financial markets in the second half of November.
Although the targets for Net Domestic Assets and Net International Reserves had been met until mid-
November 2000, the Central Bank had to inject substantial liquidity to the markets due to the shortage
arising from the turmoil in the banking system in November 2000. The liquidity, which was injected by
means  of  open  market  operations,  amounted  to  TL.  3.9  Quadrillion  between  22  and  30  November
2000. The target for Net Domestic Assets was overshot due to excess liquidity. In addition, the Central
Bank sold US dollar 6 billion to the banking sector in view of the rising demand for foreign exchange.
These developments prompted us to revise the targets for Net Domestic Assets and Net international
Reserves.  In  December,  the  Supplemental  Reserve  Facility  extended  by  IMF  and  the  additional
measures taken by the Government provided a partial relief to the financial markets. The revised post-
crisis targets were met as end of the year.
It has become clear that, the crisis in November 2000 should not be simply  regarded  as  a  liquidity
crisis.  Rather,  it  started  as  a  banking  crisis,  which  later  transformed  itself  into  a  liquidity  crisis.  As
stated in the economic literature, banking crises, which cause huge liquidity demand, may begin either
by a run on banks or by the inability of some banks to meet their economic or legal liabilities. And then
comes “a currency attack”, as we can  observe  in many emerging markets, where  the currency peg
system is in practice and foreign exchange liabilities of the banking system reach high levels.
Despite  a  decline  in  interest  rates  and  a  modest  increase  in  capital  inflows  in  January  2001,  the
damage of the crisis in November 2000 on the banking system, especially on the state-owned banks,
increased the vulnerability of the system. In this period, the maturities of the funds obtained from both
international and domestic markets gradually got shorter. It was observed that, while external funds
began 
investment
instruments.  In  particular,  TL  deposits  of  one-month  started  to  increase  and  its  share  in  the  total
deposits  rose  to  35  percent  in  February  2001  from  12  percent  in  October  2000.  In  February,  the
unfavorable developments that had occurred on the day before the Treasury auction caused a panic in
the already fragile markets. Market confidence in the system was completely lost and the Turkish lira
was once more faced with a new currency attack on 19 February 2000. The banking sector purchased
US dollar 7.6 billion from the Central Bank, to be settled the next day. This exerted pressure over the
exchange rates. In order to alleviate this pressure, the Central Bank did not roll over the repurchase
agreements maturing next day and US dollar 6.1 billion  that  had  been  purchased  the  previous  day
were  sold  back  to  the  Central  Bank.  However,  the  remaining  amount  of  TL  caused  trouble  to  the
payments system due to the state-owned banks’ daily liquidity needs. On the other hand, the concerns
that were raised about the sustainability of the currency peg system deepened the lack of confidence
further and the Turkish authorities decided to allow the lira to float freely on 22 February 2000, in order
to avoid further damage in the economy.
It is interesting to note here that, the turbulences occurred in November 2000 and in February 2001
differ from each other as regards their starting points. The crisis in November 2000 was started by the
banks’ failure to meet financial obligations, and then was followed by a liquidity crisis that increased
pressure on exchange rates. On the other hand, the crisis in February 2001 directly manifested itself
as a direct attack to domestic currency, with the increased financial vulnerability after November 2000.
An analysis of the fundamental reasons behind the failure of the disinflation program implemented in
2000  reveals  that  the  problems  in  the  banking  system  should  have  been  resolved  well  before  the
implementation of the program. It was natural that, pursuing a monetary policy similar to a currency
board,  forced  the  Central  Bank  to  pay  less  attention  to  the  liquidity  needs  of  financial  markets
compared  to  previous  years.  Moreover,  this  practice  reduced  the  flexibility  of  the  monetary  policy
against external shocks. The continuation of problems in banking sector in 2000 put pressure on the
rule-based monetary policy based on rule.  Another problem encountered in 2000  was the lack of a
front-loaded  Supplemental  Reserve  Facility,  which  would  support  foreign  exchange  reserves  when
needed in the course of the program.
The adverse developments in November 2000 and in February 2001 compelled the Central Bank to
pursue policies aimed at stabilizing the  financial  markets.  Priority  was  given  to  make  the  payments
system function again by providing liquidity to the market, after having been switched to the floating
exchange rate system. In this context, the Central Bank lowered its bid and offer rates in the interbank
money market starting from 26 February 2001. Liquidity was given mostly to the state-owned banks,
and to the banks that had been transferred to the Saving Deposits Insurance Fund through overnight
quotations under open market operations. Besides overnight funding via open market operations, the
2
BIS Review 35/2001
Central Bank has also started providing the markets with liquidity through forward transactions since
the mid-March. At the same time, the Central Bank withdrew the excess liquidity by way of repurchase
and  reverse  repurchase  transactions  at  the  Istanbul  Stock  Exchange  and  by  way  of  the  CBRT
interbank  money  market,  when  needed.  The  Central  Bank  has  also  provided  banks  with  cash  via
foreign exchange deposits and limited foreign exchange interventions to help them fulfill their external
obligations. Delay in the announcement of the new stabilization program prompted the Central Bank to
implement a multiple price auction in buying and selling foreign exchange at the end of March 2000, in
order to  ensure that  the  exchange  rates  may  be  fixed  according  to  the  market  conditions,  avoiding
excessive fluctuations.
At this point, let me touch on the operations for the state-owned banks. At present, higher overnight
borrowing  requirement,  stemming  from  the  state-owned  banks’  structural  problems,  is  putting
substantial constraints on the monetary policy actions, making financial markets more fragile. In view
of this important issue, the state-owned banks have started to lessen their overnight borrowing from
other banks and non-banking institutions in the short-term by obtaining liquidity from the Central Bank
through repurchase or outright selling transactions against government papers given by the Treasury
to cover their duty losses. A similar process is running for the banks taken over by the Saving Deposits
Insurance  Fund.  The  Central  Bank  and  the  Treasury  are  absorbing  the  excess  liquidity  from  the
market through reverse repurchase transactions and through selling government papers.
Dear Shareholders, Distinguished Guests and Valuable Press Members;
In view of the current economic conditions, the economic literature also indicates that, pursuing a tight
monetary policy to stabilize exchange rate right after the emergence of crises has certain setbacks.
Although  a  post-crisis  policy  implementation  can  reduce  the  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rates,  the
resulting higher interest rates will negatively affect both the domestic debt stock and the real sector.
Furthermore,  I  believe  that  once  the  setbacks  are  eliminated  right  after  the  crisis  and  once  the
amendments are made in the Central Bank Act, we will be able to use short-term interest rates actively
as a monetary policy instrument in the medium-term. A more efficient monetary policy implementation
will be ensured through easing the fiscal burden on the financial markets and through reinforcing the
banking sector, which will lay the ground for inflation targeting. In the near future, we will continue to
do the technical works for inflation targeting. These works will include, choosing an appropriate price
index; determining a transmission mechanism that would show how monetary policy instruments might
influence the prices and how the pressures might come up on the prices; determining a targeting band
and its period. In short, the Central Bank will shift from a post-crisis policy aimed at short-term financial
stability toward price stability, once the necessary conditions have emerged.
Let me point out that, developments in November 2000 and in February 2001 highlighted once again
the importance of achieving the structural and financial reforms, which is one of the keystones for the
medium-  and  long-term  stability  of  the  economy.  At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  the
existence of a healthy financial system can be considered as a public good with substantial positive
externalities.  Once  the  system  is  relieved  from  the  burden  of  the  state-owned  banks,  both  the
borrowing costs will decline and the Central Bank will get an upper hand in its monetary policy actions.
One of the necessary conditions for the success of inflation targeting in the medium- and long-term is
ensuring the soundness of financial sector, along with a central bank that can freely use its monetary
policy instruments. These are just some of the important factors lying behind the restructuring efforts in
the Turkish financial system in this period. With the increased efficiency resulting from adjustments in
financial markets, the Central Bank will be able to pursue a monetary policy aimed at price stability.
Here  I  would  like  to  present  some  information  on  the  monetary  policy  to  be  implemented  in  this
transition  period  that  will  pave  the  way  for  inflation  targeting  in  the  medium-  and  long-term.  The
Central  Bank  will  keep  its  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets  limited  under  the  floating
exchange rate system, but will only move to reduce volatility in exchange rates in case of excessive
fluctuations. The Central Bank will support disinflation efforts by keeping monetary aggregates under
control, and in addition, the monetary policy will be directed at achieving financial stability. The Central
Bank  will  continue  monitoring  the  targets  on  Net  International  Reserves  and  Net  Domestic  Assets,
which are among the basic items on its balance sheet. These targets will be set also by considering
financial stability. The money creation of the Central Bank against the increase in the money demand
will be carried out by considering the indicative path for Net Domestic Assets. On the other hand, the
Bank will allow flexibility on its  Net  Domestic  Assets,  whenever  unexpected  negative  developments
emerge in the financial system. Moreover, the Central Bank will resort to use short-term interest rates
BIS Review 35/2001
3
efficiently as a monetary policy instrument through reducing Net Domestic Assets, should disinflation
process be endangered by foreign exchange movements.
Dear Shareholders, Distinguished Guests and Valuable Press Members,
Now let me go into some details of the Draft-Law Amending the Central Bank Act, which will have a
greater impact on the macro-economic policies in Turkey in the medium- and long-term. As you know,
the  Draft-Law,  which  has  already  been  approved  by  the  Planning  and  Budget  Commission  at  the
Parliament, will be debated in the Parliament’s General Assembly, probably today. The Draft-Law was
prepared by taking account of economic developments of the last 31 years since the enactment of the
Central  Bank  Act  No:  1211  on  14  January  1970,  and  the  central  banking  norms  agreed  by  the
European Union. According to the Draft-Law, ensuring price stability becomes the primary objective of
the Central Bank. The Central Bank will have the exclusive power and responsibility in designing and
pursuing its monetary policy. The new Law will enable the Bank to choose and to use its monetary
policy and instruments independently. If the Draft-Law is ratified in the Parliament just as adopted in
the Commission, a Monetary Policy Committee will be established. It will be consisted of Governor,
Vice Governors, one member to be elected from among the Board members and one member to be
designated by Council of Ministers upon the proposal of the Governor. This Committee  will play an
important role in setting the targets and regulations, upon which the Central Bank will act jointly with
the  Government.  However,  the  Central  Bank  will  support  the  governments’  policies  on  economic
growth and employment, on condition that they do not conflict with the aim of achieving price stability.
The Draft-Law is removing a number of constraints of the present Law on the monetary policy actions
and is bringing new facilities.
The concepts of Transparency and Accountability are underlined in the Draft-Law. For example, the
Governor of the Central  Bank  will  report  to  the  Council  of  Ministers  and  will  brief  the  Planning  and
Budget  Commission  in  Parliament  twice  a  year  on  the  Bank’s  activities.  Moreover,  the  Bank  will
disclose its monetary policy implementation to the public by means of reports and announcements. In
addition to this, if by any chance inflation targets are missed or should there be a probability of failing
to hit the targets, then the Bank will explain the reasons thereof to the Government and to the public.
The balance sheet, profit and loss account of the Bank will be audited by independent agencies, which
is another element increasing the Bank’s transparency.
To ensure stability in the financial system and to increase its efficiency in achieving the price stability,
the Central Bank will have the power of taking necessary measures to strengthen the financial system
and to determine the systemic risks. Besides removing the burden of the state-owned banks from the
financial  system  and  restructuring  the  banking  system,  the  measures  that  would  reduce  the  public
sector  borrowing  requirement  will  boost  the  economic  efficiency  and  secure  the  price  stability.  The
Central Bank will not in any manner whatsoever extend credit to the Treasury and to the public sector,
including outright purchase of government papers, as envisaged in the Maastricht Criteria. However, a
transition  period  of  six  months  is  needed,  before  we  can  adhere  to  this  principle  in  view  of  the
operations we have to conduct in this post-crisis environment.
Having said all this let me end my remarks by making a last point. The extraordinary  period,  which
Turkey has undergone recently, should not create an obstacle for Turkey on its way to become a part
of Europe in the medium-term. On the contrary, I think we should take advantage of the opportunities
arisen from the turbulences, in order to reinforce the steps being taken by Turkey for the attainment of
its goals.
We must take the necessary structural measures to disinflate the economy and to boost the growth
potential  of  the  economy.  Decisive  steps  must  also  be  taken  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
Information Age. In the near future, Turkey will unquestionably attain an economic and social level it
deserves by reaching a social consensus and by taking appropriate policy actions today. Thank you all
for listening to me.
4
BIS Review 35/2001
