David Clementi: The City and the Euro: innovation and excellence
Speech  by  Mr  David  Clementi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  City  Seminar  on
'London into the 21st Century' at the Palace Hotel, Tokyo on 13 February 2001.
 Introduction
The City of London is, and always has been, a centre of innovation and excellence. I want to talk to
you  today  about  the  City's  role  in  the  euro  markets  as  an  example  of  how  London  proposes  to
maintain its standing and reputation for innovation and excellence in the 21st century.
For me, it is a great pleasure to be able to talk to you about this here in Tokyo. There are historic links
between Tokyo and the City of London, and I am glad that these links are continuing to flourish. We
welcome the fact that so many important Japanese financial institutions are represented in London;
and, of course, that UK-based financial institutions have operations here in Tokyo.
It is not surprising that there are such strong links between Tokyo and the City of London, because
London is one of the three global financial centres, alongside Tokyo itself and New York. Tokyo and
New York are global centres because of their large domestic markets. Unlike Tokyo and New York,
London's primary focus is international.
London is much the largest international financial centre in Europe. Historically, London developed as
a financial centre because of the international role of the pound sterling. But nowadays, London's role
depends  mainly  on  making  markets  and  providing  financial  services  in  foreign  currencies,  like  the
dollar. That means that London continues to thrive only by remaining internationally competitive. And I
should add that we in the Bank of England take a close interest in this. Maintaining the stability of the
financial system and the effectiveness of the UK's financial services are key objectives for us.
The City is a centre of innovation and excellence
London is internationally competitive, because it acts as a centre of innovation and excellence, in a
whole range of complementary ways.
•  London has a vast, critical mass of markets and financial services in commercial and investment
banking, securities and derivatives, fund management, insurance and commodities.
•  London  has  a  long  track  record  of  innovation,  and  a  ready  availability  of  financial  skills  and
professional support services in law, accountancy, tax, property and communications. More than
300,000
•  people work in financial services in London, and nearly a further 600,000 work in the supporting
professions and services.
•  London is at the forefront of technology, with an effective financial infrastructure.
•  London has a reputation as a 'clean' market, and it has a commitment to openness in welcoming
foreign  firms.  There  is  a  genuinely  level  playing-field  for  foreign  firms,  with  no  overt  or  covert
advantages given to domestic institutions.
•  And in London, we have a non-bureaucratic but rigorous approach to regulation. The FSA brings
together within a single organisation responsibility for financial regulation to deal effectively with
the oversight of increasingly complex and diverse financial groups. The Bank meanwhile retains
responsibility  for  monitoring  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  This  regulatory
structure is designed to provide confidence in financial institutions and markets, whilst not stifling
innovation  and  risk-taking.  Indeed  the  new  Financial  Services  and  Markets  Act  balances  the
objectives  of  prudential  supervision  and  consumer  protection  with  an  explicit  objective  of
promoting efficiency and competition.
•  London  has  flexible  labour  markets,  and  low  levels  of  corporate  and  personal  tax.  The  UK
compares  favourably  with  many  other  European  countries  in  this  regard  and  has  been  the
beneficiary of high levels of overseas direct investment as a result.
BIS Review 11/2001
1
•  English is the language of international finance.
•  We are lucky enough in London to find ourselves in a convenient time-zone so that market firms
can trade with Asia in the morning and New York in the afternoon.
•  And  finally,  London  has  great  attractions  as  a  place  to  live!  Like  Japan,  the  UK  has  a  long
heritage, and a rich culture.
The euro is an opportunity for the City, not a threat
Since London is an international financial centre, the launch of the euro at the beginning of 1999 was
a major event for the  City,  as  well  as for the euro area itself. As  you  know,  the  UK  decided  not  to
participate in Economic and Monetary  Union  at the outset.  But  although  the  UK  is  'out',  the  City  of
London is effectively 'in' already. And this is because of the City's international role, making markets
and providing financial services, regardless of currency.
So the City of London needed to be well prepared for the introduction of the euro in January 1999.
And it was well prepared. As a result, London remains a competitive market place for euro business.
You  can  trade  euro  in  London,  just  like  dollars.  There  is  a  wide  variety  of  euro  payment  routes
available in and from London. And London is playing a key role in pioneering the development of the
euro markets and financial services across Europe. This means that London can, and does, provide a
gateway to the euro for Japanese financial institutions.
The City of London does not depend on the currency used by the UK. Financial activity will be carried
on where it can be carried on most conveniently, profitably and efficiently. The City thrives on deep
and liquid markets, regardless of currency. Measured in these terms, we have, over the last few years,
seen the euro as an opportunity for London, not a threat.
And the City has been taking advantage of this opportunity, since the euro's launch, by innovating and
setting standards of excellence in the euro markets. Helping to develop deep and liquid euro markets
is  arguably  the  main  contribution  that  we  in  the  UK  can  make  to  the  success  of  the  euro  from  the
'outside'. And in this sense, the UK has been making a positive and constructive contribution. Deep
and liquid euro markets have become well established in London. They have replaced the previous,
more  segmented,  markets  in  the  old  national  currencies  (like  the  Deutsche  mark  and  the  French
franc). As a result, the European Union has begun to achieve  one of its objectives in  introducing  a
single currency in place of the old national currencies.
The City is pioneering the changes in the euro markets
The volatility in the euro exchange rate has diverted attention from the structural changes taking place
in the euro markets. Yet these changes are of fundamental importance. They will affect all businesses
using the euro - Japanese businesses as much as UK and euro area businesses. I would like briefly to
mention five of these structural changes. It is of course important to recognise, as I do so, that while
the euro has been the catalyst for these changes it is not the only cause. But in each case, the City of
London has been playing a leading role as a centre of innovation and excellence.
The first change is the growth  of euro issuance -  particularly  in  the  private  sector,  as  the  financing
needs  of euro-area  governments are limited by fiscal discipline and special  influences,  such  as  the
proceeds of mobile phone auctions. The flow of corporate euro bond and equity issuance has grown
significantly, though it is important to keep this in proportion: the stock of issuance outstanding in both
cases is still - by some margin - lower than the US. (Domestic debt securities in the euro area, taking
governments and corporates together, amount to the equivalent of around $6 trillion, compared with
some  $14  trillion  in  the  US.  And  the  equity  market  capitalisation  of  companies  in  the  euro  area
amounts to the equivalent of around $6 trillion, compared with some $16 trillion in the US.) Since the
launch  of  the  euro,  the  focus  of  risk  assessment  in  the  corporate  debt  market  has  shifted  from
currency risk towards credit and liquidity risk. A growing number of companies in the euro area have
been seeking external credit ratings. And an equity culture is beginning to take root in the euro area,
despite the volatility in TMT stocks over the past two years. In Europe as a whole, for example, there
were over 17,000 M&A transactions with a combined value equivalent to $1.5 trillion last year.
The second change concerns the integration of euro trading and settlement. Trading has increased in
most  euro  markets,  and  dealing  spreads  have  narrowed.  Electronic  trading  and  communication
2
BIS Review 11/2001
networks  have  greatly  increased  the  reach  of  traditional  financial  markets,  while  allowing  new
providers  to  enter  at  relatively  low  cost.  In  particular,  there  has  been  much  greater  cross-border
activity  in  Europe,  supported  by  fully-integrated  pan-European  systems  for  making  wholesale
payments. But many systems for the trading, clearing and settlement of securities are still fragmented
nationally by sector. Market firms are keen to see consolidation of the arrangements for clearing and
settling securities trades,  where costs are still considerably  greater in Europe  than in the US. Even
without mergers, market firms can of course trade remotely from a single location, though this does
not  address  the  issue  of  duplicate  investment  costs.  But  it  seems  that  full  rationalisation  may  take
years to implement and, while the broad vision of integrated European systems is widely shared, there
are still differences of view about how best to achieve it.
The third change is the diversification of investment. The launch of the euro has begun to encourage a
shift in funds away from the particular national market in which they have traditionally been invested,
and towards investment across the euro area as a whole. This helps to explain the increasing use by
fund managers of European  benchmark indices against  which  to measure investment performance,
rather  than  national  benchmark  indices.  Portfolio  diversification  has  so  far  been  rather  slower  than
originally  expected.  But  there  is  evidence  that  diversification  is  continuing  to  take  place,  and  it  is
expected to pick up over time.
Fourth, financial institutions themselves are consolidating, including in some cases across borders, so
that  they  can  better  provide  a  service  to  clients  across  the  Single  European  Market  as  a  whole.
Consolidation  is  already  far  advanced  in  investment  banking,  where  critical  mass  is  of  particular
importance  to  profitability,  and  a  US  link  has  proved  a  competitive  advantage.  The  recent  mergers
between Citibank, Salomon Smith Barney and Schroder, and between Chase, JP Morgan and Robert
Fleming, affect investment banking activity in Europe as much as in the US. Consolidation  is much
less far advanced in retail banking in Europe, where national differences in the retail markets are still
pronounced.
Finally, regulation. Much has already  been done to remove  obstacles to the  integration  of Europe's
capital markets. But the launch of the euro has served to highlight the barriers that remain. To remove
these barriers, market practitioners in London do not believe that  it  is necessary  to provide uniform
regulation  of  European  securities  markets.  Rather,  the  changes  required  can  be  implemented  by
relying  on  the  principles  of  the  Single  European  Market,  and  giving  the  necessary  priority  to
implementing the European Commission's Financial Services Action Plan. And a Committee of Wise
Men, chaired by Baron Lamfalussy, has been established in an attempt to speed up the process of
change. We welcome the direction of the Wise Men's initial report last autumn, and we look forward to
its final report, which is due shortly.
The City has maintained its market share
16 I have identified five main ways in which the structure of the euro markets is developing. The City of
London has been making a positive and constructive contribution to their development by doing what it
does best: providing a lead through innovation; and setting the standard for excellence. As a result, all
the  available  evidence  continues  to  indicate  that,  since  the  launch  of  the  euro,  London  has  fully
maintained its market share. Let me give you a few figures.
•  There are 482 foreign banking institutions in London, around double the number in Frankfurt, and
more than double the number in Paris.
•  The wholesale euro payment system in London, CHAPS euro, has recently accounted for 19% by
value of cross-border payment flows in TARGET, the pan-European payment system. This figure
has  grown  from  15%  since  the  launch  of  the  euro,  and  the  UK  now  accounts  for  more  cross-
border payment flows in euro than any other country, except for Germany, even though the UK is
not     participating in EMU.
•  London is estimated to have a 32% share of global foreign exchange turnover, compared with 5%
for Germany and 4% for France.
•  London's global market share of over-the-counter derivatives is around 35%, compared with 5%
for Germany and 6% for France.
•  Over 98% of the euro short-term interest rate contracts on the three major European derivatives
exchanges  (in  London,  Frankfurt  and  Paris)  are  traded  on  LIFFE.  And  taking  STIR,  bond  and
BIS Review 11/2001
3
other contracts together, LIFFE is the largest derivatives exchange in Europe by value, although
Eurex is the largest by volume.
•  London  originates  over  19%  of  cross-border  international  bank  lending,  compared  with  7%  for
France and 9% for Germany.
•  London has a market share of 55% of underwritten euro-denominated Eurobond issuance, and an
estimated market share of 70% of secondary trading in the Eurobond market.
•  Around 500 foreign companies are currently listed on the London Stock Exchange. This is more
than any other exchange. 59% of global foreign equity turnover is reported to the London Stock
Exchange by London market firms. And just under 40% of equity trades reported to the London
Stock Exchange by market firms are denominated in euro.
•  The market capitalisation of the London Stock Exchange, at & 128;2.7 trillion, is nearly double that
of either Frankfurt or Paris.
•  London  is  the  largest  global  centre  for  the  fund  management  of  institutional  equities,  with  $2.5
trillion of institutional equities under management.
•  And London is the global market leader in aviation and marine insurance, with a combined market
share of 22%.
Conclusion
It is early days. London is not complacent. But our view is that London will continue to thrive in the
21st  century,  so  long  as  it  remains  internationally  competitive.  In  particular,  the  environment  which
London provides for financial business must remain attractive and consistent with international 'best
practice'. This means: maintaining the right approach in areas like labour flexibility, low taxation and
regulation; and continuing to foster open markets and to welcome foreign firms. Among such firms, we
hope  that  many  of  the  largest  Japanese  financial  institutions  will  continue  to  see  London  as  their
natural European home.
London is determined to remain internationally competitive as a centre for innovation and excellence in
the 21st century. And we hope that it will also continue to be Japan's gateway to the euro.
 4
BIS Review 11/2001
