Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Response to “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability” by
Mr Andrew Crockett
Response  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  to  “Monetary  Policy  and
Financial Stability” by Mr Andrew Crockett, at the Fourth HKMA Distinguished  Lecture, Hong  Kong,
13 February 2001.
 Mr Joseph Yam, Chairman, Mr Andrew Crockett, Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Monetary and financial stability is not an end in itself. It is a means to achieving the ultimate objective
of a broad based economic prosperity. While there is general agreement that monetary and financial
stability are important pre conditions for sustainable growth, there has been less agreement as to how
this  might  be  achieved.  The  means  by  which  monetary  and  financial  stability  is  achieved  involves
costs. All too often, the focus on achieving monetary and financial stability has been at all costs. It has
been argued that  the  cost  of  financial  crisis,  and  the  subsequent  economic  crisis  would  far  exceed
these costs. While this may be the case, our quest for monetary and financial stability must take into
account  the  need  to  minimise  the  costs  of  such  policy  measures  on  our  financial  systems  and  our
economy.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It  is  my  pleasure  and  indeed  my  honour,  to  be  invited  by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  to
comment  on  the  Distinguished  Lecture  by  Andrew  Crockett  on  this  subject  of  Monetary  Policy  and
Financial Stability. Andrew Crockett has provided us with a stimulating analysis of what he terms as
the nexus between monetary and prudential policy. He argues that the intensity of this relationship has
been  underestimated.  He  makes  the  point  that  the  failure  to  appreciate  the  important  synergies
between  the  two  objectives  of  monetary  and  financial  stability  has  resulted  in  policies  that  are  less
than optimal.
The  presentation  highlights  that  while  solid  macroeconomic  policies  are  important  for  maintaining
financial stability, it is also important to recognise that success in containing inflation is not sufficient to
ensure  financial  stability,  that  financial  instability  had  in  fact  in  recent  years  been  seen  to  occur  in
environments  of  low  inflation.  Andrew  Crockett  goes  on  to  argue  that  some  of  the  main  causes  of
financial  instability  were  in  fact  macroeconomic  in  origin,  in  terms  of  both  the  diagnosis  and  the
remedies. In the former, this resulted from misjudgments on the growth prospects as well as changes
driven  by  market  sentiment  while  in  the  latter,  the  pursuit  of  price  stability  had  infact  inadvertently
endangered  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  This  relationship  therefore  required  an  enhanced
appreciation of the interdependence of policies in the two areas.
In this context, Andrew raises the question as to whether monetary policy should have as one of its
objectives, the prevention of financial excesses and imbalances. While Andrew notes that the end of
the  debate  on  this  issue  is  not  in  sight,  he  does  proceed  to  suggest  that  in  formulating  monetary
policy,  Central  Banks  should  take  explicit  account  of  the  impact  of  financial  developments  on  the
balance of risk. When credit expansion is rapid and asset prices are increasing faster than the price of
current output, the authorities, he argues should aim for price increases in the lower part of the target
corridor. While Andrew does acknowledge that such a policy may be considered excessively cautious,
particularly when the potential for inflation is remote, he does however makes the point that the cost of
a financial crisis would be far greater than the output forgone by the policy action to constrain such
unsustainable growth.
The  difficulties  with  this  proposition  goes  beyond  those  mentioned  in  the  presentation,  that  is,  the
difficulties relating to the proliferation of objectives, of garnering political support for such policies and
the difficulty of distinguishing sustainable from unsustainable changes in asset prices. My reservations
relate to whether monetary policy is the most appropriate tool to use in the circumstances described in
Andrew’s  presentation.  What  he  has  proposed  implies  that  Central  Banks  should  tighten  monetary
policy by raising interest rates during times of asset price booms even when this coincides with stable
prices of goods and services. The reliance on demand management tools, such as interest rates to
correct  such  financial  developments  and  their  consequent  imbalances  may  indeed  produce  the
BIS Review 13/2001
1
desired  results,  but  it  will  do  so  at  high  costs.  In  essence,  an  over  adjustment  can  be  expected  to
occur.
Over adjustment not only occurs due to the higher than necessary interest rates, but also due to the
very reasons mentioned in the presentation, due to the potential for misjudgments about the economy
and for market sentiments to move with the business cycle thus amplifying the magnitude of the cycle.
Just as irrational exuberance drives asset prices to unrealistic levels, irrational pessimism can reverse
the  process  with  equal  intensity.  The  paper  further  suggests  that  market  participants  may  also  be
subject  to  collective  misperception  of  risks  and  even  if  the  risk  is  correctly  perceived,  the  market
reaction may not be the appropriate response.
The  challenge  for  policy  is  to  correct  any  such  emerging  imbalances  in  an  orderly  manner.
Consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  alternative  policy  options.  If  the  concern  is  with  vulnerabilities
emerging  from  developments  in  the  asset  market,  this  can  be  addressed  directly  by  prudential  or
administrative measures specific to this sector. Interest rate policy is a blunt instrument that does not
discriminate between sectors. The end result is a weaker economy and possibly  a weaker financial
system.  It  is  important  to  recognise  that  policies  that  may  be  generally  viable  in  stable  market
conditions  may  in  fact  trigger  greater  instability  under  unstable  market  conditions.  Under  stable
conditions and rational market behavior, such  policies can be expected  to  ensure  a  high  degree  of
predictability  of  the  desired  results.  However,  under  an  environment  of  financial  market  instability,
when the system has been subjected to external shocks, these policies cannot be expected to yield
similar results. Given that shocks to the system are by their nature destabilising, policies that amplify
this instability should therefore be avoided.
In the mid 1990s, in 1995 and 1996, Malaysia implemented prudential and administrative measures
supported  by  fiscal  measures  to  address  escalating  asset  prices.  This  avoided  the  formation  of  an
asset bubble. When the crisis occurred in 1997, asset prices had already plateaued. These measures
included prudential requirements such as loan margins and credit ceilings. These requirements were
then removed  when the  objectives had been achieved. While  it  is  argued  that  such  measures  may
involve costs in terms of the distortions and the uncertainty it might generate, it would be far less than
any over adjustment following a more significant tightening.
In our quest for monetary and financial stability, consideration also needs to be made of the influence
of international factors. For small open emerging economies like Malaysia, with the encroachment of
international financial forces on their  domestic financial systems, the authorities are confronted  with
further challenges in the quest for monetary and financial stability. Andrew Crockett’s discussion is for
the most part in the context of a closed economy. In an open economy, where there is the rapid flow of
speculative  capital  across  borders,  national  authorities  have  been  confronted  with  exchange  rate
volatility or alternatively, having the volatility transferred into bank liquidity and domestic interest rates,
both of which have implications on financial stability. In emerging economies with a liberalised capital
account, there  is the potential for destabilising  implications on both monetary  and financial  stability.
Exchange  volatility  would  have  implications  on  foreign  exposures  in  the  domestic  economy  with  its
consequent implications on the financial system, whereas, the build up of domestic liquidity leads to
the  increased  credit  growth  and  the  type  of  adverse  effects  on  the  financial  system  discussed  by
Andrew  in  his  paper.  In  both  cases,  countries  are  confronted  with  the  challenge  of  managing  the
vulnerability.
The presentation also highlights several challenges that confront prudential regulators. In particular,
Andrew highlights the need to recognise the role of common factors in generating financial  distress
and  the  need  to  find  better  ways  of  identifying  and  tackling  emerging  imbalances.  Supervisors,  he
argues, should focus on developments that generate systemic rather than idiosyncratic difficulties. The
concern  should  be  with  overall  efficiency  and  resilience  not  on  the  performance  of  individual
intermediaries.  Systemic  problems,  he  argues  are  not  caused  by  individual  institutions  getting  into
problems and affecting others by contagion. For most cases of financial instability, it was a whole set
of institutions that acted in more or less the same way. Financial systems encounter crisis when many
institutions operate in a similar way, and collectively fail to detect the common macroeconomic threat.
The concern, therefore, ought to be focused on the overall  efficiency and resilience  and  not  on the
performance of individual intermediaries. He also raised the issue of the time properties of risk over
the  financial  cycle  and  the  endogenous  character  of  risk  with  respect  to  the  collective  decisions  of
lenders  need  to  be  recognised.  In  addressing  these  concerns,  we  can  agree  with  the  approaches
discussed, in adopting forward looking provisioning practices, use of loan to value ratios or the use of
other  less  cyclically-sensitive  measures  of  value.  Stress  testing  as  a  tool  can  also  address  this
concern.
2
BIS Review 13/2001
Given  the  increased  volatilities  of  the  financial  markets,  the  scope  of  surveillance  by  regulatory
agencies  over  financial  activities  and  developments  in  financial  markets  will  need  to  be  enhanced
significantly.  Key  information  on  market  development  would  need  to  be  provided  in  an  integrated
manner so as to allow better understanding of the impact of such development on the financial sector
as  well  as  the  economy.  In  the  Malaysian  experience,  quarterly  stress  tests  are  conducted  on  the
banking institutions under different scenarios to detect potential areas of vulnerabilities and to assess
the  resilience  of  the  banking  system.  This  stress  test  provides  the  authorities  with  the  ability  to
implement  preemptive  measures  before  problems  become  crisis  proportions.  More  importantly,
Malaysia is developing a single comprehensive system of real time information on financial markets
that allows tracking of sources of risks in the economy to allow corrective actions to be taken.
Finally, Andrew Crockett argues supervisory techniques need to take a balanced view of the utility of
market forces as an aid to stabilising behavior. While it is recognised that greater transparency and
disclosure is an important part of this process, equally the appropriate utilisation of information by the
market is important. All too often, the market response is biased towards the short and immediate term
perspective, due to the rigid adherence to an ideology, the conditioning by multilateral agencies, the
inability to distinguish and differentiate, herd behavior and contagion  as  well  as the inability  to  deal
with  less  familiar  contexts.  Moreover,  there  are  no  incentives  to  ensure  the  appropriate  use  of
information. There is also no penalty for misuse and abuse of information. As we move into an era in
which  there  will  be  increasing  demands  for  transparency,  there  needs  to  be  a  framework  in  which
these  concerns  are  addressed.  In  this  environment,  consumer  education  also  needs  to  be  given
priority so that better informed assessments and decisions can be made.
Mention  has  also  been  made  to  rely  on  market  discipline  to  achieve  financial  stability.  For  market
discipline to play its appropriate role in containing excesses, a change programme would need to be
implemented  with  the  objective  of  building  the  capabilities  of  domestic  banking  institutions  and
increasing the incentives to improve performance. At the same time, measures that seek to build and
enhance financial infrastructure would need to be implemented to better position the financial system
to meet the demands of the economy and absorb any destabilizing shocks. This however cannot be
achieved overnight. Reasonable time and support has to  be  given  to  emerging  markets  to  become
more efficient, competitive and resilient. In this regard, market players can play a role in distinguishing
the different risk factors and characteristics of an economy.
In  this  environment  of  greater  uncertainty  and  change,  it  will  become  increasingly  more  difficult  to
anticipate future risks. While these future risks may be unpredictable, it is important to understand how
the future might change so we can gauge and assess the approach that we have taken, so that we
can  develop  new  capabilities  to  deal  with  these  risks.  The  ability  to  recognise  the  potential  future
developments  and  to  be  able  to  prescriptively  respond  and  contain  these  risks  would  enhance  our
prospects  for  achieving  stability  and,  thereby,  improve  the  capacity  of  the  financial  system  to
contribute to growth, and thus secure the prospects for prosperity.
BIS Review 13/2001
3
