Alan Greenspan: The condition of the financial markets
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the  US Federal Reserve
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  U.S.  Senate,  Washington,
20 September 2001.
 I  would  like  to  begin  my  remarks  this  morning  by  noting  how  deeply  saddened  I  and  my  Federal
Reserve colleagues are that so many talented and productive people from so many walks of life were
lost or irreparably harmed last week. Although we are here today to discuss some of the immediate
economic and financial implications of that tragedy, we are all too aware that the topic we discuss will
be a mere footnote.
The terrorism of September 11 will, doubtless, have significant effects on the U.S. economy over the
short  term.  An  enormous  effort  will  be  required  on  the  part  of  many  to  cope  with  the  human  and
physical  destruction.  But  as  we  struggle  to  make  sense  of  our  profound  loss  and  its  immediate
consequences for the economy, we must not lose sight of our longer-run prospects, which have not
been significantly diminished by these terrible events.
Over the past couple of decades, the American economy has become increasingly resilient to shocks.
Deregulated financial markets, far more flexible labor markets, and, more recently, the major advances
in information technology have enhanced our ability to absorb disruptions and recover.
In  the  past,  our  economy  has  quickly  regained  its  previous  levels  following  the  devastation  of
hurricanes,  earthquakes,  floods,  and  myriad  other  natural  disasters  that  periodically  batter  various
regions of our country. Although the trauma of September 11 shares some characteristics with such
disruptions, the differences are important. In contrast to natural disasters, last week's events are of far
greater  concern  because  they  strike  at  the  roots  of  our  free  society,  one  aspect  of  which  is  our
market-driven economy. All modern economies require the confidence that free-market institutions are
firmly  in  place  and  that  commitments  made  today  by  market  participants  will  be  honored  not  only
tomorrow,  but  for  years  into  the  future.  The  greater  the  degree  of  confidence  in  the  state  of  future
markets,  the  greater  the  level  of  long-term  investment.  The  shock  of  September  11,  by  markedly
raising  the  degree  of  uncertainty  about  the  future,  has  the  potential  to  result,  for  a  time,  in  a
pronounced  disengagement  from  future  commitments.  And  that,  in  the  short  run,  would  imply  a
lessened current level of activity. Indeed, much economic activity ground to a halt last week.
But  the  foundations  of  our  free  society  remain  sound,  and  I  am  confident  that  we  will  recover  and
prosper as we have in the past. As a consequence of the spontaneous and almost universal support
that  we  received  from  around  the  world,  an  agreement  on  a  new  round  of  multilateral  trade
negotiations  now  seems  more  feasible.  Such  an  outcome  would  lead  to  a  stronger  global  market
system.  A  successful  round  would  not  only  significantly  enhance  world  economic  growth  but  also
answer terrorism with a firm reaffirmation of our commitment to open and free societies.
But  before  the  recovery  process  gets  under  way,  stability  will  need  to  be  restored  to  the  American
economy and to others around the world. Arguably, that stability was only barely becoming evident in
the United States in the period immediately preceding the acts of terrorism. Aggregate measures of
production, employment, and business spending continued to be weak.
That  said,  consumer  spending  moved  higher  in  August  and  appeared  to  be  reasonably  well
maintained  in  the  first  part  of  September.  Industry  analysts  suggest  that  motor  vehicle  sales  were
running close to August levels, and chain store sales were only modestly lower. Purchasing managers
had noted an improvement in the orders picture in August. Moreover, the dramatic rate of decline in
profits was slowing. To be sure, these signs were tentative but, on the whole, encouraging.
During  the  past  week,  of  course,  the  level  of  activity  has  declined.  The  shock  is  most  evident  in
consumer markets where many potential purchasers stayed riveted to their televisions and away from
shopping malls. Both motor vehicle sales and sales at major chain stores, some of our most current
information  on  consumer  spending,  appear  to  have  fallen  off  noticeably.  And,  the  airline  and  travel
industries have suffered severe cutbacks.
The unprecedented shutdown of American air travel  and tightened border restrictions have induced
dramatic  curtailments  of  production  at  some  establishments  with  tight  just-in-time  supply  chain
BIS Review 78/2001
1
practices.  Automakers,  for  example,  are  reported  to  have  pared  production  and  even  closed  some
plants  in  the  past  week,  largely  owing  to  supply  shortages,  though,  doubtless,  short-term  demand
uncertainties have also played a part.
The effect on financial markets of the devastating attack on the World Trade Center was pronounced,
as  telecommunications  and  trading  capacities  were  severely  impaired.  But  the  markets  are  mostly
functioning  now,  albeit  in  some  cases  using  contingency  arrangements,  and,  as  in  the  past,  the
infrastructure will be rapidly restored.
For a brief time, the terrorist attack markedly disrupted payment transfers that are usually measured in
terms of trillions of dollars each day. Many obligators temporarily lost their technical ability to pay on
time, leaving those counting on receiving payments caught short. The pressures ultimately ended up
concentrated in banks. Those needs were met by the Federal Reserve, both through record lending at
the discount window and through an extraordinary infusion of funds through open market operations.
To  facilitate  the  channeling  of  dollar  liquidity  to  foreign  financial  institutions  operating  in  the  United
States,  thirty-day  currency  swap  lines  were  arranged  with  major  central  banks,  again  in  record
volumes. It was essential in such an environment to meet all appropriate demands for dollar liquidity.
As the financial markets and payment infrastructure return to normal, loans are being repaid, and the
temporarily bloated balance sheet of the Federal Reserve is now shrinking back to normal.
Nobody  has  the  capacity  to  fathom  fully  how  the  tragedy  of  September  11  will  play  out.  But  in  the
weeks ahead, as the shock wears off, we should be able to better gauge how the ongoing dynamics of
these events are shaping the immediate economic outlook.
For  the  longer  term,  prospects  for  continued  rapid  technological  advance  and  associated  faster
productivity growth are scarcely diminished. Those prospects, born of the ingenuity of our people and
the strength of our system, fortify a promising future for our free nation.
2
BIS Review 78/2001
