Eva Srejber: Financial markets in a globalised world
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Swedish
Mutual Fund Association, in Stockholm on 4 September 2001.
 I should like to begin by thanking you for the opportunity to participate in your conference on mutual
fund  investments  in  Europe.  Mutual  fund  investment  is  now  a  very  important  part  of  the  financial
system, both at a national level and at a global level. I therefore intend to take this chance to discuss
the significance of the financial system for economic development, using mutual fund investment as a
basis, and to take up some of the problems connected with the way the system functions.
Rapid transformation of the financial system
Over the past few  decades  the  financial  system  has  been  fundamentally  transformed.  Deregulation
and  technological  achievements  have  made  the  Swedish  financial  sector  part  of  a  global  network
where the sun never sets. Those of us who work in this sector cannot have a limited local, or even
regional,  perspective.  We  have  had  to  learn  to  live  with  the  fact  that  events  in  countries  such  as
Indonesia  and  Thailand  can  have  a  direct  bearing  on  our  operations.  This  is  of  course  exciting,
although  it  also  makes  our  work  more  complicated.  But  that  is  the  consequence  of  living  in  a
globalised world.
Swedish savers have adapted to this development on a large scale. Whereas it was once natural to
put  money  into  a  normal  savings  account,  this  is  no  longer  the  case.  Today,  an  increasingly  large
share of savings  is being  invested  in  various securities and the rapid expansion in the mutual  fund
market is an important part of this development. One only needs to look at the Swedish Mutual Fund
Association's own report on mutual fund investment in Sweden to realise this. The statistics show that
new  mutual  fund  investment  has  increased  gradually  during  the  1990s.  In  1994  net  investment  in
mutual funds totalled SEK 7.5 billion. Last year the corresponding figure was SEK 99.1 billion. This is
an  entirely  natural  development,  as  it  has  been  possible  to  obtain  a  significantly  higher  yield  from
savings  invested  in  various  types  of  securities  than  from  savings  paid  into  a  traditional  savings
account.  Swedish  investors  have  not  only  realised  this,  they  have  also  understood  how  to  use  the
financial market to spread their risk by investing money both in fixed income funds and in shares in
different types of companies within different sectors and countries.
Many people, including me, see this development as a positive thing; others are critical and express
concern over what they call an insensitive fund capital, shovelling money around the world and quickly
withdrawing  from  countries  that  show  the  slightest  sign  of  problems.  This  criticism  cannot  be
completely dismissed, but I do feel that it often does not fully take account of the importance of the
financial sector for economic development. In addition, the critics often speak of this sector as though
it did not play any productive role, but was more or less disengaged from the rest of society. This is not
the case. The financial sector is very much an integrated part of society. We participate in it ourselves
when we, for instance, choose between different pension funds,  when  we  withdraw money from an
ATM, when we pay our bills or borrow money to buy a house or apartment. To begin with, therefore, I
shall  briefly  discuss  the  fundamental  tasks  carried  out  by  the  financial  sector  in  society.  When  we
economists try to mediate knowledge in this field, we usually talk about three tasks or roles, namely
mediating payments, channelling money from those wanting to save to those wanting to invest, and
facilitating the management of economic risk.
Easier payments and more investments
The financial sector as a mediator of payments is possibly the role where the sector's significance for
society  is  easiest  to  understand.  Try  to  imagine  an  economy  without  the  type  of  payment  system
offered by, for instance, postal giro and bank giro. In a world like that we would need to carry large
amounts of cash around with us in order to make our daily transactions. We would have to rush off to
the  landlord once a month to pay rent,  visit the telephone company to settle the  telephone  bill  and
queue in front of the TV building to pay our TV licence. Thanks to various payment systems, we can
avoid this inconvenience. This not only has a value in making our everyday life easier; there is also a
BIS Review 75/2001
1
large economic value, as we are able to use our time for other things rather than queuing to pay bills.
The Government Inquiry on the future of the financial sector presented last year estimated the value of
this  at  more  than  7  per  cent  of  GDP,  which  corresponds  to  approximately  SEK  150  billion.  This
indicates the importance of properly functioning, stable payment systems.
Mutual  fund  investment  plays  an  important  part  in  the  financial  system's  other  role.  This  concerns
converting  savings  into  investments.  Without  financial  markets  each  investment  would  have  to  be
financed by the actual investor, whether it was a question of buying a house or starting up a company.
The financial markets' economic contribution here is that they make it possible to distinguish between
the decision to save and to invest, so that the investor does not need to save all the necessary money
before  making  the  investment.  This  enables  the  implementation  of  many  projects  that  would  not
otherwise  see  the  light  of  day.  However,  the  financial  sector  does  not  merely  make  it  possible  to
distinguish  between  these  decisions;  it  also  makes  it  possible  to  solve  the  conflict  of  interests  that
often prevails between the saver and the investor. A saver often wants to be able to get his money
back quickly if the need arises. An investor, on the other hand, normally needs to have the money over
a longer period of time, as it usually takes a while before an investment pays off. The financial sector
offers two possible solutions to this conflict of interests. The investor can either turn to a bank, which
can  convert  savings  into  long-term  lending,  or  the  investor  can  issue  securities  directly  onto  the
market. In both cases, the saver can normally regain his money at relatively short notice. In the first
case,  the  money  is  withdrawn  from  the  bank  and  this  works  painlessly,  unless  all  the  other  savers
have  the  same  idea  at  the  same  time.  In  the  second  case,  the  securities  are  sold  on  a  secondary
market.  Without  these  possibilities  to  quickly  realise  savings,  there  would  be  much  less  money
channelled into investments, which are of crucial  importance for economic development. A  properly
functioning capital allocation is thus of major importance to a country's long-term growth, which is also
confirmed by several empirical studies made in this field. Mohsin Khan and Abdelhak Senhadji have
made a review of such studies for the IMF. I can recommend it for those who are interested.
Facilitating risk management
Then  we  come  to  the  third  fundamental  task  of  the  financial  sector;  facilitating  the  management  of
economic risks. As I mentioned earlier, Swedish savers have already realised the importance of not
investing all their savings in the same place. When one distributes one's savings across a number of
funds with different allocation, for instance to various industrial sectors, there is less risk, as one would
not  suffer  such  great  losses  if  one  fund  were  to  show  a  poor  development.  However,  the  financial
markets also offer other opportunities for risk management. It is possible to pay someone else to take
over  a  financial  risk.  This  can  be  done  with  the  aid  of  various  types  of  derivative.  For  example,  in
export  deals  it  is  not  unusual  for  payments  to  be  made  some  time  after  the  goods  have  been
delivered. To avoid negative effects of a change in the exchange rate, the exporter can enter into a
futures  contract  that  establishes  the  rate  at  which  the  future  income  will  be  exchanged  to  the
exporter's own currency. These opportunities for risk management have crucial economic importance.
Without them, many economic projects would be perceived as too risky and would never be realised.
And this would lead to a slower development of the economy.
Deregulation and the rapid developments in technology and finance have made it possible to transfer
these roles to the international stage on a much larger scale than before. Thus, the financial markets'
capacity to contribute to increased global growth has been strengthened. Countries importing capital
can increase their rate of investment and gain access to more modern technology, while the countries
exporting  capital  can  obtain  a  higher  yield  on  it.  Many  people  have  claimed  in  this  context  that
companies  in  countries,  which  have  recently  deregulated  their  capital  markets,  have  a  tendency  to
take on more loans than they can manage. This does not  appear to  be  the  case.  On  the  contrary,
empirical research indicates that while non-financial companies with access to the international capital
market increase their  borrowing, their equity  increases at the  same  rate.  It  also  appears  that  these
companies increase the duration of their loans. In this perspective, it is difficult to imagine that the risk
of taking out excessively large loans increases as a result of deregulation. The various types of funds
managed by many of you make a contribution to this, by supplying share capital to companies in other
countries.
2
BIS Review 75/2001
Economic policy content of crucial significance
Allow me to return to the criticism of developments on the financial markets. As I said, it cannot be
dismissed out of hand. It is evident that there are some problems in the way these markets function.
One  only  has  to  look  at  the  Mexico  crisis  of  1995  and  the  Asia  crisis  of  1997-98  to  see  that.  It  is,
however,  important  to  remember  that  the  origins  of  the  crises  lay  in  domestic  problems  in  those
countries that were hardest hit. In Asia, as was the case here in Sweden at the end of the 1980s, the
countries developed a financial vulnerability through rapid credit expansion, over-investment in certain
sectors,  grossly  inflated  asset  prices  and  short-term  borrowing  abroad.  This  borrowing  was  in  turn
channelled  via  domestic  banks  into  projects  with  long-term  funding.  When  foreign  and  domestic
investors began to show concern over uncertainty regarding the growth potential of these countries,
the course of events moved rapidly. This development shows how a misdirected economic policy can
soon have devastating consequences for a country. However, instead of focussing on the content of
the economic policy, many critics have singled out the open capital markets as culprits. Some of these
critics have therefore considered capital controls to be a good means of avoiding future crises. Yet the
experiences  of  the  1970s  and  1980s  show  that  these  controls  cannot  counteract  the  effect  of  an
inadequate domestic economic policy in the long term. Sooner or later it will be necessary to adapt the
exchange  rate.  It  is  also  very  doubtful  whether  capital  controls  have  contributed  to  increasing
monetary policy independence during these decades, which was one argument put forward in favour
of the controls. In practice, it was probably the case that the arguments for keeping the controls were
often used to postpone necessary macroeconomic adaptations and structural reforms.
Nevertheless, while financial deregulation creates opportunities for increased welfare, it  is important
not to ignore the problems in the financial system. Over the years, authorities and organisations have
tried to minimise these by producing various international standards and codes, and have continued to
debate what more needs to be done to prevent as far as possible the emergence and spread of any
new financial crises. I shall not go into this work in any great depth here. Instead, I will discuss some
factors  that  could  contribute  to  strengthening  movements  on  the  financial  markets  in  an  unhealthy
manner, and where we need to find other solutions to improve the functioning of the markets. These
factors can also be more directly connected with mutual fund investment.
Short-term evaluation and “follow the leader” behaviour
The first thing that comes to mind here is the way many of the operations on the financial markets are
evaluated. All too often the focus is on the short-term result. This applies in particular to the evaluation
of various securities funds. Although many of you manage long-term savings that people intend to live
on after retirement, you are nevertheless evaluated on the results  you have achieved over the past
year,  the  past  few  months  or  even  the  past  few  days.  We  have  all  seen  the  newspaper  headlines
declaring the winners and losers in mutual fund investment. Media coverage of developments on the
financial markets certainly plays an important role for the transparency of these markets, but the focus
on  short-term  results  can  create  a  vicious  circle  where  investors  and  companies  are  constantly
chasing the best possible result in the short term, despite the fact that this is not  a good  long-term
strategy. Such behaviour can reinforce financial crises; for instance, through a fund manager not being
given scope to wait until the crisis has abated, which could be rational in a long-term perspective.
Many players in the financial markets also appear to be governed by a “follow the leader” principle.
There  are  probably  some  who  avoid  going  their  own  way  because  of  the  risk  of  making  bad
investments and being depicted as losers. It then seems simpler to follow the others, as if things do go
wrong,  at  least  the  player  is  not  the  only  one  in  disgrace.  The  reward  structure  in  the  fund
management field probably also reinforces this behaviour. As long as a person has not done a worse
job than the average among the competitors, he can look forward to a bonus. It would probably be a
better idea if the personal income were more closely connected to the absolute result achieved by the
fund.
However, the desire to follow others is probably also an expression of uncertainty. The players have
too  little  information  to  really  dare  to  act  independently.  It  is  doubtless  the  case  that  players  in  the
financial markets, including the mutual fund investment companies, live in a complicated world. In this
world  it  can  be  rational  to  do  as  the  larger  players  do  in  the  hope  that  they  are  better  informed.
However, this is not always the case, which means that the strategy of following the big players could
contribute to worsening financial crises. When everyone rushes for the door at the same time, there is
often a crush. And in a crush, it is easy to panic.
BIS Review 75/2001
3
The broad use of statistical risk models can have a similar effect. It is, of course, a good thing to use
risk models as an aid and we can conclude that they have enabled great progress in the management
of financial risks. However, there is an evident problem here. When an increasing number of players
are using the same models, they are also likely to react in a similar way when there is unease on the
markets, which can reinforce fluctuations and trigger new signals from the models, and so on. What is
rational for one individual institute may in this case be irrational as a whole.
Increased transparency reduces risk of herd behaviour
So is it possible to counteract this type of behaviour? Allow me to begin by emphasising that economic
risk-taking in itself is an important factor behind  economic growth.  However, risk-taking also means
that  not  all investments will bear fruit. This is  why  we have created national  bankruptcy  regulations
enabling businesses to be liquidated in an orderly manner. For the same reason, we must assume that
financial crises will emerge even in the future. On the other hand, we must of course do all we can to
avoid  such  crises  spreading  unnecessarily.  I  should  also  like  to  stress  that  I  do  not  believe  that
different types of taxes aimed at reducing the turnover on the markets are a practicable route forward.
They would probably result in further reinforcement of fluctuations, as activity - and thus liquidity - on
the markets would decline. As representative of a central bank, I would also like to point out that nor
do  I  believe  that  monetary  policy  alone  can  counteract  exaggerated  movements  on  the  financial
markets. On the other hand, a clear monetary policy, aimed at price stability, is necessary in the work
on maintaining financial stability. It facilitates economic decision-making in society.
However, part of the solution must lie in breaking the pattern that causes players to behave in exactly
the  same  way  as  one  another.  Increased  transparency  with  regard  to  countries'  and  companies'
economic  status  is  an  important  step  in  the  right  direction  here.  Developments  in  technology  have
demolished  many  of  the  barriers  that  previously  hampered  the  spread  of  this  type  of  information.
However,  this  requires  that  authorities  and  companies  make  use  of  the  opportunity  and  actually
release important information. We at the Riksbank, like many other Swedish authorities, have for quite
some time now made use of the advantages of the Internet in this context. All important information is
published  on  our  website,  which  is  easily  accessible  to  most  people.  This  applies  regardless  of
whether one is an analyst at a major bank or whether one is a private person. Information technology
has  thus  created  a  powerful  instrument,  which  can  be  used  to  counteract  the  'follow  the  leader'
behaviour. When information is no longer exclusive, it becomes easier to form an opinion of one's own
with regard  to developments and risks, and not merely to follow  others  in the belief that they know
something you don't. At the same time, it is important to remember that our insight into why financial
crises arise and spread is still limited. This means that increased transparency will not in itself be able
to solve all of the problems discussed. It must be combined with increased knowledge of these issues.
Cautious use of risk models
The financial crises have exposed the failings in the various statistical risk models regularly used by
players on the financial markets. These are nothing more than very simplified pictures of reality and
are based on historical values. And history doesn't always constitute a good base for making forecasts
for  the  future.  Financial  players  must  therefore  become  better  at  taking  into  account  less  probable
events when they are analysing the risks of various investments. One example of how this could be
done  is  to  supplement  the  risk  models  with  “stress  tests”.  These  tests  are  used  to  analyse  how
“stressed  markets”  -  ie exceptional,  but  possible,  outcomes  or  events  -  would  affect  the  players'
current positions. According to  the  latest  quarterly  report  from  BIS,  use  of  stress  tests  is  becoming
more  widespread  and  many  financial  institutes  now  use  them  as  an  integrated  part  of  their  risk
management. Increasingly often, decisions on how to react when various risk limits are exceeded are
being taken on the merits of the individual case, rather than being based on a mechanical rule.
Greater  transparency  and  less  mechanical  use  of  risk  models  could  be  contributing  factors  in
improving  the functioning of the financial  markets,  but  they  will  not  solve  the  problem  of  short-term
assessments of financial operations. Counteracting this requires clear information on the targets for
the  financial  operations.  This  is  an  important  task  for  the  authorities,  the  individual  companies  and
various types of business association, such as the Swedish Mutual Fund Association. In connection
with this, it is of course necessary to review the advice provided to clients. And, as I mentioned earlier,
I also believe that a review of the reward structure in the mutual fund business would be useful, so that
incentives for fund managers are better adapted to the interests of the savers.
4
BIS Review 75/2001
Conclusion
The rapid  economic internationalisation  has made daily life much more complicated  for  many  of  us
who work in the financial sector. Today, for instance, a person managing various securities funds in
principle  has  the  whole  world  on  his  or  her  desk.  It  is  not  enough  to  have  good  knowledge  of  a
particular type of company or sector, or of developments in an individual country. What is required is a
constant monitoring of the economic system, how its various parts are integrated and what possible
risks there are that problems in one sector or country will spread to other sectors or countries.
On  a  more  comprehensive  level,  it  can  also  be  concluded  that  the  internationalisation  of  recent
decades  has  given  the  financial  markets  greater  opportunity  to  contribute  to  global  economic
development. Savings can now be channelled with relative ease into the sectors and countries where
they  will  be  of  most  use,  while  financial  innovations  facilitate  risk  management  in  economic  life.
Together, these advances have meant that more investments could get off the ground and improve
the welfare of millions of people in both rich and poor countries.
At  the  same  time,  the  strength  of  the  recurring  international  financial  crises  has  shown  that  these
markets do not always function entirely without problems. At times, there has also been considerable
criticism  of  the  players  on  the  international  financial  arena.  Although  this  may  sometimes  be
warranted,  unfortunately  it  all  too  often  stems  from  the  opinion  that  financial  operations  are  a  bad
thing. I have therefore tried to describe today the tasks carried out by the financial system in society.
These  not  only  make  our  daily  life  easier,  but  also  provide  a  crucial  contribution  to  economic
development. It is therefore important that our solutions to the problems we see in the financial system
do not destroy these welfare-creating mechanisms, but instead contribute to reinforcing them. For the
same  reason,  it  is  important  that  countries  pursue  a  good  domestic  economic  policy.  Sound
government finances and sustainable price stability, combined with structural reforms that increase the
flexibility  of  the  economy,  will  reduce  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  and  capital  flows  and  thus
increase the financial markets' capacity to contribute to the development of the economy.
Thank you.
BIS Review 75/2001
5
