Y V Reddy: Implementation of financial standards and codes: Indian
perspective and approach
Speech  by  Dr  YV  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Conference  on
International  Standards  and  Codes  organised  by  the  IMF-World  Bank,  held  in  Washington  DC,  7-8
March 2001.  The appendix mentioned by Dr Reddy can be obtained from the Reserve Bank of India.
 In  this  paper  it  is  proposed  to  describe  the  Indian  perspective  and  approach  in  regard  to  the
implementation  of  international  financial  standards  and  codes  advocated  by  the  Financial  Stability
Forum (FSF). The Indian efforts in this direction also seek to complement and support the  ongoing
initiatives of the G-20 aimed at encouraging implementation of standards and codes among member
countries.
The  paper  is  schematized  as  follows.  Section  I  explains  India’s  stand  on  global  initiatives  for
implementation  of  standards  and  codes.  While  Section  II  narrates  India’s  association  with  global
efforts  in  evolving  and  promoting  financial  standards  and  codes,  Section  III  describes  the  Indian
approach to the  implementation. Section IV mentions the  institutional  arrangements  that  have  been
put  in  place  to  guide  the  process  of  implementation.  Section  V  provides  an  account  of  the  work
processes followed by Advisory Groups in the course of preparation of Reports. Section VI indicates
the  current  status,  while  Section  VII  touches  on  the  plans  for  following  up  on  the  submission  of
Reports. Section VIII brings out some highlights of Indian experience so far.
I. India’s stand
India  is  fully  supportive  of  the  need  to  observe  certain  minimum  universally  accepted
1.1
standards  in  areas  relevant  to  the  maintenance  of  stability  in  the  international  monetary  system,
including increased transparency in formulation and implementation of monetary and financial policies
and  improvements  in  dissemination  of  relevant  data.  The  establishment  of  a  high-powered
Standing  Committee  on  International  Financial  Standards  and  Codes  (Standing  Committee)
underscores India’s commitment to this international enterprise. At the same time, India has been
voicing,  in  the  international  fora,  some  of  its  concerns  regarding  the  manner  of  international
financial institutions spearheading the implementation and assessment of codes and standards. India
advocates a voluntary approach, fair, equitable, and continuous process taking duly into account the
institutional and legal structure and stage of development in different countries.
Although  the  notion  of  a  code  of  good  practices  is  intuitively  appealing,  the  temptation  to
1.2
prescribe  universally  valid  model  codes  which  do  not  allow  for  differences  in  institutional
development,  legislative  framework  and,  more  broadly,  different  stages  of  development  must  be
avoided. Sometimes there is a tendency to recommend the practices of major industrial countries to
developing country environments without adequate consideration being given to a country’s stage of
development and its ground realities.
1.3 Moreover,  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  accent  should  be  on  voluntary  adoption  and
gradualism rather than a big bang. In fact, the process may, in any case, be a medium term one and
hence one should not look for instant compliance. Basle Core Principles of Banking Supervision offers
an interesting example of how  a standard  attains a near universal  acceptance  based  on  voluntary
participation  and  country  ownership.  It  is  also  important  that  the  manner  in  which  these
international  standards  are  monitored  does  not  degenerate  into  categorizing  countries  as
‘performers’ and ‘non-performers’. In other words, the transformation of a best practice goal should
not result in premature conditionality for  countries  that  approach  the  Fund  for  balance  of  payments
support.
1.4
The extent pace and sequencing should ideally be left to the country authorities. In keeping with
this  spirit,  it  has  been  held  that  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (Fund)  may  furnish  the  ROSCs
(Reports  on  Observance  of  Standards  and  Codes)  in  respect  of  individual  countries  only  with  the
countries’ specific permission. The release of Article IV reports should also be left to the judgment
BIS Review 20/2001
1
fostering  more 
for  undertaking  or 
intensified  research  on 
of  individual  governments.  This  is  because  the  goal  of  transparency  could  best  be  served  by  a
balanced and symmetric evalution of data as between the authorities and the private sector.
1.5
It  must  also  be  added  that  the  plethora  of  codes,  standards  and  principles  could  be
overwhelming  and  also  highly  demanding  of  manpower  and  financial  resources.  They  also  have  a
potential to become overly intrusive vis-à-vis national authorities. In any case some prioritisation of
Codes for considering implementation is inevitable in respect of each country. There is a strong
case 
the  relationship  between
implementation of standards and macroeconomic and financial stability.
1.6. Work  on  standards  and  codes  is  evolving  in  relevant  interational  fora  and  priorities  for
implementing  them  would  have  to  vary  from  country  to  coutry.  In  this  regard,  the  potential  for  self-
assessment  on  the  part  of  individual  countries  needs  to  be  explored.  Besides  being  cost-effective,
such an approach would also greatly facilitate country-ownership.
1.7. Some of the other serious concerns that deserve attention in this regard pertain to the specificity
and the source of financial difficulties that might have to be adequately reckoned in individual cases.
Since financial crises can have multiple causes, overemphasising financial standards could detract
attention from other policy priorities. The relative importance of financial standards in crisis prevention
must also be adjudged from the standpoint of the relative openness of the economy’s capital account
and in this sense the “one size fits all” approach may have to be eschewed.
1.8
Since the primary motive for having standards is to catalyze orderly capital flows, while ensuring
financial  stability,  greater  consultation  with  the  private  sector  in  evolving  and  prioritizing  of  core
standards is of utmost necessity. All standards and codes are not equally relevant to all segments of
private sector  and further they  do tend  to  evolve  over  a  period  reflecting  concerns  of  both  public
policy and market participants.
1.9
international fora as compared with the past.
It  is  gratifying  to  note  that  currently  there  is  a  better  appreciation  of  India’s  stand  in  the
II. India’s Association with the Global Efforts in Fostering International Standards and Codes
India has been  closely  associated  with  various  standard  setting  bodies  and  has  been  taking
2.1 
active part in the work of several key international fora devoted to the task of developing and
promoting  implementation  of  financial  standards  and  codes.  Although  India  is  not  a  member  of  the
Financial Stability Forum(FSF)@, it was one of the countries specially requested to help the Forum in
Task Force on the Implementation of Standards and to participate in the Joint Committee Group
meeting. The Task Force was set up to explore key issues relating to standards/codes/core principles
and  consider  the  strategy  for  fostering  the  implementation  of  international  standards  relevant  for  a
sound financial system.
The  Reserve  Bank  is  also  represented  at  the  Follow  Up  Group  on  Incentives  for
2.2
Implementation of Standards instituted by the FSF following submission of the Task Force Report.
The Group has been ascertaining how various elements of market and official incentives could best
reinforce  one  another  within  the  framework  of  the  overall  strategy  to  foster  implementation  of
standards  and,  for  this  purpose,  engages  in  a  dialogue  with  a  cross  section  of  relevant  market
participants.
  Reserve  Bank  of  India  officials  worked  closely  with  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking
2.3
Supervision(BCBS). In 1997, in consultation with the supervisory authorities of a few non-G-10
countries  including  India,  the  BCBS  drew  up  the  25  ‘  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking
Supervision’ aimed at guiding supervisory authorities seeking to strengthen their current supervisory
regime.
From  its  inception,  India  was  also  represented  on  the  Group  on  Joint  Task  Force  on
2.4
Securities Settlement Systems constituted by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems
(CPSS) and the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).
The CPSS and IOSCO have since released the report of the Task force in January 2001 for public
consultation.  Based  on 
final
recommendations.
the  Task  Force  will  develop 
the  comments 
received, 
the 
2
BIS Review 20/2001
As  a  member  of  the  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group  (CPLG)  constituted  by  the  Basel
2.5
Committee on Banking Supervision(BCBS), the Reserve Bank has been attending the meetings of
the Group and actively contributing to the discussions.
2.6  The Reserve Bank is also represented in the Working Group on Capital (WGC) set up by the
CPLG. Recently, during February 6 to 9, 2001, the Reserve Bank of India hosted the meeting of the
Group in Delhi to discuss the salient features of the second consultative paper issued by the Basel
Committee.  The meeting  was  attended  by  26  representatives  of  supervisory  agencies  from  several
non G-10 countries as well as from international financial agencies.
India  is  one  of  the  countries  that  has  sought  participation  in  the  joint  IMF-World  Bank
2.7
Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP). As part of the Reports on Observance of Standards
and Codes (ROSCs), India’s compliance in respect of five standards and codes has already been
assessed, viz., Monetary and Financial Policy Transparency, Banking Supervision, Securities Market
Regulation, Payment and Settlement system and Corporate governance.
2.8
available to IMF/World Bank in their FSAP exercises in other countries.
Furthermore,  the  professional  expertise  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  been  made
III. Indian approach
The  Indian  approach  to  implementation  of  financial  standards  and  codes  is  based  on  the
3.1
efficiency-enhancing elements of the standards and codes, and on the need to consider them as
part of process of institutional development in the country, while not ignoring their relevance to
domestic as well as international financial stability. Thus, they are viewed as an integral part of
the  process  of  economic  reform,  most  appropriate  to  the  country’s  needs.  The  emphasis  is  on
creating  awareness  to  promote  adoption  by  the  relevant  official  agencies,  self  regulating  bodies
and market participants rather than prescribing compliance at the instance of a central authority.
The  Indian  approach  to  the  implementation  of  standards  and  codes  is  noteworthy  in  that  it
3.2
follows a systematic process. The process consists of the initial recognition, identification and
taking on record of standards and codes in relevant areas. This is followed by in-depth assessment
by independent experts of issues pertaining to the present status of applicability, relevance and the
existing degree of compliance, the feasibility of compliance and the earmarking of the possible time
frame  for  transition  given  the  prevailing  legal  and  institutional  practices.  It  is  also  common  to  seek
comparison of the levels of adherence in India, vis-à-vis industrialized and emerging  economies,
particularly to  understand  India’s  position  and  to  prioritize  actions  on  some  of  the  more  important
codes and standards. The process seeks to map out a comprehensive course of possible actions
for  achieving  the  best  practices.  This  approach  is  put  in  the  public  domain  through  publication  of
Reports on each of the selected standards and codes.
The next stage involves putting efforts for the widest possible dissemination of expert opinion
3.3
on the subject in the form of the reports mentioned and by means of outreach programs like seminars
and  workshops.  The  objective  is  to  obtain  involvement  and  stimulation  of  interest  among  public-
authorities and other stake holders in the debate and to garner a higher level of general awareness on
the  subject.  This  is  to  be  followed  by  invitation  of  and  consideration  of  inputs  and  feedback  from
relevant  public  and  private  sector  organizations  to  enhance  the  sense  of  involvement  and  to  build
confidence. Such a participative and consultative approach is advocated to secure a convergence of
viewpoints and, hence, favorable public disposition towards the necessity of change.
IV. Institutional Arrangements
Standing Committee
4.1
In order to facilitate positioning of international financial standards and codes in relevant areas
of  the  financial  system  in  India  and  to  guide  the  overall  process  of  implementation  of  appropriate
changes  in  respect  to  various  segments  of  the  financial  system,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in
consultation with Government of India, in December 1999, constituted a ‘Standing Committee on
International  Financial  Standards  and  Codes’  under  the  Chairmanship  of  Deputy  Governor,
Reserve Bank of India and Secretary, Economic Affairs, Government of India as Alternate Chairman.
The Committee could co-opt members depending on the subject under consideration.
BIS Review 20/2001
3
The  Committee  has  been  enjoined  with  the  responsibility  of  identifying  and  monitoring
4.2
developments  in  global  standards  and  codes  being  evolved  especially  in  the  context  of  the
international  developments  and  discussions  as  part  of  the  efforts  to  create  a  sound  international
Financial  Architecture,  considering  all  aspects  of  these  standards  and  codes  to  Indian  financial
system. The Committee has also been asked to consider plotting a road map for aligning India’s
standards  and practices  as necessary  and desirable  in the  light of evolving international  practices,
periodically reviewing the status and progress in regard to the codes and practices; and reaching out
its reports on the above to all concerned organizations in public or private sectors.
4.3  The Standing Committee by itself will not take a view on the Standards and Codes and it will
disseminate views expressed on the subject mainly on the basis of the Advisory Groups constituted by
it in different subject areas. The Standing Committee will identify action points that may arise out of
the  views  expressed  and  also  make  a  mention  of  these  to  the  concerned  authorities  viz.,
Government, Reserve Bank of India, Securities and Exchange Board of India(SEBI) etc., thus acting
as a catalyst in the whole process, while leaving it to the concerned institutions to consider appropriate
measure.  The  Committee  will  no  doubt  make  arrangements  to  track  the  progress 
in
implementation.
Advisory Groups
The  Advisory  Groups  constituted  by  the  Standing  Committee  on  International  Financial
4.4
Standards and Codes in ten core subject areas pertaining to the financial system are entrusted with
the task of studying, in detail, the present status of applicability  and relevance and compliance of
relevant standards and codes, reviewing the feasibility of compliance and the time frame over which
this could  be achieved given the  prevailing  legal  and institutional practices, comparing the levels of
adherence in India, vis-à-vis in industrialized and also emerging economies particularly to understand
India’s  position  and  prioritize  actions  on  some  of  the  more  important  codes  and  standards,  and  to
chalk out a course of action for achieving the best practices.
4.5 Out of the set of twelve subjects (actually eleven as Accounting and Auditing are taken together)
areas for which standards and codes that have been prescribed by international financial institutions
and other standard setting bodies pertaining to the financial system, the Standing Committee has so
far identified ten core subjects for immediate attention and assessment by Advisory Groups. These
are, Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies, Data Dissemination, Payments and Settlement
System,  Banking  Supervision,  Securities  Market  Regulation,  Accounting  and  Auditing,  Fiscal
Transparency, Insurance Regulation, Bankruptcy Laws and Corporate Governance. The twelfth area
namely  ‘Market  Integrity’  associated  with  the  forty  recommendations  of  the  Financial  Action  Task
Force(FATF) on money laundering is not being presently looked into by the Standing Committee.
It may need to be mentioned that all Advisory Groups are chaired by eminent experts not
4.6
generally  holding  official  positions  in  Government  or  other  regulatory  bodies.  While  the
Chairmen of these Advisory Groups were identified and nominated by the Standing Committee, taking
into account the experience and expertise, the choice of members of these Advisory Groups, was
completely  left  to  the  Chairmen  of  Advisory  Groups.  The  members  are  generally  non-official
experts in relevant subject areas. The Groups have, however, the option of including officials from
Government,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  SEBI,  etc.,  as  special  invitees.  Such  officials  help  in
providing inputs on the understanding of extant position relating to the relevant standards and codes
and also the steps under way towards improvements. This arrangement keeps the Advisory Groups
outside the sphere of official influence and allows them to make critical assessment of relevance as
well  as  state  of  compliance  with  standards  and  codes  and  give  unbiased  recommendations  with
regard  to  the  feasibility  of  compliance  and  the  necessity  of  achieving  best  practices  in  the  areas
covered by them.
4.7
In order  to facilitate exchange of information and expertise on matters  of mutual  interest,  the
Advisory Groups have the option of having interactions/consultations amongst themselves and
many  did  exercise  the  option.  The  Advisory  Groups  may  also  jointly  deliberate  on  overlapping
issues in certain subject areas to evolve a consistent approach. In finalizing its Report, the Standing
Committee  would,  however,  attempt  to  consolidate  these  overlapping  areas.  The  Reports  of  the
Advisory Groups are made public, as soon as they are submitted to the Standing Committee.
4.8
The  Standing  Committee  also  periodically  reviews  the  progress  of  Advisory  Group  and  is
required to review its own status after the completion of one year and report to Government/RBI. The
Secretariat support to the Standing Committee is provided by the Reserve Bank of India.
4
BIS Review 20/2001
V. Work Processes
In view of the varied nature of the subject areas, each Advisory Group decided to design its
5.1
own  methods  and  processes  of  work.  Thus,  some  Groups  mounted  special  studies  or  technical
papers, some divided the work of preparing basic technical papers among each of the members and
most  depended  heavily  on  the  background  material  collected  and  analysed  by  professionals  in
Reserve Bank of India.  While  an  Advisory  Group  gave  an  interim  report,  the  general  preference
turned out to be in favour of final reports, sometimes in parts submitted sequentially.
5.2 
In  some  of  the  subject  areas,  concerned  governmental  or  regulatory  bodies  had  already
constituted some study groups and hence it was argued on occasions that the Advisory Groups are
duplicating such efforts. In such cases, it became necessary to clarify that the work of the Advisory
Groups is without prejudice to any other official and non-official initiatives, and that the work is
not  meant  to  be  intrusive.  It  also  became  necessary  to  encourage  the  Advisory  Groups  to  take
account in their deliberations such parallel, though partial, efforts and provide appropriate inputs
to such efforts whenever sought. The process was made easier in several cases since one or more
members of relevant Advisory Group happened to be so eminent as to be involved in several of the
initiatives.
Some Advisory Groups had to reckon with the fact that their perception of compliance with
5.3
international standards differed from the official stance of concerned authorities i.e. regulator or
government body. The non-official status of the  Advisory  Groups has enabled them to consider the
official stance but make its own independent assessment of degree of compliance.
In some of the Advisory Groups there has been a view in favour of making recommendations
5.4
on substantive policy-issues, while the mandate was, say on, transparency. There have also been
occasions  when  the  Group  tended  to  comment  on  functioning  of  official  bodies  in  the  context  of
standards.
5.5
In the preparation of their respective Reports, most Advisory Groups have also been studying
and reviewing international experience in various subject areas. In particular, the Report of the
Advisory Group on Monetary and Financial Policies took comprehensive account of extant institutional
arrangements and practices in five countries namely, the UK, USA, Australia, New Zealand and South
Africa. The Advisory Group on Bankruptcy Laws has examined the existing  Acts on  insolvency  and
bankruptcy in the US and selected countries in Europe and Asia. The Advisory Group on Accounting
and Auditing has conducted in depth studies of the International Accounting Standards (IAS), the US
Generally Accepted  Accounting  Principles  (US  GAAP)  and  the  comparative  structure  of  Accounting
Standards  in  India  and  standards  issued  by  the  Accounting  Standards  Board  of  the  Institute  of
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI).
In  the  course  of  their  work,  the  Advisory  Groups  have  also  been  having  the  benefit  of
5.6
discussions  with  market  participants,  members  from  professional  bodies  as  well  as
academics.  The  Advisory  Group  on  Insurance  Regulation  met  the  officials  of  Life  Insurance
Corporation of India and the Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency had extensive discussions with
all  State  Finance  Secretaries  and  the  Office  of  Comptroller  and  Auditor  General  of  India.  Advisory
Groups have, in most cases, co-opted market participants and members from professional bodies as
special invitees. For example, the Advisory Group on Payments and Settlement System has special
invitees from the National Stock Exchange(NSE) and a member from academia. The Advisory Group
on Accounting and Auditing has a member from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India(ICAI)
and other well known market participants and practicing professionals. Similarly, the Advisory Group
on Securities Market Regulation and the Advisory Group on Banking Supervision has eminent experts
from the Housing Development Finance Corporation(HDFC) and ICICI Bank. The Advisory Group on
Bankruptcy Laws also includes practicing professionals and eminent academics, including the former
Director of National Law School as the Chairman of the Group.
The  Advisory  Groups  were  encouraged  to  prepare  in  tabular  form  the  given  international
5.7
standard/code,  current  status  in  India  and  the  corresponding  recommendation  of  the  Group  as  a
supplement to the narrative to facilitate easy reference.
5.8
Reserve Bank of India’s website for immediate wider public dissemination.
As  and  when  the  Reports  are  received  by  the  Standing  Committee,  they  are  placed  on  the
BIS Review 20/2001
5
VI. Current Status
As of now, the reports/part of reports in respect of the following subjects have already been
6.1
received  by  the  Standing  Committee  :  Transparency  of  Monetary  &  Financial  Policies  (Final),
Payment and Settlement System (Parts I and II ), Insurance Regulation (Final- Parts I and II), Banking
Supervision  (Part  I),  Accounting  and  Auditing  (Final),  Bankruptcy  Laws  (Interim).  All  Reports  have
been placed on the RBI website <www.rbi.org.in> and are in the process of being published for
wider dissemination and discussion.
6.2  The  ‘Foreword’  to  the  first  in  these  series  of  Reports  on  ‘Transparency  in  Monetary  and
Financial Policies’ is presented as an Appendix to this paper. As may be seen, the effort is to make
the readers aware of what standards and codes are and their importance for national economies in the
current milieu.
The submission of the Reports by Advisory Groups would be followed up in accordance with the
VII.  Plans for follow up
7.1
decisions of the Standing Committee meeting held on September 20, 2000.
The Standing Committee would consolidate the Reports of all Advisory Groups and prepare
7.2
its  own  report  containing  executive  summaries/highlights  of  all  the  reports,  action  points  requiring
attention by regulatory authorities/agencies concerned with the follow  up.  The  Standing Committee
report also would be widely disseminated to the public as the Advisory Group reports.
The Advisory Group would be requested to help organise a seminar/workshop for a day in an
7.3
appropriate institution/centre for creating awareness and this would help the Standing Committee to
concretise the views on recommendations.
For each Report,  a mailing list covering both  public  sector  and  private  sector  organizations,
7.4
international  institutions  and  experts,  both  local  and  international,  would  be  also  be  identified  and
finalised in consultation with the Chairman of each Advisory Group. The Standing Committee would
request  specific  comments/feedback  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Group  from  these
addressees.
The Standing Committee would prepare an annual review of status and progress regarding
7.5
compliance  with,  and  implementation  of  standards  and  codes  and  submit  it  to  the  Ministry  of
Finance.
Second, the need to  assess  Indian standards and codes  with international benchmarks has
VIII. Highlights
The Indian position which recognises the significance, scope, limits and contextual degree
8.1
of relevance of international financial standard and codes has been considered by a broad spectrum
of experts, intellectuals and market participants as reasonable.
8.2
also elicited broad support.
Third,  the  impact  of  the  process  could  often  be  indirect  and  not  necessarily  direct  and
8.3
instant.  For  example,  the  Secretary  Department  of  Company  Affairs  in  a  recent  address  to  the
Accountants and Auditors referred to the work of the Standing Committee and related it to the ongoing
amendments to the Company Law.
Fourth, the participative processes also have a multiplier effect in terms of several means by
8.4
which  the  codes  and  standards  are  disseminated.  For  example,  the  widely  read  Economic  Survey
2000-01  of  Government  of  India  released  as  part  of  set  of  Budget  Documents  makes  a  detailed
reference to the subject (vide Box 6.4 on International Financial Standards and Codes). There have
also been extensive references to this in several publications of Reserve Bank of India.
8.5
Fifth, several prominent intellectuals, professionals, and market participants contributed to the
process  of  benchmarking,  and  identifying  gaps  and  they  participated  in  the  exercise  in  a  purely
honorary capacity, as a national endeavor.
6
BIS Review 20/2001
Sixth,  such  a  process  brought  out  the  possible  differing  views  between  official  bodies  or
8.6
authorities and domestic independent  opinion  as regards the  extent of compliance with such  codes
and standards. It is considered necessary to recognise this and try to arrive at a consensus.
Seventh,  some  concern  on  the  part  of  official  authorities  to  such  an  independent
8.7
assessment  is  understandable  but  could  be  significantly  overcome  through  their  participation  as
special invitees and the efforts of advisory group which have members of national standing.
Eighth, many areas of overlap among the areas  covered  by  different  Advisory  Groups  were
8.8
observed.  Also,  each  Advisory  Group  had  to  interact  with  several  regulatory  and  standard  setting
bodies. The process thus becomes quite complex, especially when the jurisdictional issues come
up.
Ninth,  several  standard  setting  bodies  including  professional  associations  and  self-regulatory
8.9
bodies of market participants involved with current practices have, on occasions had concerns about
the Advisory Groups findings but special efforts by the Advisory Groups helped assuage these
concerns.
8.10 Tenth,  the  work  of  the  Advisory  Groups  required  substantial  technical  and  professional
inputs located in several agencies, public and private. These had to be pooled and collated.
8.11 Eleventh, the Advisory Groups have found it difficult to focus entirely on compliance issues
since  there  is  a  preoccupation  with  immediate  issues  of  operational  significance  to  the  market
participants and such issues may be policy or procedural or may even be of short term relevance. The
main focus has not been, however, lost sight of.
8.12 Twelfth, the enthusiasm for disclosure and transparency in public agencies is not matched by
eagerness to be transparent on the part of private sector. The private sector’s participation in the
process helped a better appreciation of the importance of disclosures.
8.13 Finally, four lessons from the exercise appear to  be  relevant.  The  process  of  implementation
demands  significant  resources  and  is  time-consuming.  Moreover,  most  of  the  follow-up  activities
require some legislative changes. In the ultimate analysis, adoption of the standards has to be driven
by  self-interest  of  the  country  and  attempts  should  be  toward  harmony  and  ultimate  convergence
rather than mechanical compliance.
                                                     
BIS Review 20/2001
7
