Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Banking and information and communications technology
developments - legal aspects
Address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia, to the Banking and Financial Law
School, Kuala Lumpur, 24 April 2001.
 Distinguished Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen
Good morning,
It is indeed a great pleasure to welcome all delegates to the 3rd Annual Banking and Financial Law
School. The objective of the Banking and Financial Law School is to contribute to a structured learning
programme  for  members  of  the  legal  profession  who  provide  legal  counsel  to  financial  institutions.
Indeed, Bank Negara Malaysia, the Bar Council and IBBM have been collaborators in this effort for a
long time.
The  theme  for  this  year’s  law  school  is  the  impact  of  developments  in  ICT  -  Information  and
Communications Technology - upon legal aspects of financial services in Malaysia. It is a subject that
is  of  increasing  interest  to  bankers  and  central  bankers  around  the  world.  There  is  increasing
recognition of the enormous potential for these developments to transform the financial industry in a
manner  that  will  bring  tremendous  gains  to  businesses  and  consumers.  There  is  also  mounting
evidence  that  ICT  is  not  only  creating  new  alternative  delivery  channels,  but  is  bringing  about
compelling changes to the financial landscape that may threaten the very existence of the traditional
financial  institutions.  Whether  or  not  such  developments  do  in  fact  take  place,  it  is  of  paramount
importance that financial institutions and central banks are well placed to manage the challenges and
opportunities  brought  about  by  developments  in  Information  and  Communication  Technology.
Essentially, the potential benefits from the new technology need to be exploited without undermining
the security and stability of the financial system.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Central bankers around the world operate within a wide range of economic systems and structures.
Within the context of each respective systems, an administrative, regulatory and legal infrastructure is
necessary to protect and develop the interests of commerce. As lawyers, you would appreciate that
business  and  commerce  flourished  with  the  invention  of  limited  company  law.  The  limited  liability
company  structure  and  provisions  of  company  law  provides  the  structure  for  managing  complex
business risks. The corporate structure spawned economic development across the globe, and over
the years have evolved into entities with their own character and identity. A global protocol comprising
business  practices  and  ethics  evolved  largely  from  man-made  common  law.  With  the  development
arising  from  advances  in  information  and  communications  technology,  a  new  phase  of  growth  has
emerged.  Although  often  based  on  the  notion  of  the  limited  company,  the  identity  of  these  new
businesses are very  different. These newly emerging  entities do  not recognise national boundaries,
nor  local  jurisdictions  or  markets.  Instead  of  operating  within  the  established  contracts  and
international  agreements,  crafted  and  executed  by  law  firms  and  government  agencies,  these  new
entities are operating within the context of their own rules in the world of e-commerce. The Internet
provides an unregulated, open communication channel and information repository that is growing at
an exponential rate. The rate of economic development within e-commerce has far exceeded the rate
of development of the legal and administrative infrastructure. Indeed, the market is often of the view
that such infrastructure may in fact be limiting and cause more harm than good.
Consumers  however  hold  a  different  view,  and  have  approached  the  developments  with  more
cautious optimism. While there will be gains on efficiency and convenience, this is balanced against
the security and other risks associated with these developments. Consumers need to be provided with
confidence that contracts will be honoured, and deposits are secure. New business rules will only be
viable  if  the  appropriate  laws  necessary  to  give  confidence  to  the  users  are  formulated  and
implemented. Lawyers need  therefore to understand the drivers  of  the  new  economy,  the  evolution
taking  place  in  the  e-commerce  business  models  and  the  new  risks  inherent  in  the  digital
infrastructure.
BIS Review 32/2001
1
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Allow  me  to  provide  our  perspective  on  some  of  the  broad  issues  facing  the  financial  system  and
central banking in this electronic age. Central banks continue to have the responsibility to manage the
economy  and  the  financial  system  to  assure  macro-economic  and  financial  stability.  Much  of  the
stability, will stem from the confidence that investors, including retail depositors have in the financial
system. Financial transactions and commitments must be undertaken in a manner that  provides  no
room for question on the integrity of the payment channel within the country. In the event that there
are irregularities or omissions, there must be clear rules and procedures to safeguard the interests of
all relevant parties. Therefore, a sound regulatory and legal framework must be in place to provide this
minimum level of comfort. Such a framework would need to include the relevant legislation, technical
skills  to  implement  the  requirements  of  the  legislation  and  sufficient  flexibility  to  cope  with  the
continuing changes taking place in the world of electronic banking today.
No doubt you are familiar with the initiatives that have been undertaken by the Malaysian Government
to  establish  the  Multimedia  Super  Corridor  (MSC).  A  major  component  of  the  project  was  the
introduction of new legislation, the Digital Signature Act, Computer Crimes Act and Communications
and  Multimedia  Act,  all  of  which  will  provide  the  pillars  of  the  legal  framework  for  e-commerce
transactions in Malaysia. At this point in time, the legislation remains largely untested, but e-commerce
transactions are already being performed on a daily basis. Currently, in the banking arena there is still
a  clear  demarcation  between  the  electronic,  paperless  world  of  the  Internet,  and  the  more  paper
intensive, manual signature based world of conventional banking transactions. In the meantime, the
pace of transition from manual over-the-counter services, to remote electronic delivery channels are
expanding.  The  growing  demand  for  on-line  real-time  financial  services,  reinforced  by  increasing
pressures  for  cost  efficiencies  in  banking  operations  will  lead  to  greater  digitisation  of  banking
transactions.
This changing environment requires financial institutions to be adaptive and responsive. At the same
time,  a  regulatory  framework  that  will  enable  markets  to  evolve  needs  to  be  in  place.  The  rapid
advances  in  ICT  needs  a  regulatory  framework  that  promotes  innovation,  while  reinforcing  the
prudential  limits  to  ensure  that  elements  of  instability  do  not  emanate  from  such  innovations.
Regulators will need to take into account the nature and dimensions of the change so as to devise the
appropriate regulatory response that will provide a conducive environment for the financial industry to
develop.  Towards  this  objective,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  formulated  the  Financial  Sector
Masterplan to provide the direction and road map for the development of the financial sector  which
takes  into  account  the  changing  financial  requirements  of  the  economy  going  forward  and  the
implications of the changes brought about by the changes in technology.
The Financial Sector Masterplan aims to evolve a competitive, resilient and dynamic financial system,
with  best  practices,  that  are  able  to  meet  the  more  sophisticated  demands  of  consumers  and
businesses,  able  to  embrace  advancements  in  technology,  able  to  face  the  challenges  from
globalisation  and  liberalisation  and  able  to  withstand  the  economic  cycle,  thereby  contributing  to
overall  economic  growth  and  stability.  The  Financial  Sector  Masterplan  highlights  the  need  to  give
greater attention to the development of ICT by the financial services sector. As part of this process,
the surveillance of the financial sector through the use of ICT will also be enhanced.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
During this three-day programme, it will be impossible to capture the many issues that are relevant to
legal  aspects  of  e-commerce.  However,  among  the  important  issues  is  the  global  dimension  of  e-
commerce. E-commerce is as much a global topic as it is a domestic issue, and in recent years has
become a part of the international agenda for the World Bank, World Trade Organisation and similar
bodies. Although there is no framework in the WTO that governs e-commerce trade, WTO members
adopted a declaration on global e-commerce in 1998 in which members have agreed to the following:
Not to impose customs duties on electronic transmissions of goods or services. This practice
i. 
is to be reviewed at the next WTO Ministerial Conference and any extension will be agreed
upon by consensus; and
To  set  up  a  comprehensive  work  programme  (WP)  to  examine  all  trade-related  issues
arising from e-commerce. So far, the work programme has been exploring how e-commerce
should be dealt with in the context of existing WTO Agreements. For financial services, the
relevant work of the work programme is being undertaken by the WTO Council for Trade in
ii. 
2
BIS Review 32/2001
Services which looks at the treatment of e-commerce in the General Agreement on Trade in
Services (GATS) legal framework.
The  work  of  the  WTO  would  thus  be  of  considerable  interest  to  banking  institutions  that  provide
transaction  or  advisory  services  on  international  trade  conducted  through  an  e-commerce  virtual
trading exchange. The banking institution’s in-house legal counsel would need to be aware of these
developments,  and  understand  the  potential  implications.  In  particular,  matters  of  jurisdiction  and
interpretation  of  local  regulations  will  pose  many  dilemmas.  In  view  of  this,  policymakers  within  the
financial  services  sector  have  a  vested  interest  in  resolving  differences,  and  creating  a  more
harmonious  legal  environment  within  the  global  system.  To  promote  international  awareness  of
differences  in  legal  jurisdictions,  international  bodies  such  as  the  World  Bank,  have  established  a
series of databases that are accessible through the Internet.
Closer to home, there are various regional initiatives underway to promote and build on e-commerce
initiatives. One example is the APEC Electronic Commerce Task Force, which was established during
the First Senior Officials meeting held in Penang, Malaysia, in February 1998. The work plan of the
task force is built on and complements the work being undertaken in a number of established APEC
bodies, in particular the Telecommunications Working Group (TEL WG), the Transportation Working
Group (TPT WG), the Industrial Science and Technology Working Group (IST WG) and the Committee
on  Trade  and  Investment  (CTI)  and  its  sub-committee  on  Customs  Procedures  (SCCP).  The  Task
Force is in the process of concluding Stage One of its 12 month work-program and is embarking on
Stage Two, which includes an ambitious but vital program of regional technical cooperation. Initiatives
such as these can be expected to dramatically alter the rules of international trade, and consequently
the opportunities accorded to financial institutions. But these  initiatives  will tread  on the corridors of
international law, and will require legal experts to develop new and innovative contracts in the digital
world.
A further development is the e-ASEAN framework agreement that came into being during the Fourth
ASEAN  Informal  Summit  in  November  2000.  The  objectives  of  the  framework  are  to  promote
cooperation  in  the  development  of  ICT  products  and  services,  with  a  view  to  promoting  trade  and
reducing the digital divide within individual ASEAN Member States. Article 5 of the framework explicitly
addresses  the  facilitation  of  growth  in  e-commerce,  and  stipulates  that  Member  States  shall  adopt
electronic  commerce  regulatory  and  legislative  frameworks  that  create  trust  and  confidence  for
consumers. Article 5 also recommends the adoption of the World  Intellectual  Property  Organisation
(WIPO)  treaties,  namely  WIPO  Copyright  Treaty  1996  and  WIPO  Performances  and  Phonograms
Treaty  1996.  The  use  of  alternate  dispute  resolution  mechanisms  for  online  transactions  is  also
emphasised. Article 6 of the e-ASEAN framework agreement addresses the issue of liberalisation of
trade  in  ICT  products  and  services.  Actions  such  as  these  will  accelerate  the  adoption  rate  of  new
technology, reduce the costs of migrating to e-commerce platforms and create pressures for a more
globally uniform code of conduct within the trading, banking and payment sectors. An understanding of
the developments in ICT, inclusive of the legal, administrative and political ramifications, is important if
the opportunities in e-commerce are to be realised.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Another area that is of significance to bankers and central bankers is the issue of security. Security of
information has many attributes, such as confidentiality, privacy, safety, secure transmission and non-
repudiation. Financial services is unique compared with most other products in that the entire product
can  be  digitised,  and  for  that  reason  is  eminently  suited  for  conducting  business  over  the  Internet.
However,  should  the  security  of  the  financial  information  be  breached  in  any  manner,  the
repercussions are very serious. In the inter-connected world of the Internet, how does one establish
accountability  for  mistakes,  fraud  or  incidences  of  system  failure.  For  that  reason,  a  great  deal  of
resources and time has been invested in security systems. I also note that there will be an expert to
speak on this subject during this programme. Security, and the related subject  of audit controls are
part of the process to managing the risks associated with financial transaction services offered over
the  electronic  channel.  In  order  to  ensure  that  the  Malaysian  banking  system  has  proper  risk
management in place, Bank Negara Malaysia has in place prudential guidelines pertaining to Internet
Banking activities.
In the digital era, the science of hacking, filtering, intercepting, spying, on-line copying, transmission
corruption and transmission re-routing are elements of a different type of forensic law in cyber-crime
management. The study of encoding, encrypting or enciphering data is perhaps not something most
lawyers have engaged in so far, but you may be find yourselves involved in this in the near future.
BIS Review 32/2001
3
There is a great need  to maintain  an on-going training  agenda  to  aid  lawyers  and  bankers  alike  to
keep pace with the developments in ICT and to be aware of its profound implications to the business
of  banking.  Although  there  have  been  training  and  education  programmes  that  encompass  ICT  in
banking  and  the  law,  there  are  limited  opportunities  for  practicing  lawyers  to  keep  abreast  of  the
developments  in  all  these  areas.  A  further  element  that  has  increased  the  urgency  for  adequate
training and education is the increased global competition. The pace of business development in the
world e-commerce is very rapid, and opportunities that are not seized soon enough, may be lost to a
competitor. Since lawyers and in-house legal counsel are critical to completing business contracts and
transactions,  your  ability  to  give  prompt  and  quality  advisory  services  will  contribute  directly  to
business competitiveness.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We can expect that banking institutions will continue to invest in ICT, and that customers, especially
the  limited  liability  corporate  entities,  will  increasingly  demand  greater  access  to  on-line  financial
intelligence and transaction services despite its risks. In this environment, lawyers will be tasked with
ensuring  that  the  interests  of  all  relevant  parties  are  protected.  Moreover,  as  the  country  becomes
more open matters of international jurisdiction will become more and more a part of the local agenda,
even for the smaller banks and enterprises.
Essentially, there is much to be learnt about the development of e-commerce and its impact on the
financial system. This makes it all the more important to have regular exchange of information. I hope
the proceedings for the next three days will contribute towards this process. In conclusion I wish you a
successful programme. Thank you.
4
BIS Review 32/2001
