M  R  Chatu  Mongol  Sonakul:  Bank  of  Thailand’s  review  of  major  economic
events in Thailand during the past year
A  Statement  by  M  R  Chatu  Mongol  Sonakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  on  Thailand’s
Economic and Monetary Conditions: Bank of Thailand’s Public Report, 27 December 2000.1
 Ladies and gentlemen,
On the occasion of the New Year, the Bank of Thailand as one of the main national institutions would
like to take this opportunity to review some of the major economic events during the year. We would
also like to review the work that the Bank of Thailand has carried out in terms of economic policies and
internal restructuring. This would also be a good opportunity to raise a number of issues, which the
private sector may find important for consideration in the next year.
In  the  past  year,  the  Thai  economy  has  continued  to  expand.  However,  the  growth  rate  was  more
moderate  than  anticipated.  Economic  recovery  was  not  broad-based,  and  there  remain  pockets  of
fragility. In the second half of the year, with the adverse effect of increased oil prices, consumer and
investor sentiment deteriorated, leading to deceleration in domestic spending.
As a result, inventories of finished products rose by 22 % from the same period of last year. At the
same  time  stocks  of  finished  products,  which  averaged  around  15  days  of  sales  last  year,  rose  to
17 days  of  sales  this  year.  Sectors  that  saw  large  increases  in  stocks  were  canned  seafood,
beverages,  and  automobiles.  Consequently,  the  capacity  utilisation  rate  of  the  industrial  sector
remained at 56 % on average for the year.
Capacity  utilisation  rate  did  not  expand  significantly  was  due  to  the  fact  that  many  manufacturing
industries for domestic market were affected by the deceleration in domestic expenditure which led a
number of industries to operate at less than half of total capacity namely beverages, automobiles, and
iron & steel products.
Another  reasons  being  that  those  export-manufacturing  industries  which  have  performed  well  have
been  expanding  their  capacities.  For  example,  the  electronics  industry,  where  the  capacity  in  the
integrated-circuit sector has increased by 65 % since 1997.
With excess capacity prevailing, demand for new investment has been low, thus reducing the role of
investment in  propelling economic recovery.  Moreover, some firms halted operations temporarily  as
the result of debt problems, adding to excess capacity in the system.
This  year,  the  recovery  has  been  propelled  mainly  by  export.  Industries  geared  to  export  markets
expanded by 22 % on average, while industries selling to domestic markets contracted by 7.5 %.
Exports  which  saw  high  growth  rates  were  in  the  hi-tech  manufacturing  products  group,  the  export
value  of  which  rose  by  30  %.  This  group  comprises  such  products  as  integrated  circuits,  electrical
appliances,  automobiles  and  computers.  In  addition,  firms  that  have  upgraded  product  quality  and
competitiveness in labour intensive industries such as garments have also recorded buoyant exports.
Such development pointed to an adjustment in the right direction. The industrial base has shifted from
reliance on cheap labour towards an industrial structure, which relies more on high quality workforce.
As  a  result,  labour  productivity  will  increase  which  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  per  capita  income,
something that we should not discourage.
However, some export industries have little backward linkages with other sectors in the country, and
rely on high import contents. As a result, the expansion in export has not contributed significantly to
the overall economic recovery.
Import was affected by the increase in oil prices, causing the trade surplus to decline to US$4.6 billion.
In addition, the volatility in the world financial system caused the exchange rate of Thailand along with
that  of  other  regional  currencies  to  be  under  periodic  pressure,  depreciating  vis-à-vis  the  major
currencies, which, in turn, affected investors’ sentiment from time to time.
                                                     
1
This is an English language translation from the original version in Thai . For reference please refer to the Thai version.
BIS Review 6/2001
1
However,  Thailand’s  international  financial  position  has  strengthened  significantly,  as  external  debt
declined by US$11.7 billion during the first nine months, while international reserves stood at US$32.5
billion, providing more than two-fold coverage for short-term external debt.
In the past  year, commercial banks have continued to remain cautious  in new  lending. Commercial
bank credits expanded by 1.8%  if loans transferred to AMCs  and  debt  write-offs  were  added  back.
Businesses continue to have problems mobilising capital linked to the remaining risk in the business
sector, the question of discipline of borrowers, and the need for prospective borrowers to adapt to the
more sophisticated credit requirements of commercial banks. These factors restricted the expansion of
commercial bank credits.
On  a  positive  note,  the  ability  to  maintain  macroeconomic  stability  resulting  from  low  inflation,  has
enabled  monetary  policy  to  remain  accommodative  and  helped  reduce  the  financial  burden  on
businesses up to a certain level.
Although in the  year 2000 the economy grew less than forecasted, we have, however, managed to
make considerable progress in tackling a number of important problems arising from the 1997 crisis,
and some of these are bearing fruit.
On financial institutions, overall financial position of the Thai banking industry has improved markedly.
A number of banks are now showing profits while interest spread has improved to 1.57 by the third
quarter.
Commercial  bank  external  debt  has  also  declined  substantially.  More  than  78  %  of  bank’s  existing
foreign liabilities have been new borrowings incurred after July 1997. This shows that Thai banks have
no difficulties in raising funds abroad.
All banks are expected to meet full 100 % loss provision requirement by end of the year as required by
the Bank of Thailand. In the last three years some B890 billion has been raised as new bank capital,
raising  the  BIS  capital-adequacy  ratio  to  11.95  %  for  the  industry.  This  is  relatively  high  by  the
minimum standard, and will allow Thai banks to meet any provision in the future, as well as supporting
credit expansion.
Non-performing loans, which peaked at 47.7 % of total credit, have now been reduced to 22.5 % of
total credit at end-October.
A total of B1.1 trillion of NPL have been restructured, while a further B1 trillion of NPL is either in, or is
in the process of being submitted to court, with resolutions that need to be accelerated. The remaining
portion, B600 billion, of un-restructured debt consists mainly of loans to small and medium enterprises
(SMEs), as well as consumer and mortgage loans.
To speed up the restructuring of the last portion, especially the SMEs, the Bank of Thailand has set up
a  scheme  of  debt  restructuring  and  new  lending  for  SMEs  with  NPL  problems  but  have  viable
business prospects. This scheme is made possible through a credit guarantee by the Small Industry
Credit  Insurance  Corp.  When  the  scheme  was  first  introduced,  there  were  some  minor  problems
relating to the requirement for additional personal guarantee. This issue has now been resolved. It is
hoped that the scheme will help SMEs in returning to a state of normalcy.
In addition, the Bank of Thailand has encouraged financial institutions to separate their non-performing
assets either to be sold or transferred to asset management companies. In all, 14 asset management
companies  have  been  approved,  and  approximately  B579  billion  worth  of  assets  have  been
transferred  as  of  end-October. With  all  these  measures  in  place,  we  expect  further  progress  in  the
resolution of the NPL problem next year.
With regard to the intervened banks, two have been sold to new investors. The remaining two are in
the process of identifying new potential partners which are most likely to be finalised next year.
As for the existing Thai banks, the policy framework emphasised by the government is to encourage
mergers,  such  as  in  the  case  of  Bank  Thai,  which  will  help  to  preserve  Thai-owned  financial
institutions. In this regard, in the case of those banks which have already been sold, the authorities
have imposed the condition that they remain listed in the local stock market. And even in the case of
the financial institutions which have switched to foreign investors, and for which permission for exiting
the local stock market has been granted, the move to exit the stock market has been halted.
As for the financial obligation of the FIDF, there is now a clear solution to the problem. The Ministry of
Finance will provide a guarantee for the FIDF bonds to the amount equivalent to the loss incurred by
FIDF in the first year and for the estimated losses in the following years. The preliminary amount of the
2
BIS Review 6/2001
losses is currently estimated at B880 billion, with the first lot of government guaranteed FIDF bonds
expected to be issued in the first quarter of next year.
With a clear framework for resolving the FIDF problem in place, the next important piece of work is to
move toward setting up a Deposit Insurance Agency to formally replace the current blanket deposit
insurance  by  the  government  that  will  need  to  be  phased  out  at  an  appropriate  time.  Such  an
establishment will ensure a level playing field among the banks in Thailand.
What I have said so far is a review of the progress we have made in resolving the financial problems
arising from the crisis of 1997. At this juncture it is fair to say that the Thai banking system is now in a
sound position to move forward on its own strength.
An important question is how can we be sure that, in spite of all the efforts that have been put
to resolving the financial problem arising since 1997, a similar situation will not emerge in the
future? What are the preventions?
The best prevention is that macroeconomic management must aim to avoid the boom and bust cycle,
as the burst of the bubble, as had happened, brought a heavy toll on the economy and society. What
we must do is to strive for a steady-state growth path.
Another important means of prevention is to ensure that banks have a good management system, are
transparent,  and  most  importantly,  that  there  is  an  effective  and  efficient  supervision  system  that
meets international standards.
The Bank of Thailand has made substantial progress on the latter point. We have encouraged banks
to become more transparent in providing the public with more timely and transparent information on
bank management, especially information relating to non-performing loans, lending to related parties,
and violation of the Bank of Thailand’s regulations as well as the fines incurred.
In addition, we have encouraged banks to give greater importance to and abide by the best principles
of corporate governance by limiting the number of outside directorships which the bank directors or
bank senior executives may hold to not more than three, as well as not being an authorised director.
Before the announcement made on this issue by the Bank of Thailand on 17 September 1999, there
were  a  total  of  82  bank  directors  holding  more  than  3  outside  directorships.  The  number  has  now
reduced to 22, and should be finally phased out.
To  reduce  the  risk  of  economic  bubbles  and  the  consequence  to  financial  institutions,  the  Bank  of
Thailand plans to reduce the reliance of the private sector on bank credits, from a share of 77 % of the
total sources of funds, presently, to 55 % in the next 10 years.
This  requires  that  Thailand  must  have  strong  markets  for  debt  instruments  and  equities.  Thus,  the
development  of  the  bond  market  is  among  the  major  tasks  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  undertaken
during the year, as it will provide the infrastructure for the conduct of monetary policy through open
market  operation,  as  well  as  enhancing  the  country’s  long-term  economic  development.  During  the
course  of  this  year,  more  than  B200  billion  worth  of  corporate  debentures  were  issued  by  private
corporations and state enterprises, some of which have a maturity of up to 20 years. The issuance of
such debentures has helped reduce the cost in mobilising long-term capital.
In  developing  the  bond  primary  market,  in  co-operation  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  benchmark
interest  rates  were  finally  set  up.  In  developing  a  secondary  market,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has
changed the status of bank counterparties to the Primary Dealers in June 2000. This was in order to
facilitate  the  implementation  of monetary  policy,  to  provide  liquidity  in  the  secondary  market  and  to
participate in the bidding of government and state enterprise bonds in the primary market, as well as
to undertake non-competitive bidding. Moreover, when any bonds are in high demand, there will be an
issuance of the bonds to ensure adequate liquidity in the market.
In addition, by the end of next year, the Bank of Thailand will introduce BAHTNET II, which is the large
value payments system that meets international standards and will serve both domestic and overseas
financial institutions. The system will provide a facility to serve the transaction of debt instruments for
which  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  the  registrar.  The  pricing  of  this  service  will  also  be  more  market
oriented.
The Bank of Thailand also plans to improve convenience of the general public by standardising the
width of all bank notes, and to introduce chemically treated paper to promote hygiene and lengthen
the life span of the notes in circulation.
BIS Review 6/2001
3
Ladies and gentlemen,
The  most  important  factor  for  preventing  the  recurrence  of  the  financial  crisis  is  to  put  in  place  a
framework  of  financial  institution  supervision  in  which  the  business  sectors  and  the  public  place
confidence.
From  the  first  of  January  next  year,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  will  introduce  a  new  financial  institution
supervision framework which is risk-based supervision, focusing on the risk management system of
the financial institutions.
Under this new system, the responsibility of the supervisor in charge of each institution will be clearly
set out in order to ensure direct accountability. Their work will be supplemented by on-site inspection,
where the supervisor will work with internal supervisor (off-site) of the Bank of Thailand and external
auditors of the financial institutions.
In  order  to  promote  transparency  and  to  ensure  that  the  financial  institutions  being  examined
understand  the  purpose  of  the  visit,  a  formal  audit  program  will  be  sent  out  to  inform  the  financial
institutions  prior  to  the  visits.  The  annual  bank  supervisor’s  on-site  visit  plan  requires  that  each
institution be visited at least once a year.
The  process  of  bank  examination  will  be  timelier.  Moreover,  to  ensure  that  the  quality  of  the
assessment  of  each  financial  institution  is  of  the  same  standard  and  to  ensure  transparency  in  the
process, the supervision report will be submitted to the Financial Institution Development Committee,
which comprises the Heads of all Supervisor Teams.
The Bank of Thailand’s management will meet with the Board of Directors of the financial institution to
present the findings of the supervision report, and there will be a close monitoring and follow up on the
directives given, as well as the points raised in the supervision report.
To put in place this new supervision framework, the Court of Directors of the Bank of Thailand has
approved the new structure of the Supervision Group due to be effective on the first of January 2001.
Under  the  new  organisational  structure,  there  will  be  a  clear  separation  of  the  three  lines  of  work,
namely  supervision,  examination,  and  research  and  analysis.  This  will  provide  for  checks  and
balances within the system as well as serve to develop depth in supervision work.
Moreover,  a  new  Department  of  Risk  Supervision  and  Department  of  Information  Technology
Supervision  will  also  be  set  up,  which  will  help  ensure  that  the  supervision  process  will  be  more
proactive and forward looking, focusing on strategic as well as management risk.
It is quite pleasing that the work, which has been undertaken, has begun to bear fruit, and we will have
by the end this year a strengthened financial institution system.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The economic crisis, which occurred in 1997, caused the Bank of Thailand to review its role and task
as the central bank of the country.
This review pointed to a number of weaknesses in the Bank of Thailand's work in the past. As a result,
the  Bank has embarked on a  comprehensive  restructuring  and  modernisation  programme  aimed  at
improving the works of the Bank of Thailand to best serve the roles and responsibilities as a central
bank.
The  strategy  focused  on  4  aspects,  namely  organisational  structure  and  work  process,  human
resource management, decision marking process, and database and information technology.
The  Bank  of  Thailand  started  the  restructuring  programme  at  the  beginning  of  1999  with  the
revamping  of  the  management  levels.  Emphasis  was  placed  on  shorter  lines  of  command,  which
facilitate fast and effective problem solving.
The  organisation  is  divided  into  five  main  business  groups;  namely,  monetary  stability,  financial
institution  stability,  corporate  support  services,  financial  institution  rehabilitation  and  strategic
capabilities. Objectives, roles, and responsibilities of each group are clearly stipulated.
In 1999, the modernisation programme put the main emphasis on improving the work process. Those
completed included: Data Management Group - a centralisation of data collection that were originally
performed by many departments within the Bank; introduction of the use of information technology for
the  dissemination  of  information  for  public  use  through  the  Bank  of  Thailand's  web  site;  Financial
4
BIS Review 6/2001
Markets Operations Group - to develop working efficiency by increasing skills in risk management and
the  modernisation  of  the  trading  room;  another  group  which  has  been  completed  under  the
programme was the Supervision Group.
On personnel development, most of the Bank of Thailand's staff lacked systematic development. In
the past  year, therefore, heavy  investment  was put on staff training by  doubling  the  budget  for  this
purpose. Moreover, staffs with high potential were assigned job training in outstanding private sector
companies in order to increase their vision and experience and to understand how the private sector
works.
A job evaluation system has been applied to each position in order to put the right man on the right
job. Most importantly, we have introduced performance evaluation and individual development plans in
accordance with international standards.
Next year, the Bank of Thailand will start a new salary structure to be consistent with job evaluation,
and to set out a clear work target and plan for each group.
The most important change that occurs has been the improvement in the decision- making process.
Today, all Bank of Thailand policies have been made on the basis of sound principles and reasoning
that can be explained clearly to the public.
The decision-making process now evolves around decision-making by a committee rather than relying
on individuals  as in  the  past. In some of  the  committees,  well-qualified  individuals  from  outside  the
Bank of Thailand have been invited to be members. Between each committee, emphasis has been put
on the ability to communicate and exchange information.
The change in this decision making process has resulted in the implementation of policies based on
collective decision-making, accuracy and up to date  information, most importantly, the co-ordination
between the committees has helped reduce policy inconsistency.
On monetary policy, following the change to a floating exchange rate system, there was a need for a
new  monetary  policy  framework.  On  this  issue,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  believes  that  the  Inflation
Targeting framework, which is being used today, is very appropriate to the present conditions and is
well suited for Thai economic and monetary structures. Keeping inflation at a low level is an important
pre-condition in maintaining economic stability of the country in the long run. Most importantly, under
this  framework,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  must  set  clear  monetary  policy  targets,  be  transparent  in  its
decision-making,  and  accountable  for  its  policies.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  Monetary  Policy  Board
announces its decision every six weeks, and so far has published two Inflation Reports.
At  present,  the  new  monetary  policy  framework  has  been  accepted  at  a  certain  level.  More
importantly, for it to be highly successful and efficient, the Bank of Thailand must be independent in
implementing its policies.
On this  issue, the draft of the new Bank of Thailand  Act has stipulated this condition.  Even though
there is a need to review the draft in order to make it more effective, the Bank of Thailand strongly
endorses  the  importance  of  this  Act  because  it  will  provide  for  an  up  to  date  framework  for  the
development of the Thai monetary system in the future.
In  data  dissemination,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  improved  the  process  of  data  collection  and
dissemination  to  ensure  that  they  are  complete,  correct,  and  expeditiously  published,  such  as  the
improvement of the M3 data, the report on buying-selling of foreign currency especially the forms F.T.
3 and F.T. 4, as well as random checks on the correctness of the report.
At this point, we would like to note that the purpose of this random check is not to emphasise the use
of penalties but to create awareness amongst the financial institutions the importance of data reporting
to  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  so  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand  can  have  an  up  to  date  database  for  policy
decision-making.
On the external data, for the first time there has been a survey and announcement of the International
Investment Position (IIP), in order to correctly monitor foreign currency exposure of the Thai economic
system. Also, Thailand is the 21st country ranking in the world, in compliance with the International
Monetary Fund's Special Data Dissemination  Standard (SDDS).  Moreover, the  dissemination  of  the
Bank of Thailand's data to the public has been improved through the access to information through the
web site and the use of the Interactive Voice Response.
BIS Review 6/2001
5
The various improvements to the Bank of Thailand have also started to show results. In this regard,
the Bank of Thailand was invited by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) to hold shares with
other prominent central banks in the world.
But  the  work  does  not  end  here.  The  improvement  within  the  Bank  of  Thailand  must  continue  to
ensure the Bank is an organisation which is ready to learn and develop itself as well as being the main
economic  organisation  with  accepted  international  working  standards.  More  importantly,  it  is
necessary to have an ability to maintain monetary and financial institution stability effectively and have
the confidence of the public.
In 2001, we projected the economy to grow at around 4 %, a similar rate compared to this year.
In the first half, economic activity is projected to  be somewhat stabilised. However, given a cleared
economic and political environment, higher growth is anticipated in the second half of the year.
Following the adoption of an accommodative monetary policy stance by the Bank of Thailand to foster
economic  growth,  which  has  enabled  a  continued  downward  adjustment  of  market  interest  rates,
domestic spending is expected to pick up next year, as there is usually a lag of 1 – 1.5 years before
monetary policy will result in increased spending.
As for Thailand’s international financial position, even though exports will not be as buoyant as this
year due to a less favourable external environment and imports will continue to increase in line with
the economic recovery, the current account will continue to record a surplus in the year 2001, though
of a smaller amount.
Although  the  Thai  economy  will  continue  to  expand,  there  are  a  number  of  important  issues  to  be
taken into consideration:
The first issue: The US economic slowdown
External risks will be increased as the US economy is expected to slow in the coming year. How much
should we be concerned about this, given that the USA  is a major industrial country and the major
export  market  for  Asian  countries?  The  degree  of  Thailand’s  exposure  to  the  US  market  can  be
considered moderate, as exports to the US market constitutes about 21% of Thailand’s total exports.
Major export goods include textiles, electrical appliances, electrical parts and integrated circuits.
Over the years, the structure of Thai exports has diversified considerably in terms of both markets and
goods,  thus  reducing  over  dependence  on  any  particular  market  or  goods.  It  is  expected  that  this
diversified structure and the enhanced price competitiveness will help cushion any adverse effects on
Thai exports caused by the US economic slowdown.
The second issue: Restoring public confidence
Given  that  exports  will  slow  down,  economic  recovery  will  have  to  rely  more  on  domestic  demand
which  in  turn  depends  on  the  recovery  of  purchasing  power.  However,  at  present,  private  sector
spending has been affected by the decline of consumer and investor confidence, leading to a situation
where those with purchasing power are cautious in their spending.
This confidence has to be restored. Those who are able to invest have to begin investing. But a good
starting  point  to  restore  confidence  is  to  have  a  clear  economic  policy  framework  which  can  be
realised  only  by  having  people  electing  good  citizens  to  run  the  government.  If  the  people  are
confident in their government and in the policies of that government, then confidence in the economy
will be restored speedily.
The third issue: Fiscal policies for economic growth
Fiscal policies will play an important role in the process of economic recovery next year. At present,
government spending amounts to a fifth of GDP, which is not considered as a high level. But for other
countries, people are used to the system which the government plays a major role. Government deficit
at  a  level  which  is  conducive  to  economic  recovery  should  therefore  be  readily  understood  and
accepted.
6
BIS Review 6/2001
Therefore,  fiscal  policies  must  play  a  more  important  role  in  stimulating  the  economy,  but  should
maintain a balance between economic stimulation and long-term fiscal discipline.
The fourth issue: Monetary policy
On monetary policy implementation, the Bank of Thailand’s view is that the Thai economy at present
and in the near future continues to need low level of interest rate rather than a high level. The Bank
will continue to support this need as it is deemed possible, under the Inflation Targeting framework.
As  for  the  exchange  rate,  the  stability  of  the  baht  has  improved,  due  to  measures  that  have  been
implemented.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  international  capital  flows  and
exchange rate movements in order to ensure timely policy responses to different circumstances.
In the area of international reserves, the Bank of Thailand has set a plan to repay  loans. However,
given our relatively modest reserves, it might be appropriate to consider using new interest incomes
that will accrue from these reserves to repay loans. This may be deemed a better alternative than to
keep on accumulating reserves, whilst taking on new borrowings to repay existing debts.
What I have said so far should help make it clear that, in spite of increasing global risks in the next
year, we remain in a position to be able to steer our economy towards another year of satisfactory rate
of economic expansion.
As for the economic problems that remain to be solved, this should not be a cause for much concern,
as we have already prepared the appropriate policy framework and strategy to address them. It is only
for the newly formed government to give  importance  to  these  policy  frameworks,  as  well  as  to  pay
attention to the following three areas that are critical to the long-term survival of the Thai economy:
1. 
Thailand  needs  to  modernise  its  industrial  base  and  requires  government  initiatives  to
introduce improvements in areas of management and production technology. Education and
labour  skill  developments  also  need  to  be  given  top  priority,  along  with  research  and
development of Thai products. These will enable Thailand’s productive sector to serve as the
main engine for economic growth in the future.
The prevailing social and economic problems at present partly reflect the lack of integrity in
public and private sector management. The Bank of Thailand urges the introduction into the
national agenda the specification for implementation of good governance at all levels. In the
long run, this will serve to reduce risks to future social and economic developments.
The  authorities  must  develop  a  financial  infrastructure  that  can  support  a  balanced
development  benefiting  capital  formation,  liquidity  management  and  risk  protection  on
business  and  income  in  all  business  sectors  namely  agricultural,  industrial  and  service
sectors. We need to develop markets for financial products that are necessary to complete
the structure  of  Thailand’s  financial  market. We  also  need  to  promote  the  use  of  financial
instruments, such as derivatives. The Bank of Thailand will have an important role to play in
overseeing the provision of such financial services.
2. 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen,
At the end of the Second-stage expressway at the Rama IX exit there is a large billboard. In it there is
a  Chinese  saying.  It  reads  in  Chinese  "bu  dan  xin  jin  bu  huan  man  zhi  dan  xin  mei  yan  jin  bu."  It
translates into Thai "Do not be afraid to walk slowly. Be afraid to stand still." Let me end by stating that
the  Thai  economy  is  ready.  But  readiness  can  not  stand  still  forever.  Let  me  end  my  speech  by
paraphrasing this saying. If Thailand were not to  have  a second  wave, a second crisis:  "Do  not  be
afraid to walk fast". Thank you for listening.
BIS Review 6/2001
7
