Willem  F  Duisenberg:  The  ECB’s  assessment  of  current  economic  and
monetary developments and prospects for the euro area
Introductory statement delivered by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
at  the  Testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European
Parliament, Brussels, on 28 May 2001.
 It is a pleasure for me again to appear before your Committee to report to you on recent decisions by
the Governing Council in the area of monetary policy as well as within its other fields of competence. I
shall start with the ECB's assessment of current economic and monetary developments, as well as the
prospects for the euro area, and explain our recent monetary policy decisions. I shall then turn to the
preparations for the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. Finally, I should like to address the
role of central banks in the field of banking supervision. I should like to indicate already at this stage
that my opening remarks may slightly exceed the usual time frame.
Economic and monetary developments
1.
Since my last appearance before this Committee on 5 March 2001, the Governing Council of the ECB
decided  to  reduce  its  key  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points  on  10  May.  I  would  like  to  explain  the
reasons for the decision.
Over the last few months, the Governing Council has gradually changed its  view on the balance of
risks to price stability in the euro area, moving from a situation where the risks basically remained on
the upside towards a far more balanced situation.
Starting with the first pillar, we have been witnessing a downward trend in the dynamics of both money
and credit growth in the second half of 2000 and early 2001, partly reflecting the increase of 225 basis
points  in  key  ECB  interest  rates,  which  occurred  between  November  1999  and  October  2000.  The
three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 was 4.8% in the period from January to March
2001.  In  addition,  some  slowdown  in  credit  aggregates  had  also  been  visible  over  the  past  few
months, and M1 continued to grow at a very low pace.
Moreover, there is now evidence that the monetary growth figures are distorted upwards by non-euro
area residents' purchases of negotiable paper included in M3. The Vice-President of the ECB already
informed this Committee on 2 May, in his presentation of the ECB's Annual Report, that the ECB was
working on identifying these distortions precisely and on making the necessary corrections to the data.
Some of these distortions have recently been confirmed by more specific evidence, and there are now
indications that, over recent months, the inclusion of non-euro area residents' holdings of negotiable
instruments has increasingly led to an upward distortion of M3 growth. The magnitudes involved are
significant and higher than previously expected.
As regards holdings of money market fund units/shares by non-euro area residents, on which reliable
statistical data are now available, the distortion has become more sizeable over recent months and
currently  amounts  to  around  half  a  percentage  point  of  the  annual  rate  of  growth  of  M3.  As  for
non-euro  area  residents'  holdings  of  other  marketable  paper  included  in  M3,  precise  statistical
information is currently being developed. Preliminary evidence indicates that the size of this upward
distortion to M3 growth might have been similar in early 2001 to that related to non-resident holdings
of money market funds units/shares. Consequently, the upward distortion to M3 growth figures in early
2001 may be in the order of one percentage point.
A detailed analysis of these distortions to M3 growth was published in the Monthly Bulletin of May. The
ECB intends to publish a revised M3 series towards the end of this year. In the meantime, the ECB will
continue to inform the public about these developments and explain how these distortions are taken
into account in the regular assessment of monetary developments.
Taking into account all these factors, it was clear that the slowdown in M3 over the past few months
was  more  pronounced  than  expected,  with  estimates  of  corrected  M3  growth  at  or  even  below  the
reference value of 4½% for some months now. Overall, the Governing Council therefore concluded on
10 May that current analysis under the first pillar no longer signalled risks to price stability over the
medium term.
BIS Review 46/2001
1
In the analysis from the second pillar of the monetary policy strategy, several developments pointed to
moderating  inflationary  pressures  in  the  medium  term.  The  global  outlook  for  growth  in  2001  has
deteriorated  over  the  last  few  months,  and  has  continued  to  be  characterised  by  substantial
uncertainty, especially with respect to the outlook for the US and Japanese economies. Owing to a
less favourable external environment, a moderation in real GDP growth in the euro area from the high
levels reached in 2000 is expected in 2001, and this should dampen upward pressure on consumer
prices.  Data  on  economic  activity  recently  released  in  the  euro  area,  like  industrial  production  in
March,  and  business  confidence  indicators  confirm  this  picture  of  a  moderation  in  growth.  This
notwithstanding,  currently  available  forecasts,  both  by  international  organisations  and  private
institutions,  expect  that  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  will,  supported  by  domestic  demand,  be
broadly in line with trend potential growth in 2001. This outlook for a continuation of solid growth in the
euro area is accompanied by expectations for inflation to remain in line  with the  ECB's definition of
price stability in the medium term. Bond yields in the euro area further underpin this expectation.
The improvement in the medium-term outlook for price  stability  will,  however,  be  overshadowed  for
some more months by short-term developments in inflation. As expected, the annual rate of increase
in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose to 2.9% in April 2001. Recent increases in
HICP inflation have mainly resulted from developments in unprocessed food prices due  to the  BSE
related  health  concerns  and  the  measures  taken  to  contain  the  outbreak  of  the  foot-and-mouth
disease. Furthermore, energy prices continue to have an impact, after the strong increases seen in
2000. In addition, other non-energy components of the HICP, namely prices of services and industrial
goods,  have  been  on  an  upward  trend  since  summer  1999.  However,  this  upward  movement  was
partly due to temporary factors (such as rises in administrative prices or indirect taxes) and is also a
consequence of indirect effects of past oil price increases and the feeding-through of the depreciation
of the euro.
The effects of all these factors, which have caused HICP inflation to remain above 2% since mid-2000,
should, however, gradually diminish, making it likely that annual HICP inflation will start to fall in the
course  of  this  year  and  be  below  2%  in  2002.  The  protracted  period  of  time  in  which  inflation  has
remained above 2% should not have medium-term consequences. This assessment is also supported
by the continuation of wage moderation in the euro area, as we have seen so far.
Overall, the recent reduction in key ECB interest rates is to be seen as an adjustment of the levels of
interest rates to somewhat lower inflationary pressures in the medium term. The Governing Council of
the  ECB  has  to  focus  on  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  term,  as  only  this
perspective takes account of the time lags for monetary policy to work its way through the economy.
On  the  basis  of  the  information  available,  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy  is  appropriate  to
ensure that the euro area will be able to maintain price stability over the medium term. Nonetheless,
while  recent  wage  developments  have  been  encouraging,  we  will  monitor  very  closely  the  upward
risks to price stability related to the risk of possible second-round effects of past oil price increases on
consumer prices via wages.
The maintenance  of  robust  non-inflationary  growth  is  a  challenge  to  be  met  by  many  policy  areas.
Fiscal policy  will have to continue the consolidation  process, and governments should  abide  by  the
commitments  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  by  those  made  in  the  context  of  their  stability
programmes,  pursuing  further  improvements  on  the  expenditure  and  revenue  sides  of  the  budget.
Progress along the way to the medium-term objective of budgetary positions "close to balance or in
surplus" cannot be delayed. In fact, economic growth lower than previously expected should not be a
reason to miss budgetary targets in countries with remaining fiscal imbalances.
Finally,  the  objective  of  expanding  the  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  economy  must  remain  a
priority  in  the  agenda  of  the  euro  area. While  progress  is  being  made  in  a  number  of  areas,  more
ambitious market-oriented structural reforms remain a challenge. The still high level of unemployment
calls for ongoing policy efforts to remove structural rigidities from the product and labour markets, and
to diminish adverse incentives provided by tax, benefit and pension systems. Moreover, it is crucial to
increase investment incentives through structural policy measures such as deregulation, privatisation,
and tax reforms.
Issues relating to the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins
2.
I should now like to turn to the preparations for the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. As
far as the Eurosystem is concerned, preparations are  well  on track. At the end  of April 2001, more
2
BIS Review 46/2001
than half of the euro banknotes to be put into circulation from 1 January 2002 onwards, or needed as
logistical stocks, had already been produced. If measured only against the initial launch requirements,
the produced banknotes amount to as much as 70% of those needs.
At the same time, the logistical arrangements within the Eurosystem related to the circulation of the
euro banknotes and coins are being implemented in line with the plans that have been agreed over
the  last  few  years  after  careful  consultation  with  all  parties  involved.  This  includes  the  storage  of
substantial amounts of banknotes and coins, for which adequate  provisions have  been established,
even though it posed unprecedented logistical and organisational challenges, not least with regard to
security  and  spatial  requirements.  The  preparations  for  the  transportation  and  frontloading  of
banknotes to banks also form part of these activities.
As  concerns  the  latter,  on  which  I  have  already  reported  on  previous  occasions,  there  are  still
discussions in some quarters, even at this late stage of the preparations, on whether it might not be
preferable to go back on our decision not to frontload euro banknotes to the general public. As I have
seen, your Committee, too, is preparing a Resolution calling for a review of this decision.
In this context, I should like to stress that the Governing Council of the ECB does not intend to change
its decisions with regard to the front-loading of euro banknotes to the general public. The reasons for
this decision, which I have already spelled out in detail on other occasions and which I am willing, if
necessary,  to  elaborate  further,  are  still  valid  and  there  are,  according  to  our  assessment,  no  new
elements which would justify a renewed reflection on this issue at this late stage of preparations. We
are  certainly  aware  that  retailers,  albeit  not  all  of  them,  are  very  vocal  in  their  demands  for  a
frontloading of euro banknotes to the general public. It is also indisputable that there might be specific
situations in support of this request. However, the ECB has to take a global perspective covering all
aspects and, especially, the general interest.
Having said this, I should like to stress that, in any case, the smooth conduct of the cash changeover
will require particular efforts by all parties concerned, be they banks, businesses or citizens. However,
quite  a  number  of  measures  have  been  prepared  or  are  under  consideration  which  should  help  to
smooth the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins, in particular during the very first days of the
cash changeover. In this respect, I should like to mention the conversion of ATMs already in the early
hours  of  1  January  as  well  as  their  provision  with  lower-denomination  banknotes.  Moreover,  the
opening of banks on 1 January 2002, as has so far been foreseen in some countries and might be
considered  by  others,  should  help  smooth  the  specific  challenges  during  the  early  stages  of  the
changeover. Finally, I should  like to stress that  the  various  extensive and  well-prepared information
campaigns should familiarise the general public with the organisation of the cash changeover.
All in all, the challenges with regard to the cash changeover should, of course, not be underestimated.
At the same time, however, I am not aware of any indications that could place the effectiveness of the
careful and comprehensive preparations for a smooth and successful cash changeover in doubt.
Issues related to banking supervision
3.
To  conclude  my  opening  remarks,  I  should  like  briefly  to  address  some  issues  related  to  banking
supervision.  As  you  are  aware,  the  financial  systems  are  undergoing  an  impressive  transformation,
which  – in the euro area –  is further reinforced  by  the changes  triggered  by  the  introduction  of  the
euro. In many euro area countries, this has led to a debate on the institutional structure for prudential
supervision. The ECB is strongly convinced that there are good arguments for maintaining, or even
reinforcing,  one  of  the  basic  features  of  the  institutional  arrangements  in  the  euro  area,  that  is  the
strong involvement of central banks in the conduct of supervisory tasks.
Within  the  institutional  framework  brought  about  by  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  many  of  the
arguments frequently raised for attributing supervisory and monetary policy responsibilities to separate
authorities  do  not  apply,  since  the  two  functions  are  now  performed  with  distinct  decision-making
processes and with reference to different geographic jurisdictions. At the same time, Economic and
Monetary  Union  (EMU)  is  changing  the  nature  and  scope  of  systemic  risk.  This  calls  for  extensive
monitoring  within  the  euro  area,  attentive  to  the  cross-border  dimension  and  to  the  channels  for
contagion through increasingly integrated payment, clearing and settlement infrastructures and capital
markets. Central banks, due to their traditional focus on systemic issues and to their twofold nature of
national  institutions  and  members  of  the  Eurosystem,  are  well  placed  to  carry  out  this  monitoring
activity.  In  this  way,  they  also  provide  a  substantial  contribution  to  the  operation  of  prudential
supervision.
BIS Review 46/2001
3
The Governing Council of the ECB has discussed these issues extensively and has decided to convey
its position to the Ministers of Finance, anticipating the main elements of the opinions it intended to
deliver  on  national  legislative  projects  for  reform,  according  to  Article  105  (4)  of  the  Treaty.  In  the
analysis of concrete draft laws reforming national arrangements for prudential supervision, the ECB
will reiterate its views. In cases where supervisory responsibilities are not allocated to national central
banks, in particular, we will argue in favour of a strong operational involvement of the central bank in
prudential supervision, calling also for an open exchange of information and effective mechanisms for
close co-operation between all authorities with responsibilities for financial stability.
4
BIS Review 46/2001
