Jarle Bergo: Inflation targeting in a small open economy
Address by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank, at the General Meeting of ACI Norge on
31 August 2001.
 The overview of the economic situation is based on the assessments from Norges Bank's monetary
policy meeting on 8 August.
Introduction
First of all allow me to thank you for the opportunity to provide this address on Norwegian monetary
policy. Since Governor Gjedrem was here one year ago, the Central Bank of Norway has been given
new guidelines, and I therefore find it natural to start by providing an account of the new mandate for
monetary policy. I will then talk about the implementation of monetary policy, with a closer look at the
role  of  the  krone  exchange  rate.  I  would  also  like  to  address  the  topic  of  the  evaluation  and
transparency  of  monetary  policy,  before  concluding  with  a  discussion  of  the  basis  for  interest-rate
setting and the current economic situation.
New mandate
This  spring,  the  Government  and  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  adopted  new  guidelines  for
economic  policy.  The  Government  has  announced  that  it  will  use  the  expected  real  return  on  the
Government Petroleum Fund over the central government budget. The Government estimates that the
guideline  implies  an  average  annual  increase  in  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  over  the  central
government budget of about 0.4 per cent of mainland GDP in the years between 2002 and 2010. A
clear  parliamentary  majority  supports  the  Government  long-term  strategy  for  the  use  of  petroleum
revenues.
At the same time, the Government stresses, with the support of the Storting, that fiscal policy must
also  be  used  to  stabilise  economic  developments.  The  annual  budget  resolutions  will  provide  an
indication of the emphasis placed on this consideration.
BIS Review 74/2001
1
The Government was also of the view that there was a need for a clearer anchoring of monetary policy
to  underpin  economic  stability.  Norges  Bank  was  thus  given  an  operational  monetary  policy  target,
which  means  that  the  Bank  is  to  use  instruments  to  maintain  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  inflation
target is set at 2½ per cent.
The inflation target is linked to the annual rate of increase in consumer prices. The monetary policy
regulation explicitly refers to factors that the Bank shall in general not take into account, such as the
direct effects on consumer prices resulting from changes in interest rates, taxes and excise duties.
The regulation further stipulates that Norges Bank shall regularly publish the assessments that form
the basis for the implementation of monetary policy.
Report no. 29 2001 "Guidelines for economic policy" also states:
"Consumer price inflation is expected to remain within an interval of +/-1 percentage point around the
target "
This must not be misconstrued to mean that the inflation target is an interval. Norges Bank aims at an
inflation  rate  of  2½  per  cent  two  years  ahead.  Should  any  significant  deviations  between  actual
inflation and the monetary policy target occur, the Bank will provide an assessment of the reasons for
this.
2
BIS Review 74/2001
Even  though  there  was  confidence  in  the  implementation  of monetary  policy  prior  to  the  change  in
regulation, the communication of Norwegian monetary policy was clearly facilitated by the Government
quantifying  an  inflation  target.  However,  in  our  view  the  most  important  aspect  of  the  shift  to  an
inflation target is that political authorities clearly recognise that low inflation is a benefit in itself. History
has  shown  that  high  inflation  does  not  lead  to  sustained  higher  economic  growth  or  lower
unemployment. This recognition and the positive inflation track record in Norway since 1990 provide
the Bank with a sound basis for conducting monetary policy.
Implementation
In the light of the orientation of monetary policy in recent years, the new guidelines have been applied
without any significant change in the conduct of monetary policy.
The key rate is set on the basis of an overall assessment of the inflation outlook. Higher interest rates
curb  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  reduce  inflation.  Lower  interest  rates  have  the  opposite
effect. If evidence suggests that inflation will be higher than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates,
the  interest  rate  will  be  increased.  If  it  appears  that  inflation  will  be  lower  than  2½  per  cent  with
unchanged  interest  rates,  the  interest  rate  will  be  reduced.  There  is  symmetry  here.  It  is  equally
important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low, as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high.
BIS Review 74/2001
3
A  change  in  interest  rates  is  not  expected  to  have  an  immediate  effect  on  inflation.  Our  analyses
indicate that a substantial share of the effects of a change in interest rates will occur within two years.1
Two years is thus a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target of 2½ per cent. Hence,
the key rate is set with a view to achieving an inflation rate of 2½ per cent two years ahead.
In  some  situations,  where  unexpected  events  lead  to  an  inflation  rate  that  is  too  high,  it  may  be
appropriate to apply a longer time horizon than two years. For example, reducing inflation to 2½ per
cent within this time horizon may be associated with unnecessary real economic costs. A precondition
for applying a longer time horizon is that there is clear evidence of strong confidence in low and stable
inflation  over  time  on  the  part  of  economic  agents.  Gradually,  as  we  gain  experience  with  setting
interest rates according to an inflation target, the possibilities for placing emphasis on stability in the
real economy will probably increase.
Low and stable inflation is a necessary precondition for stability in the foreign exchange and financial
market  and  the  property  market.  However,  there  have  also  been  episodes  where  bubbles  have
accumulated in these markets, in the form of sharp increases in asset prices, while inflation has been
low.  The  situation  in  Japan  in  the  1980s  is  an  example.  Price  increases  in  property  and  financial
markets may have a considerable impact on wage growth and consumer price inflation after a period.
When  the  bubbles  burst,  the  result  may  be  an  economic  downturn.  In  this  way,  developments  in
financial and property markets may be a source of a more unstable inflation environment. In principle,
it  would be appropriate  to use the interest rate to counter this. In  practice,  however, it  is  difficult  to
assess whether price trends in property and financial markets are sustainable.
When Norges Bank concludes that the key rate should be changed, the change will in most cases be
made  gradually.  This  is  because  there  is  normally  uncertainty  about  the  situation  in  the  economy,
potential disturbances to the economy and how fast an interest rate change will affect price inflation.2
But we will not always take a gradualist approach. A rapid and pronounced change in the interest rate
is appropriate if monetary policy credibility is threatened. If special circumstances prompt Norges Bank
to apply a different time horizon than two years, the Bank will provide an assessment of this. We will
also do so if developments in financial markets or the property market warrant particular attention.
The role of the krone exchange rate
With the new operational target of monetary policy, Norges Bank will aim to maintain low and stable
inflation. We no longer have a specific exchange rate target for the Norwegian krone. Nevertheless,
developments in the krone exchange rate are still very important when Norges Bank sets the interest
rate. This is due to a number of factors:
• 
Changes in the krone exchange rate affect prices measured in NOK for imported consumer
goods and services. Bearing in mind that imported goods are used in Norwegian production,
the rise in prices for imported goods and services combined determines nearly 40 per cent of
consumer price inflation.
Developments in the krone exchange rate have an influence on the earnings of companies
that compete with foreign enterprises and that traditionally also negotiate first in the income
settlements.
Changes  in  the  exchange  rate  affect  the  competitiveness  of  Norwegian  business  and
industry as well as demand at home and abroad. Thus, the activity level in the economy is
affected.
As  the  Norwegian  and  international  money  and  capital  markets  become  more  integrated,
changes in the exchange rate will be increasingly important. Changes in the exchange rate
generate wealth gains and losses for Norwegian households and companies.
                                                     
1
See box in Inflation Report 4/2000. ”Effects of a change in interest rates”, December 2000
See for example Jan F. Qvigstad. ”Monetary policy in real time”, Working Paper 2001/1, April 2001.
BIS Review 74/2001
   2
4
The value of the Norwegian krone will vary, as exchange rates do in most countries. There are many
reasons  for  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate.3  Changes  in  the  exchange  rate  are  often  due  to
disturbances to the economy. One example is a change in the terms of trade, which measure prices
for exported goods and services in relation to prices for imported goods and services. Commodities
account for a substantial share of Norwegian exports. Prices fluctuate widely. As a result, Norway is
exposed to fairly large variations in its terms of trade. A decline  in commodity  prices results in  less
favourable  terms  of  trade.  This  reduces  our  source  of  revenues  and  experience  shows  that  the
exchange rate will weaken. On the other  hand, an increase in commodity prices improves terms of
trade and often results in a strengthening of the exchange rate.
It is desirable for the krone exchange rate to fluctuate in pace with developments in the terms of trade
or  demand  for  Norwegian  products.  If  prices  for  our  export  products  decline,  a  weakening  of  the
exchange rate will dampen the income loss for internationally exposed industries. The exchange rate
can therefore be seen as an automatic stabiliser, or buffer, that shelters the economy to some extent
from changes in the terms of trade.
Oil and gas are the commodities that account for the largest share of Norwegian exports. A substantial
portion of the revenues from the sale of oil and gas is invested in foreign equities and bonds through
the Government Petroleum Fund. As a result, short-term fluctuations in the oil price have less impact
on the domestic use of petroleum  revenues.  In  the  last  20  years,  fluctuations  in  the  terms  of  trade
                                                     
3
See  for  example  Tom  Bernhardsen  and  Øistein  Røisland.  ”Factors  that  influence  the  krone  exchange  rate”,  Economic
Bulletin no. 3/2000, November 2000.
BIS Review 74/2001
5
have been three to four times greater for the Norwegian economy including the petroleum sector than
for the mainland economy. The Petroleum Fund thus relieves pressure on the krone exchange rate.
Changes in the krone exchange rate may also be due to interest rate changes. Higher interest rates
normally make it more attractive to buy NOK-denominated assets and reduce NOK-denominated debt,
leading to an appreciation of the krone. In contrast, a decrease in interest rates will normally result in
lower demand for the krone and a weaker exchange rate. Experience shows that the interest rate only
has this predictable effect on the krone exchange rate when it contributes to stabilising inflation.
The  exchange  rate  constitutes  an  important  channel  through  which  monetary  policy  operates.
Changes  in  the  exchange  rate  are  both  desirable  and  intended  when  they  contribute  to  stabilising
inflation. However, fluctuations in the exchange rate can also be a source of economic disturbances.
Sentiments in the foreign exchange market may induce market participants to be excessively positive
to a currency for a time while at other times they are overly negative. This may lead to unnecessary
and wide swings in the exchange rate, which may spill over into other parts of the economy. Low and
stable  inflation  will  also  strengthen  expectations  of  stability  in  the  krone  exchange  rate  over  time.
However, we must be prepared for fluctuations in the krone.
Norges Bank's reaction to a change in the exchange rate will depend on its assessment of the effect
on  inflation.  The  reasons  for  the  change  must  be  assessed,  as  well  as  how  long  the  change  is
expected to persist. Evidence suggests that short-term fluctuations in the krone exchange rate have
little impact on inflation. When the changes are potentially more permanent and thus may be assumed
to  have  a  greater  impact  on  inflation,  the  Bank  will  set  the  interest  rate  with  a  view  to  stabilising
inflation.  However,  it  is  difficult  to  establish  whether  exchange  rate  fluctuations  are  permanent  or
temporary. As a rule, Norges Bank will thus be cautious about responding with interest rate changes to
movements  in  the  exchange  rate.  A  special  situation  arises  if  strong  turbulence  in  the  foreign
exchange  market  indicates  that  confidence  in  monetary  policy  is  in  jeopardy.  It  may  then  be
appropriate with a marked change in the key rate.
In  addition  to  the  interest  rate,  exchange  market  interventions  are  a  possible  monetary  policy
instrument.  However,  our  experience  has  been  that  heavy  and  sustained  interventions  have  little
influence  on  the  exchange  rate,  and  hence  inflation.  Exchange  interventions,  whether  they  involve
selling or buying currency, are not an appropriate means of influencing the exchange rate over time.
If Norges Bank intervenes heavily in the market, a game situation may arise where market participants
perceive central bank interventions as an interesting opportunity to make a profit. Market participants
know  that  interventions  cannot  be  sustained.  This  tempts  operators  to  take  positions  against  the
central bank, thereby intensifying the pressure on the krone. Under the European currency crisis  in
1997-1998,  and  probably  during  the  currency  turbulence  in  1997-1998  as  well,  these  mechanisms
appeared  to  be  at  work.  Norges  Bank  does  not  intend  to  act  in  a  way  that  prompts  such  game
situations.
6
BIS Review 74/2001
Other countries that conduct monetary policy using an inflation target also use the interest rate as the
main instrument, and interventions are used only by way of exception. Over the last year, however, the
ECB and Sveriges Riksbank have intervened in the foreign exchange market. The ECB intervened for
the first time in September last year. The interventions were undertaken in concert with several central
banks,  including  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  Japan.  The  ECB  intervened  again  on  three
occasions in the beginning of November, but this time unilaterally. The ECB subsequently maintained
that  the  interventions  had  been  successful.  At  a  US  Congressional  hearing,  Peter  Fisher  of  the
Federal Reserve qualified the interventions as successful because they had contributed to improving
market psychology and reducing the implied volatility in the options market.
Sveriges Riksbank intervened in the foreign exchange market in June with the aim of strengthening
the  Swedish  krona.  The  Riksbank  found  that  the  Swedish  krona  was  weaker  than  implied  by
fundamentals. This was followed by an increase in interest rates. The Bank of England has seldom
intervened  in  the  exchange  market  after  the  UK  left  the  ERM  in  1992.  The  currency  crisis  in  1992
appears to have reduced their faith in interventions as an instrument. However, the Bank of England
has made it clear that interventions remain an instrument at their disposal. Canada has had a floating
exchange rate for 30  years, and has used  intervention operations actively in the 1970s, 1980s and
1990s. However, in 1997 the Canadian central bank was not able to prevent the depreciation of the
Canadian dollar, and since then has not intervened. Australia still uses interventions, and the Reserve
Bank of Australia maintains that they have benefited substantially from  their  intervention  operations
during the period with a floating exchange rate. New Zealand has not intervened after introducing an
inflation target in 1990. An evaluation report on monetary policy in New Zealand, written by Professor
Lars  E.  O.  Svensson,  supports  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand's  assessment  that  interventions
would hardly have made a significant contribution to increasing stability in New Zealand's economy in
recent years.4
Internationally, a number of empirical studies have been conducted on the effectiveness of exchange
market interventions. The studies of interventions in the 1990s find that they were more effective than
studies conducted in the 1980s.5 This may be due to shifts in monetary  policy regimes and greater
emphasis on transparency. It is probably easier to win credibility when market participants know that
interventions are anchored in stabilisation policy considerations rather than a short-term exchange rate
objective. However, this presupposes market confidence in the ability of economic policy in general
and monetary policy in particular to deliver nominal stability. It is first and foremost the signal effects of
interventions  that  have  been  found  to  be  effective  and  particularly  when  interventions  are  made
publicly known and justified by the central bank.
                                                     
4
Lars  E.  O.  Svensson.  ”Independent  Review  of  the  Operation  of  Monetary  Policy:  Report  to  the  Minister  of  Finance”,
February 2001.
L. Sarno and M.P. Taylor. ”Official Intervention in the Foreign Exchange Market: Is it Effective, and if so, How does it Work”,
Discussion Paper No. 2690, February 2001, Center for Economic Policy Research.
5
BIS Review 74/2001
7
For Norges Bank, it may be appropriate in special situations to intervene to a limited extent to stabilise
inflation,  should  the  krone  move  to  a  level  that  we  do  not  consider  reasonable  on  the  basis  of
fundamentals, and if this could contribute to stabilising inflation. However, Norges Bank will not act in a
way  that  prompts  unilateral  bets  against  the  krone.  As  a  main  rule,  the  Bank  is  likely  to  consider
intervening  only  when  we  see  a  clear  profit  opportunity  for  the  central  bank.  This  may  also  be
appropriate in the event of extensive short-term fluctuations in thin markets. In such situations, the risk
of a loss-making game against foreign exchange operators will be limited.
Any interventions and the background for them will be clearly communicated to market participants.
Evaluation and predictability
Today's inflation rate is partly the result of the interest rate that was set one to two years ago. Current
inflation  figures  do  not  provide  an  adequate  basis  for  determining  the  level  at  which  interest  rates
should be set today. Monthly figures for the consumer price index are also influenced by random and
temporary factors that have little impact on inflation over time. Precipitation levels influence electricity
prices. Changes in indirect taxes have an immediate impact on the consumer price index. The direct
effects  of  such  factors  on  inflation  will  be  exhausted  after  a  year.  Hence,  they  will  not  have  any
8
BIS Review 74/2001
significance for the interest rate, which is normally set with a view to maintaining inflation at 2½ per
cent two years ahead. However, automatically adjusting inflation figures for the direct effects of one-off
factors may be associated with pitfalls. Increases in indirect taxes and energy prices may be sources
of rising inflation as a result of spillover effects on other prices and wages.
However,  it  is  still  interesting  to  adjust  monthly  inflation  figures  for  temporary  effects  to  determine
whether developments are broadly in line with our projections. Norges Bank analyses and  presents
figures  for  consumer  price  inflation  where  the  effects  of  some  temporary  factors  are  excluded.  The
chart shows developments since 1995 in the CPI, the CPI excluding the direct effects of changes in
excise duties (CPIX) and the CPI excluding the direct effects of changes in excise duties and energy
prices  (CPIXE).  As  the  chart  shows,  the  CPIXE  will  normally  be  more  stable  than  the  CPI  and  the
CPIX. This is because energy prices have historically been among the most volatile components of the
CPI. Since energy prices have a substantial weight in the CPI, wide fluctuations in these prices will
have an impact on the total CPI. However, measured since 1996, CPIXE inflation is not systematically
lower or higher than CPI inflation. Substantial changes in inflation as a result of extraordinary swings in
prices for certain products or changes in direct and indirect taxes may occur on occasion. The effects
of  such  random  and  temporary  factors  on  developments  in  consumer  prices  are  analysed  in  the
Inflation Report.
Norges Bank's forecasts two-three years ahead may be perceived as projections for consumer price
inflation  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  changes  in  interest  rates,  direct  and  indirect  taxes  and
extraordinary  temporary  disturbances.  However,  there  are  seldom  any  reasons  for  substantial
deviations between estimates for the total CPI and the other CPI measures in this context. As a rule,
these estimates coincide.
Norges  Bank  places  considerable  emphasis  on  the  transparency  and  communication  of  monetary
policy.  Norges  Bank’s  analyses  and  the  background  for  the  Bank’s  interest  rate  decisions  are
published regularly. The inflation outlook is presented three times a  year  in Norges Bank’s Inflation
Report. Further assessments are presented every six weeks in connection with the Executive Board's
monetary  policy  meetings.  The  Bank  also  reports  on  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  its
annual report. If there are significant deviations between actual price inflation and the target, the Bank
will  provide  a  thorough  assessment  in  its  annual  report.  Particular  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  any
deviations outside the interval +/- 1 percentage point.
Transparency about the intentions, strategies and implementation of monetary policy make it easier for
economic agents to evaluate monetary policy. If monetary policy is predictable, an important source of
uncertainty is reduced and the interest rate that is necessary to achieve the inflation target - all other
thing being equal - is  lower. A  predictable monetary policy can thereby contribute to  enhancing  the
efficiency  and  impact  of  monetary  policy.  Even  though  there  is  not  necessarily  a  one-to-one
relationship  between  transparency  and  predictability,  some  degree  of  transparency  is  probably  a
precondition for achieving monetary policy credibility.
BIS Review 74/2001
9
In Norway at least it appears that transparency in Norges Bank's interpretation of the mandate and in
the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  a  somewhat  more  predictable  monetary
policy.  The  chart  shows  that  Norges  Bank’s  changes  in  the  key  rate  have  less  impact  on  money
market rates now than earlier.
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  an  international  trend  towards  increased  focus  on  the  need  for
monetary policy transparency. Under the auspices of the IMF and others the "Code of Good Practices
on  Transparency  in  Monetary  and  Financial  Policies"  was  drawn  up,  which  emphasises  the
importance of clarity, transparency and evaluation in monetary policy.
This view of transparency and predictability contrasts sharply with the earlier practice of playing on the
element of surprise. In monetary policy, this was associated especially with control of the exchange
rate.  In  many  countries,  this  approach  was  met  with  deteriorating  credibility  and  high  premiums  for
uncertainty. The effects of changes in monetary policy instruments became increasingly uncertain.
Nevertheless, the consideration of predictability must not overshadow Norges Bank's obligation to set
the  interest rate  at the level  deemed  appropriate  by  the  Bank.  The  expectations  of  other  economic
agents must not control the setting of interest rates. There are a number of examples from countries
with "transparent" monetary policies where interest rate changes have come as a surprise. This may
10
BIS Review 74/2001
be  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  central  bank  had  a  different  view  of  the  outlook  for  economic
developments.
Norges Bank has sought to promote transparency, for example by publishing our interpretation of the
mandate  for  monetary  policy  and  our  assessment  of  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  In
addition,  we  have  been  open  about  our  response  pattern,  our  analyses  of  economic  developments
and our assessment of monetary policy performance. Others are bound to judge the Bank in a critical
light,  not  least  this  assembly.  I  hope  and  believe  that  you  will  find  that  our  words  and  actions  are
compatible, and that in retrospect it will not be difficult to see the rationality in what we do, although it
may on occasion seem surprising then and there. If we manage this, confidence in monetary policy
should take firm hold and strengthen ahead.
The basis for interest-rate setting and the present economic situation
By  way  of  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  address  the  basis  for  interest-rate  setting  and  the  present
economic environment. The projections and analyses in the Inflation Report, in conjunction with our
continuous assessment of the inflation outlook and developments in the money and foreign exchange
market, form the basis for our decisions concerning interest rates. In the last Inflation Report published
on June 20, price inflation was projected at 2½ per cent in 2003 on the assumption that interest rates
remain  unchanged.  Norges  Bank's  assessment  of  the  economic  outlook  was  last  presented  in
BIS Review 74/2001
11
connection with the Executive Board's monetary policy meeting on 8 August. Both the analysis in the
Inflation Report and developments since its publication indicated that at today's interest rate level, it is
likely that the inflation target will be reached in the course of two years.
However,  the  balance  of  risks  is  complex.  The  Norwegian  economy  still  features  high  capacity
utilisation. The rate of increase in consumer prices was slower than expected in July, at a year-on-year
rate of 2.7 per cent. Measured from June, the total index fell by 1.4 per cent. The decline, however,
primarily reflects the decrease in excise duties, notably the reduction in VAT on food and petrol taxes.
Excluding changes in excise duties and energy prices, the rate of increase in prices, as calculated by
Norges Bank, was about 2.6 per cent. At the same time, there is a shortage of labour and labour costs
are rising at a fairly rapid pace. The rise in service prices where wages are a dominant factor moved
up from 6.3 per cent in June to 6.9 per cent in July. Credit growth is also high and growth in household
loan demand is still on the rise. Against this background, there is a risk that domestic pressures may
translate into stronger inflationary impulses than we have projected.
On the other hand, growth in the world economy has slowed markedly, with the risk of even slower
growth and a longer recession. Around the beginning of the year, most forecasters expected that the
slowdown in the US economy would be relatively short and that the effects on the rest of the world
would be limited. This picture has now changed. In the US, the slowdown in growth has been more
pronounced  than  expected  by  most  observers  when  the  first  signs  of  a  turnaround  emerged  last
autumn. Industrial output has declined over the last 10 months and business investment has shrunk by
almost  14  per  cent,  annualised,  in  the  second  quarter.  Moreover,  the  impact  on  Europe  and  the
emerging economies in Asia has been substantially greater than expected. The shift in perceptions of
the outlook is reflected in the estimates from Consensus Forecasts.
Since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  growth  forecasts  have  been  revised  downwards  by  2  percentage
points in Japan, 1½ percentage points in Germany and 1 percentage point in the US. Not since 1974
has GDP growth been below 2½ per cent in all three countries. Growth among our trading partners
has been revised downwards by 1 percentage point to a little less than 2 per cent, which is the lowest
rate recorded since 1993.
Growth forecasts for 2002 have also been adjusted downwards somewhat, but growth is still expected
to pick up next year. However, there is substantial uncertainty associated with these forecasts.
12
BIS Review 74/2001
The forecasts are to a large extent based on the assumption that household consumption will continue
to fuel growth in domestic demand, as has been the case in the US and Europe so far this year. This
is expected because of the solid financial situation of the household sector in most industrial countries
after  many  years  of  rising  employment  and  real  wage  growth.  Another  important  factor  is  that
productivity growth in the US is expected to secure sound profit trends over the longer term, with the
decline in corporate investment turning up slightly next year.
Although business and industry have been sheltered so far from the slowdown in the world economy,
the Norwegian economy may gradually be more strongly affected.
Slow growth in the world economy may lead to lower demand for Norwegian produced goods and curb
the pressures in the Norwegian economy. In addition, slower growth in the world economy may push
down imported price inflation, which may imply that price inflation will be lower than we have projected.
Our forecasts provide an indication of the scenario we consider to be the most likely, given that key
variables such as interest rates, the exchange rate, public demand, wage formation and oil prices are
in line with our assumptions. If these variables deviate from our assumptions, the real economy and
nominal developments may also show a different path.
BIS Review 74/2001
13
The Norwegian economy is balancing on a tightrope. It will not take much to throw the economy off
balance. While the overall global situation suggests that consumer price inflation may be somewhat
lower  than  anticipated  in  the  period  ahead,  the  domestic  economic  situation  points  in  the  opposite
direction. Growth in domestic labour costs may turn out to be higher than estimated.
According  to  an  overall  assessment  of  the  inflation  outlook,  our  conclusion  at  the  Executive  Board
Meeting on 8 August was that with an unchanged interest rate ahead the probability that inflation two
years ahead will be higher than 2½ per cent is the same as the probability that it will be lower.
Thank you for you attention.
14
BIS Review 74/2001
