David  Clementi:  Debt  workouts  for  corporates,  banks  and  countries:  some
common themes
Speech by Mr David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the INSOL International
Sixth World Congress held at the Hilton Metropole Hotel in London on 19 July 2001.
 Introduction
I  am  delighted  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  this,  the  Sixth  World  Congress  of  INSOL
International. The Bank has a long-standing  interest in insolvency  arrangements. As the keepers of
the  London  Approach,  we  have  a  direct,  if  informal,  role  in  corporate  workouts.  This  is  in  part
historical,  but  it  is  no  accident.  Development  of  a  satisfactory  framework  for  corporate  workouts  is
integral  to  the  Bank’s  core  purposes  of  maintaining  financial  stability  and  seeking  to  ensure  the
effectiveness of the UK financial system. The Bank is more commonly associated with the Monetary
Policy Committee and the pursuit of monetary stability. But financial stability is an important corollary
to this; it is difficult to achieve one without the other. The Bank in particular is closely involved with the
design of regulation and financial infrastructure, such as payments and settlement systems, to ensure
that these are robust and the system is, as a result, better able to withstand a crisis. Our interest in
insolvency arrangements is similar. Without a framework that is predictable, equitable and transparent,
designed to maximise value for all interested parties, the costs and wider  economic disruption from
unnecessary corporate liquidations may be enormous.
My speech this morning, therefore, provides an opportunity to signal the Bank’s support for INSOL’s
mission  to  take  a  leadership  role  in  international  insolvency  and  credit  issues  and  to  bring  about
greater  international  co-operation  among  the  main  players.  The  growing  interest  by  a  number  of
international organisations in the design of orderly and effective corporate insolvency regimes, and in
the encouragement of greater co-operation in cross-border corporate insolvencies, suggests you have
been successful in that objective. I think this has been greatly assisted by the important work which
the  INSOL  Lenders  Group  has  been  co-ordinating  in  developing  a  set  of  principles  governing
corporate workouts at the pre-insolvency stage.
But corporate workouts represent just one strand in financial restructurings more generally. There are
two others I want to cover; and these are, first, restructurings of financial institutions, including banks,
and,  second,  sovereign  debt  workouts.  Indeed,  in  many  instances,  restructurings  in  the  corporate
sector will need to proceed in tandem with those in the financial and sovereign sectors. I would argue
that,  in  all  three  cases,  a  collective  approach  by  the  different  participants  in  the  private  and  public
sectors, and effective co-ordination among creditors and debtors, should help to preserve value. So I
would like to consider today the extent to which these differing approaches raise common themes, and
also whether there are distinguishing features which could affect the  interactions between the three
strands.
I recognise, of course, that more progress has been made in the corporate context than in the area of
financial institutions or sovereign debts; and I think that reflects great credit on many individuals and
organisations  represented  at  this  Congress.  So  I  will  start  by  offering  a  few  thoughts  on  corporate
workouts, linking these to the Bank of England’s long-standing involvement in the London Approach
and  our  responsibility  for  the  maintenance  of  financial  stability.  I  will  then  turn  to  look  at  how  the
desirable features, incorporated into the agreed principles governing international corporate workouts,
might be applied to financial restructurings; and finally in a similar way look to whether these principles
can  be  carried  across  into  the  field  of  sovereign  workouts.  This  raises  the  issue  of  the  role  of  the
various  different  parties  to  debt  restructurings,  including  the  official  sector.  By  drawing  out  some
common  themes,  I  hope  to  put  INSOL’s  work  on  the  corporate  sector  into  the  broader  context  of
differing approaches to resolving debtor difficulties.
Corporate workouts
Let me start then with corporate workouts; and let me begin by saying a few words about the Bank’s
interest  in  this  issue.  As  I  noted  a  moment  ago,  it  arises  mainly  from  our  financial  stability
responsibility, although I would argue that our role in promoting the efficiency and effectiveness of the
financial  system  is  also  relevant.  Episodes  of  incipient  or  actual  financial  instability  are  often
BIS Review 67/2001
1
accompanied by failures in the corporate sector which may lead more generally to losses throughout
the  financial  system.  In  some  cases,  the  corporate  failures  reflect  an  inability  to  resolve  temporary
liquidity  problems  affecting  a  company  that  remains  viable  in  the  longer-term.  Creditors  may  act
without the benefit of all available information on a company’s solvency. This imbalance in information
available to company and creditors can be compounded by conflicts of interest between different types
of creditors, or between banks, bondholders and other financial institutions. The end-result is often the
same: the unnecessary liquidation of viable companies, which represents a market failure capable of
amplifying financial instability. That, in a nutshell, explains the Bank’s interest and involvement in this
area.
A country’s insolvency regime should seek to limit the costs arising from potential market failure, for
example by supporting effective private sector mechanisms for reorganising viable companies. I would
say it should do so partly by providing incentives for debtors and creditors to negotiate workouts at the
pre-insolvency  stage.  This  will  hopefully  reduce  the  risk  of  unnecessary  corporate  liquidations  and
avoid benefiting one group of creditors at the expense of others.
Most of you, of course, will know that, guided by these principles, the Bank took the lead in developing
a framework governing corporate workouts in the 1980s and early 1990s – the ”London Approach” or
”London Rules”. We are not jingoistic about this; we are equally supportive of variants whether Hong
Kong  Guidelines  or  Jakarta  Initiatives.  We  draw  the  line,  however,  at  Aussie  Rules;  references  to
Australian sports jangle a few nerves at the Bank! In any case, ”rules” is definitely the wrong word,
since the London Approach has no legal or statutory backing – it is merely an informal codification of a
set of practices that had come to be widely accepted in the vast majority of large corporate workouts
undertaken in the UK in recent years. This includes arrangements for an informal standstill while an
independent review of the company’s long-term viability and financing needs is carried out. But what is
perhaps less well-known is that, in developing the London Approach, the Bank built on a tradition of
involvement  in  industrial  restructuring  dating  back  to  the  1920s.  Indeed,  a  cursory  glance  at
R S Sayers’ excellent history of the Bank from 1891-1944 reveals that Montagu Norman’s involvement
in  corporate  restructuring  in  the  inter-war  period  probably  took  up  more  of  his  time  than  any  of  his
other duties, often to the consternation of some of his more conventional colleagues!
Since the recession of the early 1990s, and reflecting the more stable macroeconomic conditions in
recent years, the Bank’s direct participation as a mediator in corporate workouts has declined. We do,
however, remain willing to take on that role again if invited to do so and where this appears necessary
to help resolve the potentially conflicting problems of a company’s creditors. Where we have tried to
add value in recent years has been in promulgating the London Approach abroad and in working to
develop the framework in the light of recent innovations and developments in global financial markets.
Several  issues  have  loomed  large.  One  is  the  applicability  of  the  unanimity  requirement  given  the
proliferation in the number and type of creditors in any large international workout. Another is the lack
of a formal moratorium over all or part of the period of resolution of a company’s problems, as distinct
from the informal standstill of the London Approach during the initial period of collecting all available
information and evaluating the company’s long-term prospects. More broadly, the extent to which the
Approach  is  affected  by  developments  such  as  securitisation,  loan  trading  and  credit  derivatives  is
exercising our minds and those of others closely involved in corporate workouts.
These  issues  raise  potentially  very  tricky  questions.  For  example,  loan  trading  arguably  makes  the
creditor co-ordination problem more challenging, but at the same time provides an exit route for those
unwilling to be involved in the restructuring and an entry for specialist turnaround investors.
Credit  derivatives  raise  a  different  set  of  issues,  because  they  need  not  involve  transfers  of  the
company’s debt until, in the case of physical settlement, a credit  event  occurs. The knowledge that
debt  will  change  hands  following  a  credit  event  might,  however,  affect  the  incentives  facing  the
company, its ”pre-credit event” creditors and its potential ”post-credit event” creditors in unpredictable
ways. One possibility is that a bank which has purchased credit protection via a credit derivative may
have  an  incentive  to  put  an  ailing  company  into  liquidation  in  order  to  obtain  a  payment  from  its
counterparty  rather  than  participate  in  a  restructuring,  the  results  of  which  are  uncertain.  For  many
banks,  such  an  approach  would  be  incompatible  with  building  banking  relationships,  but  the  recent
debate as to whether restructuring, rather than failure, constitutes a credit event for the purposes of a
credit derivative contract shows the matter is highly topical. At the very least, active markets in credit
derivatives and secondary loans might make it more difficult to identify and organise creditors in order
to negotiate any debt workout.
2
BIS Review 67/2001
These are, as I have noted, awkward issues.  But I am encouraged to see that  the INSOL Lenders
Group has attempted to address some of them in the course of drawing up its Statement of Principles
for  a  Global  Approach  to  Multi-Creditor  Workouts.  I  am  also  encouraged  that  discussions  on  the
Principles  involved  not  only  the  largest  global  banks,  but  also  a  range  of  other  finance  providers,
including  insurance  companies,  institutional  investors,  hedge  funds  and  secondary  market  debt
providers.  As  the  Governor  noted  in  providing  the  Bank’s  endorsement  of  the  ILG’s  initiative  in
October 2000, past experience suggests that a collective approach by the major creditors to a debtor
company in financial difficulties can help to preserve value, to the benefit of the creditors as a whole
and  of  others  with  an  interest  in  the  company.  Although  I  know  there  have  been  tricky  issues  to
resolve in the negotiations – notably those relating to the standstill, debt trading and the provision of
new money – in the end, the Principles seem broadly consistent with the London Approach, based as
they are on the enlightened self-interest of all the creditors. Ultimately, although some debt providers
may be  able to gain in individual cases by striking  out  on their own, in  the  long  run  a  co-operative
approach will ensure greater recoveries for creditors, including bondholders, in aggregate.
Just as greater international co-operation can produce net gains at the workout stage, so that needs to
be  backed  up  by  greater  co-ordination  in  cross-border  corporate  insolvencies.  That  is  why  we
welcome the UNCITRAL Model Law on cross-border insolvencies, which, as most of you will know,
has been implemented into UK insolvency law. The Model Law is consistent with the UK insolvency
regime  and  contains  many  helpful  provisions  relating  to  co-operation  between  insolvency  courts  in
different jurisdictions, and to the granting of recognition to foreign insolvency practitioners. We would
therefore urge other countries to enact the UML.
In this context, we also welcome the ongoing work by international organisations, including the IMF
and World Bank, on the design of efficient and effective insolvency regimes worldwide. It is, of course,
difficult to establish international standards in this area, because the approaches adopted by different
countries reflect not only different legal traditions but also different policy choices, most especially on
the extent to which the system should favour debtors or creditors. Indeed, this is a debate that is live in
several countries, including the UK where new measures were announced last month in the Queen’s
Speech, and I am sure is occupying minds at this Congress. But the IMF work argues, rightly in my
view, that any insolvency regime, whether debtor- or creditor-oriented, will enhance financial stability
effectively only if it protects value for the benefit of all interested parties and the economy in general;
and  this  requires  the  allocation  of  risk  among  market  participants  to  be  done  in  a  way  that  is
predictable, equitable and transparent.
Financial sector restructurings
Let me turn now to my second area: financial sector restructurings, and I would like to start by noting
the importance of confidence in the smooth running of a financial system. Confidence is important in
most industries, but it is at the heart of the financial  industry.  It is confidence  that permits banks to
operate,  as  a  matter  of  course,  with  gearing  many  times  capital,  and  with  a  maturity  mismatch
between their assets and liabilities, often concentrated in short-term or sight deposits. They are thus
peculiarly  vulnerable  to  a  loss  of  confidence,  individually  and  as  a  group.  The  potential  for
contagion – the threat that trouble in one bank will result in a run on others that might endanger the
system as a whole – makes monitoring banks’ solvency and liquidity a core activity for central banks.
Whether responsible day-to-day for supervision or not, central banks still need to stand ready to act as
lender  of  last  resort.  However,  any  such  operation  must  be  carefully  considered.  Any  decision  to
support an institution, particularly in circumstances of underlying insolvency, creates a moral hazard
that  undermines  market  discipline.  Designing  effective  arrangements  for  restructuring  financial
institutions  is  thus  a  particular  challenge  – there  is  a  need  to  act  quickly  and  finally;  intermediate
arrangements are much more difficult to sustain.
The challenge is complicated by the degree to which financial markets are now global and financial
groups  operate  in  a  number  of  different  jurisdictions.  The  G30 report  on  international  financial
insolvencies, published in March 1998, raised several themes that are rather similar to those relating
to cross-border corporate insolvencies. In particular, it emphasised that a close degree of international
co-operation  was  necessary  to  prevent  the  disorderly  failure  of  a  bank  or  insurance  company.
Effective co-operation would help to bring about a reorganisation or if necessary an orderly disposal of
assets,  and  avoid  the  delays,  uncertainties  and  loss  of  value  often  associated  with  formal  legal
proceedings. If the financial institution does fail, in my view some of the provisions of the Model Law,
BIS Review 67/2001
3
especially  those  relating  to  judicial  cross-border  co-operation,  are  potentially  helpful  in  providing  a
starting point for negotiations.
There  used  to  be  a  clear  distinction  between  banks  and  securities  houses,  fund  management  and
insurance,  and  financial  institutions  of  different  nationalities.  Restructuring  could  be  to  some  extent
contained within one market or one jurisdiction. Now the distinctions between different markets and
types of firm have become blurred and the increasing consolidation of financial groups has given rise
to a range of large complex financial institutions or LCFIs. Restructuring one of these groups would be
far from straightforward. The steps involved with winding up an LCFI have been the subject of recent
discussion  among  central  banks.  This  has  involved  not  only  co-ordination  and  information  sharing
arrangements but also how the wider risk to the system would be assessed in these circumstances.
Winding up a firm on this scale could be a large undertaking in itself. But the wider repercussions in
terms of dislocation of markets could be enormous.
Thankfully, as yet, we have had little if any experience of restructuring or winding down an LCFI. As
with  corporates,  however,  the  first  step  would  be  an  assessment  of  the  long-run  viability  of  the
institution prior to the restructuring. This will determine whether liquidity support to the LCFI may be
justified,  or  whether  it  should  be  closed,  in  much  the  same  way  as  the  independent  review  in  a
corporate restructuring will determine whether the company should be reorganised or liquidated. With
financial  institutions,  the  time  available  to  make  an  assessment  and  reach  a  decision  on  providing
support may be limited.
Other  common  themes  in  the  two  strands  are  the  need  for  co-operation  between  all  the  relevant
parties, based on full exchanges of information, and the need for equitable treatment of similar classes
of  creditors,  investors  and  depositors.  It  may  also  be  possible  to  envisage,  in  the  winding  down  or
restructuring of an LCFI, the authorities playing a facilitating role in a private sector solution, raising
parallels with the Bank’s role in the London Approach.
There  has,  as  yet,  been  little  in-depth  exploration  of  the  linkages  between  corporate  sector  and
financial sector restructurings. I believe that efforts to explore the complementarities between the two
approaches  would  reap  dividends.  A  well-designed  corporate  restructuring 
framework,  by
rehabilitating  viable  companies  facing  short-term  problems,  should  maximise  the  value  of  creditors’
claims if it preserves the going concern value of the companies. By providing for an orderly recognition
and allocation of losses, it should also improve banks’ ability to assess the value of impaired assets
and  determine  the  appropriate  level  of  loan  loss  provisions.  As  the  IMF  has  noted,  this  should
encourage more accurate and predictable pricing of distressed claims, assisting the development of a
deeper  secondary  market  in  which  financial  institutions  can  trade  distressed  claims  and  thereby
transfer loans to specialist turnaround investors.
Of  course,  some  of  these  complementarities  may  be  difficult  to  exploit  in  countries,  especially
emerging market economies, in which banks are facing major problems arising from their corporate
loan  books.  Banks  with  inadequate  loan  loss  provisions  and  low  capital  ratios  may  be  reluctant  to
participate in corporate workouts, because they may then be forced to recognise actual losses. The
role of the public authorities is often crucial in such cases. In practice, bank restructuring programmes
have often transferred distressed corporate sector debt to separate government agencies. Indeed, this
has happened in recent years in some G10 countries, notably the US, Japan and Sweden. This can
lead  to  tensions  between  maximising  short-term  debt  recoveries  to  limit  the  public  costs  of  bank
recapitalisation  and  preserving  longer-term  corporate  value.  Effectively,  the  public  authorities  may
liquidate  companies  prematurely,  in  an  effort  to  secure  immediate  cash  recoveries,  when  a
longer-term restructuring of these companies might be a more effective way to preserve value in both
the  corporate  sector  and  the  wider  economy,  including  the  banking  sector.  To  avoid  this  conflict,
corporate and banking sector restructurings need to be more effectively co-ordinated. I would argue
that  this  can  lead  to  synergies  by  facilitating  the  rehabilitation  of  viable  companies  in  a  manner
benefiting all the creditors – including the public authorities – in the longer term.
Having said all that, there is no doubt that financial restructurings and insolvencies do contain several
distinguishing  features  compared  with  corporate  reorganisations,  besides 
importance  of
confidence with which I started. Indeed, that probably explains why much of the debate on the Model
Law  is  on  whether  its  principles  can  be  applied  to  the  insolvencies  of  banks  and  other  financial
institutions. Different views on this meant that the Law had to contain an effective opt-out for banks
and insurance companies. I would certainly agree that depositors or policyholders are  in  a different
position from ordinary creditors. They are likely to have less information, be greater in number, and be
less well organised to recover their assets than professional creditors. So any application of corporate
the 
4
BIS Review 67/2001
workout  and  insolvency  principles  to  international  financial  insolvencies  would  have  to  allow  for
depositor and policyholder protection schemes.
The  role  of  supervisors  would  also,  of  course,  need  to  be  recognised  explicitly.  In  particular,  the
principles  underlying  corporate  workouts  and  insolvencies  would  have  to  be  consistent  with
internationally recognised principles of banking and insurance regulation. In the  EU framework, that
requires consistency between cross-border corporate sector initiatives such as the Model Law and ILG
Principles  and  the  EU  passport  system  and  principle  of  home  state  responsibility  for  banking  and
insurance supervision. Relevant EU directives would also need to be taken into account.
All  this  strengthens  my  view  that  although  synergies  should  be  realised  through  consistency  in  the
approaches  to  corporate  and  financial  sector  workouts,  we  need  to  recognise  that  banks  (and
insurance companies) are different. I have noted that, in corporate insolvencies, countries may differ in
the extent to which their legal and statutory arrangements favour the debtor or the creditor. But they
will also differ in the extent to which their insolvency laws embody a universal or territorial approach to
cross-border  insolvencies.  Exactly  the  same  distinction  is  relevant  in  an  international  financial
insolvency. In the ”single-entity” approach, a bank with branches in several jurisdictions will be wound
up according to universal principles, so that creditors and depositors worldwide are entitled to an equal
claim on the bank’s worldwide assets. By contrast, a ”separate-entity” (or ”ring-fencing”) approach to
liquidating an LCFI proceeds according to territorial principles, so that creditors and depositors of an
individual bank branch in a particular jurisdiction take precedence in the distribution of all the LCFI’s
assets within that jurisdiction, before the local liquidator is authorised to turn over any excess assets to
the home country liquidator.
This implies that, in both corporate sector and financial sector insolvencies, banking supervisors and
insolvency practitioners will be subject to varying legal responsibilities that may make the co-ordination
problem more difficult. I would argue that initiatives such as those of the ILG and UNCITRAL are more
consistent  with  the  spirit  of  a  universal  approach.  In  fact,  I  would  go  further  and  suggest  that  the
application of these initiatives to international financial restructurings and insolvencies is only possible,
in all respects, if a country  adopts a single  entity approach  to the  liquidation of international  banks.
Continued adherence to separate entity approaches could therefore make it more difficult to achieve
greater  consensus  on  the  principles  governing  cross-border  corporate  workouts  and  international
financial insolvencies.
Sovereign debt workouts
I would now like to stray into even more uncharted territory and turn to my third area, sovereign debt
workouts. I hope I have already said enough to clarify that the establishment of an effective framework
governing the relationships between  non-sovereign debtors and their creditors provides  a means of
involving the private sector in the resolution of financial crises. But how does this relate to the current
very  live  debate  about  private  sector  involvement  (PSI)  in  sovereign  debt  workouts?  The  potential
linkages between the three strands of financial restructurings are amply illustrated by the Asian crisis
of 1997-98, which involved widespread defaults by the corporate sector on both its domestic liabilities
and its obligations to foreign creditors. This impacted not only on the banking sector’s balance sheets
and capital positions, with further feedback effects on the corporate sector, but also on the sovereign
sector, through its need to involve itself in bank recapitalisation and corporate sector restructuring. On
top of that, there were contagion effects on public and private sector holdings of sovereign debt at a
time when public finances in many countries were themselves deteriorating independently.
I think it is important to appreciate that the existing framework governing sovereign debt workouts in
emerging market economies (EMEs) evolved in a world where official financing dominated and private
financing was provided by a relatively small number of developed country banks. But private claims
now  outweigh  official  claims  on  the  major  EMEs  – by  a  ratio  of  70:30  in  recent  years.  And  these
private claims are increasingly to bond investors rather than banks – direct and portfolio investment
flows now dwarf bank lending as a source of finance for EMEs. Bondholders are dispersed and often
anonymous, so there are potentially greater creditor co-ordination problems. To contain the potential
systemic  consequences  of  future  crises,  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  have  an  incentive  to
devise  a  new  framework  that  can  deal  more  effectively  with  sovereign  debt  workouts,  and  most
especially with the role of PSI, when private claims, particularly bondholdings, are substantial.
This is very similar in kind to the challenge of adapting the London Approach, whose original principles
were  most  relevant  where  the  creditor  group  largely  consisted  of  a  fairly  small  group  of  relatively
BIS Review 67/2001
5
homogeneous  banks,  to  a  world  where  creditor  groups  had  become  much  more  disparate  and
international, involving large numbers of bondholders and other financial creditors. It seems sensible,
therefore, to consider to what extent the sovereign sector can borrow from the ideas11 discussed by
the ILG and others in developing principles governing multi-creditor global corporate workouts that are
more appropriate to modern financial markets.
I take considerable encouragement from the fact that, in recent months, a number of different private
sector groups have published  views  on ”best practice” principles that might underlie sovereign debt
workouts.  Although  there  are  inevitably  differences  between  the  various  groups,  in  all  cases  a
collaborative framework to facilitate negotiations and co-operation between a sovereign debtor and its
creditors,  and  also  to  overcome  possible  co-ordination  problems  between  different  creditor  groups,
seems  to  be  envisaged.  These  general  principles  seem  to  me  to  have  much  in  common  with  the
themes underlying the ILG’s corporate workout principles. They also include several other suggestions
to enhance creditor co-ordination, such as the inclusion of collective action clauses in bond contracts
and, more widely, the use of ”creditor country clubs” as a conduit for information exchanges.
The key to all this is, in my view, the creditor co-ordination issue. A failure of creditor co-ordination in
the  sovereign  context  can  lead  to  cancellation  of  longer-term  investment  projects  and  protracted
exclusion from international capital markets. The private sector groups argue that, when a sovereign
encounters  financial  difficulties  likely  to  trigger  a  debt  default,  it  should  encourage  a  process  of
dialogue  between  the  affected  creditors  and  the  sovereign.  That  should  involve  co-operation  to
facilitate  a  full  exchange  of  information  and  analysis  relating  to  the  current  financial  situation  and
prospects of the sovereign. This will be easier if the country has already taken the necessary action to
improve data availability and transparency and to meet relevant IMF data standards and codes. There
is a close parallel with the way in which corporate and financial sector restructurings are governed by
independent  reviews  based  on  full  exchanges  of  information  on  the  corporate’s  or  bank’s  financial
position. In both cases, it is essential that those analysing the debtor’s financial position (the IMF in the
sovereign  context  and  the  independent  accountants  in  a  corporate  case)  are  able  to  distinguish
between  different  types  of  default.  More  effective  monitoring  should  improve  the  discipline  on  the
debtor and facilitate the extension of more lending by the private creditors in both cases.
Another area where sovereign debt workouts could borrow from corporate and financial restructurings
is in possible recourse to a neutral mediator, charged with facilitating a co-operative creditor solution.
In  the  sovereign  context,  one  possible  facilitator  might  be  the  IMF.  It  would  certainly  have  the
resources  and  expertise  to  do  the  job,  although  one  possible  drawback  is  that  the  IMF,  unlike  an
arbiter  in  a  corporate  workout,  will  sometimes  itself  have  claims  on  the  debtor,  in  this  case  the
sovereign.  And  this  raises  a  separate  issue  of  whether,  or  in  what  circumstances,  the  IMF  might
provide financial support  during  a  sovereign  debt  workout  – so-called  lending  into  arrears.  Such  an
approach  would  have  to  be  designed  to  limit  the  moral  hazard  implications,  incorporating  strict
conditionality.  But  it  can  be  useful  as  a  means  of  supporting  a  country  as  it  takes  remedial  policy
action through bridging finance.
The  issue  of  the  standstill  is,  as  many  of  you  will  know,  controversial  in  the  sovereign  context,
notwithstanding the fact that an informal standstill plays a crucial role in corporate workouts. Voluntary
debt rollover agreements with creditors or bond restructurings are, I believe, useful aspects of effective
PSI.  But  historical  experience  of  involuntary  sovereign  debt  standstills,  in  the  form  of  payments
suspensions,  has  not  exactly  been  encouraging  – the  process  has  often  been  inefficient  and
inequitable.  Nevertheless,  there  are  circumstances  in  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  where  the  immediate
payments relief provided by  a standstill may make an important contribution.  An  example  would  be
where  capital  flight  is  pervasive  because  immediate  policy  adjustment  is  insufficient  to  bring  about
adequate voluntary private sector refinancing.
In these circumstances, a standstill may realise the same advantages as in a corporate workout if it
provides breathing space for remedial policy measures to be evaluated and put in place; if it promotes
creditor co-ordination and avoids unjustified creditor preference by treating creditors of the same type
equitably; and if it provides incentives to both creditors and debtors to reach a voluntary arrangement
sooner  rather  than  later.  That  is  a  lot  of  ifs  and,  as  I  have  noted,  a  further  provision  is  that  if  the
standstill is supported by IMF lending into arrears, it would need to be subject to strict conditionality.
But  again  these  conditions  could  usefully  borrow  from  the  corresponding  provisions  attached  to
corporate  workout  standstills.  In  both  cases,  the  standstill  should  be  subject  to  a  strict  time  limit;  it
should allow for a full release of all relevant information from debtor to creditors on a timely basis; it
should facilitate equitable treatment of similar types of creditors (for example through the formation of
6
BIS Review 67/2001
bank creditor and bondholder committees); it should provide for the seniority of any new money; and
above all it should deliver the rapid presentation of a restructuring plan to creditors.
What this means is that any sovereign debt standstill would need to be orderly, efficient, equitable and
expeditious.  Easier  said  than  done,  of  course,  especially  given  the  fact  that  generally  no  single
organisation  represents  the  disparate  group  of  private  creditors.  But,  as  with  corporate  workout
standstills, the key is to reduce the incentives for creditors to rush for the exits.
Of course, some have argued that attempts to negotiate a standstill could have the opposite effect, in
other words they could prompt a rush for the exits. But longer-term investors benefit from country runs
being forestalled, so the net effect might be a beneficial switch from short-run to long-run investors.
Others have suggested that standstills create moral hazard and alter debtor incentives in the process
by undermining the primacy of debt contracts. But, as I have noted before, a well-designed framework
for sovereign debt workouts, involving a voluntary standstill where that is thought to be helpful, might
be no more likely to provide perverse incentives for sovereign debtors to default than insolvency law
does  for  corporate  debtors.  But  it  would  have  to  be  clear  that  the  standstill  option  would  be  used
sparingly and in tightly-defined circumstances; otherwise, it could be self-defeating.
Having highlighted all these common themes, I could be accused of wearing rose-tinted spectacles if I
did  not  also  acknowledge  that  there  are  important  distinguishing  features  between  sovereign  and
corporate  workouts.  Unlike  a  company,  a  sovereign,  of  course,  cannot  be  liquidated.  Public  policy
approaches to crisis management recognise that there is an argument for sovereign debt restructuring
in cases where the crisis arises from poor performance and policy. In such cases, as more generally,
crisis  management  will  involve  a  careful  combination  of  official  finance,  policy  adjustment  by  the
debtor and PSI. This is rather different to the corporate case, where the creditors might well decide to
liquidate, rather than restructure, a company  whose  problems arose solely  from  poor management.
The  lack  of  a  corresponding  insolvency  law  back-up  in  the  sovereign  case  might  mean  that  the
incentives to repay are weaker, and that the moral hazard effect inducing a voluntary default is more
common, than in the corporate case.
Such  factors  might  be  compounded  by  other  differences  between  the  corporate  and  sovereign
frameworks, including the lack of collateral (or the means to acquire it) underlying sovereign debt, and
the greater uncertainties in the sovereign case on issues such as creditor seniority, assessing ongoing
debt  sustainability  and  burden  sharing.  This  latter  point  also  raises  the  thorny  issue  of  Paris  Club
comparability, which could be regarded as imposing a form of involuntary PSI on the private creditors.
The sovereign case will also generally be subject to political factors that are simply not present in the
corporate case.
The  uncertainties  surrounding  these  questions  explain  why  progress  has  been  slow  in  devising  a
framework  governing  sovereign  workouts  that  is  capable  of  commanding  widespread  support.  I
believe  there  is  great  scope  in  developing  such  a  framework  to  draw  heavily  on  the  principles
governing  corporate  and 
they  are  relevant,  without
compromising the distinct features of sovereign workouts. I am pleased to see that this seems to be
the approach being taken by the various private sector groups, and I wish them well in their efforts.
financial  sector  restructurings,  where 
Conclusion
Let me try to bring my remarks to some conclusion. In a financial system that has become ever more
global  and  inter-connected,  central  banking  increasingly 
linkages  between
developments  in  different  countries,  sectors  or  markets.  Usually  this  is  a  matter  of  identifying  and
dealing with threats before they emerge. But there is also an opportunity to take ideas developed to
address  one  set  of  problems  and  apply  them  elsewhere.  I  have  tried  to  give  you  a  flavour  of  the
synergies that I believe exist in debt workouts affecting, first, companies, then financial institutions and
finally sovereign countries. But I hope I have also not underestimated the difficulties in realising those
synergies,  especially  as  the  number  and  type  of  players  involved  in  workouts  has  increased.
Significant  progress  towards  a  global  approach  to  corporate  workouts  has  been  made,  however,
thanks  to  the  efforts  of  many  of  you.  I  am  convinced  that  this  has  laid  the  foundations  for  further
moves towards more effective frameworks governing bank and, especially, sovereign debt workouts.
Thank you.
involves  spotting 
BIS Review 67/2001
7
