Joseph Yam, JP: Hong Kong Foreign Exchange and Money Market Practices
Committee
Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, JP, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the
inaugural seminar of the reconstructed  Hong  Kong  Foreign  Exchange  and  Money  Market  Practices
Committee, held in Hong Kong on 16 January 2001.
 Good afternoon
Mr Powell,
Mr Mathieson,
Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
1. 
I am delighted to welcome all of you to today’s seminar. This is the inaugural seminar of the
reconstructed  Hong  Kong  Foreign  Exchange  and  Money  Market  Practices  Committee  (MPC).  The
organisation  of  seminars  by  the  MPC  will,  I  hope,  provide  bankers,  treasurers  and  other  market
practitioners with an opportunity to focus on issues of common interest. It will help specifically to fulfil
at  least  two  of  the  objectives  of  the  MPC:  to  promote  understanding  and  expertise  relevant  to  the
markets; and to encourage communication among market participants and professional bodies, both
local and overseas.
2.
The  MPC  was  first  established  in  1992,  as  a  non-statutory  body,  with  the  mandate  to  give
advice  on  matters  relating  to  the  health  and  development  of  Hong  Kong’s  foreign  exchange  and
money  markets.  Last  year  was  a  year  of  restructuring  and  recovery  for  Hong  Kong,  and  the  MPC
seems to have been following very much the same path. After a review of its functions, the Committee
decided to restructure itself, with a view to playing a fuller role in developing and promoting the forex
and  money  markets  in  Hong  Kong.  It  has  broadened  its  representation  and  established  three
sub-committees, which deal with  issues  ranging  from market  practices  and  product  development  to
training and education. The Committee also expects to adopt a higher profile – for example, through
the publication of standard documentation and promotional literature, and by organising seminars of
the kind that we are having today.
3.
The  reconstructed  MPC  has  already  begun  to  show  achievements.  Some  of  its  contributions
may  seem  a  little  quaint,  such  as  its  work  in  formulating  a  set  of  standard  typhoon  and  rainstorm
procedures  for  settling  foreign  exchange  and  money  market  transactions  under  extreme  weather
conditions.  But  just  imagine  the  chaos  and  confusion  if  everyone  were  to  adopt  a  different
methodology  for  interest  calculations  and  use  a  different  date  to  settle  the  trades  every  time  the
markets close down because of bad weather. The MPC has also been advising the HKAB on other
payment and settlement standards. Again, the advice given may seem insignificant or prosaic, like the
creation  of  a  standard  format  for  the  settlement  code  needed  by  participants  in  our  new  US  dollar
clearing system; but it is often tiny creations like this one that go a long way towards strengthening
efficiency in payment and settlement systems.
4.
Apart from this “domestic” work, the MPC has  also  served  as  a  window  connecting  the  local
forex and money market industry with the outside world. It has already started to strengthen its ties
with overseas foreign exchange committees. These efforts help to keep local practitioners abreast of
what is going on in overseas markets, and of product development, as well as codes and standards.
This  is  important  in  ensuring  that  the  professionalism  of market  practitioners  in  Hong  Kong  can  be
maintained at internationally accepted levels.
5.
In this connection, the MPC has recently been consulted on the draft Model Forex Guidelines
prepared by an international private sector task force under the encouragement of a small group of
central  bank sponsors, including the HKMA. The draft Guidelines are formulated  to  ensure  that  the
industry will follow the best market practices and avoid potentially problematic trading practices, such
as  trading  at  illiquid  hours  or  spreading  rumours  and  false  information.  The  MPC  has  expressed
support for the draft and will consider incorporating the proposed Guidelines into its Code of Conduct
for  Hong  Kong  practitioners.  This  is  a  very  positive  move.  An  abundance  of  international  financial
activities take place in Hong Kong. The adoption of the proposed Guidelines in Hong Kong will go a
BIS Review 3/2001
1
long  way  towards  enhancing  the  integrity  of  our  markets  and  sustaining  the  development  of  Hong
Kong  as  an  international  financial  centre.  It  will  also  contribute  to  greater  financial  stability  in  our
domestic markets.
6.
There are a number of future challenges that the forex and money markets players will have to
face,  including  the  changing  landscape  of  the  industry.  In  a  number  of  ways  I  feel  that  the  world’s
foreign exchange and money markets may have reached something of a watershed in the past year or
so. We have  witnessed a  reduction  in  the  number  of  significant  world  currencies  as  a  result  of  the
arrival of the euro. We have also seen accelerating consolidation among the ranks of major players.
These two factors have tended to reduce the volume of interbank business. Meanwhile the traditional
market  infrastructure  is  being  supplemented  and  challenged  by  the  emergence  of  new  electronic
trading platforms. And, while there has already been for many years a strong momentum for product
innovation, the pressure to sustain profits may most recently have intensified that search. At the same
time  the  regulators  are  as  anxious  as  ever  to  ensure  that  risks  are  properly  understood  (both  by
themselves and by the bankers) and appropriately managed. I am sure that the MPC will play a useful
role  in  helping  the  industry  meet  this  challenge,  by  providing  training  for  new  practitioners  and
continuing  its  work  on  product  development.  The  recent  study  on  the  feasibility  and  desirability  of
introducing overnight index swaps in Hong Kong is one good example of this work.
7.
I should perhaps stop here to avoid encroaching further on the valuable time set aside for our
guest speaker today. Donald Mathieson of the IMF is no stranger to Hong Kong. Many of you will be
familiar  with  the  authoritative  reports  and  analysis  of  financial  markets  that  he  and  his  colleagues
produce. We are fortunate in having been able  to grab him for a couple of hours today  while  he  is
briefly passing through Hong Kong. It is my pleasure to welcome him and to join with  you all in the
launch of this seminar, which will, I hope, be the first of many organised by the MPC over the coming
months and years.
8. 
Finally,  let  me  record  my  gratitude  and  congratulations  to  all  the  Committee  members  of  the
MPC  for  the  excellent  work  they  have  put  into  the  reconstruction  of  the  Committee,  and  my
thanks to everyone here for supporting this event today.
2
BIS Review 3/2001
