Klaus Liebscher: The euro - a solid basis for the future of Europe
Speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  at  the  3rd  YEPP
Congress, Vienna, 6 April 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen!
I regard  it  a privilege - and pleasure - to share  the  podium with  our Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Ms
Ferrero-Waldner,  who  has  shown  to  the  Austrian  people  and  to  her  European  collegues,  what  true
devotion to the spirit of European integration is, also when, at times, the wind blows in your face.
I am very happy about the opportunity to share some views with you on an issue which, I believe, is of
paramount importance for our future.
"The euro is a powerful symbol of European identity and has the potential to consolidate and
propel progress towards European integration."
Ladies and gentlemen,
Let me use the next half hour or so to explore with you why I believe that this statement captures the
essence of Economic and Monetary Union and of the euro.
The euro in the broader historical context of European integration
1.
Ladies and gentlemen,
As Europe lay in ruins after World War II, the question arose of what was to become of Europe. In his
Zurich speech of 19 September 1946, Winston Churchill was mapping out the way forward with his
vision of a "United States of Europe". Against the background of the emerging East-West conflict, fast
action  was  called  for.  Europe  was  too  weak  to  restore  itself.  The  newly  founded  Organization  for
European  Economic  Cooperation  (which  was  later  to  evolve  into  the  Organization  for  Economic
Cooperation  and  Development,  or  briefly  OECD)  coordinated  the  implementation  of  the  so-called
Marshall Plan of US aid to European reconstruction.
As  the  threat  of  communism  was  perceived  to  rise,  the  United  States  were  actively  supporting  the
(Western)  European  unification  project,  hoping  to  re-establish  free  democracies  and  prosperous
trading partners in Europe.
Within Europe, the drive for integration was primarily motivated in the desire to remove the risks for
future  wars.  The  important  goal  was  to  re-establish  a  working  relationship  between  the  Western
alliance and Germany, without arousing the fears of Germany’s former enemies. It was against this
background that Robert Schuman, at the time France’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, held a speech on 9
May 1950, which was to enter the history books as the birthday of the European Community. In this
speech, Robert Schuman proposed to unite German and French coal and steel production, which was
a natural sector to start with, given the strategic importance of these industries for arms production.
The  crucial  achievement  of  the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community  was  that,  for  the  first  time  in
history,  European  governments  ceded  part  of  their  sovereignty,  albeit  only  in  a  limited  and  well-
specified area, to a joint, supranational authority. This pragmatic, step-wise approach - to pick out a
special area and find a common solution for that specific area, leaving other things for later - was to
become known as the "Community method" of integration. You can trace this approach up the most
recent steps in European intergration and, I would expect, it will continue to form the basis also for the
next years to come.
A guiding principle in this context was to become the idea of "political integration through economic
integration". Let me elaborate a little bit. Against the backdrop of the rise of the Soviet Union and the
outbreak of the cold war, the next obvious areas of integration in the early 1950s would have been a
common defence policy, which would, in turn, have required a political union. However, as it turned
BIS Review 30/2001
1
out, this was simply beyond what some countries, notably France, were prepared to go along with. So
an alternative strategy was needed.
At the conference of Foreign Ministers in Messina on 1 June 1955, it was decided to start negotiations
on two further areas of integration. The outcome was the signing on 25 March 1957 of the Treaty of
Rome,  which  established  the  European  Economic  Community  and  the  European  Atomic  Energy
Community.  Again,  integration  was  carried  forward  in  selected  fields  -  i.e.  the  establishment  of  a
customs union and a common market, on the one hand, and a joint  policy on the sensitive area of
nuclear energy.
Ladies and gentlemen,
By now, you will have noticed that European integration does not happen following a once-approved
long-term  strategy,  but  happens  through  a  series  of  initiatives,  often  represented  by  outstanding
personalities,  with  periods  of  stagnation  in  between.  Further  important  examples  of  such  initiatives,
which  exert  their  influence  up  to  now,  are  the  Single  Market  Program  of  1985  and  the  Maastricht
Treaty of 1992.
The  European  Communities  had  been  experiencing  an  extended  period  of  economic  and  political
stagnation since the second half of the 1970s, for which the term "Eurosclerosis" had been coined.
One of the cornerstones of continued integration at that critical point in time was the Single European
Act of 1985. Its principal aim was the completion of the Single Market for goods, services, capital and
labor  (which  are  commonly  known  as  the  "four  freedoms").  The  secret  of  its  success  was  a  firm
deadline:  31 December 1992. The Single  Market Programme provided  a concrete goal for the next
few years and kept European integration going.
The second example is the Maastricht Treaty of 1992, which scheduled the start of monetary union by
1 January 1999 at the latest. It is no secret that when the Maastricht Treaty was signed, many sceptics
doubted whether this project would ever become reality. But these sceptics underestimated the power
of a firm timetable, enshrined in the Treaty of European Union, and the joint forces of the European
Commission and a number of European political leaders committed to European integration. Despite
currency  crises  and  economic  recession  in  the  early-1990s,  and  undeterred  by  the  substantial
economic  and  institutional  convergence  efforts  required  by  the  Member  States,  EMU  started  as
scheduled on 1 January 1999.
Aside  from  political  considerations,  there  are  also  sound  economic  reasons  which  made  the
introduction of a single currency more or less imperative. As the four freedoms of the Single Market
were put in place, the far-reaching economic linkages among EU countries were making independent
economic policies more and more difficult. In particular, fluctuating exchange rates were regarded as
detrimental to internal trade.
It was just a logical step to irrevocably fix exchange rates between the EU countries and introduce a
single  currency.  At  the  same  time  a  single  currency  provides  a  tremendous  stimulus  for  further
economic reform and integration way beyond the limits of the single market itself; I will come back on
this later.
Ladies and gentlemen,
So far, I have exclusively dealt with the so-called "deepening" of the European Union. In parallel, a
continuous process of "widening" in several waves of EU enlargement went on.
The six founding members of the European Union comprised Germany, France, Italy and the Benelux
countries. The first wave of enlargement happened in 1973, when Denmark, Ireland and the United
Kingdom joined the EC. Following this "northern" enlargement, in 1981 Greece, and in 1986 Portugal
and Spain joined the EC on its southern rim. German unification in 1990 implied that the territories of
former Eastern Germany became part of the Communities. The hitherto last enlargement wave was in
1995, when Austria, Finland and Sweden joined. As you may know, the European Union is currently
conducting accession negotiations with further twelve, mostly Eastern European, countries.
Obviously,  any  enlargement  affects  the  decision-making  within  the  European  Union.  As  the  Union
becomes larger, a gradual move away from unanimity decisions in favour of qualified majority voting is
imperative to safeguard the efficiency and workability of the Union’s decision-making procedures. It is
against  this  background  that  the  Treaty  of  Nice,  agreed  in  2000,  foresees  a  number  of  institutional
changes for the European Commission, the Council and the European Parliament. In particular, voting
weights in the Council were adjusted to accommodate new EU Member countries. Also the structure
2
BIS Review 30/2001
of the European Commission was streamlined. No doubt, the current wave of enlargement will be the
largest and most challenging ever.
Two years of the euro: achievements and challenges
2.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Let me now zoom in from this broad, long-term perspective on the recent past and the near future of
the euro.  As  you  probably  know,  the  so-called  Eurosystem,  which  comprises  the  European  Central
Bank in Frankfurt and the national central banks of the euro-area countries, took over responsibility for
monetary policy in the euro area on 1 January 1999. This means that all monetary policy decisions are
taken at the bi-weekly meetings in Frankfurt of the ECB Governing Council.
The Governing Council comprises the six members of the ECB Executive Board, including the ECB
President, and the Governors of the now twelve euro area national central banks. Inter alia, the ECB
Council decides on the official interest rates at which banks can obtain liquidity from the central bank.
There are two important institutional features which ensure that price stability will be maintained in the
euro area on a  lasting  basis:  First,  the  Eurosystem  is  granted  institutional,  functional,  personal  and
financial  independence  in  the  design  and  conduct  of  its  monetary  policy.  Second,  the  Maastricht
Treaty unambiguously enshrines price stability as the Eurosystem’s primary objective.
To testify about the fulfilment of its Treaty mandate, various mechanisms of democratic accountability
have  been  installed;  for  instance,  the  ECB  President  has  to  appear  regularly  before  the  European
Parliament for questions and answers.
There is no doubt that monetary  union has - contrary to all sceptics - turned out as a full success.
Exchange rates between the participating currencies  were  irrevocably fixed on 1 January 1999  and
the new federal central banking system took over monetary policy. Already a few months earlier, the
System had announced a clear definition of its price stability objective, namely an annual increase in
the  Harmonized  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  in  the  area  as  a  whole  below  2%.  The  System  also
announced  details  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy,  i.e.  the  set  of  macroeconomic  indicators  that  it
would  use  in  assessing  the  appropriate  level  of  interest  rates.  Already  in  its  first  two  years,  the
Eurosystem has shown that it follows a pragmatic and forward-looking approach in its policy. In April
1999, we cut interest rates by half a percentage point, in the light of the very low rate of inflation and
the international uncertainties then prevailing. As economic prospects brightened up substantially from
the summer of 1999 and inflationary pressures emerged - not least due to the more than doubling of
world oil prices - the ECB responded by a series of interest rate increases between November 1999
and October 2000, which lifted policy rates by a total of 2 1/4 percentage points. Since then, monetary
policy has been in a waiting position, given increasing signs of fainting price pressures against slowing
worldwide economic growth.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The positive effects of the euro are felt in numerous ways. International financial crises are no longer
able  to  upset  intra-European  exchange  rate  relations  and  trade.  Even  ahead  of  the  formal  start  of
monetary  union,  the  1998  international  financial  crises  did  not  cause  any  major  disturbances  in
European exchange markets. Recall that, just a few years earlier in the first half of the 1999’s, major
devaluations of some European partner currencies put "hard currency" countries such as Austria in an
unfavorable international competitive position.
The euro ensures that such "monetary shocks" are now a thing of the past. In addition, the euro has
unified  twelve  formerly  segmented  financial  markets  into  a  huge  single  market  for  capital,  where
companies  find  a  broad  range  of  financial  services  including  risk  and  venture  capital  at  more
favourable  terms  than  before.  As  a  result,  the  euro  has  also  made  Europe  more  attractive  as  a
business location. Enterprises settling down in the euro area operate in a single market of more than
300 million people. For consumers, the euro creates a single market with full price transparency.
At the international scene, the euro is increasingly used as an investment, issuing, reserve and anchor
currency. Just to give you some examples: The euro/US-dollar foreign exchange market is the largest
in the world, around 30 % of international debt securities are issued in euro and the share of euro-
currency reserves held worldwide amounts to some 13 %. Moreover, approximately 50 states already
use the euro as their nominal anchor currency. But also trade transactions will over time increasingly
BIS Review 30/2001
3
be  switched  over  into  euro,  thus  sheltering  European  businesses  from  international  currency
fluctuations.
Ladies and gentlemen,
For economic policy makers, the euro provides a strong incentive to reinforce economic reform. Let
me just quote two examples: fiscal policy and structural reform. As you know, before entering the euro
area, a country has to satisfy strict economic convergence criteria. The latter include the observance
of  limits  on  the  government  deficit  and  debt.  Governments  strengthened  this  unique  arrangement
already ahead of the start of the euro by agreeing on  the so-called  Stability and Growth  Pact. This
Pact  stipulates,  among  other  things,  that  Governments  commit  themselves  to  achieving  balanced
budgets or fiscal surpluses over the medium run. In practice, the Stability Pact has so far been taken
very seriously, and the majority of EU countries already exhibits budget surpluses. Also Austria has
commited itself in its so-called Stability Program to achieve a balanced budget by next year. Let me
emphasize: the firm adherence to Stability and Growth Pact is key to Europe’s and Austria’s long-term
attractiveness as a business location, and therefore for growth and employment.
The  second  example  of  a  policy  area,  where  the  euro  exerts  strong  reform  pressure,  is  structural
reform. With  a  single  currency  across  the  euro  area,  divergent  economic  developments  among  the
euro  area  countries  need  to  be  absorbed  by  adjustments  in  goods  and  labor  markets.  The  more
flexible  and  the  faster  these  markets  react  to  economic  disturbances,  the  better  for  growth  and
employment. Economic reforms which aim for such flexibility are thus high on the agenda. European
politicians  have  therefore  taken  a  number  of  important  initiatives  in  the  past  three  years  to  foster
structural change and adaptability of the European economy.
The so-called "Luxembourg process" calls for employment guidelines to be issued on an annual basis,
which  recommend  actions  to  raise  the  flexibility  and  the  skill  level  of  the  work  force.  The  "Cardiff
process" aims at structural reforms in the product and capital markets by establishing  best practice
models and benchmarking. Finally, in Lisbon 2000 the European Union set itself the goal to become
the  most  competitive  and  dynamic  knowledge-based  economy  in  the  world,  inter  alia  by  further
liberalisation of network industries and an extension of benchmarking in new policy areas.
Ladies and gentlemen,
To be sure, living with the euro is not just plain pleasure. There is no prize without an effort. Let me
just pick out three challenges that I see for the near and medium-term future.
The first challenge is the smooth changeover to euro banknotes and coins. Starting on 1 January next
year, national banknotes and coins will be replaced with euro-denominated cash. Within two months,
this cash changeover will be finalised. From 1 March, national banknotes will cease to be legal tender,
in other words shops will then only be obliged to accept euro denominated banknotes and coins as
settlement  of  a  liability.  Of  course,  the  OeNB  will  also  after  this  deadline,  without  any  time  limit,
exchange schilling banknotes and coins into euro. Nobody will lose any money. Naturally, this euro-
cash changeover is a huge organisational and logistical project for the central bank, for banks, shops
and vending machine operators. Therefore, preparations have been started several years ago, which
makes us confident that this changeover will be managed as smoothly as was the start of monetary
union  on  1  January  1999.  But  we  are  certainly  aware  that  also  for  many  consumers,  this  change
should  not  be  underestimated.  Not  only  for  elderly  people  will  the  switching  over  to  a  new  unit  of
account and to the new appearance of cash imply a substantial adjustment effort. Naturally, during the
first  few  days,  dealing  with  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  will  be  as  with  a  foreign  currency  when
traveling abroad: you do not automatically feel whether a price is low or high. But after a certain while
and with the daily use of the euro, our perception will soon adjust to the new unit of account. Be also
assured,  by  the  way,  that  we  will  watch  very  carefully  that  the  changeover  to  the  euro  will  not  be
abused by shops and enterprises to sneak in "silent" prices increases.
The second challenge for European policy makers will be a possible major economic downturn, which
- as economic history tells us - will sooner or later come. The Eurosystem has already shown right
after the start of the euro that it follows a flexible and undogmatic monetary policy approach.
I am convinced that we will cope also with future economic downturns in as timely and appropriate a
manner as we did with the recent period of high growth. In the same vein, I am equally confident that
European  governments  will  also  during  times  of  weaker  economic  growth  stick  to  their  strategy  of
medium-term balanced budgets and structural reforms.
4
BIS Review 30/2001
The third challenge will be the European Union’s Eastern enlargement. To be sure, EU membership
does by no means imply automatic and immediate participation in the euro area. But it is realistic to
anticipate  that  the  future  new  member  countries  will,  after  satisfying  the  Maastricht  entry  criteria,
eventually also join the euro area.
The economic challenge will be to integrate such low- income, high-growth economies smoothly into
an area where only one single set of interest rates applies. The institutional challenge will be to ensure
that,  after  further  enlargement  of  the  euro  area,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  be  an
efficient decision-maker with regard to a single and price-stability oriented monetary policy.
The euro as a symbol of a European identity
3.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Let  me  come  to  my  conclusion.  Konrad  Adenauer  once  said  "Die  Einheit  Europas  war  ein  Traum
weniger, wurde eine Hoffnung für viele und ist heute Notwendigkeit für alle. - The unity of Europe was
a dream of a few, grew into the hope of many, and is nowadays a necessity for all." I believe that a
similar statement could also be made on the euro. I pointed out already why I believe that the euro has
become a necessity. Let me now focus on why it bears, in my view, the hope - and the potential - for
helping the evolution of a European identity.
For many  European citizens, the  European Union  is something  quite abstract, far-away,  with  which
they therefore - in the depth of their hearts - do not identify. The European Union  is faced  with the
challenge  that  much  of  its  working  is  not  visible  to  the  public.  Who  cares  -  or  even  knows  -  that
Ministers and officials meet in Brussels every month to co-ordinate policies?
For  Europe  to  become  a  priority  for  its  citizens,  we  need  to  be  frequently  in  touch  with  it.  For  this
reason, I find the European Union’s student exchange programs so vital: they open up young peoples’
minds beyond their national borders and show them an immediate area, where the European Union is
directly  useful  for  the  individual.  Similarly,  European  research  projects  boost  the  research
Community’s awareness of the Union and foster European-wide networks.
The  same  applies  to  business  and  agricultural  support  programs.  All  these  little  puzzle  stones
increase awareness of the European Union and familiarize us with the thought of being Europeans.
This  is  also  why  a  European  Union  passport  and  the  free  movement  of  persons  within  the  Union
without border controls are so vital: they are visible signs of European integration.
One of the things that we are most frequently confronted with is money. We use money many times a
day,  money  governs  all  our  economic  activities.  Sometimes,  money  even  assumes  a  symbolic
character that goes far beyond its actual functions as a means of exchange, unit of account and store
of value.
Take, for instance, Austria and Germany, where the Schilling and the Deutsche Mark became symbols
of reconstruction and economic prosperity in the post-World War II decades. Similarly, the US dollar is
a symbol of US economic and political power in the world. In the same way, I believe, the euro is a
symbol of European integration and Europe’s increasing role in the world.
So, when from January 2002 onwards, you take out a euro banknote or coin to pay the newspaper,
you will be reminded that you are a citizen of Europe. And, once you have discovered that the euro is
quite  a  practical  and  useful  thing  to  have,  this  might  also  strengthen  your  feeling  that  European
integration is a cause worth all our best efforts.
Thank you very much for your attention!
BIS Review 30/2001
5
