David Clementi: Recent developments in securities markets and the
implications for financial stability
Speech by David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Euromoney International
Bond Congress, London, 21 February 2001.
 Introduction
Let me begin by saying how pleased I am to be giving the closing address at this Conference. I know,
in previous years, the Governor has done the honours. While he is engaged elsewhere today, I am
glad to keep up the association with the Bank. Especially now we have joined the ranks of issuers in
the  Euro  markets  in  our  own  name.  If  you  did  not  have  a  chance  to  subscribe  to  our  euronotes  in
January, the issue - the 4.5% of 2004 - will reopen in April, July and October. But I have not come to
plug our paper.
Nor have I come to talk about monetary policy. The minutes of the February meeting, published this
morning, are designed to set out the MPC's considered view as well as the vote itself. On the voting
front, you will find there was a rare outbreak of unanimity in the Committee with a nine to nothing vote
for the recent ¼% cut in rates. But there is little on this front that I can add that is not already in the
minutes or in the Inflation Report we published last week.
I want to talk instead about recent developments in bond markets that impinge on the Bank's role in
relation to financial stability. First I want to talk about credit derivatives and the new markets for the
transfer of credit risk. Second about the revised Basel Accord and what this implies for securities firms
and securities markets. And finally about the implications of the shrinking share of government bonds
in issue.
The Bank's financial stability role
But I ought to start by saying something about the Bank's role in relation to financial stability. As most
of you will know, regulatory responsibility for individual UK financial institutions is now consolidated in
the Financial Services Authority. The Bank is no longer a regulator of individual firms but as a central
bank we retain a vital interest in the system as a whole. We are the ultimate provider of liquidity to
banks and markets. This interest  is reflected in a formal responsibility for the overall stability of the
financial system set out in a Memorandum of Understanding between the Treasury, Bank and FSA.
Responsibility for the overall stability of the UK financial system as a whole sounds a huge and slightly
fuzzy task. It requires the Central Bank to try to see the wood from the trees - to identify and assess
potential shocks, to understand how risk is distributed within the system, and to look for interlinkages
that might cause a problem in one institution or market to spread and trigger wider difficulties. Given
the  importance of London  as  an  international  financial  centre,  for  a  full  assessment  of  UK  financial
stability, we must look beyond this country. So we also have to take a close interest in developments
in  overseas  and  international  financial  markets.  The  international  bond  market  is  of  course  a  key
example. We try to analyse the information in market prices and other data. But the real understanding
of the latest developments comes from talking to market participants.
Credit risk transfer markets
This is particularly important when it comes to financial innovation. In recent years, instruments and
markets for the transfer of credit risk have been a particular focus of change. New ways have been
found to securitise cashflows which could not previously be traded, to unbundle the credit risk from
loans and bonds, and to re-bundle credit exposures in different ways to create securities with different
pay-offs.
BIS Review 15/2001
1
The distinction between a loan and a bond is becoming increasingly blurred. Individual loans are sold
into the secondary loan market, although some companies remain reluctant to see their debt traded in
this way. And portfolios of loans and other cash flows, ranging from mortgage payments to recording
royalties,  are  sold  to  special  purpose  vehicles  for  securitisation  into  tranches  with  different  risk
characteristics  and  maturities,  from  AAA  to  junk,  and  from  commercial  paper  to  long-term  bonds.
Portfolios of bonds are also repackaged, sliced and diced in a similar way to create collateralised bond
obligations.
The new area of growth at present, however, is not in these sales of assets to remove them from the
balance  sheet.  Rather  it  is  in  the  use  of  credit  derivatives  that  leave  the  underlying  asset  on  the
balance  sheet  but  transfer  some  or  all  of  the  credit  risk.  The  market  in  credit  default  swaps  on
individual investment-grade corporate and country issuers is becoming more liquid, in some cases, we
have been told, more liquid than the underlying bond market. And investment banks pricing new bond
issues can increasingly look to credit default swap premia as well as to the spread over the relevant
benchmark on any existing debt. Increasingly, also, banks use derivatives to transfer some portion of
the credit risk on a loan portfolio rather than selling the portfolio outright, creating so-called 'synthetic'
collateralised debt obligations. Data on the size of the market are difficult to come by. But a survey by
the  British  Bankers'  Association  last  year  found  that  outstanding  notional  principal  of  all  credit
derivatives had increased more than three times since 1997 to  around  $600  billion.  Some  contacts
suggest the market may now be even larger than this. But I think it safe to conclude that it is already
large and has been growing quickly.
In a wider sense, the development of these markets for the transfer of credit risk is highly desirable.
The institution best placed to originate a loan is not necessarily best placed to bear the risk. Markets in
credit  risk  allow  financial  institutions  to  diversify  their  exposures  across  different  sectors  and
geographic  regions  while  maintaining  customer  relationships.  Just  as  important,  prices  from  liquid
markets  are  valuable  information,  which  can  help  market  participants  to  allocate  resources  and
manage  risk  more  efficiently.  If  they  work  well,  markets  in  credit  risk  transfer  have  the  potential  to
enhance financial stability and efficiency by ensuring that exposures to shocks are diffused throughout
the system, with no single player excessively exposed.
Unfortunately, however, where there is innovation, there are generally questions and I have three. My
first is a concern about lack of transparency. These markets mean that a bank need no longer remain
exposed to its main customers but can rapidly take on large exposures to other credits without any
new borrowing by the underlying entities. This could make it more difficult for creditors, shareholders
and regulators to assess risk. From the point of view of financial stability, the concern is that these
instruments  might  equally  be  used  to  concentrate  risk  as  to  disperse  it.  Careful  monitoring  and
management of counterparty risk exposures by firms is an important market mechanism to limit this
risk. But any individual firm does not know how much total exposure a counterparty has to a particular
credit through its transactions with other market participants. These concerns underline the importance
of the disclosure elements of the new Basel proposals intended to promote market discipline - I have
more to say on the Basel package in a moment.
And if disclosure is an issue at the level of individual firms, you can imagine that in aggregate, for the
financial  system  as  a  whole,  the  gaps  in  the  data  can  be  large.  It  is  a  major  challenge  for  the
authorities  to  keep  pace  with  financial  innovation  in  the  collection  of  financial  statistics.  The  Asian
Crisis revealed the importance of derivatives exposures in assessing a country's financial position but
these were not included in BIS statistics on cross-border lending, even though derivatives had been a
common feature of financial markets for at least fifteen years.
My second question is a concern that some participants in this market may not fully understand, or
may  have  differing  understandings  of,  the  transactions  into  which  they  have  entered;  and  that
uncertainties may remain about how the courts in some countries would treat these agreements. This
is always an issue in new markets, until market standards and legal precedents are clear. But some
aspects  of  the  credit  transfer  market  make  it  particularly  relevant.  Purchasers  of  asset-backed
securities and creditors of firms that securitise assets need to take care to assure themselves that this
transfer is legally robust - a true sale. An unexpected consolidation of the assets of a securitisation
vehicle with those of the original lender could lead to potential losses for either party. Lawyers do, of
course, pay great attention to this issue and I am neither questioning their opinions nor suggesting that
this is necessarily a problem. But transactions differ and investors must do their own due diligence. I
do think that there is too great a tendency to rely unthinkingly on the rating agencies in this area.
2
BIS Review 15/2001
Regulators have signalled their intent in this area in the new Basel Consultative package. Not only will
banks need to demonstrate a clean break to earn a reduction in their capital requirements, but they will
also need to consider the operational and reputational risks involved in securitisations and derivative
deals.
My  third  question  is  whether  we  collectively  yet  have  a  proper  understanding  of  the  way  the  credit
transfer business is bridging the lending, securities and insurance markets. Contracts in banking, on
the  one  hand,  and  insurance  markets,  on  the  other,  are  in  some  respects  different  animals.  In
securities markets, timing of payments is of the  essence.  An  insurance contract, by contrast,  is not
typically a commitment to timely payment. If insurance companies are participating in this market, in
part  using  reinsurance-type  agreements  and  in  part  using  derivative  agreements,  there  may  be
imperfect hedges or liquidity risks.
The relationship a borrower has with its lending banks has also traditionally been different to that with
its bondholders. Any problems the borrower may have in servicing the debt are typically addressed in
different ways by lenders and bondholders. This problem has surfaced recently with the debate about
whether restructuring should be included within the definition of a credit event. ISDA is addressing the
question  and  it  is  clearly  desirable  that  a  market  standard  agreement  and  set  of  defnitions  should
exist. I do think, though, that it is intrinsically more difficult to standardise the definition of a credit event
compared to that of a price or interest rate - the underlying for most other derivative products - where
data can be taken off screens or lifted from the pages of the FT.
Market participants will therefore have to pay even greater attention to documentation - reviewing new
and existing transactions regularly to see whether changes in market practice might leave them with
imperfect hedges or basis risks. The 1999 ISDA standard documentation was a great advance. But
firms will need to review carefully transactions into which they entered prior to 1999; and, of course,
documentation is valid only if both parties have signed the agreement and confirmations have been
exchanged. It is not a happy position if back and middle offices are struggling to keep up with traders,
in particular to deal with unsigned master agreements or backlogs of confirmations.
Basel proposals
I  have  mentioned  the  new  consultative  package  from  the  Basel  Committee  a  couple  of  times.  The
Bank is of course a member of the Basel Committee, alongside the FSA, and we are keen to hear
views from the market on the proposals. As the second theme of my address today, I would like to
discuss the possible impact of the revised Accord on securities markets and capital flows.
While the Basel Accord ostensibly applies only to international banks, directly and indirectly it will have
a significant impact on securities firms. Indirectly, in the same way that the change in banks' behaviour
in response to the original Basel Accord had a profound effect in shaping developments in securities
markets  in  the  last  decade.  Directly  to  the  extent  that  EU  investment  firms,  under  the  Capital
Adequacy Directive, are subject to the same capital requirements as banks.
One of the principal goals of the new Basel framework is, of course, greater risk sensitivity. The lack of
sensitivity of the existing Accord has been one of the drivers of increased capital market activity: both
through  disintermediation,  as  companies  have  accessed  the  capital  markets  for  funding  directly
instead of relatively more expensive bank loans, and through securitisation, as banks themselves have
sought to continue originating credit but not incur the capital costs of holding it on their balance sheet.
The  new  Basel  proposals  to  the  extent  they  succeed  in  aligning  capital  more  closely  with  the
underlying risk, will we hope significantly reduce incentives for pure regulatory arbitrage.
While the original Accord created an incentive to securitise or, by other means, move exposures off
balance sheet, it is too simplistic to assume that adoption of the new proposals will result in a swing
back  to  more  traditional  bank  lending.  The  wider  use  of  internal  ratings,  coupled  with  greater
transparency regarding their compilation and some assurance of quality control by the regulators, may
in  fact  contribute  to  further  'commoditisation'  of  bank  loans.  It  is  conceivable  that  this  development
could reduce the cost of due diligence on loan portfolios by rating agencies and buyers. And, in turn, it
could mean a reduction in the costs of risk transfer through securitisation or credit derivatives,  with
beneficial effects on banks' balance sheets and liquidity.
However for this to happen, banks' internal ratings will need to carry credibility in the market and, for
this,  transparency  is  essential.  The  transparency  proposals  from  the  Basel  Committee  have  come
under  a certain amount  of fire for their volume  and  detail.  But  I  would  like  the  critics  to  dwell  for  a
BIS Review 15/2001
3
moment on the alternative: a world in which banks effectively set their own capital, with no assurance
of  consistency  or  comparability  from  one  bank  to  another.  This  is  an  important  debate  and  we  are
keen to listen to others' views before the proposals are finalised.
Turning  to  the  possible  effect  of  Basel  on  capital  flows  more  generally,  including  bank  lending,
undoubtedly the new risk sensitivity will tend towards changing conditions for certain borrowers and
issuers.  This  is  particularly  marked  in  the  sovereign  context,  where,  based  on  current  ratings,
approximately twenty seven sovereign borrowers will incur a lower bank capital charge versus eleven
incurring a higher one. Again I would stress that the cushion of capital which most banks maintain over
and  above  their  regulatory  minimum  will  blur  the  impact  of  the  Basel  changes,  since  in  these
circumstances banks' lending and pricing decisions will not be constrained by the regulatory standard.
However,  in some sense the Basel  proposals  will  have  failed  in  their  purpose  unless  the  pricing  of
bank credit better reflects the riskiness of borrowers. By removing perverse incentives for banks, we
also wish to establish better incentives for borrowers.
Greater risk sensitivity does, however, carry with it a possible danger, and that is the introduction of
potential 'procyclicality' into the capital framework. I have touched on this concern more than once in
the past, and make no apology for doing so again. To counteract this danger, regulators should not
allow  banks'  internal  ratings  to  reflect  the  optimistic  prospects  of  borrowers  during  an  economic
upswing:  rather,  ratings  need  to  be  genuinely  forward-looking,  and  to  factor  in  borrowers'  likely
performance  during  economic  stress.  Long  runs  of  performance  records  will  be  invaluable  in
establishing  how  robust  borrowers  are  to  different  economic  circumstances.  In  this  way,  economic
downturns when they come should not prove too much of a shock to the ratings scales.
Of  course,  I  do  not  wish  to  sound  complacent  regarding  the  avoidance  of  'procyclicality'.  Capital  is
after all meant to be a cushion against volatility, also referred to as 'unexpected' loss, but measuring
the  unexpected  is  something  of  an  oxymoron.  Some  of  our  researchers  at  the  Bank  of  England
recently reviewed the usefulness of various predictive models of banking problems, but unfortunately
our conclusion at the moment is that banking crises are each unique in its own way. In the area of
financial  stability  at  least,  there  appears  to  be  some  merit  in  Sam  Goldwyn's  admonition  that  one
should 'never make forecasts, particularly about the future'. So whilst we may be able to ensure that
the banking system is protected against the normal ups and downs of a developed economy, more
extreme events will continue to require tailored solutions.
Changing composition of bond markets
I have speculated on the possible long-term effect of the new Basel framework on securities markets. I
want briefly to touch on a third topic and that is the significant change that the markets seem likely to
face  in  the  composition  of  the  bonds  being  issued.  A  recent  BIS  report  on  trends  in  collateral  in
wholesale  financial  markets  shows  that  the  share  of  US  government  bonds  within  the  dollar  bond
markets decreased from over 44% to under 29% between March 1994 and September 2000, with the
increase  mainly  in  bonds  issued  by  financial  institutions  and  government  sponsored  agencies.
Worldwide, the share of government bonds decline from 53% to under 45%. Of the  G10  countries,
only in Japan is the share of government bonds on the increase. In the US, the Congressional Budget
Office recently projected that the government debt might be repaid as early as 2006.
From  a  macro-economic  perspective,  sound  government  finances  are  clearly  desirable.  Smaller
government borrowing requirements can also encourage private sector issuance or "crowding  in" to
revert to the terminology of a similar debate from the early 1980s.
For  financial  markets,  however,  shrinking  government  bond  markets  have  a  number  of  potential
implications that could be relevant to financial stability.
First,  government  bond  markets  have  tended  to  be  more  volatile  in  recent  years.  Volatility  makes
government bonds less reliable as a hedge and as a benchmark for pricing, and market participants
have  been  exploring  other  instruments,  such  as  swaps  and  securities  issued  by  public  sector
agencies.  Indeed,  US,  European  and  prospectively  Japanese  agencies  are  playing  an  increasingly
important role in the bond markets, with for example, Freddie Mac's €2 billion annual debt programme
in Europe and European agencies such as KfW also bidding to position their issues as substitutes for
government debt. Given this trend, the Bank continues to follow closely the debate in the US over the
credit status of the US federal agencies, which are not in fact government-guaranteed.
4
BIS Review 15/2001
A second issue  is that the growth  of private sector  debt relative  to government debt  puts  a greater
premium on credit risk management. This of course brings us back full circle to my earlier remarks
about credit transfer markets. More generally, though, bond investing seems likely to be a higher risk
and higher return business than before. The growth of a European high yield market over the past few
years and the fall in prices of many of those issues in the second half of last year, mean many of you
will need no reminding of this.
Finally,  a  reduced  supply  of  government  bonds  could  have  important  implications  for  collateral
markets, in which they currently play a key role. Wider use of non-government securities as collateral
could have the result that a flight to quality in a crisis might leave lenders exposed to credit risk, or
borrowers to liquidity risk as they try to meet margin calls. Larger haircuts can address this risk in part.
More generally, wider use of exposure netting through well-managed and prudently designed central
counterparties may be desirable in future.
Conclusion
I think it is too early to judge how material these issues will become or whether private sector solutions
could  emerge.  Bringing  together  my  themes,  however,  it  is  clear  that  credit  risk  management  will
become an even more important issue for the securities markets. Your challenge will be to understand
and manage these risks prudently and  profitably. Our challenge, at the Bank  of  England,  will  be  to
follow market developments closely as part of our financial stability role.
BIS Review 15/2001
5
