Vahur Kraft: Safeguarding financial stability – key issues for the central bank
Speech by Mr Vahur Kraft, Governor of the Bank of Estonia, at the conference on the Challenges for
the Unified Financial Supervision in the New Millennium, Tallinn, Estonia, 2 July 2001.
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
After  the  most  interesting  presentation  by  Minister  Kallas,  it  is  my  pleasure  to  address  this
distinguished audience on more general issues. Departing slightly from the pre-announced agenda, I
will discuss the key challenges to maintain financial stability from the central bank's point of view.
Why is the central bank interested in financial stability?
I.
The  question  "why  is  financial  stability  so  important  for  the  central  bank"  does  not  need  to  be
discussed here in detail. Monetary transmission can not be efficient if weak financial system distorts
interest rate signals by increasing margins or if the financial markets have ceased to function as some
participants  do  not  trust  other  players.  The  causality  can  run  also  in  other  direction.  Over  the  past
decade,  we  have  once  and  again  witnessed  how  weak  financial  systems  have  directly  caused  the
currency crisis that resulted in capital flight, devaluation and deep recessions. The latter is particularly
relevant for fixed exchange rate systems. And finally, central banks are interested in financial stability
because often the central banks would have to take the leading role in crisis resolution, by providing
emergency assistance and working out restructuring plans.
These concerns are very familiar to Bank of Estonia. Fixed rate of Estonian kroon and the currency
board  to  support  the  peg  necessitates  in  strong  financial  system  for  several  reasons.  In  the  open
economy, if the exchange rate is fixed, the interest rates should be let to fluctuate, from time to time
within  wide  margins,  to  meet  the  market  supply  and  demand  for  Estonian  assets.  That  monetary
transmission channel from the rest of the world – in our case from the ECB in Frankfurt – to Estonian
economy  is  of  vital  importance  to  provide  early  signals  to  address  emerging  imbalances.  Financial
system  is,  thus,  both  the  messenger  and  the  first  line  of  defense,  as  the  banks  have  to  withstand
volatile interest rates in case of negative expectations and resulting market uncertainty. Lack of lender
of  last  resort  even  more  underlines  the  essential  role  the  financial  stability  plays  to  avoid  domestic
currency crisis.
As Minister Kallas vividly explained, we have gone through lot of experiences over the past decade. At
the outset of East-Asian crisis, Estonian currency system survived the speculative attack that we at
these times considered a pure "Asian contagion". The 1-month TALIBOR rates were pushed up from 6
to 15 percentage points in less than 2 weeks. Of course, it became clear afterwards that at least part
of the reasons for the attack were entirely home grown. Nevertheless, it showed us very convincingly,
– in real life, so to say –, the importance of capitalized and liquid financial system that  was  able to
adjust its risk management accordingly. A year after, as the Russian ruble collapsed, we had to deal
with both international and domestic loss of confidence in the financial system during the economic
downturn.  Again,  the  interest  rates  more  than  doubled  (from  8-18%)  in  a  few  weeks  due  to  the
temporary  loss  of  confidence  in  the  currency.  These  two  episodes  provided  clear  examples  of  the
importance of financial stability for the monetary and, ultimately, economic conditions in case of a fixed
rate. But these  experiences also provided policy insights that are  useful not only under the  present
circumstances but also for the financial policy making in a common currency area.
What are the main challenges for the central bank?
II.
Central  bank's  direct  responsibilities  to  maintain  the  financial  stability,  apart  from  direct  supervisory
functions, can be divided into three large areas.
Firstly, central banks are responsible for analysis of financial system developments and to determine
the early signs of possible financial difficulties. Central banks are well positioned for that task because
of the close relations with market participants and because of the analytical skills that provide natural
ground for analyzing the so-called macroprudential indicators and perform regular stress testing.
BIS Review 63/2001
1
Secondly, central banks are by definition involved in designing and building up financial system safety
nets.  The  so-called  "traditional"  central  banks  are  directly  responsible  for  short-term  emergency
liquidity support to prevent the problems of one institution to develop into a systemic crisis. Even if the
ability to provide liquidity assistance is limited, like in case of currency board, central banks take – or
are even supposed to take – a leading role in crisis resolution.
Thirdly, central banks are often responsible for regulating the banking system. That is also the case in
Estonia,  even  after  the  reorganisation  of  the  supervisory  function  has  been  completed.  Bank  of
Estonia is responsible for banking regulations while the Ministry of Finance will regulate insurance and
securities market. From the central bank's point of view, the banking regulatory policy goes somewhat
beyond the traditional micro-prudential approach that is basis for Basle capital accords. The equally
important  question  for  central  banks  is  to  what  extent  the  banking  policy  depends  on  the  general
macroeconomic conditions or to put it simply, should regulatory changes take into account business
cycles or should they be guided solely by concerns on micro level.
Early warning systems and macroprudential analysis
III.
Let me now touch upon these three broad categories in more detail.  Estonian experiences  and  the
regulatory questions lead me directly back to the first main task – efficient monitoring and analysis. For
us,  the  harsh  lessons  from  late  nineties  have  underlined  the  need  to  better  understand  the  key
vulnerabilities  in  financial  system.  This  task  has  become  even  more  pressing  now  when  Estonian
banks have become an integral part of major Scandinavian financial groups. While this development
has  somewhat  lessened  our  concern  for  immediate  liquidity  and  capital,  the  performance  of  the
financial system is yet to be tested during an economic downturn. In essence, we do not know how the
strategic partners of Estonian banks would react if the GDP growth will slow, loan losses amount and
bank profitability starts to decline. We must be vigilant to grasp the changes as soon as possible.
The  key  to  vulnerability  analysis  is  a  successful  implementation  of  ideally  several  analytical  tools,
including  early  warning  systems  and  macroprudential  analysis.  As  we  know,  the  early  warning
systems typically try to estimate the impact of external factors on domestic financial systems, i.e., how
vulnerable  the  banking  sector  is  to  decline  in  exports  or  to  worsening  market  sentiment.
Macroprudential  analysis  undertakes  to  broaden  that  approach  to  a  variety  of  economic  indicators,
using the stress testing models. Several organizations are focussing on these developments, including
the BIS, ECB and IMF. The topic gains even more prominence for us as the European Commission,
acting on the request from the ECOFIN Council, is starting to prepare the so-called Macro Financial
Stability  Assessments  later  this  year  that  would  evaluate  the  resilience  of  the  financial  systems  of
prospective new member states.
Several prerequisites are necessary for the development of reliable and robust early warning systems
and even more so for the meaningful macroprudential approach. Reliable data and reasonably long
time series is a necessity  as  well  as is  the  profound  intertemporal  analysis.  All  these  assets  are  in
relatively  scarce  supply  in  EU  accession  countries  with  ten  years  of  independent  banking  history.
However, we have got a few initial building blocks in place. We have looked at our banking data in the
light of the very recent IMF research and were encouraged that our statistics covers the key indicators
fairly well. Secondly, we have dedicated significant resources to improve our analytical skills over the
last couple of years. And finally, we have had an encouraging experience on stress testing during the
FSAP  mission  last  year,  although  the  approach  was  simple.  Against  that  background,  we  will  give
considerable  attention  already  this  year  to  further  upgrade  of  financial  system  analysis  and  we  are
looking forward to cooperate in that respect with our friends in Europe as well as in Washington.
Safety nets: crisis prevention
IV.
From  here,  I  would  like  to  proceed  to  the  other  major  challenge  for  the  central  bank  –  to  build  up
financial safety net. We know that a full-fledged financial safety net consists of two major pillars: crisis
prevention and crisis resolution. Efficient analysis is a sine qua non for every effort to prevent financial
difficulties. Of course, we have the problem that all models tend to be perfect in forecasting the past
while their predictive power is unknown at best. Therefore, our concern is how to build a network of
institutions that would minimize the risk of a sudden shock.
I would like to start this part by stressing the importance of the dialogue with market participants. The
constructive discussions with bank managers serve two purposes. The commercial bankers know and
2
BIS Review 63/2001
in their own way understand both the market situation and the prevailing trends in the so-called "real
economy". Thus, these regular discussions are most welcome complement to the economic analysis
by central bank experts. But the regular contacts provide also a unique channel for moral suasion, for
explaining central bank's concerns and in some occasions, possibilities to put pressure on managerial
choices. Obviously, these contacts are easy to arrange in a small country like Estonia. We have made
use of that opportunity and established dialogue with our financial sector on financial as  well as on
general economic issues, both on regular as well as on ad hoc basis. What we should do more is to
have more in-depth contacts with the main strategic partners of our banks.
The other essential, albeit specific element for crisis prevention is the pre-emptive involvement of the
private sector in crisis resolution. I would like to point out two simple but effective principles that we
have  relied  upon.  Firstly,  the  completely  free  movement  of  capital,  both  long  and  short  term,  has
increased the credibility of our financial policy and, thus, encouraged strategic partners to take much
longer term approach to their investments. That has by now resulted in a full integration of our banks
into  Scandinavian  markets.  Secondly,  Estonia  has  avoided  volatile  short-term  capital  flows  due  to
strong fiscal stance.
While  these  "soft"  policy  principles  support  crisis  prevention  by  providing  relatively  stable  and
transparent  environment,  the  resilience  of  the  system  depends  ultimately  on  the  actions  of  market
participants themselves. The task of the authorities  is to  provide an adequate regulatory framework
and to undertake maximum effort for the supervision of the implementation of these regulations. There
is another interesting, albeit still debated issue – to what extent should the supervisors rely on banks'
internal  risk  control  models  and  ratings.  Estonian  banking  supervisors  have  taken  relatively
forward-looking  approach  in  that  respect  by  increasingly  relying  on  risk-based  approach  of
supervision. At the same time, and having in mind rapidly developing  economy  and currency  board
arrangement, we believe that our banking system should have also robust liquidity buffers as well as
sufficient  capital  to  withstand  the  fluctuation  of  asset  prices.  Therefore,  we  have  set  relatively  high
reserve requirement half of what the banks can meet by the holdings of high-rated foreign assets. We
will further adjust the system of reserve requirements in the future as monetary policy framework will
converge towards the eurosystem principles.
Finally,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  as  an  essential  element  of  the  safety  net,  the  Deposit  Insurance
Fund is functioning well and has proved its usefulness already two years ago. The immediate task for
Estonian authorities is to introduce the investor protection scheme for the other parts of the financial
system.
Safety nets: crisis resolution
V.
In free market economy, no policy and no supervision can prevent the possibility of financial distress in
any  particular  financial  institution.  What  the  public  policy  can  do  is  to  minimize  the  likelihood  of
systemic crisis. Crisis resolution is the key to avoid systemic disturbance. As we know, the ultimate
policy  choice  for  the  authorities  is  to  find  the  balance  between  the  public  sector  and  private  sector
solution from the one hand and between the pre-determined schedule and ad hoc approach from the
other hand.
Estonia's currency board regime sets for Bank of Estonia clear and strict limits that exclude several
options  available  for  the  authorities  in  many  other  countries.  By  limiting  the  money  supply  to  net
foreign assets of the central bank, the room for emergency liquidity support is very limited. Therefore,
in our case, the private sector solution is preferable and particular modalities of crisis resolution will
depend very much on the circumstances. At this point, I would like to refer back to previous parts of
my  speech  and  underline  that  this  particular  approach  rests  upon  a  few  strong  fundamentals.
Continuous  analysis  of  financial  system  developments  and  early  warning  indicators,  importance  of
strong owners and sound risk management in banks, high liquidity and capital requirements – these
basic principles are a necessity for us.
By combining the principles just mentioned, we can now describe a few hypothetical crisis resolution
situations 
the  extreme  private  sector
solution – winding-down of the troubled institution – would probably be the preferred approach. The
Law on Credit Institutions together with the Bankruptcy Act provides central bank and other authorities
with  all  necessary  powers  for  closing  down  the  business  and  letting  trustees  to  take  care  of  the
practical aspects. The Deposit Insurance Fund will immediately reimburse all depositors within legal
limits.
In  some  cases, 
financial  system. 
in  Estonian 
BIS Review 63/2001
3
Of course, in other situation, different approach must be taken and a strict adherence to the former
rule is not feasible. Nevertheless, the initial response  would still  be the private solution. One option
would  be  the  central  bank  to  take  the  lead  as  an  honest  broker  and  bring  together  all  private  and
official parties concerned. Ideally, that would result in design of ad hoc private solution in a form of
merger, acquisition or emergency support. The role of central bank would effectively be the application
of moral suasion, without committing public funds.
However,  one  can  and  should  not  wholly  dismiss  the  need  for  direct  public  intervention  should  it
become necessary. What will be different in our case is that in case of serious trouble, the dividing line
between liquidity support and capital injection would be rather blurred or these operations may even
take place simultaneously, after writing down capital of the troubled institution. The need for very close
coordination between the central bank, the government and supervisors is characteristic feature of this
approach.
Finally, there is perhaps no need to say that over the past decade, we have indeed applied all these
scenarios on our financial institutions in very real circumstances.
Regulations: pro or counter cyclical?
VI.
Finally, let me briefly touch upon the regulatory issues. Bank of Estonia is responsible for regulating
the  banking  system  in  Estonia.  The  detailed  description  of  Estonian  banking  regulations  goes  far
beyond the scope of my speech, but I would just like to say that one advantage of being a transition
economy was the possibility to draw the legislation from the scratch. That has facilitated very much the
compliance with good practices and de facto full adoption of the EU acquis.
What  is  a  real  regulatory  challenge  for  central  bank  in  our  case  is  the  question  of  to  what  extent
regulatory measures should be taken into account in broader financial policy context. Arguments can
be made for changing the regulations in accordance with the business cycle, especially as it seems
that in modern world financial systems have become more pro-cyclical than before. In that case, early
tightening may pre-empt the possibly devastating effects of asset price volatility and loan losses once
the economy starts to cool down. That might be even more relevant if credit growth is high in the early
stage of the cycle.
This approach has particular appeal for policy makers under the currency board as the active use of
monetary measures is excluded and reserve requirements are essentially the only available monetary
tool. In these circumstances, tightening prudential measures early on might seem a very reasonable
thing  to  do.  It  is  important  to  underline  that  in  heavily  bank  dominated  financial  system,  banking
regulations  might  serve  also  as  an  instrument  to  affect  domestic  demand  more  directly  than  under
other  circumstances.  Indeed,  Bank  of  Estonia  increased  capital  adequacy  ratio  on  more  or  less
cyclical grounds in 1996 and tightened capital requirements further at the onset of Asian contagion,
before the peak of the cycle.
Having  said  that,  one  should  not  look  over  the  possible  caveats  of  this  "macro-prudential"  policy
approach. One obvious shortcoming is that as financial markets do mature and financial instruments
become more complex, tightening banking regulations will simply intensify financial disintermediation.
In that case, major capital flows will be channeled to less regulated areas that will bring  about new
risks of potentially systemic nature. The second problem is that the determination of the exact stage of
business cycle is simply impossible. The longer it takes, the more weight is given to the consideration
whether the tightening would not emerge too late and contrary to the best intentions, would contribute
to pro-cyclical behavior of banks. To be honest,  we  have recently thought  what approach  would be
suitable for us to take at present and  we have understood that the topic is debated also  in several
present EU member states.
Conclusions
VII.
After  I  prepared  this  presentation,  I  started  even  more  to  support  the  old  truth  in  slightly  modified
wording  –  maintaining  financial  stability  is  more  the  art  than  the  science.  Maintaining  the  financial
stability is the mission impossible for one institution to carry out in isolation, be it the central bank or
any other authority. What is needed is shared data, shared analysis that brings together macro and
micro prudential aspects of financial stability, common set of principles to fall back in case of systemic
crisis, and perhaps most essentially, there is a need for common mindset.
4
BIS Review 63/2001
I would like to highlight one essential aspect of financial stability. The pan-European consolidation of
banking  industry  has  resulted  in  rapid  increase  of  cross-border  ownership.  The  question  of
co-operation between central banks and supervisors is the key to maintain sound financial systems.
That  applies  both  to  crisis  prevention  as  well  as  to  crisis  resolution.  How  to  pass  on  early  warning
signals,  how  to  provide  emergency  liquidity  support,  how  to  restructure  or  wind  up  big  financial
conglomerates – these questions are highly relevant for us as well as for the whole common market.
I believe this a good time to stop and pass the word over to our moderator who will elaborate more
thoroughly on the other mission impossible: how to find a right institutional structure for financial sector
supervision.
Thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 63/2001
5
