Alan Greenspan: Semi-annual monetary policy report to the US Congress
Testimony  of  Mr  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  on  the  occasion  of  the
Federal Reserve Board’s semi-annual monetary policy report to the Committee on Banking, Housing,
and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate on 13 February 2001.
 I  appreciate  the  opportunity  this  morning  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve's  semi-annual  report  on
monetary policy.
The  past  decade  has  been  extraordinary  for  the  American  economy  and  monetary  policy.  The
synergies of key technologies markedly elevated prospective rates of return on high-tech investments,
led to a surge in business capital spending, and significantly increased the underlying growth rate of
productivity. The capitalization of those higher expected returns boosted equity prices, contributing to
a  substantial  pickup  in  household  spending  on  new  homes,  durable  goods,  and  other  types  of
consumption generally, beyond even that implied by the enhanced rise in real incomes.
When I last reported to you in July, economic growth was just exhibiting initial signs of slowing from
what had been an exceptionally rapid and unsustainable rate of increase that began a year earlier.
The surge in spending had lifted the growth of the stocks of many types of consumer durable goods
and business capital equipment to rates that could not be continued. The elevated level of light vehicle
sales, for example, implied a rate of increase in the number of vehicles on the road hardly sustainable
for a mature industry. And even though demand for a number of high-tech products was doubling or
tripling annually, in many cases new supply was coming on even faster. Overall, capacity in high-tech
manufacturing industries rose nearly 50 percent last year, well in excess of its rapid rate of increase
over the previous three years. Hence, a temporary glut in these industries and falling prospective rates
of return were inevitable at some point. Clearly, some slowing in the pace of spending was necessary
and expected if the economy was to progress along a balanced and sustainable growth path.
But the adjustment has occurred much faster than most businesses anticipated, with the process likely
intensified  by  the  rise  in  the  cost  of  energy  that  has  drained  business  and  household  purchasing
power. Purchases of durable goods and investment in capital equipment declined in the fourth quarter.
Because the extent of the slowdown was not anticipated by businesses, it induced some backup in
inventories,  despite  the  more  advanced  just-in-time  technologies  that  have  in  recent  years  enabled
firms to adjust production levels more rapidly to changes in demand. Inventory-sales ratios rose only
moderately; but relative to the levels of these ratios implied by their downtrend over the past decade,
the  emerging  imbalances  appeared  considerably  larger.  Reflecting  these  growing  imbalances,
manufacturing  purchasing  managers  reported  last  month  that  inventories  in  the  hands  of  their
customers had risen to excessively high levels.
As a result, a round of inventory rebalancing appears to be in progress. Accordingly, the slowdown in
the economy that began in the middle of 2000 intensified, perhaps even to the point of growth stalling
out around the turn of the year. As the economy slowed, equity prices fell, especially in the high-tech
sector, where previous high  valuations and optimistic forecasts were  being reevaluated, resulting in
significant  losses  for  some  investors.  In  addition,  lenders  turned  more  cautious.  This  tightening  of
financial conditions, itself, contributed to restraint on spending.
Against  this  background,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  undertook  a  series  of
aggressive  monetary  policy  steps.  At  its  December  meeting,  the  FOMC  shifted  its  announced
assessment of the balance of risks to express concern about economic weakness, which encouraged
declines in market interest rates. Then on January 3, and again on January 31, the FOMC reduced its
targeted  federal  funds  rate  1/2  percentage  point,  to  its  current  level  of  5-1/2  percent.  An  essential
precondition for this type of response was that underlying cost and price pressures remained subdued,
so  that  our  front-loaded  actions  were  unlikely  to  jeopardize  the  stable,  low  inflation  environment
necessary to foster investment and advances in productivity.
The exceptional weakness so evident in a number of economic indicators toward the end of last year
(perhaps in part the consequence of adverse weather) apparently did not continue in January. But with
signs of softness still patently in evidence at the time of its January meeting, the FOMC retained its
sense  that  the  risks  are  weighted  toward  conditions  that  may  generate  economic  weakness  in  the
foreseeable future.
BIS Review 12/2001
1
Crucial to the assessment of the outlook and the understanding of recent policy actions is the role of
technological  change  and  productivity  in  shaping  near-term  cyclical  forces  as  well  as  long-term
sustainable growth.
The prospects for sustaining strong advances in productivity in the years ahead remain favorable. As
one would expect, productivity growth has slowed along with the economy. But what is notable is that,
during the second half of 2000, output per hour advanced at a pace sufficiently impressive to provide
strong support for the view that the rate of growth of structural productivity remains well above its pace
of a decade ago.
Moreover,  although  recent  short-term  business  profits  have  softened  considerably,  most  corporate
managers appear not to have altered to any appreciable extent their long-standing optimism about the
future returns from using new technology. A recent survey of purchasing managers suggests that the
wave of new on- line business-to-business activities is far from cresting. Corporate managers more
generally, rightly or wrongly, appear to remain remarkably sanguine about the potential for innovations
to continue to enhance productivity and profits. At least this is what is gleaned from the projections of
equity  analysts,  who,  one  must  presume,  obtain  most  of  their  insights  from  corporate  managers.
According to one prominent survey, the three- to five-year average earnings projections of more than a
thousand analysts, though exhibiting some signs of diminishing in recent months, have generally held
firm at a very high level. Such expectations, should they persist, bode well for continued strength in
capital accumulation and sustained elevated growth of structural productivity over the longer term.
The  same  forces  that  have  been  boosting  growth  in  structural  productivity  seem  also  to  have
accelerated the process of cyclical adjustment. Extraordinary improvements in business-to- business
communication have held unit costs in check, in part by greatly speeding up the flow of information.
New technologies for supply-chain management and flexible manufacturing imply that businesses can
perceive imbalances in inventories at a very early stage--virtually in real time--and can cut production
promptly in response to the developing signs of unintended inventory building.
Our most recent experience with some inventory backup, of course, suggests that surprises can still
occur and that this process is still evolving. Nonetheless, compared with the past, much progress is
evident. A couple of decades ago, inventory data would not have been available to most firms until
weeks  had  elapsed,  delaying  a  response  and,  hence,  eventually  requiring  even  deeper  cuts  in
production. In addition, the foreshortening of lead times on delivery of capital equipment, a result of
information and other newer technologies, has engendered a more rapid adjustment of capital goods
production to shifts in demand that result from changes in firms' expectations of sales and profitability.
A  decade  ago,  extended  backlogs  on  capital  equipment  meant  a  more  stretched-out  process  of
production adjustments.
Even consumer spending decisions have become increasingly responsive to changes in the perceived
profitability of firms through their effects on the value of households' holdings of equities. Stock market
wealth has risen substantially relative to income in recent years--itself a reflection of the extraordinary
surge  of  innovation.  As  a  consequence,  changes  in  stock  market  wealth  have  become  a  more
important determinant of shifts in consumer spending relative to changes in current household income
than was the case just five to seven years ago.
The hastening of the adjustment to emerging imbalances is generally beneficial. It means that those
imbalances are not allowed to build until they require very large corrections. But the faster adjustment
process does raise some warning flags. Although the newer technologies have clearly allowed firms to
make  more  informed  decisions,  business  managers  throughout  the  economy  also  are  likely
responding to much of the same enhanced body of information. As a consequence, firms appear to be
acting in far closer alignment with one another than in decades past. The result is not only a faster
adjustment, but one that is potentially more synchronized, compressing changes into an even shorter
time frame.
This  very  rapidity  with  which  the  current  adjustment  is  proceeding  raises  another  concern,  of  a
different  nature.  While  technology  has  quickened  production  adjustments,  human  nature  remains
unaltered. We respond to a  heightened pace of change  and  its  associated  uncertainty  in  the  same
way we always have. We withdraw from action, postpone decisions, and generally hunker down until a
renewed,  more  comprehensible  basis  for  acting  emerges.  In  its  extreme  manifestation,  many
economic decisionmakers  not  only  become  risk  averse  but  attempt  to  disengage  from  all  risk. This
precludes taking any initiative, because risk is inherent in every action. In the fall of 1998, for example,
the  desire  for  liquidity  became  so  intense  that  financial  markets  seized  up.  Indeed,  investors  even
2
BIS Review 12/2001
tended to shun risk-free, previously issued Treasury securities in favor of highly liquid, recently issued
Treasury securities.
But even when decisionmakers are only somewhat more risk averse, a process of retrenchment can
occur. Thus, although prospective long-term returns on new high-tech investment may change little,
increased uncertainty can induce a higher discount of those returns and, hence, a reduced willingness
to commit liquid resources to illiquid fixed investments.
Such a process presumably is now under way and arguably may take some time to run its course. It is
not that underlying demand for Internet, networking, and communications services has become less
keen. Instead, as I noted earlier, some suppliers seem to have reacted late to accelerating demand,
have overcompensated in response, and then have been forced to retrench--a not-unusual occurrence
in business decisionmaking.
A pace of change outstripping the ability of people to adjust is just as evident among consumers as
among  business  decisionmakers. When  consumers  become  less  secure  in  their  jobs  and  finances,
they retrench as well.
It is difficult for economic policy to deal with the abruptness of a break in confidence. There may not be
a seamless transition from high to moderate to low confidence on the part of businesses, investors,
and  consumers.  Looking  back  at  recent  cyclical  episodes,  we  see  that  the  change  in  attitudes  has
often been sudden. In earlier testimony, I likened this process to water backing up against a dam that
is finally breached. The torrent carries with it most remnants of certainty and euphoria that built up in
earlier periods.
This  unpredictable  rending  of  confidence  is  one  reason  that  recessions  are  so  difficult  to  forecast.
They may not be just changes in degree from a period of economic expansion, but a different process
engendered  by  fear.  Our  economic  models  have  never  been  particularly  successful  in  capturing  a
process driven in large part by nonrational behavior.
Although consumer confidence has fallen, at least for now it remains at a level that in the past was
consistent  with  economic  growth.  And  as  I  pointed  out  earlier,  expected  earnings  growth  over  the
longer-run continues to be elevated. If the forces contributing to long-term productivity growth remain
intact, the degree of retrenchment will presumably be limited. Prospects for high productivity growth
should,  with  time,  bolster  both  consumption  and  investment  demand.  Before  long  in  this  scenario,
excess inventories would be run off to desired levels.
Still, as the FOMC noted in its last announcement, for the period ahead, downside risks predominate.
In addition to  the  possibility of a break in confidence,  we don't know how far  the  adjustment  of  the
stocks  of  consumer  durables  and  business  capital  equipment  has  come.  Also,  foreign  economies
appear  to  be  slowing,  which  could  damp  demands  for  exports;  and,  although  some  sectors  of  the
financial markets have improved in recent weeks, continued lender nervousness still is in evidence in
other sectors.
Because the advanced supply-chain management and flexible manufacturing technologies may have
quickened  the  pace  of  adjustment  in  production  and  incomes  and  correspondingly  increased  the
stress on confidence, the Federal Reserve has seen the need to respond more aggressively than had
been our wont in earlier decades. Economic policymaking could not, and should not, remain unaltered
in the face of major changes in the speed of economic processes. Fortunately, the very advances in
technology that have quickened economic adjustments have also enhanced our capacity for real-time
surveillance.
As I pointed out earlier, demand has been depressed by the rise in energy prices as well as by the
needed slowing in the pace of accumulation of business capital and consumer durable  assets. The
sharp rise in energy costs pressed down on profit margins still further in the fourth quarter. About a
quarter of the rise in total unit costs of nonfinancial, nonenergy corporations reflected a rise in energy
costs. The 12 percent rise in natural gas prices last quarter contributed directly, and indirectly through
its  effects  on  the  cost  of  electrical  power  generation,  about  one-fourth  of  the  rise  in  overall  energy
costs for nonfinancial, non-energy corporations; increases in oil prices accounted for the remainder.
In  addition,  a  significant  part  of  the  margin  squeeze  not  directly  attributable  to  higher  energy  costs
probably has reflected the effects of the moderation in consumer outlays that, in turn, has been due in
part to higher costs of energy, especially for natural gas. Hence, it is likely that energy cost increases
contributed significantly more to the deteriorating profitability of nonfinancial, non-energy corporations
in the fourth quarter than is suggested by the energy-related rise in total unit costs alone.
BIS Review 12/2001
3
To be sure, the higher energy expenses of households and most businesses represent a transfer of
income to producers of energy. But the capital investment of domestic energy producers, and,  very
likely, consumption by their owners, have provided  only  a small offset to the constraining effects of
higher energy costs on spending by most Americans. Moreover, a significant part of the extra expense
is sent overseas to foreign energy producers,  whose demand  for  exports  from  the  United  States  is
unlikely to rise enough to compensate for the reduction in domestic spending, especially in the short-
run. Thus, given the evident inability of energy users, constrained by intense competition for their own
products,  to  pass  on  much  of  their  cost  increases,  the  effects  of  the  rise  in  energy  costs  does  not
appear to  have  had  broad inflationary effects, in contrast to some previous episodes  when  inflation
expectations  were  not  as  well  anchored.  Rather,  the  most  prominent  effects  have  been  to  depress
aggregate  demand.  The  recent  decline  in  energy  prices  and  further  declines  anticipated  by  futures
markets,  should  they  occur,  would  tend  to  boost  purchasing  power  and  be  an  important  factor
supporting a recovery in demand growth over coming quarters.
Economic projections
The  members  of  the  Board  of  Governors  and  the  Reserve  Bank  presidents  foresee  an  implicit
strengthening of activity after the current rebalancing  is over, although the central tendency  of their
individual  forecasts  for  real  GDP  still  shows  a  substantial  slowdown,  on  balance,  for  the  year  as  a
whole.  The  central  tendency  for  real  GDP  growth  over  the  four  quarters  of  this  year  is  2  to
2-1/2 percent. Because this average pace is below the rise in the economy's potential, they see the
unemployment rate increasing to about 4-1/2 percent by  the fourth quarter of this  year. The central
tendency  of  their  forecasts  for  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  prices  for  personal  consumption
expenditures, suggests an abatement to 1-3/4 to 2-1/4 percent over this year from 2-1/2 percent over
2000.
Government debt repayment and the implementation of monetary policy
Federal  budget  surpluses  have  bolstered  national  saving,  providing  additional  resources  for
investment  and,  hence,  contributing  to  the  rise  in  the  capital  stock  and  our  standards  of  living.
However,  the  prospective  decline  in  Treasury  debt  outstanding  implied  by  projected  federal  budget
surpluses does pose a challenge to the implementation of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve has
relied  almost  exclusively  on  increments  to  its  outright  holdings  of  Treasury  securities  as  the
"permanent" asset counterpart to the uptrend in currency in circulation, our primary liability. Because
the  market  for  Treasury  securities  is  going  to  become  much  less  deep  and  liquid  if  outstanding
supplies  shrink  as  projected,  we  will  have  to  turn  to  acceptable  substitutes.  Last  year  the  Federal
Reserve System initiated a study of alternative approaches to managing our portfolio.
At its late January meeting, the FOMC discussed this issue at length, and it is taking several steps to
help better position the Federal Reserve to address the alternatives. First, as announced on January
31, the Committee extended the temporary authority, in effect since late August 1999, for the Trading
Desk  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  to  conduct  repurchase  agreements  in  mortgage-
backed securities guaranteed by the agencies as well as in Treasuries and direct agency debt. Thus,
for  the  time  being,  the  Desk  will  continue  to  rely  on  the  same  types  of  temporary  open  market
operations in use for the past year and a half to offset transitory factors affecting reserve availability.
Second, the FOMC is examining the possibility of beginning to acquire under repurchase agreements
some  additional  assets  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  already  authorizes  the  Federal  Reserve  to
purchase. In particular, the FOMC asked the staff to explore the possible mechanisms for backing our
usual repurchase operations with the collateral of certain debt obligations of U.S. states and foreign
governments. We will also be consulting with the Congress on these possible steps before the FOMC
further considers such transactions. Taking such assets in repurchase operations would significantly
expand and diversify the assets our counterparties could post in temporary open market operations,
reducing the potential for any impact on the pricing of private sector instruments.
Finally, the FOMC decided to study further the even longer-term issue of whether it will ultimately be
necessary to expand the use of the discount window or to request the Congress for a broadening of its
statutory authority for acquiring assets via open market operations. How quickly the FOMC will need to
address  these  longer-run  portfolio  choices  will  depend  on  how  quickly  the  supply  of  Treasury
securities declines as well as the usefulness of the alternative assets already authorized by law.
4
BIS Review 12/2001
In  summary,  although  a  reduced  availability  of  Treasury  securities  will  require  adjustments  in  the
particular form of our open market operations, there is no reason to believe that we will be unable to
implement policy as required.
BIS Review 12/2001
5
