David Dodge: The Bank of Canada and monetary policy: future directions
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Toronto  Board  of  Trade,
Toronto, Ontario, 20 February 2001.
 It's a pleasure to be here today, in my home town of Toronto, for my first public speech as Governor of
the Bank of Canada. And I am particularly pleased to be speaking to the Board of Trade. One of my
great delights as a boy was when my father would bring me to the dining room of the Old Board of
Trade  for  lunch  in  June,  if  I  had  done  well  in  school  that  year!  That  was  my  first  contact  with  the
Toronto business and financial community—a valuable contact that I have sought to maintain over the
years. And it is a contact that I hope to strengthen while I am at the Bank of Canada.
The Bank is well respected both inside and outside Canada for the quality of its professionals and the
work that it does. I am honoured to join it and to lead it over the next seven years. My task will be to
ensure that we build on the Bank's record to date and that we strengthen and deepen the progress
made so far in fulfilling our responsibilities to Canadians.
There are three main issues I want to address publicly as I begin my term: the Bank's contribution to
good  economic  performance;  the  Bank's  contribution  to  promoting  financial  stability,  both  nationally
and  internationally;  and  the  importance  of  open  and  frank  dialogue  with  business,  labour,  and  the
general public.
Today, I would like to focus my comments on the first and the third of those issues. I hope to address
financial  stability  as  part  of  my  next  public  speech.  And  I  will  conclude  with  a  few  remarks  on  the
current economic situation.
The Bank's contribution to good economic performance
As the country's central bank, the Bank of Canada has a commitment to contribute to the economic
well-being of Canadians. Fundamentally, this means that we must conduct monetary policy so as to
promote sustained economic growth, create conditions conducive to rising investment, employment,
and  incomes,  and  encourage  a  more  stable  macroeconomic  environment.  How  can  the  Bank  of
Canada foster such an outcome?
...low, stable, and predictable inflation
The  best  contribution  that  the  Bank  can  make  to  good  economic  performance  is  to  preserve
confidence in the future value of money. In practical terms, this means that Canadians should not have
to  worry  about the  effects of inflation  when  they  make  everyday  decisions  as  consumers,  business
people, savers, and investors. It means that they should be able to go about their affairs confidently,
knowing that they can count on their central bank to do whatever is necessary to keep future inflation
low, stable, and predictable. In this way, they will be able to make sounder economic decisions, which
will lead to better overall economic performance and rising incomes.
Over the past several years, the Canadian economy has experienced low and stable inflation and a
strong rate of expansion. Moreover, economic activity has been less variable than in the 1970s and
1980s, even though we had to face some important economic shocks, such as the Mexican and the
Asian crises. Employment and personal incomes have risen, and business investment in machinery,
equipment, and new technology has increased very substantially, particularly since 1996. At the same
time, low inflation has encouraged Canadian businesses to operate more efficiently and to focus on
cost control and productivity improvements.
That  is  quite  a  change  from  our  experience  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  That  experience  amply
demonstrated  what  a  terrible  price  the  economy  and  the  people  pay  for  high,  unstable,  and
unpredictable inflation. I am thinking here of the increased uncertainty about the future, the distortion
of vital signals and information that people rely on to make important decisions, the ups and downs in
BIS Review 15/2001
1
output  and  employment,  and  the  waste  of  valuable  economic  resources  as  they  are  diverted  from
productive investments to speculative activities.
All of this should be enough to strengthen our collective resolve not to let inflation break out again.
And  it convinces me that the focus of Canadian monetary  policy  since  the  early  1990s  on  low  and
predictable inflation as an essential building block of a productive, well-functioning economy has been
exactly right.
While low inflation is a necessary condition for good economic performance, it is not sufficient by itself.
Other factors are also crucial. Clearly, it is very important that we all continue to work to improve the
structure of our economy and the skills of our labour force, and to ensure that our product and labour
markets  operate  efficiently.  It  is  also  critical  that  over  the  next  decade  all  levels  of  government
continue  to  focus  on  reducing  their  net  indebtedness  to  lessen  Canada's  vulnerability  to  external
shocks and to  prepare for the  pressures  we  will  face  with  the  projected  decline  in  our  working-age
population.
Canada's monetary policy approach: inflation-control targets and a flexible exchange rate
Let me now turn to the role of the inflation-control targets and the floating exchange rate in Canadian
monetary policy.
Explicit inflation-control targets were jointly introduced by the Bank and the Government of Canada in
1991. Since 1995, the target has been to hold the trend of inflation inside a range of 1 to 3 per cent,
with a focus on the midpoint of 2 per cent.
Inflation targets provide an anchor for policy and an anchor for people's inflation expectations. They
supply the Bank with an effective mechanism for assessing and dealing with demand pressures in the
economy in a way that reduces fluctuations in output. Here's how this ‘stabilizer' feature of the targets
works—bearing  in mind that monetary policy actions take anywhere from one to two  years  to  have
their full effects on the economy and prices. If total demand was pressing on the economy's capacity
to  produce,  so  that  the  future  trend  of  inflation  looked  likely  to  move  towards  the  top  of  the  target
range, the Bank would tighten in order to reduce demand and inflation pressures. Equally importantly,
in a symmetric fashion, if demand was weak and inflation looked likely to move towards the bottom of
the range,  the  Bank would ease, providing more room for the economy to  expand to its  production
potential.
Moreover, the focus on inflation control can help the Bank to gauge where the economy's capacity to
produce really is, especially after periods of widespread restructuring that may have raised capacity
above the levels estimated on the basis of past experience. By comparing actual inflation relative to
what the Bank expected, we can draw inferences about the limits of capacity, which  is important  in
setting monetary policy.
The basic point here is that the focus on inflation control and the clarity of the targets provide the Bank
with  an  effective mechanism for guiding monetary policy  in a  way that reduces  output  volatility  and
helps to assess the economy's production potential.
What about the exchange rate, how does it fit in all this? If the inflation targets are the anchor of our
monetary  policy,  we  need  a  flexible  exchange  rate.  That  much  is  clear.  But  in  addition,  a  floating
exchange  rate  allows  the  economy  to  adjust  to  economic  disturbances,  including  fluctuations  in
external demand for our products. A classic example of this is a sharp movement in the relative price
of our exports compared with our imports. In cases like this, movements in the relative value of the
Canadian dollar help our economy to adjust more quickly than if the exchange rate did not move. And
when the currency does move in response to shocks, the inflation target serves to anchor expectations
about its value, thus facilitating the adjustment process.
All this is to say that, in my view, inflation-control targets and a flexible exchange rate have worked
well and continue to make sense for Canada in the foreseeable future.
Openness, transparency, and public communications
So far, I have explained why I consider an ongoing commitment by the Bank to low and predictable
inflation to be of paramount importance to sustained strong economic performance in Canada. I have
2
BIS Review 15/2001
also outlined why I think that the Bank should continue to pursue the objective of low inflation within
the current framework of inflation targets supported by a floating exchange rate.
All  this  is  fine,  you  may  say,  but  how  will  the  Bank  ensure  that  it  continues  to  deliver  a  credible,
effective monetary policy?
In  a  world  subject  to  all  kinds  of  shocks,  and  with  financial  markets  increasingly  more  open  and
globalized, there are no guarantees that monetary policy will be successful at all times and under all
circumstances. Still, it helps if those who are affected by policy decisions — the financial markets and
the general public — understand what their central bank is doing, and why.
Put another way, central bank actions will likely be more successful if they are better understood and
more predictable. Financial markets will then  likely respond more effectively,  and  indeed  anticipate,
monetary policy actions. And the general public will be better able to take monetary policy into account
when making plans for the future. Transparency actually leads to better policy outcomes.
In Canada, the move towards greater openness, transparency, and accountability in monetary policy
received a big boost with the adoption of the inflation targets in 1991. The targets established a clear
objective for monetary policy. And they set a precise  yardstick for measuring the Bank of Canada's
success in meeting that objective. The Bank's explicit inflation target and our commitment to achieving
it, have provided strong incentives for us to be as candid as possible about the external and domestic
developments that are likely to influence inflation and the ability of monetary policy to respond to them.
Under  the  stewardship  of  my  predecessor,  Governor  Thiessen,  who  placed  particular  emphasis  on
encouraging greater openness and more effective two-way communications, the Bank made important
strides in this area. Today, we provide large amounts of data and commentary on monetary policy in
our regular publications and on our Web site. We also discuss the outlook for the economy, inflation,
and monetary policy in the Monetary Policy Report, the Updates to the Monetary Policy Report, and in
speeches by Bank officials. Our latest initiative to improve public understanding of the Bank's actions
is the adoption of a system of fixed dates for the announcement of decisions on the Bank Rate. The
press release that we issue on each of these dates gives our latest assessment of the economy and
the rationale for changing or not changing the Bank Rate.
Communication, however, goes both ways. The Bank also needs to understand what is happening in
the markets and in all key sectors of the economy and across the regions. We need your input, your
information,  and  your  views.  We  can  only  formulate  good  policy  if  we  are  good  listeners.  So  I
encourage you to talk to us. The phone lines and doors at our regional offices, here in Toronto and
across the country, are open.
Recent economic developments
Constructive two-way communication is particularly critical in times of increased uncertainty about the
future. So let me now say a few words about how the Bank views the current economic situation.
The Canadian economy began 2001 from a strong base—expanding by an estimated 5 per cent, on
average, in 2000 and with solid growth continuing right through the second half of last year despite the
slowdown of the U.S. economy.
In our last Update to the Monetary Policy Report, which was prepared on 23 January and released on
6  February,  we  revised  down  our  projection  for  economic  growth  in  Canada  this  year  to  about
3 per cent, primarily because of the more abrupt weakening of U.S. economic activity. That projection
assumed that the U.S. economy would expand by 2 to 2.5 per cent, on average, in 2001, with a weak
first half followed by a relatively strong rebound in the second half.
When  we  released  the  Update  on  6  February,  we  pointed  out  that,  on  the  basis  of  accumulating
evidence, it appeared that U.S. economic activity in the first half of the year would be weaker than we
had projected on 23 January, even though we still expected a reasonable rebound in the second half
of the year. We noted that this posed some near-term risks for the Canadian economic outlook.
But,  as  we  also  pointed  out  then,  despite  the  near-term  uncertainties,  the  Bank  remains  generally
positive  about  Canada's  economic  prospects  for  the  year,  given  productivity  increases  and  rising
disposable incomes aided by tax cuts that are working to sustain domestic demand growth.
Of  course,  there  are  some  sectors  and  regions  of  the  country  that  will  feel  the  effects  of  the  U.S.
slowdown more than others, for example, those with heavier concentration in the production of cars
BIS Review 15/2001
3
and equipment, notably equipment related to communications and information technology. Offsetting
those, there will be generally solid growth in construction and services, and particularly strong growth
in energy-related sectors.
Canadian and international data that have become available since 6 February have not caused us to
alter the views outlined at that time.
The Bank will continue to monitor the evolving situation closely, and we will have more to say on the
subject in the press release on our next fixed announcement date, 6 March.
Concluding thoughts
Let me now conclude by underscoring my two main messages today.
First, low, stable, and predictable inflation is the best contribution that monetary policy and the Bank
can make to a productive, well-functioning economy.
Second,  effective  dialogue  between  the  Bank,  the  markets,  and  the  general  public  is  vital  to  the
success of monetary policy.
On  both  counts,  my  colleagues  and  I  are  determined  to  carry  forward  the  Bank's  commitment  to
Canadians.
4
BIS Review 15/2001
