Christian Noyer: Presentation of the European Central Bank’s Annual Report
for 2000
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  to  the
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 2 May 2001.
 It is a great pleasure for me to present to you today the third Annual Report of the ECB, which covers
the second year of the ECB's operational existence. The Annual Report is an important instrument for
the  ECB  to  provide  the  European  public  and  its  directly  elected  representatives  with  detailed
explanations  of  its  monetary  policy  and  other  activities.  It  thus  complements  the  various  other
channels through which the ECB is held to account such  as, in particular, the quarterly testimonies
before your Committee. Given the time-frame for our meeting today, it will not be possible to address
all the subjects covered by the Annual Report. Therefore, I will focus on some of the most pertinent
issues before answering any questions that you may have.
Review of economic and monetary developments
1.
The year 2000 was one of solid economic growth. The growth rate, at around 3.5%, was the highest in
the euro area in over a decade, and it was accompanied by continued strong employment creation.
At  the  same  time,  we  have  seen  an  increase  in  HICP  (Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices)
inflation.  HICP  inflation  reached  2.4%  on  average  in  2000,  a  level  above  what  we  consider  to  be
compatible with price stability. This rise in consumer prices was caused by an increase in import prices
which,  in  turn,  was mainly  due to exchange rate and oil price  developments. Such  short-term  price
fluctuations cannot be avoided. It  was,  however, crucial  in 2000 for monetary policy  to  prevent  any
spillover  from  the  short-term  upward  inflationary  pressure  to  medium-term  inflation  expectations,
especially in the context of the strong economic growth witnessed in 2000.
A tightening of monetary policy in 2000 was also indicated by the analysis of monetary developments.
M3 was continuously above the reference value of 4½% during the year and growth in the extension
of credit to the private sector remained strong.
As the information stemming from both pillars of the monetary policy strategy of the ECB pointed to
upward risks to price stability, the ECB raised interest rates six times in 2000, following the increase in
November  1999.  Overall,  between  November  1999  and  October  2000,  the  key  ECB  interest  rates
were raised by 225 basis points. Through these measures, the ECB made its contribution to ensuring
the sustainability of a process of non-inflationary economic growth in the euro area over the medium
term.  The  success  of  this  policy  is  evident  in  all  measures  of  medium-term  inflation  expectations,
notably in bond market developments which signal that, despite the recent increases in HICP inflation,
markets expect price stability to prevail over the medium term.
Since the last increase of ECB interest rates in October 2000, risks to price stability in the euro area
have become more balanced. However, they have not entirely disappeared.
With regard to the first pillar of our strategy, M3 growth has, over recent months, gradually approached
the reference  value of 4½%. In this respect, there is some evidence that the figures for M3 growth
have  been  increasingly  distorted  upwards  by  measurement  problems  related  to  the  non-resident
holdings of marketable paper included in the definition of M3. The ECB is working on identifying these
problems precisely and making the necessary corrections to the data.
Indications of lower inflationary pressures over the medium term have also emerged from the analysis
under the second pillar of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. Changes in the external environment
have  weakened  the  prospects  for  global  economic  growth,  and  uncertainty  about  the  economic
outlook, notably for the United States and Japan, remains high. Although the euro area is a large and
relatively closed economy, some effects of the slowdown in the global economy will be felt. This can
already  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  business  confidence  has  deteriorated  and  industrial  production
growth has moderated over recent months.
BIS Review 34/2001
1
Nevertheless,  growth  in  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain  robust.  Consumer  confidence  has
remained high in recent months and, despite some decline, it is still around the cyclical peaks seen in
1998. More fundamentally, the euro area has not accumulated imbalances in the real economy or the
financial sector that would require a pronounced adjustment. Therefore, economic growth in the euro
area is expected to remain solid. Available forecasts (including those of the European Commission,
the OECD and the IMF) suggest that actual  growth  will be  in  line  with  or  above  the  trend  potential
growth in 2001 and 2002.
While  the  somewhat  slower  pace  of  economic  activity  this  year  will  reduce  the  risk  of  inflationary
pressures, recent consumer price developments have been very much affected by energy and food
prices. Although a number of these effects are temporary in nature, it would be a mistake to rule out
the possibility that their cumulative impact may produce more lasting price effects.
The  abatement  of  such  domestic  upward  pressures  on  HICP  inflation  remains  conditional  upon
continued wage moderation. In this respect, it is crucial that there be no second-round effects arising
from wage reactions to the current increase in consumer prices. Currently available forecasts give rise
to the expectation that inflation could fall slightly below 2% in 2002 if there are no deviations from the
path of wage moderation observed in recent years.
At the current juncture, it is important to recall that interest rate levels in the euro area are not high
historically, neither in nominal nor in real terms. Financing conditions in the euro area are therefore
conducive to economic growth.
Moreover, monetary policy cannot raise the production potential of the euro area. In this respect, in
December  2000  in  the  context  of  its  regular  review  of  the  reference  value  for  M3,  the  Governing
Council of the ECB, while acknowledging that progress had been made in the euro area in the field of
structural reforms, noted that it was difficult to find clear evidence of signs of lasting increases in trend
productivity growth in the euro area.
The improvement in structural conditions necessary to raise potential growth is undoubtedly of utmost
priority for the euro area. Ongoing comprehensive structural reforms of labour  and product markets
remain essential in order to improve the functioning of markets.
Fiscal  policy  will  also  have  to  make  its  contribution  towards  enhancing  the  growth  potential  of  the
economy. Despite favourable economic conditions, in 2000 no further progress was made in reducing
structural fiscal deficits in the euro area as a whole.
The challenges in the area of fiscal policy are to continue on the path towards consolidation, in line
with the Stability and Growth Pact, and at the same time to pursue further qualitative improvements on
both the revenue and expenditure sides of the budget. A lowering of the tax burden is conducive to
stimulating  employment  and  growth,  but  it  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  corresponding  restraint  in
public expenditure.
Although 2001 will not see economic growth as high as in 2000 owing to the weakening of economic
activity abroad, the medium-term prospects for the euro area remain good overall. The euro area will
be  able  to  successfully  meet  the  challenges  ahead.  The  Treaty  has  laid  down  an  appropriate
framework for the allocation of tasks among policy areas. Monetary policy can best support economic
growth  over the medium term if it is strictly focused  on  its primary objective. At the same  time,  the
responsibility for the reforms needed to enhance the growth potential of the euro area and to boost
employment  creation  lies  with  governments,  as  well  as  with  the  key  national  economic  agents  in
labour and industry. If all policy actors take the steps which are needed in their field of competence, I
am very optimistic for the future of the euro area.
Preparation of the introduction of euro banknotes and coins
2.
Let me now turn to a crucial event in the history of European monetary integration, the introduction of
euro banknotes and coins on 1 January 2002. The thorough  and careful preparation of this historic
moment continues to be one of the foremost priorities of the Eurosystem.
In  order  to  facilitate  a  cost-efficient  and  smooth  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins,  the
Governing Council of the ECB agreed on a Guideline (ECB/2001/1) adopting certain provisions on the
cash changeover scenario, which entered into force in January this year. All national central banks of
the euro area have now fully implemented this Guideline.
2
BIS Review 34/2001
With  regard  to  the  production  of  euro  banknotes,  I  can  report  that  this  is  on  track.  The  Governing
Council of the ECB has also approved an additional production of euro banknotes of about 10% of the
launch requirements. This central reserve stock of euro banknotes will further contribute to a smooth
cash changeover.
As part of the efforts to prepare for the threat posed by forgery of the euro, the ECB is establishing a
Counterfeit Analysis Centre and a Counterfeit Monitoring System in order to enhance the protection of
the  euro  by  providing  comprehensive  technical  and  statistical  information  on  counterfeiting.  This
information will be available to all relevant competent authorities including national police authorities,
Europol and the European Commission.
The  Euro  2002  Information  Campaign  has  been  launched.  The  ECB  has  set  up  a  specific  website
giving information on the introduction of the euro, and a series of conferences in the euro area is being
organised. At the end of August, we will unveil the security features of the euro banknotes and start a
mass  media  information  campaign.  Within  the  framework  of  our  Partnership  Programme,  we  are
inviting public and private organisations to participate in the task of informing the public.
The introduction of the euro banknotes and coins will enhance the visibility of the single currency: in
eight months' time, the public will identify the Eurosystem and the euro with the images of the euro
banknotes. The banknotes will be the face of the euro and, thereby, instrumental in further increasing
public  and  financial  market  confidence  in  the  single  currency.  In  view  of  the  comprehensive
preparations which are currently under way, I am confident that the introduction of euro banknotes and
coins will proceed as smoothly and successfully as the changeover to the euro on 1 January 1999.
Comments on other activities of the Eurosystem
3.
As far as the other activities of the Eurosystem are concerned, during 2000, the Eurosystem continued
to devote great attention to the issue of how to improve cross-border retail payment services within the
euro area. In pursuit of its  policy  to  act  as  a  catalyst  for  change,  the  Eurosystem  has  continued  to
organise meetings with the European banking sector and payment system industry in order to monitor
the progress achieved with regard to the seven objectives defined by the Eurosystem. In September
last  year,  the  Eurosystem  published  a  progress  report,  which  concluded  that  progress  has  been
achieved in some areas, such as the agreement on standards allowing straight-through processing,
the  lightening  and  harmonisation  of  the  balance-of-payments  reporting  requirements  and  the
establishment  of  a  cross-border  low-value  payment  system  by  the  European  Banking  Association.
However,  in  several  other  areas  further  progress  is  needed,  in  particular  with  a  view  to  further
reducing  the  level  of  fees  charged  to  retail  customers.  Therefore,  the  Eurosystem  will  continue  to
closely monitor the progress with regard to the fulfilment of its stated objectives in this field. To this
end, a new progress report is intended for publication in early 2002.
To conclude my opening remarks, let me turn to the annual accounts of the ECB for last year. The
ECB made a net profit amounting to EUR 1,990 million, after setting aside an agreed provision of EUR
2,600  million  against  its  large  exchange  rate  exposure.  This  profit  is  also  net  of  remuneration
amounting to EUR 1,375 million of the claims by the national central banks of the Eurosystem on the
ECB with respect to the foreign reserve assets that had been transferred to the ECB at the beginning
of  1999.  In  the  course  of  last  year,  the  ECB  further  increased  its  number  of  staff  by  209,  and  it
currently employs around 1,000 staff members from all 15 EU Member States. The ECB's budget for
2001 foresees an increase in the number of staff by around 7% compared with last year.
Overall,  the  ECB  looks  back  over  the  first  years  of  the  single  monetary  policy  with  satisfaction.
Developments since the start of Monetary Union have confirmed that the ECB has chosen a solid and
efficient  framework  for  monetary  policy.  The  ECB's  monetary  policy  strategy  has  offered  a  robust
guide for taking policy decisions in an environment which was – and continues to be – characterised
by a high level of uncertainty.
I shall now be happy to answer your questions.
BIS Review 34/2001
3
