David Dodge: Update on economic and monetary developments in Canada
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, before the Standing Senate
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 28 March 2001.
 I appreciate the opportunity to appear before your Committee for the first time since my appointment
as Governor of the Bank.
On this occasion, I would like to touch on the Bank's contribution to good economic performance, our
emphasis  on  openness  and  transparency,  and  our  role  in  promoting  domestic  and  global  financial
stability.  I  will  then  comment  on  the  Bank's  view  of  current  economic  conditions  and  discuss  any
issues you may wish to raise.
The Bank of Canada has a commitment to contribute to the economic well-being of Canadians. This
means conducting monetary policy so that it fosters sustained economic growth, by creating conditions
favourable  to  rising  investment,  employment,  and  incomes  and  by  bringing  about  a  more  stable
macroeconomic environment.
The  unique  contribution  that  the  Bank  can  make  to  good  economic  performance  is  to  preserve
confidence in the future value of money. This means that Canadians should be able to go about their
business  secure  in  the  knowledge  that  their  central  bank  will  do  whatever  it  takes  to  keep  future
inflation low, stable, and predictable.
The  cornerstone  of  our  monetary  policy  approach  is  an  explicit  inflation-control  target.  The  current
target range of 1 to 3 per cent, with emphasis on the 2 per cent midpoint, was established jointly by
the Bank and the government under an agreement that runs until the end of 2001. An announcement
regarding a new agreement to extend beyond 2001 will be made well before the end of the year.
In a world that is subject to all kinds of shocks and with financial markets increasingly more open and
globalized,  monetary  policy  actions  stand  a  better  chance  of  being  effective  if  they  are  more
predictable and better understood by the public. That is why the Bank emphasizes transparency and
effective two-way communication. In this context, I would like to highlight our latest initiative to improve
public understanding of the Bank's actions. We have adopted a system of eight fixed dates each year
when we announce decisions to change or maintain the Bank Rate and explain the reasons for our
action in a press release.
For a market economy like ours to function well, there must be widespread confidence not only that
money will retain its value, but also that Canada's financial institutions, markets, and infrastructure are
sound and efficient. Individuals and businesses must be confident that financial claims can be reliably
and efficiently created, held, and transferred. This is why the Bank of Canada works closely with other
federal and provincial entities to promote financial stability.
The Bank focuses its attention mainly on macro financial stability issues. Our contribution includes the
provision of liquidity to the financial system, the oversight of major clearing and settlement systems,
policy advice to the government on the overall framework for the financial system, and collaboration
with other domestic and international bodies that work on financial stability issues.
In an increasingly interconnected world, we also must — and do — work with other members of the
international  community  to  promote  the  development  of  robust  national  financial  systems  and  to
prevent or minimize the impact of global financial crises of the sort experienced in the 1990s.
Canada has a financial system that is recognized worldwide as being sound and efficient. To keep it
that  way,  we  must  ensure  that  as  financial  markets  evolve  we  evolve  with  them.  The  Bank  will,
therefore,  continue  to  work  closely  with  its  domestic  and  foreign  partners  to  strengthen  financial
stability at home and around the world.
Let me now give you a quick overview of the economy.
BIS Review 26/2001
1
Since  last  fall,  most  forecasters  have  marked  down  their  projections  of  world  economic  growth  for
2001,  from  just  over  4  per  cent  to  just  over  3  per  cent.  While  3  per  cent  may  not  be  a  stellar
performance, it would still be quite respectable.
In the United States, positive developments in such areas as employment and housing provide some
hope that the end of the slowdown may not be far off. The Bank continues to believe that the pace of
economic expansion in that country will strengthen during the second half of 2001, supported by the
substantial decline in interest rates, the moderation in energy prices, and the drawing to an end of the
current inventory adjustment. The exact timing of the recovery is uncertain, however, and will depend
importantly on how U.S. consumer confidence and business investment evolve.
In Canada, somewhat slower growth had been foreseen for 2001 as the economy was beginning to
press against capacity. In fact, growth eased in the fourth quarter of last year. And with data for the
first three quarters revised, the level of economic activity at the end of 2000 was not quite as high as
we had estimated. Based on recent indicators, growth in the first quarter of 2001 will be less than in
the closing months of last year.
The slowing is clear in the automotive sector, where there have been production cutbacks in response
to  weaker U.S. demand and  excess  inventories.  Activity  has  also  eased—from  very  high  levels—in
electronics and telecommunications, where world production has been running ahead of demand.
These three high-profile sectors naturally attract a lot of attention, especially in parts of Canada with a
heavy concentration in such industries. Weakness also continues in sectors that produce non-energy
commodities. But we must keep a sense of perspective. There is still considerable strength in other
important areas of our economy. The latest data show that investments in the energy sector are very
strong.  And,  except  for  autos,  retail  sales  are  solid.  In  addition,  activity  in  housing,  non-residential
construction, and most other service industries remains firm.
When we weighed all of the evidence in early March, we concluded that there was, in the near term,
room for more monetary stimulus without risking pressures on capacity and inflation. On 6 March, we
cut the Bank Rate by another 50 basis points, bringing the total reduction since January to 75 basis
points. These lower domestic interest rates and rising disposable incomes, aided by recent tax cuts,
should help to support the growth of domestic demand in Canada in the second half of 2001.
This  additional  stimulus  to  economic  activity  is  consistent  with  keeping  the  core  rate  of  inflation  in
Canada close to the 2 per cent midpoint of the inflation-control target range. We see total CPI inflation
moving down to about 2 per cent in the second half of 2001, if world oil prices remain around current
levels.
All in all, as we look ahead through this year and into 2002, the Bank remains positive about Canada's
economic prospects.
The  recent  volatility  in  exchange  rates,  both  here  in  Canada  and  in  many  other  countries,  has
generated considerable public commentary, and I would like to say a word about that. What we have
been  seeing  is  a  strengthening  of  the  U.S.  dollar  against  all  major  currencies  despite  the  marked
slowdown in U.S. economic growth. Since the exchange rate is a key price in the Canadian economy,
the Bank recognizes that movements in its value can be a source of concern for Canadians. I want to
reassure you that the Bank watches market developments closely and carefully assesses the effects
of currency movements on aggregate demand and inflation in Canada.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, let me emphasize two points. First, although we expect reasonable growth to
resume in the second half of the  year, there are risks and  uncertainties  attached  to  this  projection.
These  risks  stem  from  global  and,  especially,  U.S.  developments.  Although  a  moderation  of  U.S.
demand was needed to sustain non-inflationary growth over the medium term, the slowing has been
more  abrupt  than  anticipated.  As  we  look  ahead,  the  question  is  how  quickly  will  the  necessary
adjustments in production and inventories be completed in North America.
My second point is that Canada's economic fundamentals are sound—in fact, they are the best they
have  been  in  nearly  30  years.  Canada  continues  to  benefit  from  a  climate  of  low,  stable,  and
predictable  inflation.  Canadian  governments  are  running  budgetary  surpluses.  Canada  is  running  a
record trade surplus. Federal and provincial governments are reducing their public debts. Canada is
reducing its net foreign  indebtedness. And there has been a surge  in  investment in  equipment  and
technology that is essential for rising productivity and improved standards of living. Canada's strong
fundamentals should operate in favour of the Canadian dollar over time. Moreover, corporate balance
sheets are strong, financial institutions are sound, and credit markets are functioning well. Although
2
BIS Review 26/2001
consumer debt loads have increased, with rising incomes and lower interest rates households are in a
better position to service those debts.
In  sum,  Mr.  Chairman,  I  believe  that  Canada  is  well  placed  to  weather  this  period  of  economic
adjustment. Given the uncertainties, however, the Bank will continue to monitor developments closely
with a view to maintaining the low inflation that helps our economy to achieve its full potential.
BIS Review 26/2001
3
