Jean-Claude Trichet: The Euro after two years: present situation and prospects
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Banque de France, at a conference organised by
“The Economist”, held in Madrid, on 7 February 2001.
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  a  great  pleasure  and  an  honour  for  me  to  be  invited  to  speak  in  this
seminar organised by The Economist, today in Madrid. I also thank Arthur Andersen and the Banco
Bilbao Viscaya for their contribution to this gathering. It is also a great pleasure to meet again with my
colleague  Jaime  Caruana,  between  two  meetings  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council.  I  am  particularly
happy to express my views on the already successful existence of the euro and Monetary Union, and
the conditions and prospects for its further success.
As you all know, within ten months, on 1st January 2002, the euro will become a reality across Europe
as euro banknotes and coins are introduced. This will be the largest monetary change over the world
has  ever  seen.  However,  it  should  be  recalled  that  for  all  economic,  monetary  and  institutional
purposes, Monetary Union was created on 1st January 1999. Then, a decisive event in the history of
Europe  occurred.  The  euro  was  born  and  the  irreversible  nature  of  this  change  has  convinced  an
increasing number of economic players that the success of the euro is necessary for Europe. It is a
keystone of the European single market, which will ensure prosperity in Europe for the benefit of the
rest of the world.
I would like to draw your attention to why the euro and Monetary Union have been successful from the
outset, and to the conditions and prospects for building on this success.
I.  The euro and Monetary union are based on a credible monetary policy and contribute to an
appropriate economic and monetary equilibrium in Europe
I.1. A credible, stability-oriented monetary policy
a/ First of all, let me point out that, from a technical and operational point of view, the launch of the
euro on financial markets has been an indisputable success. In this respect, one has to remember all
the doubts voiced three years ago.
The decentralised organisation of the Eurosystem has achieved the objectives it was assigned in three
important respects:
•  operational  efficiency,  as  is  demonstrated  by  the  timely  adjustment  of  banking  liquidity  and
steering of short-term interest rates;
the security provided by the procedures and systems implemented by the Eurosystem, both for
the execution of its operations and in the field of large-value  payments. At the shortest end of the
market, the integration of the interbank market took place in 1999, right from the start of Monetary
Union, thanks to the setting up of the Target system for the transfer of large-value payments in
real  time  throughout  the  euro  area  and  other  EU  countries.  The  system  now  processes  over  4
million payments on average each month, representing roughly 1,000 billion euros daily, of which
43% are cross-border payments. These figures show a significant increase in the use of real-time
gross settlements in the EU since the introduction of the euro;
the  smooth  functioning  of  the  entire  integrated  organisation  of  the  Eurosystem,  in  which  the
decision-making  centre  works  in  constant  contact  with  the  national  central  banks  on  the
implementation of operations.
  The  reasons  for  this  achievement  lie  primarily  with  the  in-depth  preparatory  work  conducted  over
several years by the central banking community and private financial market operators.
b/ Second, together with many other factors, this technical and operational success has contributed to
the high credibility of the single monetary policy, which is guaranteed, inter alia, by the independence
of the European Central Bank and of the national central banks.
The Eurosystem has inherited the store of confidence that was built up over several decades by the
national  central  banks  in  charge  of  the  most  reputable  currencies.  In  France  for  example,  the  last
BIS Review 11/2001
1
opinion  survey  indicated  that  80%  of  French  citizens  trust  the  Banque  de  France.  And  the  level  of
confidence in Spain towards the Banco de Espana, or in the other countries participating in the euro
area towards their respective NCB, is certainly as high.
Moreover,  and  contrary  to  what  is  often  said,  the  monetary  union  of  Europe  is  not  starting  from
scratch. It is worth emphasising that for no fewer than 12 years before the launch of the euro, six of
the currencies which now make up the euro—and represent close to two thirds of the GDP of the euro
area—had proven to be remarkably stable, not being subject to any realignment within the E.R.M.
This high level of confidence is also supported by the homogeneous functioning of the Eurosystem:
the  European  monetary  team,  composed  of  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  -now-
twelve euro area countries as we have welcome, on the 1st of January 2001, a new member, the Bank
of Greece. All the components of the Eurosystem work constantly hand in hand. The Eurosystem is a
single monetary team, with the ECB acting as a coach and the NCBs as the players on the field, with a
single team spirit and this team spirit is one of the priceless assets of the euro area.
c/ Third, the credibility of the Eurosystem rests, fundamentally, on its stability-oriented monetary policy
strategy. I would like to allay the fears and doubts expressed by some observers as regards the clarity
of our monetary policy strategy.
The Maastricht Treaty has given us a mandate for maintaining price stability. We have decided to be
as clear and as transparent as possible by announcing a clear definition of price stability, featuring a
year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area of below 2%. To
reach that goal  we  have  based  our  monetary  policy  on  two  “pillars”.  As  regards  the  first  “pillar”  we
have  set  up  a  quantitative  reference  value,  namely  4.5%,  for  the  growth  of  the  broad  monetary
aggregate  M3;  we  have  recently  confirmed  this  rate  of  growth  of  4,5  %  as  an  important  factor  for
stabilising  expectations.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  concept  of  a  reference  value  does  not  imply  a
commitment on the part of the Eurosystem to mechanistically correct deviations in monetary growth in
the short  term. However, the reference value for M3 is consistent  with, and helps to maintain  price
stability over the medium term.
The second pillar of the monetary policy strategy is a very comprehensive set of indicators that are
important in our eyes in signalling future price developments in the euro area.
This strategy, which ensures a great deal of continuity with the monetary policies of the participating
national central banks, appears to have been understood by financial markets and the public at large.
In particular, the yields on long-term bonds denominated in euros indicate clearly that the Eurosystem
has kept intact the legacy of credibility that it has inherited.
d/  Finally,  the  credibility  of  the  euro  also  results  from  the  Eurosystem's  constant  efforts  towards
transparency  and  communication.  I  must  stress  here  that  the  Eurosystem  is  one  of  the  most
transparent central banks in the world. Once a month, immediately after the meeting of the Governing
Council, the President of the ECB holds a press conference- which starts with a precise exposition of
the diagnosis of the Governing Council which is immediately made available in real time on the ECB
website. This was the case when we met last Thursday in Frankfurt.
It is extremely important to stress that the Eurosystem was the first in the world to introduce, on the 1st
January  1999,  the  concept  of  regular,  frequent,  real-time  transparency  in  the  domain  of  monetary
policy.  This  illustrates  the  extent  to  which  some  criticisms  are  profoundly  unjust  !  It  is  especially
noteworthy,  in  this  regard,  that  soon  after  we  had  embarked  upon  this  new  concept  of  real-time
transparency, other important central banks decided to go along the same path.
Being accountable for an independent institution in a modern democracy or, as it is the case for the
Eurosystem,  in  a  subtle  set  of  democracies  like  the  European  Union,  means  being  accountable  to
public opinion at large.
In this respect, the public speeches and testimonies of the President of the ECB for the benefit of both
European institutions and public opinion, the public speeches and testimonies of the Governors of the
National Central Banks to national institutions and public opinion, are crucial. Explaining tirelessly the
reasons and the reasoning that underpin the decisions of the Governing Council is a key part of our
collective  duty.  This  intertwining  of  the  communication  of  the  European  monetary  team  with  the
European and national institutions and the full body of the civil societies is currently underestimated.
Wim  DUISENBERG  attends  hearings  at  the  European  Parliament  in  Brussels  as  often  as  Alan
GREENSPAN does on the Hill in Washington. Each national governor explains in his own language
(so in total in ten languages), through the lens of twelve different cultures the same message from the
2
BIS Review 11/2001
Eurosystem. To improve its transparency and its communication even further, the Eurosystem decided
to publish for the first time in December 2000 Staff Economic Projections for the euro area.
In  terms  of  transparency  and  accountability—namely  the  duty  to  explain,  justify,  whenever  possible
convince, and in any case, being fully responsible vis-à-vis public opinion for decisions taken- I think
that the Eurosystem meets the best practices of the main central banks in the world.
I.2. Co-ordination of economic policies
A few years ago, it was necessary to convince a great number of skeptical people, in Europe as well
as  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  that  the  euro  was  really  to  be  set  up.  Many  observers  pointed  to  its
presumed  contradictions  and  alleged  inconsistencies:  claiming,  for  example,  that  the  economic
divergences  and  structural  gaps  among  euro-area  countries  would  be  too  large  to  ensure  a  viable
monetary union or that the lack of co-ordination between economic policies would deprive the area of
an appropriate policy-mix, and could not be achieved without a political federation. Other objections
raised  were  the  absence  of  instruments  to  respond  to  any  asymmetric  shocks,  and  the  European
economies' lack of flexibility and real mobility  in the  labour force. The conclusion  was that the euro
would  never  exist  !  The  facts  have  disproved  this  conclusion.  But  the  very  same  arguments  are
sometimes deployed to suggest that the euro-area economy contains some inconsistencies that could
endanger its prosperity.
What can we say, from an economic standpoint, on this very important question? Firstly, that monetary
union per se, and wherever it takes place, does not necessarily imply that, at any given point in time,
all the participating countries will experience the same rate of inflation or of growth, even though the
move to the euro was based on the successful completion of a convergence process.
Let  us  focus,  for  example,  on  inflation.  Present  differentials  do  not  appear  to  be  very  large,  in
comparison  with  the  experience  of  the  United  States,  a  long-established  monetary  union  of
comparable size. Data on major cities of the US shows that inflation differentials have been at times
very substantial, with divergences of 7 percentage points being recorded in the early 1980s.
In the euro area, long-term convergence to a common level of prices gives naturally rise to differences
in inflation rates across EMU countries. The convergence of productivity and living standards creates a
trend  towards  price  convergence,  as  a  consequence  of  the  commonly  known  Balassa-Samuelson
effect. According to the IMF, this effect is estimated to have contributed 1.5-2.0 percentage points per
annum to inflation for EU countries catching up on productivity.
The  recent  statistics  available  for  the  United  States  also  confirm  that  wage  and  salary  differentials
within  the  euro  area  are  by  no  means  atypical  in  a  monetary  union  :  for  example,  in  the  US  the
average weekly earnings in the non-durable goods sector stood at USD 546 at the national level, while
standing at USD 437 in Mississippi and USD 644 in New Jersey.
I  am  convinced  that  we  can  be  reasonably  confident  in  the  increasing  integration  of  European
countries, and in the fact that economic developments are becoming more and more correlated in the
area. It has been highlighted, in the academic field, by several empirical investigations that business
cycles are becoming more synchronous across Europe.
Secondly  it  has  often  been  questioned  whether  EMU  can  be  a  success  without  some  form  of
enhanced political union. Certainly, for EMU to function well, all Member States must be aware of the
spill-over effects of all their national policies, especially their budgetary policies.
In this regard, we are in favour of strong co-ordination between economic policies, while respecting the
independence  of  the  Eurosystem.  This  co-ordination  is  contained  in  the  Treaty  itself,  which  obliges
Member States to treat national economic policies “as a matter of common interest” and subjects them
to a multilateral procedure.
Even more importantly, the euro zone is not devoid of mechanisms conducive to an appropriate policy
mix. As a matter of fact, monetary policy alone cannot ensure price stability without the appropriate
fiscal  discipline  at  the  overall  EMU  level.  Indeed,  for  my  part,  I  would  mention  three  economic
justifications for the Treaty provisions that gave rise to the Stability and Growth Pact:
•  First,  by  co-ordinating  the  fiscal  policies  of  the  Member  States  of  Monetary  Union,  the  pact
ensures  a  good  policy  mix  within  the  Euro  area.  This  is  essential  for  monetary  policy,  to
counterbalance the fact that Europe does not have a significant federal budget, just as it has no
federal  government.  Close  mutual  surveillance  and  co-ordination  of  fiscal  policies  are  the
BIS Review 11/2001
3
responsibility  of  the  "Euro  Group"  and  of  the  Ecofin  Council.  Adherence  to  the  medium-term
objective  of  achieving  budgets  that  are  "close  to  balance  or  in  surplus"  means  that  individual
countries  must  first  rely  on  themselves  to  withstand  possible  economic  downturns  which  affect
only their own economy, while ensuring a balanced policy mix throughout the euro zone.
•  Second, the pact helps to prevent well-managed economies from having to bear an unjustified risk
premium by setting up a penalty system for excessive deficits.
•  And lastly, the stability and growth pact allows us to disprove the assertion that the euro area has
no  automatic  stabilisers  in  the  event  of  asymmetric  shocks  to  a  member  economy.  Indeed,  by
urging governments to aim at a fiscal position "close to balance or in surplus" in the medium term,
the  pact  enables  them  to  let  fiscal  deficits  increase  during  recessions  without  exceeding  the
3% reference  value.  In  short,  it  allows  them  to  create  a  fiscal  buffer  during  normal  economic
periods that can be drawn on to counter economic divergences or asymmetric shocks.
To summarise that overall issue, the “Optimal Currency Area” theory has frequently been called upon
by economists who criticized EMU and expressed concerns about giving up the exchange-rate policy
instrument as a response to asymmetric shocks—in particular to asymmetric shocks within a monetary
union. I would like to point out, first, that one of the most remarkable effect of the European integration
has been the increasing symmetry of shocks. Second, Professor Mundell himself, in support of EMU,
made an interesting clarification at the beginning of 1998: in the event of a shift in demand from one
member country to another, creating unemployment in the first and inflationary pressure in the second,
flexible  exchange  rates  would  not  be  able  to  solve  the  problem.  I  quote:  “If  the  argument  for
devaluation  were  valid,  it  could  be  applied  to  every  state  or  sub-region  in  any  country,  with  a
proliferation  of  new  currencies,  so  they  could  be  devalued!”.  In  the  same  vein,  other  economists
suggest that dealing with divergences and asymmetries should not  prove much more difficult  within
the euro area, at least in its major countries, than within a long-established monetary union such as
the US.
II.The euro as a catalyst for further progress
While many acknowledge that the introduction of the euro has been broadly successful, one may ask
at this point what needs to happen to ensure the success of the euro in the medium term. What is very
encouraging in this respect is the fact that  in  a number of areas the euro itself appears to  be as  a
catalyst for these conditions to be met.
II.1.  The euro and the single market
a/  The  euro  is  the  crowning  achievement  of  the  single  market.  Need  we  mention  the  advantages
inherent in the single market? It enables the productive sector to make significant economies of scale
and allows savings to be allocated to the most efficient investments. It also enhances market visibility
and boosts competition and innovation to the benefit of consumers. But the ultimate objective of the
single  market  could  not  be  achieved  while  monetary  barriers  continue  to  prevent  the  free  flow  of
goods, services, capital and, in a way, people, by imposing unpredictable and erratic exchange-rate
movements and transaction costs. The last step in this process will be made with the cash changeover
at the end of this year; it will enable not only enterprises but all our citizens to enjoy all the advantages
of  using  the  same  monetary  instrument  throughout  the  European  continent,  just  like  Americans  do
today throughout the territory of the United States.
b/Moreover,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  brings  about  a  significant  change  in  the  economic  and
financial environment.
The introduction of the euro has been a strong catalyst for mergers and acquisitions in the euro area.
The European M & A market seems to be amongst the most dynamic in the world: with  operations
totalling over 1,000 billion euros in 1999, it is now catching up on the American market.
The euro has brought about significant changes for participants in financial markets and has fostered
structural developments in the financial industry. This is true both on euro-area money markets and on
capital markets.
From the beginning of Stage Three of EMU, cross-border transactions in the money market increased
so  as  to  represent  more  than  50%  of  the  total  activity  in  all  segments  of  the  money  market.  The
unsecured deposit interbank market—which is mostly concentrated on shorter maturities—exhibits a
4
BIS Review 11/2001
very high degree of integration. The integration of interest-rate markets within the euro area is a key
achievement which deserves to be underscored. EONIA and EURIBOR have provided the market with
uniform benchmarks fully accepted by all market participants. The diagnosis is the same in the short-
term  derivatives  market,  whose  integration,  standardisation  and  depth  have  increased.  This  is
reflected, for instance, in the scale of daily transactions and the huge expansion of the euro interest-
rate swap market.
These structural changes in the euro area money market have generated significant moves by market
participants,  who  have  concentrated  their  euro  cash  management  activity  and  have  benefited  from
better liquidity on the secondary market. Of course, such integration has to be brought to fruition in the
other  segments  of  the  money  market,  i.e.  the  repo  market  and  the  short-term  securities  market.
Further integration will enhance the efficiency of the euro area financial markets and will be beneficial
to borrowers and investors alike.
With  regard  to  the  capital  markets,  progress  towards  integration  has  been  significant,  both  on  the
euro-denominated bond market and the equity market.
The gross issuance of long-term debt securities denominated in euro amounted to 791 billion euro in
1999,  against  the  equivalent  of  902  billion  euro  for  debt  securities  denominated  in  US  dollars.  The
pace of euro-denominated issues remained brisk in the first three quarters of 2000 at 498 billion euros.
According to the Bank for International Settlements, euro-area private sector borrowers have issued
76%  of  their  debt  in  euros  since  1 January  1999,  compared  with  an  average  of  50%  in  the
predecessor currencies since during the 1990s. Similarly, private borrowers resident outside the euro
area issued more than a fifth of their international debt in euros from the beginning of 1999, roughly a
twofold  increase  over  the  total  share  of  the  legacy  currencies  before  the  introduction  of  the  euro.
Furthermore,  European  investors  have  substantially  diversified  their  bond  portfolios  since  the
introduction of the euro, encouraged by the removal of the exchange rate risk. This enables them to
achieve higher rates of return for a given level of portfolio risk.
Additionnally,  let  me  recall  recent  trends  towards  mergers  or  close  co-operation  between  stock
exchanges, securities settlement systems and clearing houses, and so forth. Had the euro not been
created,  would  it  have  been  thinkable  that  the  Paris,  Brussels  and  Amsterdam  exchanges  would
merge, creating EURONEXT? It is evident that the introduction of the euro is fostering very large-scale
market  restructuring  throughout  Europe.  The  total  stock  market  capitalisation  of  euro-area  equity
markets stood at more than 5.5 trillion euros at the end of 1999, compared with a market capitalisation
of 3.6 trillion euros at the end of 1998. This figure reflects not only the increase in stock prices but also
the powerful drive towards securitisation  of private companies throughout  Europe and,  in particular,
the take off of the “new markets” network.
There are still some barriers to further integration of EU capital markets. In this regard, the Eurosystem
has  welcomed  the  objective  of  the  European  Council,  meeting  in  Lisbon  in  March  2000,  of
accelerating completion of the internal market for financial services, and to set a tight timetable so that
the Financial Services Action Plan is implemented by 2005. The Eurosystem also fully supports the
initial  policy  conclusions  of  the  Committee  of  the Wise  Men  on  the  integration  of  the  EU  securities
markets,  in  the  conviction  that  their  implementation  would  contribute  to  an  improved  allocation  of
capital in the European economy and to developments in securities markets coherent with the needs
of the single monetary policy.
II.2. An incentive for further structural reforms
a/  The  Euro  is,  per  se,  also  a  strong  catalyst  for  structural  reforms  in  all  non-financial  domains  in
Europe : a single currency facilitates the full comparison of prices, taxes and earnings. I think that the
euro could encourage "cross-fertilisation" of best  practice through stronger co-ordination of Member
States'  structural  policies  in  areas  such  as  labour  markets,  education  and  training,  job  creation
incentives, effective welfare safety nets, etc. It is the reason  why the  European Council, meeting in
Luxembourg in December 1997, explicitly mentioned structural policies among the items selected for
reinforced co-ordination. The Lisbon European Council made a further contribution to the necessary
medium-term strategy for structural reform in the Union. The emphasis put on deepening the single
market, the setting of indicators allowing comparisons of best practices among the Member States, the
fact that the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines will examine the structural issues closely : all these
developments are going in the right direction.
BIS Review 11/2001
5
All European countries must resolutely carry on the structural reforms they have already initiated. It
must be acknowledged that a lot has already been done, in particular with implementation of the single
market. However, continental Europe  is still  experiencing levels of unemployment that are  too  high,
despite the fact that the jobless rate has been declining significantly in most of its economies for three
years. According to the IMF and the OECD, around 80% of this unemployment level appears to be
structural, that is, generated by our own burdensome rules and regulations.
EMU certainly stimulates structural reforms in the labour market. With increased capital mobility and a
better  functioning  single  market,  firms  will  become  more  and  more  sensitive  to  overall  labour  cost
differentials  and  business  regulations  in  choosing  a  particular  location  in  the  euro  area.  They  will
therefore exert a considerable pressure for appropriate reforms.
b/ In addition to structural reforms, a strong emphasis will continue to be put on competitiveness.
Pre-euro economic policy meant monitoring the balance of payments and the foreign exchange and
interest-rate  markets.  The  authorities  thus  received  constant  feedback  on  key  indicators  affecting
national economic performance and could react accordingly. These indicators were sensitive, multiple
and very reactive.
In contrast to the pre-euro period, a loss of competitiveness will not show up quickly on radar screens
like foreign exchange markets, interest-rate markets or the external accounts. As a result, economic
managers  must  monitor  the  relevant  competitiveness  indicators  with  even  greater  vigilance.  The
sanctions for economic policy errors could come more slowly and insidiously via rising unemployment
and weak growth.
The rules of a market economy, especially competition, continue to apply to each economy. Jobs are
created  by  consumers  when  they  choose  the  goods  and  services  they  feel  are  the  best  value  for
money. Businessmen allocate these jobs to various possible locations in various countries according
to the relative competitiveness of these locations. It is therefore necessary to monitor competitiveness
even  more  closely  than  before  through  indicators  such  as  unit  production  costs  and  the  tax  and
regulatory framework.
The close multilateral surveillance and the frank discussions provided in the context, inter alia, of the
Eurogroup,  will  help  monitor  competitiveness  trends  with  a  view  to  ensure  early  warnings  and
appropriate reactions.
Let  me  address,  in  conclusion,  two  questions:  the  issue  of  sustainable  growth  and  the  present
diagnosis of the Eurosystem as regards the balance of risks.
Growth: Central bankers are sometimes portrayed  as being excessively cautious and reserved  with
respect  to  economic  growth.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  very  much  in  favour  of  growth.  First  and
foremost, because the objective of monetary policy—price stability—is a necessary condition for long-
term, robust growth. At the press conference following the ECB Governing Council on 1st February,
Wim DUISENBERG said very clearly on behalf of all of us that "within the euro area, the maintenance
of price stability over the medium term (…) will provide an important contribution to the achievement of
sustained  non-inflationary  economic  growth  and  will  also  support  a  further  solid  and  sustainable
expansion of the world economy ”.
Not only are we aiming at sustainable non-inflationary steady growth through our action but also via all
our  recommendations  :  we  are  resolutely  anti-Malthusian  in  all  fields  of  the  economy,  that  is  we
support innovation, liberalisation and growth incentives.
We  are  anti-Malthusian  as  regards  scientific  and  technical  progress. We  feel  the  new  technologies
should be approached with an open mind so as to broaden our scope of economic activity and derive
the  best  possible  productivity  gains  from  these  advances,  together  with  the  corresponding  positive
impact on production costs and prices.
We are anti-Malthusian as regards labour. It is essential to ease the bottlenecks in all sectors reporting
a significant shortage of skilled labour in order to continue to contain production cost increases—and
thus  ensure  price  stability—and  to  allow  unfettered  growth.  In  this  respect,  we  all  welcomed  the
objectives of the European Council in Lisbon, which aim at boosting the labour force participation rate
in  Europe  from  61%  to  70%  and  increasing  the  supply  of  “new  economy”  skills.  This  is  a  very
important decision which represents a conceptual turning point.
We are anti-Malthusian as regards investment. We would like it to be as dynamic as possible, in terms
of  both  capacity  and  productivity,  in  order  to  loosen  production  capacity  bottlenecks,  preserve
6
BIS Review 11/2001
production costs, which is good for price stability, and allow unfettered  growth. More than  ever, the
time has come to invest in Europe.
We  are  also  anti-Malthusian  as  regards  the  liberalisation  of  trade.  An  open-minded  attitude  in  this
respect has the advantage of consolidating and strengthening price stability, increasing the purchasing
power of consumers and encouraging long-term growth.
As  regards  our  present  diagnosis  on  the  situation  of  the  Eurozone  we  are  very  often  asked  three
questions, namely : “ How do you assess the risks to price stability ? “  “What is your judgment on the
present conjuncture in Europe? “ and finally “What about the euro on the exchange markets?”.
Let me respond as concisely as possible to these three questions.
To the first one I will refer to the analysis displayed, in the name of the Governing Council, by Wim
Duisenberg  :”  after  the  recent  slowdown  in  monetary  growth  the  risks  to  price  stability  from  the
monetary side have become increasingly balanced. Caution still needs to be exercised ”.
As far as the second question is concerned I can also refer to a joint analysis of the Governing Council
: “ While downside risks to real GDP growth exist, growth is  very likely to continue at a reasonably
robust pace.”
Finally,  as  regards  exchange  rates  I  will  only  mention  that  we  are  living  in    a  universe  of  floating
exchange system : in such a system exchange rates are not a target but are a pertinent indicator for
monetary policy. And I see only one sentence to sum up our position : “ A solid , a strong euro is in the
interest of Europe”.
Thank you for your attention.
 BIS Review 11/2001
7
