Andrew Crockett: Monetary policy and financial stability
Speech  by  Andrew  Crockett,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and
Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, given at the Fourth HKMA Distinguished Lecture, held in
Hong Kong, 13 February 2001.
 It is a great pleasure to be invited to give the Fourth Annual HKMA Distinguished Lecture. And it is a
special  honour  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  such  eminent  predecessors  as  Bill  McDonough,  Wim
Duisenberg and Jean-Claude Trichet. With the BIS having established its Asian office here in Hong
Kong, our links with the Special Administrative Region are now particularly close.
My topic today is Monetary Policy and Financial Stability. There can of course be no debate about the
importance of the twin goals of price stability, on the one hand, and the stability of the financial system,
on the other. What is less well understood is the relationship between them, and that is what I want to
explore in this lecture.
It  is  an  issue  that  is  both  important  and  timely.  Important,  because  we  need  to  ensure  that
arrangements for the pursuit of price stability do not inadvertently endanger the stability of the financial
system.  And  we  need  to  ensure  that  financial  system  weaknesses  do  not  impede  the  effective
operation of monetary policy. Timely, because the new Basel Capital Accord is focussing additional
attention  on  the  issue  of  systemic  risk.  Moreover,  in  a  number  of  countries,  responsibility  for  the
supervision  of  financial  institutions  has  been  moved  from  the  central  bank  to  an  independent
regulatory  authority,  with  the  central  bank  itself  retaining  a  more  general  responsibility  for  overall
systemic stability. Australia and the United Kingdom are perhaps the clearest examples of such a shift,
but  similar  moves  have  taken  place  in  Korea,  Hungary  and  a  number  of  other  countries.  These
institutional  changes  have  sparked  a  lively  debate  about  the  appropriate  institutional  framework  for
monetary and financial stability policies.
In this lecture, I will argue that the terms of this debate are too narrow. What matters is not so much
the  institutional  division  of  responsibilities.  It  is  rather  the  nexus  between  monetary  and  prudential
policies  and  how  to  devise  a  set  of  arrangements  that  can  promote  both  monetary  and  financial
stability, regardless of the formal assignment of policy tasks. This is a very complex matter because
the linkages between monetary policy and financial stability go in both directions and take many forms.
My  argument  will  be  that  a  greater  consensus  than  now  exists  is  required  on  the  underlying
relationship  between  monetary  and  financial  stability  (diagnosis)  in  order  to  better  frame  policy
responses  (remedies).  In  implementing  prudential  policies,  supervisory  authorities  may  require  a
keener recognition that some of the main roots of systemic instability have been macroeconomic. One
common  macroeconomic  element  behind  overextension 
financial  system  has  been
misjudgements about the economy’s potential growth rate – a major factor in Japan in the 1980s and
in South-East Asia in the mid 1990s. Another element is that financial market sentiment tends to move
with  the  business  cycle.  Many  of  the  dilemmas  of  policy  arise  because  it  is  difficult  in  practice  to
distinguish what is cycle and what is trend.
Likewise, in framing monetary  policy, central  banks may require  a  keener  recognition  of  the  role  of
monetary policy in unintentionally accommodating the credit expansion that contributes to the build up
of financial imbalances.  In developing  these  themes, I will try to derive some operative conclusions
both for the monetary policy and the supervisory function.
The  structure  of  what  I  have  to  say  is  as  follows:  I  will  begin  by  recalling,  in  a  somewhat  stylised
manner, the current debate on the relationship between monetary and financial stability. Next, I  will
broaden  the  focus  so  as  to  bring  out  some  of  the  under-appreciated  aspects  of  this  relationship.
Finally,  I  will  try  to  draw  some  policy  implications,  both  for  the  monetary  and  the  supervisory
authorities.
the 
in 
BIS Review 13/2001
1
The current debate
The  conceptual  framework  underlying  the  current  debate  is  one  in  which  the  two  objectives  of
monetary and financial stability, and the instruments used to achieve them, can be largely separated.
The monetary authorities direct interest rate and credit policies towards a clearly defined objective of
price  stability.  Increasingly,  this  is  being  done  in  the  framework  of  inflation  targeting,  though  Hong
Kong,  for  reasons  related  to  both  its  history  and  its  economic  structure,  has  chosen  to  anchor  its
monetary policy on an external peg. Against a background of price stability, financial stability is seen to
be  assured  by  rigorous  prudential  supervision,  targeted  at  the  risk  management  practices,  and  the
solvency of individual institutions.
Within  this  broad  conceptual  framework,  there  are  areas  of  agreement  and  disagreement.  It  is
generally agreed that there is a clear division of responsibility between the monetary policy function
and the  prudential supervisory function. And  it  is accepted that  information  needs  to  be  exchanged
and actions coordinated, particularly during periods of financial turbulence. But otherwise, little need is
seen for continuous interaction between the authorities responsible for these two functions.
Where disagreement has arisen is on the subject of whether supervisory functions should be placed in
the  central  bank  or  outside.  This  is  a  debate  that  is  set  to  continue  for  some  time  yet.  Among  the
arguments made for retaining supervisory authority in the central bank are the following:
–
The central bank will have easier access to information in the case of a crisis, and it will be
easier to coordinate monetary and prudential policy actions;
It  will  be  easier  to  assess  and  respond  to  the  build-up  of  system  risk  if  the  supervisory
authority  also  has  responsibilities,  and  hence  specific  know-how,  in  other  areas  of  the
financial  system  (e.g.  market  functioning  and  the  operation  of  clearing  and  settlement
systems).
Access to supervisory information can help the  authorities better calibrate monetary  policy
(e.g. the case of the “headwinds” that confronted the US economy during the recovery of the
early 1990s).
The central bank may be the only institution (especially in emerging market economies) with
the  necessary  independence  and  credibility  to  implement  rigorous  prudential  policies  and
limit governmental interference.
     There are, however, also arguments on the other side:
–
–
Information exchange does not require that functions be grouped within the same institution;
Given the blurring of distinctions between different types of financial institutions, the retention
of supervisory responsibilities within the central bank may give rise to perceptions that the
lender of last resort function is being extended, with consequent risks of moral hazard.
The  central  bank may  become  too  powerful  if  it  is  both  independent  and  endowed  with  a
broad range of functions.
There could be a conflict of interest with monetary policy, if central banks were induced to be
excessively expansionary in order to head off weaknesses at individual financial institutions.
In these terms, there is no obviously “right” answer to the debate. Individual observers may have their
own  preferences,  but  at  the  end  of  the  day,  the  answer  probably  depends  on  country-specific
circumstances.  For  example,  how  independent  from  political  and  industry  pressure  can  a  separate
supervisor  be?  How  scarce  are  the  relevant  skills?  And  how  blurred  have  the  distinctions  between
different types of financial intermediary become? Some, such as Charles Goodhart,1 have argued that
these  considerations  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  case  for  combining  supervisory  and  monetary
policy responsibilities in the central bank will generally be stronger in emerging markets.
But whatever is the answer to the question “Who should supervise?”, it is necessary to define tasks
clearly and in such a way that the tools are available to discharge them. One risk in the present trend
to  remove  supervision  from  the  tasks  of  central  banks  is  that  central  banks  could  be  left  with  a
responsibility  for  overall  financial  stability  that  is  neither  clearly  defined  nor  supported  with  the
necessary powers or access to information to discharge it. So where separate supervisory authorities
are being established, it is important to set up a structure that promotes the necessary exchange of
                                                     
1 C A E Goodhart: “The Organisational Structure of Financial Supervision”, FSI Occasional Paper No 1, BIS, Basel, 2000.
2
BIS Review 13/2001
information  and  coordination.  Much  attention  is  being  given  to  this  subject  in  the  United  Kingdom,
Japan and other countries where new supervisory structures are being put in place.
My  argument  in  this  lecture,  however,  is  that  even  with  these  developments,  the  basic  conceptual
framework  for  the  promotion  of  financial  stability  is  not  fully  adequate.  It  tends  to  see  the
interrelationship  between monetary  policy  and financial supervision  as  being  important  in  managing
crises,  rather  than  in  their  origination.  There  is  not  sufficient  focus  on  the  genesis  of  financial
instability.
It  is  this  framework  that  I  wish  to  try  and  broaden.  My  conjecture  is  that  the  relationship  between
monetary and financial stability runs deeper than is often imagined. More specifically, the pursuit of
price stability can sometimes allow financial imbalances to arise inadvertently, and can sow the seeds
of subsequent instability. Conversely, the pursuit of prudential objectives, institution by institution, can
take inadequate account of feedback mechanisms that can exacerbate macroeconomic cycles. Allow
me to elaborate on these points.
Beyond the current debate: the genesis of financial instability
I will begin with two observations to support my conjecture that monetary and financial stability cannot
be put in separate compartments and separately pursued.
My first observation is that since the 1980s  inflation  has  been  largely  conquered,  and  yet  financial
instability  has,  if  anything,  intensified.  It  has  taken  the  form  both  of  price  misalignments  and
widespread financial distress, both in industrial countries and emerging market economies. Exchange
rate relationships have been highly volatile, and “bubbles” appear to have emerged and occasionally
burst  in  property  and  equity  markets.  Bond  yields,  too,  have  varied  over  a  wide  range.  In  financial
systems, there have been highly damaging crises in the Nordic countries, in Japan, in East Asia and in
Mexico.
Several common features of these episodes of instability are worthy of comment. First, they occurred
in circumstances where inflation was either not a threat, or was on a downward trend. In a liberalised
financial system, the absence of inflation is therefore a necessary but not sufficient condition to avoid
financial instability. Secondly, systemic problems were not caused by individual institutions getting into
difficulty, and affecting others by contagion. In all cases, a whole set of institutions acted in more or
less the same way, and were not disciplined by a supervisory authority which certainly knew what was
going on. Thirdly, the portfolio behaviour in question was encouraged by expectations that underlying
macroeconomic conditions – interest rates and growth rates – could be extrapolated uncritically into
the future.
My  second  observation  is  that  there  have  been  several  combinations  of  monetary  and  financial
regime  during  the  20th  century,  and  none  has  been  conspicuously  successful  at  achieving
simultaneously both price stability and stability in a liberalised financial system.
–
Under the gold standard, there was a single anchor, gold convertibility, for both monetary
and  financial  stability.  Monetary  stability  was  in  fact  defined  as  the  preservation  of  the
convertibility of a currency into gold. Likewise, individual financial institutions had to assure
they could always mobilise gold (or assets convertible into gold) to redeem their liabilities.
The gold standard was an example of a liberalised financial system in which the quantity of
gold acted as a visible exogenous constraint on monetary authorities and banks alike. But it
did  not  prevent  waves  of  excessive  expansion,  followed  by  instability  and  bust.  In  other
words,  such  a  system,  unmanaged,  was  inadequate  to  discipline  inherent  tendencies  to
excess in financial markets.
The interwar years saw the replacement of the brittle discipline of the gold standard with the
emergence of fiat monetary standards. This led to a closer identification of monetary policy
with the objective of price stability.  At the same time, it loosened the constraints on credit
expansion,  and  did  nothing  to  prevent  widespread  financial  instability.  In  the  wake  of  the
turbulence  of  the  early  1930s,  most  countries  introduced  strict  regulation  of  commercial
banking, and sometimes of other financial activity as well.
The Bretton Woods system of the post-war period was a de facto dollar standard. Given
the  experience  of  the  interwar  period,  it  involved  heavy  regulation  of  domestic  and
international financial transactions. The system delivered monetary stability, at  least for as
long as the US authorities were able to keep inflationary forces in check. It also  delivered
  BIS Review 13/2001
3
 financial  system  stability.  But  there  was  a  heavy  cost  from  repressed  financial  systems  in
terms of the efficiency with which resources were ultimately allocated.
The floating exchange rates that followed the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system saw
a  search  for  alternative  monetary  anchors,  and  for  a  means  of  disciplining  the  financial
system within a more liberal environment. As I noted a moment ago, the approach pursued
was  to  segregate  pursuit  of  the  two  objectives.  For  the  pursuit  of  price  stability,  money
supply  targets  were  the  first  object  of  attention,  but  when  they  proved  unsatisfactory,  an
increasing  number  of  central  banks  resorted  to  the  “constrained  discretion”  of  inflation
targeting.  As  far  as  financial  system  stability  was  concerned,  the  answer  was  found  in
intensified prudential supervision. This followed several damaging crises that occurred in the
wake of financial liberalisation. The focus of supervision was less on permitted activities of
financial  intermediaries,  but  on  prudential  risk  management  pursued  by  a  combination  of
balance sheet constraints, supervisory oversight, and, market discipline. Until now, however,
this approach has still not delivered durable financial stability.
The foregoing brief review leads me to the conjecture that is the basis of this lecture: the combination
of a liberalised financial system and a fiat standard with monetary rules based exclusively in terms of
inflation is not sufficient to secure financial stability. This is not to deny that inflation is often a source of
financial  instability.  It  certainly  is.  Inflation  clouds  and  distorts  relative  prices,  biases  investment
towards  inflation  hedges,  and  when  it  threatens  to  get  out  of  control,  requires  drastic  monetary
tightening, and the wrenching adjustments that come in its wake.
Yet  the  converse  is  not  necessarily  true.  There  are  numerous  examples  of  periods  in  which  the
restoration of price stability has provided fertile ground for excessive optimism. “Irrational exuberance”
can drive asset prices to unrealistic levels, even as the prices of currently traded goods and services
exhibit few signs of inflation.
The reason is not far to seek. In a fiat money standard, the supply of credit is endogenous, governed
by  the  reaction  function  of  the  authorities.  If  that  reaction  function  responds  solely  to  what  is
happening to inflation in the price of current output, there is little to prevent the emergence of cycles in
the price of real and financial assets that do not enter into the inflation measure.
If  an  absence  of  inflation  is  not,  by  itself,  sufficient  to  ensure  financial  stability,  and  the  authorities’
reaction function does not prevent financial imbalances, to what can we look to contain their build-up?
The  answer  is,  of  course,  prudential  regulation.  However,  the  tools  of  prudential  regulation  are
themselves  based  on  perceptions  of  risk  which  are  not  independent  on  the  credit  and  asset  price
cycle. If prudential regulation depends on assessments of collateral, capital adequacy and so on, and
if the valuation of assets is distorted, the bulwark against the build-up of financial imbalances will be
weakened. Put in simple terms, even with the necessary prudential rules, the system may not have
enough built-in stabilisers to avoid financial instability.
This point can be made more apparent through a closer look at the anatomy of financial instability. In a
stylised  financial  cycle,  some  exogenous  development  sets  off  an  expansion  of  credit.  It  is  often
improved  economic  prospects,  due  to  technological  innovation,  the  implementation  of  reforms  –  or
indeed many other genuine, real factors. Once under way, credit expansion fuels an acceleration of
output and an increase in asset prices. Such developments appear to boost returns and  lower risk,
leading  to  further  credit  expansion  and  increased  leverage  in  the  system.  If  the  mechanisms  of
prudential  oversight  –  comprising  markets,  counterparties  and  official  supervisors  –  work  well,
excessive leverage will be avoided. In such benign circumstances, financial  institutions  will  weather
any subsequent downturn. But if the extension of balance sheets goes too far, an eventual reversal
can  be  abrupt  and  severe,  with  widespread  bankruptcies,  and  substantial  damage  to  financial
intermediaries.
This kind of financial cycle is easy to identify ex post. It can be purely domestic in nature, or it can be
driven by international capital flows. Examples are to be found in the Nordic countries following  the
liberalisation in the 1980s; in Japan in the 1980s and 1990s; and in the recent experience of a number
of East Asian economies. But it is much harder to identify ex ante.
I draw first five conclusions from the foregoing analysis, that will be important for what I want to say in
the final part of this lecture, concerning policy challenges.
First, the financial industry is unlike other sectors in that the feedback mechanism from supply to price
is less effective,  or  even  perverse.  In  a  traditional  industry,  an  expansion  in  supply  puts  immediate
downward  pressure  on  price,  squeezing  profit  margins,  reducing  the  incentives  to  invest  and
4
BIS Review 13/2001
encouraging exit from the industry. In the financial sector, the price that falls when the supply of credit
increases  is  the  interest  rate.  This  has  the  effect  of  pushing  up  asset  values  and  appearing  to
strengthen the balance sheets of borrowers and intermediaries alike. Rising asset values encourage
leverage  and  credit  expansion  contributing  to  further  increases  in  credit  growth.  Conversely,  falling
values lead to deleveraging and reductions in credit growth.
Second,  fundamental  value,  the  basis  on  which  decisions  to  buy  and  sell,  to  lend  and  borrow  are
made, is extremely hard to assess. We can of course decompose value into an expected stream of
returns, a discount rate and a risk premium. But this does not take us very far. To an important extent
value,  like  beauty,  is  in  the  eyes  of  the  beholder.  Its  assessment  is  subject  to  powerful  waves  of
shared optimism or pessimism. Investors are prone to see new paradigms, to force new facts to fit
entrenched perceptions. This helps explain why exchange rates among major currencies can exhibit
wide volatility, and why individual stocks, and even stock indices, can move by large amounts even in
the absence of significant new information.
My third conclusion is that cyclical upswings are typically sustained by overly optimistic expectations,
and muted perceptions of risk. As expansion proceeds, risk spreads usually narrow, asset values are
buoyant and loan-loss provisions are reduced. With the benefit of hindsight, this looks perverse, since
we can see that risks and imbalances have actually accumulated in the later stages of an upswing,
only  to  materialise  in  the  ensuing  recession.  The  fact  is  that  financial  intermediaries  are  better  at
assessing relative risks at a point in time, than projecting the evolution of risk over the financial cycle.
Unfortunately, however, it is these perceptions of risk, and the asset values that lie behind them, that
constitute the raw material on which prudential controls operate.
Fourth,  widespread  financial  instability  typically  arises  from  exposures  to  common,  rather  than
idiosyncratic factors. The model in which an individual institution gets into difficulties and affects the
system through contagion, is the  exception  rather  than  the  rule.  More  commonly,  financial  systems
encounter crisis when many institutions have operated in a similar way, and have collectively failed to
see  a  common  macroeconomic  threat.  The  financial  cycle  is  the  most  typical  cause.  Financial
intermediaries, and their supervisors, fail to take adequate account of emerging imbalances, and are
lulled to a false sense of security by the apparent strength of asset prices.
Fifthly,  monetary  policy  loses  much  of  its  effectiveness  in  dealing  with  a  recession  if  banks,  badly
overexposed as a result of the preceding boom, are unable to lend. I hardly need to belabour this point
to an Asian audience. A well-functioning financial system is essential for successful monetary policy
because of its pivotal role in the transmission of monetary policy measures.
Policy challenges
If the argument so far is valid, achieving the elusive twin goals of financial and monetary stability will
require mutually reinforcing anchors to be put in place in the two spheres. Moreover, it will require an
enhanced appreciation of the interdependence of policies in the two areas. I will deal with these two-
way channels of inter-dependence in turn, starting with prudential regulation and the goal of financial
stability.
A key element here is to recognise the role of common factors in generating financial distress, and the
need to find better ways of identifying and tackling emerging imbalances. Supervisors are recognising
this, and are increasingly focussing on developments that generate systemic, rather than idiosyncratic,
difficulties. This means looking at the correlation  of risks across institutions, rather than factors that
threaten individual failure. It also means that prudential controls should be calibrated to the systemic
relevance of individual institutions, rather than being the same for all.
We  can  think  of  this  analogously  to  the  paradigm  shift  brought  about  by  mean/variance  portfolio
analysis in the 1950s. Portfolio analysis now focuses on the aggregate risk/return characteristics of a
whole  portfolio,  not  on  the  characteristics  of  individual  securities.  Similarly,  our  concern  with  the
financial  system  ought  to  be  with  its  overall  efficiency  and  resilience,  not  on  the  performance  of
individual intermediaries. This is not an easy shift in perspective for supervisors to make, given their
natural focus at the institution level. Nevertheless, it is a shift that is now becoming apparent in the
public statements of leaders of the supervisory profession.
Another area in which a change in supervisory perspective is taking place lies in a greater recognition
of the time properties of  risk  over  the  financial  cycle,  and  of  the  endogenous  character  of  risk  with
respect  to  the  collective  decisions  of  lenders.  There  are  two  problems  here.  One  is  the  fact  that
BIS Review 13/2001
5
underlying risk builds up as expansion and leverage continues, while apparent risk declines, with the
rise in collateral values. The second is that decisions to extend or withdraw credit can have perverse
externalities:  what  is  rational  for  one  lender  acting  in  isolation  becomes  systemically  threatening  if
undertaken by all lenders together.
The answer seems to lie in stronger  incentives to build capital cushions  in good times, that can be
reduced in bad times. This would better reflect the underlying riskiness of banks’ portfolios and would
provide a built-in mechanism to dampen the financial amplification of the business cycle.
I  am  of  course  aware  of  the  difficulties  of  implementing  such  proposals.  Fluctuations  in  regulatory
capital would provide opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and supervisory forbearance. Nevertheless,
there  are  certain  options  that  would  limit  such  dangers.  For  example,  provisioning  practices  could
certainly be made more forward-looking than at present. Loan-to-value ratios could be adapted in the
light  of  potentially  unsustainable  movements  in  asset  prices  or  be  based  on  conservative,  less
cyclically-sensitive  measures  of  value.  More  generally,  financial  intermediaries  could  be  induced  by
their supervisors to adopt a critical attitude to optimistic scenarios  particularly  during booms. Stress
testing  is  an  essential  technique  in  this  connection.  Many  of  the  techniques  I  have  just  referred  to
should find their place in the supervisory oversight pillar of the new Basel Capital Accord.
Lastly, supervisory techniques will need to take a balanced view of the utility of market forces as an
aid  to  stabilising  behaviour.  Disclosure  and  transparency  undoubtedly  facilitate  the  exercise  of
counterparty discipline. They are an important part of a more robust financial architecture, as the third
pillar of the new Basel Capital Accord recognises. There is still much to do in Asia in raising disclosure
standards and in allowing the market to provide the necessary discipline. Asia’s crises were a stark
lesson  that  sweeping  problems  under  the  carpet  did  not  solve  them.  I  hardly  need  to  remind  this
audience of that. At the same time, one should be aware that market participants may be subject to
collective misperceptions of risk. And even if risk is correctly perceived, private responses may not be
appropriate from the viewpoint of systemic stability. Private behaviour can be affected by expectations
of official action (moral hazard); by short term horizons induced by the nature of contracts; by differing
interests as between principals and agents; and more generally by the combined effect of forces that
make for what we commonly term “herd behaviour”.
Let  me  turn,  finally,  to  the  role  of  monetary  policy.  I  have  argued  that  excessive  credit  expansion
during upswings has often contributed to the accumulation of financial imbalances, imbalances whose
unwinding has been associated with bouts of damaging instability. If I am right in  this,  the  question
immediately  arises  of  whether  monetary  policy  should  have  as  one  of  its  objectives  to  limit  the
accumulation of such imbalances or, more simply put, to prevent the emergence of financial excesses.
This has become a hotly debated subject of monetary economics in recent years, and the end of the
debate is not in sight.
On  the  one  hand,  there  are  powerful  arguments  for  saying  that  monetary  policy  should  focus
exclusively  on  consumer  price  inflation  and  not  concern  itself  with  asset  prices  and  financial
imbalances more generally. A proliferation of objectives is a recipe for confusion. Moreover, how can
the authorities distinguish an unsustainable from a sustainable evolution in asset prices? Even if they
felt  confident  that  a  particular  development  was  unsustainable,  how  could  they  muster  the  political
support to resist it, especially if in so doing they were to induce an economic slowdown? Finally, how
could  one  recognise  such  a  development  sufficiently  in  advance  to  deflate  it  without  damaging
consequences that would inevitably be blamed on the central bank?
Nevertheless, it seems a counsel of despair to say that nothing can be done. The costs of uncontrolled
financial cycles are sufficiently large that avenues for resisting them should at least be explored. At a
minimum, it seems reasonable to suggest that,  in formulating monetary  policy  aimed  at  an  inflation
objective, central banks should take explicit  account  of the  impact of financial  developments on the
balance of risks. When credit expansion is rapid and asset prices are growing substantially faster than
the price of current output, it might be appropriate for the authorities to aim for price increases in the
lower part of the target corridor, or else to aim at a slowing in the overall rate of credit expansion. In
particular, rapid credit growth should prompt the central bank to look extra hard for inflation risks.
Such a policy, undertaken when the inflation threat seems remote, would no doubt be characterised
as excessively cautious.  Yet  it should be remembered that the costs of  financial  crises  have  in  the
event  turned  out  to  be  much  greater  than  the  output  forgone  in  the  short  term  by  restraining
unsustainable growth.
6
BIS Review 13/2001
Conclusion
Let me end by recapitulating the main points of my argument. Many institutional actors are involved in
the quest for financial and monetary stability. They share a common goal, but they approach it from
different perspectives.
I  hope  I  have  persuaded  you  that  the  interrelationship  between  these  perspectives  is  broader  and
deeper  than  is  usually  thought.  Monetary  policy  and  prudential  supervision  interact  in  ways  that
increasingly demand a unified, and mutually reinforcing framework. Much progress has been made in
developing such a framework in recent years. Nevertheless, much remains to be done.
The preservation of stability in the financial system requires an understanding of how macroeconomic
developments  interact  with  institutional  behaviour  and  prudential  norms  to  support  or  undermine
equilibrating tendencies. And the implementation of monetary policy requires an understanding of the
fact  that  the  consequences  of  monetary  policy  for  economic  behaviour  go  much  wider  than  their
impact on the consumer price index.
This is much more than simply a matter of who does what, of whether responsibility for supervision of
banks is located inside or outside the central bank. One could even argue that the loss of supervisory
responsibilities by central banks has prompted a healthy re-examination of what is meant by systemic
stability, and how it can be achieved in a world of many actors.
Systemic stability remains a key challenge for financial authorities worldwide. Nobody, least of all an
Asian audience, needs to be reminded of the costs of crisis and disruption in the financial sector. An
enormous amount has been achieved in improving the capacity of the financial system to contribute to
economic growth and development. The task now is to ensure that adequate defences are in place to
understand and limit the system’s exposure to financial instability.
BIS Review 13/2001
7
