Guy Quaden: The euro after two years
Speech by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at “De Hanze” International
Club of West-Flanders, held id Bruges on 11 January 2001.
 Since the changeover to monetary union on 1 January 1999, economic activity in the euro area has
accelerated considerably. The year 2000 brought growth rates (of the order of 3.5 p.c. on average for
the euro area and 4 p.c. for Belgium) which we had not seen since the end of the 1980s.
Of  course,  this  improvement  was  not  due  solely  to  monetary  union.  The  international  climate  has
become more favourable; following the 1998 crisis, Asia, in particular has seen a recovery and in the
United States economic activity remained at a high level until the past few months.
But  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  undeniably  contributed  to  renewed  growth  in  our  countries  by
creating a far more stable economic framework. This was achieved by irrevocably fixing the parities
between 11 and with the Greek dragma now 12 currencies, curbing inflation (a constitutional objective
of  the  European  Central  Bank)  and  limiting  budget  deficits  (required  by  the  European  Stability  and
Growth Pact).
In 2000, the exchange rate of the euro against the dollar was much discussed. But there are some
exchange rates which, fortunately, no one talks about at all any more: e.g. that of the Belgian franc
against the German mark or the Italian lira, or the French franc. That kind of monetary instability has
been  totally  eliminated  for  ever,  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  but  it  was  what  caused  our
economy the most problems, since the bulk of our companies’ foreign trade is  with other European
countries.  Our  foreign  trade  with  the  other  countries  in  the  euro  area  has  become  domestic  trade
which is paid for in our common currency, the euro.
The considerable extra stability created by the euro was particularly marked in Belgium’s case. You
will remember that, a few months after the introduction of the single currency, our country suffered a
specific  economic  shock:  the  dioxin  crisis.  If  the  macroeconomic  consequences  of  that  crisis  were
minimal,  then  that  is  thanks  to  the  euro.  Without  the  euro,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Belgian  franc
would most likely have come under pressure, and the National Bank would have had to respond by
increasing  its  interest  rates.  The  crisis  would  then  have  had  an  impact  extending  far  beyond  the
sectors directly affected.
After  a  temporary  slowdown  in  activity,  the  prospects  for  the  coming  year  remain  good.  Most
institutions agree in predicting a growth rate of the order of 3 p.c. for the euro area and for Belgium.
Though this is not as high as in 2000, it is still very satisfactory in historical terms.
Admittedly external uncertainty has recently increased with regard to the quality of the landing of the
US  economy.  This  might  be  somewhat  abrupt.  But  a  real  recession  remains  improbable  and  the
American authorities that are in charge of economic policy have already demonstrated their resolve to
react without delay.
Above  all,  internal  demand  in  the  euro  area,  which  represents  85 p.c.  of  final  expenditure  remains
robust.  In  Belgium,  which  is  often  regarded  as  indicative  of  future  developments  in  the  entire  euro
area, after the decline in both confidence of enterprises and consumers in September at the time of
the oil crisis, confidence of enterprises has been rising again  at the end  of the  year  and  consumer
confidence  has  once  more  reached  a  historic  peak.  The  latter  is  borne  by  a  steady  decline  in
unemployment and by job creation and also by the prospect of inflation coming down once more to a
low level after the increase in the autumn.
The oil price rise has not seriously disrupted growth prospects. We can call it a “mini oil crisis”. First,
the rise, though rapid (recovering from a position  where  prices  had  fallen  excessively  low)  was  not
comparable with the price increases of the 1970s. Also, our economies have become less dependent
on  oil  (by  the  exploitation  of  new  energy  sources,  the  energy-saving  measures  which  were
implemented  for  a  time  and  the  shift  in  economic  activity  towards  the  service  sector).  Finally,  the
mistakes made  in  economic  policy  25  years  ago  were  fortunately  not  repeated.  The  suspension  of
index-linking of incomes –or in Belgium, the use of an adjusted price index– has made it possible to
avoid a new inflationary spiral of prices and wages and governments have limited the compensatory
budget measures.
BIS Review 2/2001
1
The  European  Central  Bank,  which  is  now  in  charge  of  monetary  policy,  has  done  what  it  should.
Naturally, it could not prevent the oil price rise from causing inflation to worsen temporarily, but it had
to prevent inflationary expectations from snowballing. That is why it raised interest rates several times
last year.
The aim of the European Central Bank is to maintain the confidence of the economic players in price
stability in the medium term. And it is apparently succeeding because, despite the oil price rise, long-
term interest rates –determined by the markets on the basis of the inflation outlook– did not increase in
2000.
Monetary policy has kept inflation down but without destroying growth. Even now that they have been
raised,  the  interest  rates  of  the  European  Central  Bank  cannot  currently  be  regarded  as  damaging
economic growth, because real short-term interest rates (nominal interest rate minus inflation) are now
no higher than when monetary union was launched at the beginning of 1999 (during the first quarter of
1999 the key benchmark rate was 3 p.c. and inflation in the euro area was 0.8 p.c.).1
The euro’s internal value (its purchasing power) has been safeguarded by the actions of the ECB, but
we must admit that the trend in its external value has been less satisfactory.
The relatively weak exchange rate of the euro has naturally favoured European exports, but that is a
short-term  advantage,  because  an  economy’s  competitiveness  needs  to  be  based  on  factors  other
than a weak currency. Furthermore, it has increased the cost of our imports. We have realised that as
oil prices have risen, so that is a factor which can push up inflation. And if the exchange rate continues
to weaken, that could in the long run impair savers’ confidence in this new currency, both in Europe
and beyond. There was a time when one dollar cost over 3 marks and so the mark has been weaker
against the dollar than the euro. And at that time no one ever viewed the mark as a bad currency. But
it is true that the mark could boast of a long history and that no one in that instance doubted that the
international currency fluctuations would change direction one day.
The differences in economic growth and interest rates between the United States and the euro area
could to some extent explain the depreciation of the euro against the US dollar.
But last summer we, the members of the Governing council of the ECB, repeatedly said that the fall
had  become  excessive  and  unjustified.  We  also  said  that  intervention  on  the  foreign  exchange
markets could not be ruled out. By  actually  intervening  we  gave  the  markets  two  signals:  first,  that
even if  the  internal  value  of  the  euro  is  the  only  objective  to  which  it  puts  a  figure,  the  ECB  is  not
indifferent to the euro’s exchange rate (and to demonstrate that, actions  speak  louder  than  words);
also, it should be clear that this rate does not necessarily move in one direction only, that it is not a
one-way trend.
Recently,  the  markets  do  seem  to  have  become  more  realistic  once  again;  they  are  no  longer
considering only the good news about the dollar and the bad news about the euro, as was the case at
one time.
The euro exchange rate is beginning to recover; the extent of the recovery will depend mainly on the
convergence  of  growth  rates  on  either  side  of  the  Atlantic  and  continuing  consolidation  of  the
European economies.
Of  course,  the  improvement  in  the  euro  exchange  rate  should  preferably  be  based  not  on  the-
transient-  weakness  of  the  American  economy  but  on  the  lasting  strengthening  of  the  European
economy.  Fortunately,  the  structural  reforms  are  gaining  ground  in  Europe:  new  technologies  are
steadily making progress; competition on the markets has increased and labour markets are becoming
more flexible, even if such a statement is taboo. Now that government finances are also being put in
order, scope is gradually being created for reducing the fiscal and parafiscal burden in Europe. That is
important because the burden is currently much higher in Europe than in the United States.
It is time to conclude.
Internationally, just as the notes and coins are about to be introduced, 2001 could become the year of
the  euro.  The  euro  is  only  two  years  old,  so  it  is  still  in  its  infancy  and  needs  to  grow  up,  but  it  is
already sturdy and indeed looks older than it is. As we have seen, it has helped to boost growth and
employment in Europe. It has proved itself on the financial markets, but many people still see it as a
virtual currency because it does not yet exist in tangible form.
                                                     
1  Today the official interest rate stands at 4.75 p.c.; inflation ran at 2.7 p.c. during October 2000 and 2.9 p.c. in November for the euro
area, and was probably lower in December.
On its third birthday it will at last take on the form of notes and coins, which will circulate from Helsinki
to Lisbon via Bruges. Europeans will then become fully aware of the fact that they have a common
currency, which is already the second most widely used currency in the world.
BIS Review 2/2001
3
