The  Rt  Hon  Sir  Edward  George:  International  efforts  to  improve  the  global
economy
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Swiss Institute of
International Studies at the University of Zurich, 7 May 2001.
 A week ago I returned from the annual Spring Meeting of the IMF in Washington, and I thought that I
might discuss with you this evening where we are in our collective international efforts to improve the
functioning of the global economy. In particular I will touch upon two broad areas: first, the approach to
overall  economic  management;  secondly,  the  approach  to  strengthening  the  international  financial
system.
But I should like to begin with a few words about the process of international monetary and financial
co-operation. Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, as well as their Deputies, spend a good
deal of time at meetings in various different international fora. I am often asked after one or other of
these meetings "what exactly did you decide?" And more often than not, the answer is that we did not
actually take any specific decisions. We exchanged opinions, and often agreed that we needed to do
more  work  on  this  or  that  issue  which  we  could  review  and  debate  at  a  subsequent  meeting.  You
could be forgiven for thinking that the process of reaching international agreement on anything moves
at a snail's pace. To a degree that is true.
But  even a snail can make considerable  progress provided it keeps going. I am  told  that  the  world
record for a snail is about 16 cms a minute, or roughly one kilometre in 4 days. On that basis a snail
could leave here this evening and be in the BIS in Basel in under a year. It necessarily takes time to
build  an  international  consensus  to  move  forward  on  any  significant  issue,  and  you  need  a  broad
consensus if whatever it is you agree is to have any meaningful effect. And if you look back over ten,
or  even  five,  years,  rather  than  just  at  the  outcome  of  any  particular  meeting,  then  the  amount  of
progress really has been very considerable.
Overall economic management
Let me illustrate this first in relation to the broad consensus that now exists – within the developing,
emerging, and transition economies as well as within the industrial world – on the general approach to
overall economic management. That consensus can perhaps be summed up essentially as "macro-
economic stability and supply-side flexibility", though that characterisation needs elaboration.
On the macro-economic side we have learned – and it has taken some countries longer than others –
that  you  cannot  achieve  what  we  are  all  trying  to  achieve  –  sustained  growth,  high  levels  of
employment and rising living standards – simply by pumping up  demand in our economies through
expansionary monetary and fiscal policies without proper regard to the underlying supply-side capacity
of our economies to meet that demand. Short-term demand management through monetary policy too
often led instead to accelerating inflation, and increasing external deficits, which had eventually to be
brought under control through recession – an absolute recipe for short-termism in both financial and
business  behaviour.  Equally,  excessive  public  expenditure  –  which  had  ultimately  to  be  financed
through  higher  taxation  –  imposed  burdens  on  the  private  sector  which  weakened  its  capacity  to
generate employment and income and wealth.
So  the  emphasis  now,  more  or  less  everywhere,  is  on  effective  price  stability  as  the  immediate
objective of macro-economic policy – not simply as an end in itself but as a measure of the balance
between aggregate demand and underlying supply in the economy as a whole. In effect the aim of
monetary  policy  in  particular  is  to  moderate,  rather  than  aggravate,  the  economic  cycle,  and  so  to
provide the basis for sustainable growth at around the underlying rate of growth of productive, supply-
side, potential. And the emphasis now – again more or less everywhere – in relation to fiscal policy is
to limit public sector borrowing, and the outstanding level of public sector debt, to levels that can be
sustained  into  the  medium  and  longer  term  without  the  need  for  increasing  tax  burdens  or  the
imposition of rising real interest rates on the private sector.
These  objectives  of  macro-economic  policy  –  monetary  and  overall  fiscal  policy  –  will  certainly  be
familiar to you in this country; they are at the heart of the policies being pursued right across Europe;
BIS Review 36/2001
1
and  they  are  the  policies  endorsed,  too,  by  all  the  members  of  the  IMF  in  the  Madrid  Declaration
adopted at the IMF Annual Meeting in 1994 and expanded and updated two years later. Of course on
occasion  the  flesh  proves  to  be  weaker  than  the  spirit  –  and  achieving  these  macro-economic
objectives  is  not  easy  in  practice  even  as  a  technical  matter.  But  the  intention  –  the  international
commitment to macro-economic stability – is clear.
Acceptance of the aim of macro-economic stability served to bring into sharper focus the structural,
supply side, of the economy – that is the whole raft of influences that can affect the underlying growth
rate of capacity and thus the growth rate of aggregate demand that can be sustained.
And  here, too, there has been a strengthening international presumption in favour  of  open  markets
and free competition – both  domestically and  internationally  – with  a continuing strong presumption
against predatory trade or exchange rate manipulation. The justification is that undistorted competition
contributes to  potential global  economic growth  through  increased efficiency  and  the  more  effective
allocation  of  productive  resources.  Faster  growth  in  turn  provides  a  more  favourable  context  for
addressing social concerns, including the issue of poverty.
The international presumption in favour of free markets in itself is somewhat remarkable, given that, at
the  micro-economic  level,  increased  competition  invariably  constitutes  a  threat  to  established
producers  –  and  their  employees  –  who  might  well  be  tempted  to  urge  protection  in  one  form  or
another on their national governments. Consumers, who benefit from such competition, tend to be less
vocal  or  well  organised.  The  threat  of  protectionism  is  never,  therefore,  far  away.  But  in  fact  the
presumption in favour of competition has proved encouragingly robust. And that is not just in relation
to international trade. There is a parallel presumption in favour of freedom of capital movements, and
much greater openness around the world to foreign investment.
Among  other  things  on  the  supply-side,  there  is  a  shared  emphasis  on  the  need  to  direct  public
spending to developing human resources through education and training, to effective health care, and
affordable  social  safety  nets.  There  has  been  a  global  trend  to  privatisation  through  which
governments  have  increasingly  returned  essentially  commercial  activities,  in  which  they  have  no
necessary comparative advantage, to market disciplines.  And  there  is a common recognition of  the
need  for  reforms  in  labour  and  product  markets  designed  to  reduce  distortions  which  impede  the
efficient allocation of resources.
Now I do not pretend to you, Mr Chairman, that the international policy consensus in favour of macro-
economic stability and supply-side reform is fully articulated, particularly on the supply side; nor do I
claim that it is subscribed to in its detail equally in every IMF member country. But it does represent a
substantial  evolution  in  our  collective  thinking  over  the  past  decade  or  so  towards  a  much  more
common  approach  to  economic  management,  which  serves  as  a  valuable  framework  within  which
countries' performance can be assessed. The snail may have moved slowly but it has in fact travelled
a considerable distance!
But broad agreement on the principles, does not make them any easier to apply in practice. This is
evident from the imbalances which have built up within and between the major industrial countries in
recent  years.  It  is  uncertainty  as  to  how  those  imbalances  are  likely  to  be  corrected  that  underlies
much of the current concern about the prospects for the global economy.
The major uncertainty relates to the situation in the United States which has experienced a period of
exceptionally strong economic growth with relatively low inflation until quite recently. Briefly – and no
doubt  oversimply  –  this  very  strong  performance  is  widely  seen  as  driven  largely  by  exceptional
productivity  gains,  as  the  application  of  new  information  and  communications  technologies  spread
through  the  economy.  This  development  promised  a  higher  sustainable  rate  of  growth  in  the  US
economy and higher corporate earnings growth. That expectation contributed to a rapid rise in equity
prices, especially in the "high tech" sectors, which in turn helped stimulate both business investment in
the US and consumer demand causing the private sector to move into financial deficit. It also attracted
massive direct and portfolio investment inflows from abroad which over-financed an increasing current
account deficit in the US and caused the dollar to strengthen against other currencies. By the first half
of last year the US economy was expanding at a rate of over 5%, which even on the most optimistic
view of underlying productivity growth was clearly unsustainable. The pace of demand growth in the
US needed to slowdown – as of course it has.
The big questions now are about the extent of the slowdown and how long it will last. And the reality is
that no one can be confident that they know the answers.
2
BIS Review 36/2001
What  we  do  know  is  that  the  US  data  on  the  whole  have  not  so  far  been  as  weak  as  many
commentators predicted. Consumer spending in particular has held up reasonably well, though there
has  been  a  fall-off  in  investment  growth,  as  well  as  a  sharp  downwards  stocks  adjustment  and  an
associated  decline  in  US  imports.  On  an  optimistic  view,  if  consumption  continues  to  hold  up,  and
assuming that the recent underlying  productivity  gains  can  be  maintained,  investment  spending  will
recover as the spread of ICT through the economy resumes, and the downward stock adjustment will
come to an end. On this view we can look forward to a pick up in US activity as we move, say, into
next year. But the pessimist is inclined to point to the weakness of private sector saving, which could
induce more cautious consumer behaviour especially if unemployment continues to rise; he points to a
possible overhang of past investment excesses; and he points to the US external deficit which will at
some point need to be corrected. These adjustments might take place gradually over time, in which
case  the  US  might  face  a  more  protracted  period  of  relatively  slow  growth;  or,  if  you  are  really
pessimistic, the adjustments might be more abrupt implying a possible period of negative growth and
global financial instability. The recent somewhat erratic recovery of US stock markets from their earlier
gloom  suggests  that  they  are  beginning  to  side  with  the  optimists;  some  of  the  survey  evidence  of
consumer and business confidence on the other hand still supports a rather more pessimistic view.
For what it is worth, and given the strong policy response in the US, I am modestly optimistic, but I
recognise the downside risks. The outcome is obviously the major uncertainty surrounding the global
economic prospect, and policymakers elsewhere can only monitor, continuously and very closely, the
emerging evidence and react to that in the light of its likely impact on their own situation.
The  US  slowdown  comes  at  a  particularly  bad  time  for  Japan  which  is  already  suffering  from  a
combination of weak domestic demand – particularly consumer demand – and supply-side constraints
reflecting  pressures  on  the  banking  system,  heavily  burdened  with  non-performing  loans,  and  an
acknowledged need for restructuring parts of the non-financial sector. Japan has pretty well exhausted
the scope for macro-economic stimulus. Successive fiscal packages focussed on public works, and a
sustained period of attempted monetary expansion, at near-zero interest rates in the face of deflation,
have  failed  to  overcome  a  high  rate  of  precautionary  saving  by  an  ageing  population  facing  an
uncertain economic future. The policy  emphasis of the  new  Japanese  administration  appears  to  be
shifting  towards  firmer  action  to  bring  about  supply-side  reform  in  the  belief  that  this  will  help  to
engender  greater  confidence.  The  danger  is  that,  to  the  extent  that  more  aggressive  restructuring
results in bankruptcies and higher unemployment in the short term, that in itself might tend to weaken
consumer demand for a time before the benefits of the restructuring come through.
Closer to home, the Euro area economy is a good deal better placed to withstand the US slowdown
although  we  are  all  bound  to  be  affected  to  some  degree.  For  most  of  last  year  the  Euro  area
economy  performed  relatively  strongly,  with  overall  output  growth  well  above 
trend,  and
unemployment in the area as a whole continuing to fall from its earlier chronically high level.
A problem, of course, was the persistent weakness of the Euro in foreign exchange markets, despite
strong "fundamentals" in terms of conventional analysis. This was largely the result of an outflow of
capital,  much  of  it  drawn  into  the  US  by  the  magnetic  attraction  of  prospective  corporate  earnings
growth – and apparently continuing despite the US slowdown.
The euro's weakness gave rise to widespread – but in my view unjustified – criticism of the ECB. The
task of a central bank operating an independent monetary policy is necessarily a limited task, not least
because it effectively has only one instrument – its control over short-term interest rates. Its role – as I
said earlier – is essentially, to use that instrument to influence aggregate demand in the economy, with
the aim of keeping demand broadly in line with the supply-side capacity of the economy. The measure
of  its  success  is  consistently  low  inflation.  Against  that  criterion  the  ECB  has  been  relatively
successful.  The  Euro  area  economy  has  grown,  above  trend,  with  core  inflation  nevertheless
remaining within the tolerance range of 0-2%, even though on the headline measure, influenced by
rising oil prices and the weaker exchange rate, inflation has for the time being moved above the top of
that range. The ECB would have put that internal stability of the Euro area as a whole at risk if it had
attempted at the same time to use monetary policy to target the euro's exchange rate.
The more recent criticism has been that the ECB has been slow to respond to the weakening of the
US economy. Implicit in that criticism is no doubt a judgement about the extent and duration of the US
slowdown and its likely impact on the euro area. As I have said there is a great deal of uncertainty
about that. But the ECB has to take account, too, of domestic demand pressures in the euro area, and
of the fact that even on the core measure Euro area inflation has been moving up gradually towards
the top of the ECB's 0-2% range. Frankly I don't see how anyone can be confident whether the ECB
has it precisely right or wrong – it is perfectly normal for even the best-informed people to disagree on
BIS Review 36/2001
3
these judgements, as anyone who reads our own Monetary Policy Committee meeting minutes will tell
you. But I am wholly confident that the ECB is sensitive to the issues surrounding those judgements,
including the downside risks in the US.
So,  too,  are  we  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  our  case,  we  again  enjoyed  relatively  steady  overall
economic growth last year combined with a further fall in unemployment to its lowest rate for 25 years.
Inflation meanwhile continued to run somewhat below the Government's 2½% target, partly at least as
a  result  of  the  dampening  effect  of  sterling's  surprisingly  persistent  strength  against  the  euro.  The
problem that has been with us for some time now is the sectoral (and associated regional) imbalance
within  our  overall  economy.  The  domestically-oriented  sectors  have,  for  the  most  part,  been  doing
relatively  well,  whereas those sectors that are exposed to competition  within or from  the  Euro  area
have been under considerable pressure.
Domestic demand growth has remained relatively robust into this year, but we too are affected by the
US slowdown and by the associated weakening of equity prices. And we have had a new problem of
our own in the form of Foot and Mouth Disease, the effects of which have gone a good deal wider than
just  the  agricultural  sector.  These  new  developments  were  likely  to  have  a  dampening  effect  on
demand pressure within the overall economy, both through their direct  impact and through possible
damaging effects on confidence. Given the fact that we started from a position in which inflation was
below  target  (and  expected  to  remain  so  for  some  period  ahead);  and  given  only  modest  upward
pressure – at least so far – on  wages and  earnings  growth,  despite  the  continuing  tightness  in  the
labour market; we judged that we needed to reduce interest rates – by ½% – earlier this year in order
to meet the inflation target further ahead. And we have made it clear that we will continue to monitor
the downside risks very closely, in the context of course of all the other developments affecting our
economy.
Mr Chairman, I have discussed the current international conjuncture at some length to illustrate that
even  though  we  all  have  broadly  common  economic  objectives,  that  does  not  make  them  easy  to
achieve.  We  all  face  our  own  domestic  uncertainties  and  are  exposed  to  the  international
repercussions of developments elsewhere.
Financial stability
One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  we  face  is  the  problem  of  how  to  cope  with  movements  in  financial
asset prices, including exchange rates. That problem has become an increasing preoccupation with
increasing financial wealth in our economies and with global financial integration.
In the context of macro-economic stabilisation we can, and of course do, take account of asset prices
as  best  we  can  in  both  our  projections  and  our  policy  decisions.  The  strength  and  subsequent
weakening  of  stock  markets  in  all  our  economies,  for  example,  will  have  been  one  of  the  factors
influencing both investment and consumer demand to varying degrees for all of us; and the behaviour
of exchange rates is clearly a factor influencing inflationary  pressures  in  our  respective  economies,
both through its direct effect on prices and indirectly through its impact on net external demand. But
while we can try to make allowance for these effects we cannot predict future asset price movements
and we certainly cannot seek to control them. They remain a major source of uncertainty.
They  also,  of  course,  represent  a  major  potential  threat  to  financial  stability  which  is  a  necessary
concomitant to monetary stability. In the rest of my remarks I should like to comment briefly on the
evolving international consensus on the approach to maintaining financial stability.
The 1994  Madrid Declaration, to  which I referred  earlier,  had  already  welcomed  "the  growing  trend
towards currency convertibility and encouraged IMF member countries to remove impediments to the
free  flow  of  capital."  One  might  have  supposed  that  the  subsequent  eruption  of  the  Asian  financial
crisis – which was certainly aggravated, if not provoked, by volatile international capital flows – might
have resulted in something of a reaction to further evolution in that direction. In fact, in the midst of the
turmoil, in September 1997, the IMF's Interim Committee confirmed the consensus view that: "Private
capital  flows  have  become  much  more  important  to  the  international  monetary  system,  and  an
increasingly  open  and  liberal  system  has  proved  to  be  highly  beneficial  to  the  world  economy.  By
facilitating the flow of savings to their most productive uses, capital movements increase investment,
growth, and prosperity." In other words, while markets may not be perfect, they are in general the best
means we have of allocating financial resources efficiently. The impact of the crisis was instead to give
fresh impetus to defining and establishing the conditions that are necessary for financial markets to
function more efficiently, and that would help to reduce the risks of and limit the damage from, volatile
4
BIS Review 36/2001
shifts  in  market  sentiment,  with  their  potentially  disruptive  effect  on  both  economic  and  financial
stability.
It goes  without saying that macro-economic stability is our first line  of  defence.  But,  beyond  that,  a
huge  amount  of  work  has  been  undertaken  in  a  variety  of  international  fora  to  develop  codes  and
standards  of  best  practice  in  a  whole  range  of  more  specific  areas  relevant  to  improving  the
functioning of the international financial system. The IMF has produced codes of good practice on data
dissemination, on transparency of monetary, financial and fiscal policies, and guidelines for public debt
and  reserves  management.  The  main  Basel  Committee  has  put  forward  proposals  for  revising  its
capital accord  designed to align  regulatory  capital  requirements more  closely  with  economic  capital
and  has  drawn  up  core  principles  for  effective  banking  supervision.  The  Basel  Committee  on
Payments and Settlement Systems has developed core principles for systemically important payments
systems.  The  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  has  developed  objectives  and
principles  for  securities  regulation;  the  International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  have
developed insurance core principles; and the OECD a set of principles on corporate governance. The
International Accounting Standards Committee has developed international accounting standards; and
the International Federation of Accountants international standards on auditing and audit practice and
so the list goes on.
The emphasis now has to be on implementation by national authorities with the help where necessary
of the international community. And there needs to be increasing emphasis, too, on transparency and
validation  of  progress  towards  implementation  in  individual  countries  in  the  context  of  IMF
surveillance.
The Financial Stability Forum has recommended that in seeking to strengthen their financial systems
countries give priority to implementing standards  and codes in twelve  particular  areas, and the IMF
and  World  Bank  have  developed  a  framework  for  assessing  the  progress  countries  are  making  in
implementing  these  key  standards  and  codes.  Standards  that  are  particularly  relevant  to  the
development  of  sound  financial  systems  are  evaluated  under  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment
Programme  (FSAP),  while  Reports  on  the  Observance  of  Standards  and  Codes  (ROSC)  provide
summary assessments of a country's progress in observing standards across a range of areas. Taken
together all these initiatives should contribute to greater stability at the national level. But they should
also help lenders and investors better to assess the risks of lending to or investing in one country as
against another, dampening potential volatility and, at the same time, giving the countries themselves
stronger incentives to move toward best practice. As far as crisis prevention goes our snail has come
a long way in the past few years, though of course it needs to keep moving forwards.
But  while  we  can  hope  to  reduce  the  risk  of  crises  we  cannot  realistically  hope  that  they  will  not
continue to occur. So a great deal of attention has also been paid to improving our capacity for crisis
management.
A  major  step  forward  was  the  agreement  –  at  the  G7  Summit  some  two  years  ago  –  on  a  set  of
principles and tools that could be applied in managing a crisis.
Broadly, having emphasised the importance of not undermining contractual obligations, the principles
stress that all private creditors should accept responsibility for their lending and investment decisions –
without  expecting  to  be  underwritten  by  the  official  sector.  They  encourage  co-operative  solutions
between the debtor country and its creditors, building on effective dialogues established in advance.
The tools link official support to efforts by the debtor country to obtain private financing – or maintain
existing exposures – on a voluntary basis, and provide for comparability of treatment within the Paris
Club,  of  all  categories  of  creditors  other  than  international  financial  institutions.  They  include
mechanisms that can be used to limit the use of official financing to fund external deficits or domestic
capital outflows or to repay private sector debt. And they provide ultimately for capital controls, as part
of payments standstills, in conjunction with IMF programmes.
So we have the principles and we have the tools. What we still need to develop is a better framework
of understanding as to how they might normally be applied. I agree of course that we should not adopt
hard and fast rules, because to a degree each case is different. But we do need to develop some kind
of  presumption  about  the  limits  within  which  IMF  support  might  be  made  available  to  member
countries in different situations, and the conditions, relating both to adjustment action and to private
sector financing that would normally be applied. We need to develop a clearer presumptive framework
of this kind – no doubt with provision for exceptions where they could be properly justified – before the
next crisis hits us, because what debtor countries and their private sector creditors believe they can
expect will influence their behaviour in the meantime.
BIS Review 36/2001
5
What we all have to recognise is that the exceptional amounts of official funding committed during the
Asian  crisis  are  far  less  likely  to  be  forthcoming  in  future.  And  to  the  extent  that  official  funding  is
forthcoming,  conditions  may  well  be  attached  to  ensure  that  it  is  not  used  simply  to  re-finance
payments of short-term debt to private sector creditors or to fund a resident capital outlflow. Several of
the tools which the G7 communiqué identified are designed to have precisely this effect.
The  last  thing  that  the  official  international  community  wants  is  to  get  dragged  into  the  micro-
management  of  relations  between  debtor  countries  and  their  creditors.  We  would  all  agree  on  the
desirability of voluntary solutions,  which might  be  easier  to  achieve  if  borrowing  countries  and  their
major creditors – above all the short-term lenders – were to establish, during the good times but on an
on-going  basis,  arrangements  for  regular  dialogue.  Nor  would  anyone  want  to  insist  upon  the
imposition of constraints on capital outflows.
But  where,  in  more  extreme  situations,  an  agreed  solution  in  relation  to  external  debt  is  not
immediately achievable  there may be a  logical case for  the  orderly  suspension  of  payments  until  a
better  alternative  can  be  put  in  place.  This  could  have  advantages  for  committed  private  sector
creditors as well as for the debtor country and the official international community if it prevented free
riders running for the exit, or seeking to attach assets, and provided time for orderly negotiations on
the  provision  of  new  finance  or  for  equitable  debt  rescheduling.  Similarly,  in  some  situations,  there
may be an equivalent case for restraining domestic capital outflows.
I am under no illusion that this area is an extremely sensitive and complex one. There are no simple
solutions. But we do need to continue to explore the available options or we will remain in the position
of making things up as we go along. The snail in this area certainly still has a long way to go!
Conclusion
Mr  Chairman,  I  hope  that  I  may  have  been  able  to  persuade  you  this  evening  that  the  continuous
round of meetings on international monetary and financial question do indeed serve a useful purpose,
even though the outcome from one meeting to another may not be immediately apparent. It may just
reflect the increasing patience that comes with advancing years, but I believe we have in fact made
very  real  progress  towards  defining  common  objectives,  and  agreeing  upon  tangible  steps  that  will
help  us  towards  achieving  those  objectives,  in  relation  both  to  monetary,  and  broader  macro-
economic, stability and to creating a more effective and more robust financial system. It is of course an
endless journey, and no doubt we will from time to time run into rough waters. But I'm convinced that
our snail will keep moving forwards – and that it will even learn to swim!
6
BIS Review 36/2001
