David Dodge: The Bank of Canada's contribution to the economic well-being of
Canadians
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Vancouver  Board  of  Trade,
Vancouver, British Columbia, 20 April 2001.
 I am glad to have this opportunity to talk to the Vancouver Board of Trade.
I know that you are anxious to hear the Bank's views on the current economic situation, and I will have
some comments on that later.  But first I  would like to talk  about  how  the  Bank  contributes  to  good
economic performance and how we promote financial stability here in Canada and abroad.
The Bank's contribution to the economic well-being of Canadians
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  a  commitment  to  contribute  to  the  economic  well-being  of  Canadians.  In
other  words,  we  must  conduct  monetary  policy  so  that  it  fosters  sustained  economic  growth.
Fundamentally,  this  means  creating  conditions  that  favour  rising  employment  and  incomes,  strong
investment, and a more stable macroeconomic environment.
Low, stable, and predictable inflation
The best contribution the Bank can make to good economic performance is to preserve confidence in
the future value of money. This means that Canadians should not have to worry about the effects of
inflation when they make everyday decisions as consumers, business people, savers, and investors. It
means that they should be able to go about their affairs confidently, knowing that they can count on
their central bank to do whatever is necessary to keep future inflation low, stable, and predictable. In
this way, they will be able to make sounder economic decisions, which will lead to better performance
for the economy as a whole and to rising incomes.
Since the early 1990s, inflation in Canada has been low and stable. And economic activity has been
expanding solidly over the past several years despite some major global disturbances.
Of course, a low-inflation policy by itself is not sufficient. It must be complemented by other policies:
policies that seek to improve the structure of our economy; policies that seek to enhance the skills and
flexibility  of  our  workforce;  policies  that  seek  to  make  Canadian  product  and  labour  markets  more
efficient. In addition, all levels of government must continue to reduce their net indebtedness. This is
extraordinarily  important  if we as a  nation are to become less vulnerable  to  external shocks and  to
prepare for the pressures of a shrinking working-age population.
Inflation-control targets and a flexible exchange rate
Let me now talk briefly about the role of the inflation-control targets and the floating exchange rate in
Canadian monetary policy.
Explicit inflation-control targets were jointly introduced by the Bank and the Government of Canada in
1991. Since 1995, the goal has been to hold the trend of inflation inside a target range of 1 to 3 per
cent, with emphasis on the midpoint of 2 per cent.
Inflation targets provide an anchor for policy and an anchor for people's inflation expectations. They
supply the Bank with an effective mechanism for assessing and dealing with demand pressures in the
economy in a way that reduces fluctuations in output. Here's how this 'stabilizer' feature of the targets
works. If total demand was pressing on the economy's capacity to produce, so that the future trend of
inflation looked likely to move towards the top of the target range, the Bank would tighten in order to
reduce demand and inflation pressures. Equally importantly, in a symmetric fashion, if demand was
weak and future inflation looked likely to move towards the bottom of the range, the Bank would ease,
providing more room for the economy to expand.
BIS Review 31/2001
1
The basic point here is that the focus on inflation control allows the Bank to support growth when the
economy  is  weak  and  to  prevent  overheating  when  the  economy  is  strong  and  is  pushing  against
capacity constraints.
The other important element of our monetary policy approach is a flexible exchange rate. A floating
exchange  rate  allows  our  economy  to  adjust  to  economic  disturbances  such  as  a  sharp  change  in
foreign demand for our products or a sharp movement in the relative price of our exports compared
with our imports. In cases like these, movements in the relative value of the Canadian dollar help our
economy to adjust with less fluctuation in output and employment than if the exchange rate did  not
move. And when our currency moves in response to those shocks, the inflation target helps to anchor
expectations regarding its value in world markets. So the inflation target and a flexible exchange rate
work well together—indeed they reinforce each other—under our current monetary policy framework.
Effective two-way communication
In an increasingly interconnected world subject to all kinds of shocks and uncertainties, delivering a
monetary policy that is credible and effective has become quite a challenge. The Bank believes that
greater openness and clear, two-way communication are important ways in which it can influence the
economy,  particularly  at  times  of  increased  uncertainty.  Put  another  way,  our  actions  will  likely  be
more successful if those we seek to affect—the financial markets and the general public—understand
what we are up to and why.
The Bank has made considerable progress in this area, and efforts will continue. Today, we provide
large  amounts  of  data  and  commentary  on  monetary  policy  in  our  regular  publications  and  in
speeches  such  as  this  one.  Very  importantly,  we  have  also  developed  an  excellent  Web  site  that
contains more than 5,000 documents touching on every aspect of our operations. It includes economic
and financial data, research and analysis, speeches, and even an inflation calculator. I strongly urge
you to  visit our Web  site,  at  www.bankofcanada.ca.  I  also  encourage  you  to  stay  in  touch  with  our
regional offices across Canada.
Our latest initiative to improve public understanding of the Bank's actions is a system of eight fixed
dates each year for the announcement of decisions on the Bank Rate. This system has been in place
since last December. I believe that it is working well because it allows all of us here in Canada to focus
on our own unique economic circumstances.
The Bank's contribution to domestic and global financial stability
As I said before, widespread confidence that money will retain its value is crucial to sound economic
performance. But a market economy like ours cannot function properly unless it is also supported by a
strong financial system—that is, sound financial institutions, efficient financial markets, and a robust
financial  infrastructure.  Canadians  should  be  able  to  count  on  financial  claims  being  reliably  and
efficiently created, held, and transferred.
If the financial system is not robust, it can turn into a channel through which the effects of shocks—
financial or economic—are magnified as they are transmitted from one part of the system to the next,
within a country or between countries. The experience of the 1990s with the Mexican and the Asian
financial crises showed us how this can happen. The echo of those events reverberated around the
world. And, in both instances, Canada was sideswiped by the disturbance.
So there are compelling reasons why all countries have to ensure that their financial systems function
well.
Here in Canada, the Bank works closely with other federal and provincial entities to promote financial
stability. Bodies such as the B.C. Securities Commission focus on individual markets. But the Bank of
Canada focuses mainly on stability issues from a broad, system-wide perspective. We contribute to
financial stability in a number of ways. The Bank provides liquidity to the Canadian financial system. It
oversees  major  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  It  gives  policy  advice  to  the  government  on  the
overall  framework  for  the  financial  system.  The  Bank  also  collaborates  with  other  domestic  and
international  bodies  that  seek  to  improve  national  financial  systems  and  to  prevent  or  minimize  the
impact of global financial crises.
Canada's financial system is recognized worldwide as being sound and efficient. To keep it that way,
those  of  us  charged  with  promoting  financial  stability  will  have  to  stay  one  step  ahead  of  today's
2
BIS Review 31/2001
rapidly evolving financial markets. The Bank of Canada will continue to work closely with its domestic
and foreign partners to strengthen financial stability here in Canada and around the world.
This completes my brief overview of the Bank's role in promoting  monetary  and  financial  stability.  I
now propose to turn to the current economic situation.
Recent economic developments
Let me start with the external environment in which Canada operates. The sharp easing in the pace of
economic expansion in the United States has caused most forecasters to scale back their projections
of world economic growth for 2001. Compared with an average projection of just over 4 per cent last
fall,  we  are  now  looking  at  something  a  little  over  3  per  cent—not  spectacular,  but  still  quite
respectable. This forecast assumes that, after a weak first half, economic activity in the United States
will strengthen in the second half.
Some  of  the  recent  U.S.  data  (such  as  housing,  motor  vehicle  sales,  and  industrial  production)
indicate  that the economic situation there may be stabilizing. The Bank expects that,  with  stable  or
lower energy prices and with the inventory adjustment process well advanced, U.S. economic growth
should  strengthen  during  the  second  half  of  the  year.  The  reductions  in  interest  rates  by  the  U.S.
Federal Reserve should underpin this recovery. But of course, its exact timing and precise strength
are difficult to predict.
Here in Canada, our economy was, by last summer, beginning to press against capacity limits. Thus,
somewhat lower growth was anticipated for 2001. But, with the abrupt slowing of the U.S. economy,
growth  in  Canada  began  to  slow  significantly  in  the  final  quarter  of  2000.  And  by  mid-2001,  the
Canadian economy will probably be operating somewhat below potential—that is to say, below what it
is capable of producing over the long run without adding to inflation pressures.
This  slowing  in  economic  activity  has  not  been  uniform.  Some  high-profile  sectors  such  as  the
automotive, electronics, and telecommunications equipment industries have been affected the most.
And the prices for many non-energy commodities have been weak. It is this weakness that has had an
important effect here in British Columbia.
But to keep a sense of perspective, let us not forget that there is still considerable underlying strength
in  other  areas  of  our  economy.  This  is  certainly  true  of  the  energy  sector,  where  production  and
especially  investments to increase capacity  are  in  high  gear.  And  retail  sales  have  held  up  well.  In
addition,  activity  in  housing,  non-residential  construction,  and  most  other  service  industries  remains
firm in most parts of Canada.
On balance, looking at the economy as a whole, the Bank concluded that there was room to provide
additional support to total demand consistent with our objective of keeping inflation close to 2 per cent
over the medium term. To return to my earlier point, this is exactly how the inflation target is working
today to guide us in our actions to support growth at a time when total demand is weak.
So last Tuesday (17 April), we cut the Bank Rate by a further 25 basis points to 5 per cent, bringing
the total reduction in interest rates since January to 100 basis points. This means that the overnight
rate here in Canada is now at 4 3/4 per cent. It is this rate that corresponds to the federal funds rate in
the United States, which is now 4 1/2 per cent.
Easier  domestic  monetary  conditions,  rising  disposable  incomes  (boosted  by  recent  tax  cuts),
continued  business  investment  in  new  technology,  and  a  pickup  in  U.S.  growth  should  support  a
stronger economic expansion in Canada in the second half of 2001 and in 2002. Consistent with this
profile for output growth, core CPI inflation will likely average somewhat less than 2 per cent over the
remainder of this year, but move back up to 2 per cent towards the end of 2002. (Core CPI focuses on
the CPI without its volatile food and energy components, and without the effect of changes in indirect
taxes.) Total CPI inflation is still expected to move down to about 2 per cent towards the end of 2001,
if world oil prices remain around current levels. The Bank's spring Monetary Policy Report, which will
be coming out on 1 May, will provide more detail on the economic outlook.
The  increased  uncertainty  surrounding  global  economic  prospects  has  been  reflected  in  recent
developments  in  financial  markets.  Despite  the  marked  slowing  in  economic  growth  in  the  United
States, the U.S. dollar has strengthened against all major currencies, at least partly because global
investors have sought the safety and liquidity of U.S. financial assets at a time of market uncertainty.
Although the Canadian dollar has remained firm against other major currencies, the decline in its value
against  the  U.S.  dollar  has  once  again  generated  considerable  public  commentary  in  this  country.
BIS Review 31/2001
3
Since the exchange rate is a key price in our economy, the Bank recognizes that movements in the
external value of our currency can be a source of concern for Canadians. I want to reassure you that
we watch market developments closely. And we carefully assess financial market sentiment towards
the Canadian dollar and the implications of movements in its value for aggregate demand and inflation
in Canada.
In closing, let me leave you with two key messages regarding our economic prospects. First, the Bank
continues  to  expect  a  pickup  in  growth  in  the  second  half  of  this  year  and  further  strengthening  in
2002.  However,  there  are  uncertainties  attached  to  this  scenario,  mainly  stemming  from  external—
especially U.S.—developments. For example, there is a risk that the slowdown in the United States
could be more protracted than anticipated. The Bank will have to monitor developments in this area
closely.
My second message is that there are good reasons to be positive about Canada's economic prospects
over the medium term. We have established a climate of low inflation. Most Canadian governments
are running budgetary surpluses. As a nation, we have a large trade surplus with the rest of the world,
and  we  are  reducing  our  net  foreign  indebtedness.  Moreover,  there  are  no  serious  speculative
excesses in the economy. Corporate and financial sector balance sheets are generally healthy. Credit
markets are functioning well. And although consumer debt loads have increased, with rising incomes
and lower interest rates households generally are in a good position to service those debts.
All this gives us a more solid basis to stand on as we go through this period of economic adjustment.
And it provides a platform for future growth. The Bank's role is to target low inflation and to work with
others to promote financial stability. As I explained before, by targeting inflation the Bank is providing
appropriate  support  for  growth  in  output  and  employment  at  this  time  of  increased  economic
uncertainty.
4
BIS Review 31/2001
