Jaime Caruana: Key economic and financial developments in Spain
Address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Banco de España, to the Governing Council of the
Banco de España on the presentation of the Annual Report, Madrid, 15 June 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen:
In July last year, Governor Luis Angel Rojo completed his six-year mandate, as envisaged under the
Law of Autonomy of the Banco de España. During his term of office and that of the Deputy Governor,
Miguel  Martín,  the  Banco  de  España  experienced  at  first  hand  the  far-reaching  reform  and
modernisation  of  our  financial  system,  the  process  of  economic  convergence  with  Europe  and  the
milestone of our accession to the Monetary Union. As this is the first time I am called upon to present
the Annual Report to the Governing Council, I should like to begin by reiterating the gratitude of the
Deputy Governor and myself for the legacy of independence, credibility and rigour bequeathed by our
predecessors. The same values shall be our guiding principles in the coming years.
It is customary to devote this type of address to an analysis of the past year. Allow me to break with
this tradition and begin by referring to the future, to the year 2002. With the physical introduction of
euro notes and coins, that year will see the culmination of the transition to Monetary Union and may
well  symbolise  a  new  phase  for  the  Spanish  economy  based  on  economic  and  financial  stability,
integration and reform. Such principles will likewise underpin the work of this Bank in the future.
In the first part of this address, I shall highlight the key economic developments during the year 2000
and the opening months of 2001. In the second part, focusing on the financial system, I shall broach
macroprudential issues, along with matters relating to the structure and the performance of the sector.
Finally, I shall devote the third section to the role and activities of the Banco de España in this new
stage.
World economy
Growth  in  the  world  economy  in  the  year  2000  was,  at  4.8%,  unusually  high.  The  industrialised
economies, with the exception of Japan, and the emerging economies alike benefited from the boom
climate. At the same time, inflation rose in the industrialised countries, owing partly to the surge in oil
prices,  and  fell  overall  in  the  emerging  economies.  But  the  year  2000  was  also  a  turning  point;
economic activity progressively lost momentum, highlighting weaknesses that need to be tackled.
As in previous years, the US economy was the driving force of this expansion. Nonetheless, although
the United States saw its highest annual average growth for the past 16 years in 2000, the year also
marked the end of the recent exceptionally lengthy and intense upturn. Signs of a slowdown became
perceptible towards the summer and were confirmed as the second half of the year unfolded. As early
as the second quarter the financial markets had signalled their concern at the first symptoms of a fall
in  corporate  earnings.  The  decline  in  share  prices  was  sharpest  in  securities  linked  to  the  new
economy, and was accompanied by a rise in the risk premia on lower-rated bonds.
The opening months of the year 2001 have seen a continuing slowdown in the US economy and its
extension  to  other  areas,  especially  those  with  close  trade  links  (Canada,  Mexico  and  south-east
Asia).
This sluggishness in the US economy is in contrast to the resilience shown to date by the dollar, not
only  against  the  euro  but  also  in  effective  terms.  Its  robustness,  linked  to  the  relatively  more
favourable medium-term prospects for returns on investment in  the  United  States,  might  well  prove
excessive  given  the  US  current-account  deficit  and  the  fact  that  the  financial  markets  may
occasionally,  even  for  protracted  periods,  keep  exchange  rates  some  way  off  what  fundamentals
would appear to warrant.
In any event, doubts prevail over the intensity, duration and timing of the current phase of economic
adjustment in the United States. These doubts are tied to a series of imponderables, including most
notably: first, the extent to which the productivity growth rates observed to mid-2000 will be restored;
next, the depth of the decline in consumption which, even were it to restore potentially more balanced
levels of private saving in the long run, would also tend to heighten the loss of momentum of demand;
BIS Review 57/2001
1
and  lastly,  the  intensity  and  duration  of  the  correction  of  corporate  earnings,  especially  in  the  new
technology sector and, in connection with this, the extent of the correction of share prices. The scale
and duration of the slowdown in the United States will turn on the response to these questions.
The  immediate  prospects  for  the  world  economy  appear  to  be  closely  linked  to  the  US  outlook,
whether  because  of  its  direct  influence  or  because  the  other  economies  are  exposed  to  the  same
shocks.  Before  addressing  the  situation  in  Europe  and  Spain,  I  should  briefly  like  to  mention  Latin
America.
The influence of US economic developments on Latin America is through two channels: one real and
one  financial.  The  real  channel,  namely  trade,  is  particularly  marked  in  the  case  of  Mexico,  whose
growth forecasts for 2001 have been revised downwards, while it is rather more tenuous in the case of
the region's two other major economies, Argentina and Brazil. The financial channel partly offsets the
adverse effect of the real channel by means of the feed-through to Latin America of US interest rate
cuts,  amounting  to  2.5  points  in  the  first  five  months  of  2001.  Overall,  the  slowdown  in  the  US
economy  is  expected  to  draw  the  cyclical  positions  of  the  main  Latin  American  economies  closer
together.
Euro area
Economic results in the euro area in the year 2000 were favourable both in terms of growth and job
creation.  The  buoyancy  of  the  US  economy  until  mid-year  and  the  greater  competitiveness  arising
from the depreciation of the euro contributed to this. On the negative side, the rise in oil prices has
adversely affected economic expansion in Europe.
The  euro  area  is  not  immune  to  heightening  uncertainty  on  the  international  economic  stage.  In
particular, the slowdown in the US economy may lead the diminishing growth path in Europe, initiated
at  the  end  of  last  year,  to  be  prolonged.  That  will  hinge  on  the  intensity  and  duration  of  the
deceleration in the United States and on the effect this may have on agents' confidence and on the
financial markets. In any event, activity in the euro area may be expected to remain relatively buoyant
insofar as domestic demand is underpinned by favourable income and financial conditions.
In the first half of 2000, monetary policy was progressively adapted to the deteriorating price outlook,
against a backdrop of an improved economic situation. Gradual interest rate rises were implemented,
though  these  did  not  prevent  the  monetary  stance  from  being  propitious  to  economic  expansion
across the area. Indeed, monetary conditions  were clearly generous in certain countries  which,  like
Spain, were ahead in the cycle and were experiencing greater price pressures.
Due to essentially temporary factors, euro area inflation climbed to above 2%. But the slowdown in US
economic  growth  and  the  subsequent  deterioration  in  the  world  economic  outlook  tempered
inflationary risks as from the third quarter, paving the way in October for a halt in the succession of
official interest rate rises. In its evaluation of inflationary risks, the European Central Bank (ECB) has
since adopted a prudent stance, gradually modifying its assessment of macroeconomic conditions in
the area on the basis of developments in its external environment and of the data available on their
impact on the euro area. As a result, it trimmed its benchmark interest rate in May this year to 4.5%,
estimating  that  the  lower  economic  growth  envisaged  for  the  euro  area  should  mitigate  inflationary
pressures in the medium run.
The  ECB  nevertheless  monitors  inflation  developments  in  the  euro  area  attentively.  While  the  less
expansionary  economic  climate  is  tending  to  moderate  price  increases,  risk  factors  –  associated
mainly  with  uncertainty  as  to  future  wage  restraint  and  to  the  feed-through  to  final  prices  of  dearer
energy and other imported inputs – remain which could delay the forecast reduction in inflation rates in
the near future.
Having discussed the salient international economic developments over the past year, I should like to
highlight two conclusions arising from such developments which merit special comment. The first is
that technological progress does not imply the disappearance of macroeconomic disequilibria. And the
second  is  the  differing  position  of  the  US  and  European  economies,  as  regards  both  their  cyclical
position and their medium-term growth outlook.
2
BIS Review 57/2001
Technological progress does not presuppose the absence of disequilibria
Economic  developments  in  the  United  States  in  recent  years  have  been  forcefully  influenced  by
technological  innovation.  Their  effect  has  been  felt,  primarily,  in  the  new  economy  industries.  But,
gradually, they  have also emerged  in the more traditional industries as the latter  have  incorporated
technological advances into their production and distribution processes. As a result, not only has there
been  a  considerably  higher  economic  growth  rate  than  in  the  past  two  decades,  but  there  is  also
increasingly firm empirical evidence that the rate  of expansion  of trend  productivity  may  have  been
stepped up.
However, the fact that technical progress may provide a sustained boost to growth capacity does not
mean,  as  the  experience  of  recent  years  in  the  United  States  clearly  shows,  that  macroeconomic
disequilibria  concurrently  disappear.  On  the  contrary,  the  favourable  economic  expectations  in  the
wake of technological progress prompted a strong rise in share prices and, by means of the low cost
of  capital  and  the  wealth  effect,  an  expansion  of  domestic  demand  which,  as  from  a  certain  point,
outpaced the growth rate of potential output, even under the most optimistic scenario of the effects of
the new economy.
The  results  of  these  maladjustments  have  been  the  notable  decline  in  US  household  net  financial
saving (to -4% of disposable income), the significant increase in corporate debt and, for the economy
as a whole, the widening of the already sizeable current-account deficit to 4.4% of GDP, albeit largely
financed by direct investment.
This build-up in disequilibria, against a background in which signs of upward pressures on prices were
also  beginning  to  emerge,  made  it  not  only  inevitable  but  also  desirable  that  there  should  be  a
slowdown in the pace of aggregate demand to rates compatible with the economy's growth potential.
And that necessarily entailed a temporary decline in productivity. The conclusion may thus be drawn
from recent experience that technical progress and the structural changes it entails do not mean the
disappearance or moderation of economic cycles. What technical progress does entail is an extension
to the limits of sustained non-inflationary growth capacity.
Differences in the euro area economy
As indicated, the  euro  area economy has been affected by  the deteriorating international  economic
climate and, in particular, by the sharp slowdown in the US economy. This is a natural consequence of
the growing interdependence of the various regional economic areas, brought about by the increase in
international trade and financial flows. Nonetheless, it would be mistaken to draw excessive parallels
between economies which, with their differing cyclical positions and structural characteristics, do not
share the same growth prospects.
In particular, many of the macroeconomic and financial disequilibria that have built up in the United
States are not be found in the euro area. Although investment has remained buoyant in recent years
in Europe, there is no sign of a surplus in capital goods being accumulated. Moreover, although the
European saving ratio has declined in recent years, it is still holding at appreciably higher levels than
in the United States. Finally, the private sector is in a less vulnerable wealth position, characterised by
lower relative debt and by less exposure to fluctuations in financial asset prices.
The sustained high private saving ratio and the fiscal consolidation drive undertaken by the euro area
Member States pursuant to the Stability and Growth Pact have helped the area as a whole achieve a
healthy external position. Foreseeably, these factors will mean that the euro area may sustain, in the
near  future,  a  growth  rate  close  to  potential,  albeit  subject  to  the  impact  of  developments  on  the
international front.
Against this background, it should come as no surprise that monetary policy has differed on each side
of the Atlantic. This discrepancy is, I believe, due not so much to differences in the statutory remit of
the  respective  central  banks  but  rather  to  economic  situations  departing  from  different  bases  and
requiring different measures.
To  meet  the  objective  of  increasing  the  economy's  capacity  for  growth  requires  the  contribution  of
strands  of  economic  policy  other  than  monetary  policy.  In  this  respect,  the  European  governments
have made headway in recent years in terms of fiscal consolidation, thereby increasing the room for
manoeuvre available in public finances to withstand adverse cyclical circumstances. Likewise, mention
should be made of the efforts to improve the workings of European product and factor markets, as part
BIS Review 57/2001
3
of the so-called Cardiff and Luxembourg processes. These have provided for significance advances in
market integration and efficiency.
Despite these achievements, the challenges facing the European economy in the medium term go far
beyond the scope of the economic policy measures and reforms applied to date.
Thus,  in  a  setting  where  public  finances  should  be  ready  to  withstand  the  foreseeable  budgetary
consequences of the  ageing of the  population,  effective additional measures to contain  expenditure
are generally needed to exert a positive and durable influence on public finances. Likewise, budgetary
priorities  must  be  established  to  favour  those  items,  such  as  education  or  R+D,  which  can  most
contribute to increasing growth potential in the medium term. In many countries there is ample room to
increase the efficiency of current tax systems. That said, in order to maximise their effectiveness, the
measures  aimed  at  improving  the  quality  of  public  finances  must  not  be  at  the  expense  of  fiscal
consolidation.
European structural policies must be pursued and deepened to achieve more integrated, flexible and
competitive markets and to remove the obstacles to the development and use of new technologies.
This  is  an  important  challenge  requiring  far-reaching  reforms  in  widely  differing  areas  such  as  the
education system, the financial markets and the mechanisms regulating economic activity.  Success
here is pivotal if Europe is to aspire to competing in the cutting-edge industries and to satisfactorily
increasing the economy's overall productivity.
Many of the factors indicated here are among the objectives set  out  by  the  European authorities in
conclusions  such  as  those  of  the  extraordinary  Lisbon  summit  last  year.  Notwithstanding,  an  air  of
fatigue is palpable in some countries in respect of fiscal consolidation and structural reform. The scale
and  significance  of  the  challenges  posed  require  that  governments  should  not  succumb  to  an
excessively short-termist vision that diminishes the momentum of the reforms needed  and  hampers
overall progress.
Spanish economy
For the Spanish economy, the year 2000 saw the culmination of a prolonged growth phase in which
further headway was made in real convergence with the other European countries.
The year closed with a real GDP growth rate of 4%, six-tenths of a point above that for the euro area
as a whole. Nonetheless, the growth rate of output moderated as the year unfolded as a result of the
appreciable slowdown in national demand, which was offset only partly by the improved contribution of
net  external  demand.  The  lesser  momentum  of  demand  was  particularly  evident  in  the  capital
investment component, which reacted promptly to the change in expectations.
Consumer spending also slowed amid the greater uncertainty, rising prices and the loss of financial
wealth.  But  it  is  still  holding  at  a  sustained  level  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  employment.  Lastly,
exports of goods and services have remained highly buoyant, despite lower growth in foreign markets.
This warrants reasonable optimism about the limited impact of the change in the international setting
on our economy. But this will largely depend on the correction of certain incipient imbalances which
gradually became apparent last year.
These imbalances have essentially been manifest in the price and cost differentials with the other euro
area  countries,  in  the  savings  shortage,  in  the  loss  of  steam  of  the  investment  process  and  in  the
increase in the economy's borrowing requirements. As can be seen, all these imbalances are those
characteristic  of  an  economy  which,  after  several  years  of  uninterrupted  growth,  is  at  an  advanced
stage  in  the  cycle  (ahead  of  most  of  our  trading  partners).  Their  correction  will  be  assisted  by  the
slowdown  in  demand  already  taking  place.  Indeed,  the  moderation  of  consumption  has  halted  the
decline in the saving ratio and the slowdown in imports has lessened the deterioration in the external
deficit.
Despite  their  eminently  cyclical  nature,  these  tensions  also  highlight  structural  shortcomings  which
continue to beset the  workings of the economy. The risks arising from these imbalances should  be
tackled through the economic policy instruments available, bearing in mind that monetary policy is no
longer available for domestic requirements.
Euro  area  monetary  conditions  have  proved  excessively  generous  for  the  Spanish  economy  in  the
light of the expansionary setting in which it was immersed and of the intensity of the external shock in
the form of oil price rises. True, the monetary stance of the Eurosystem was altered as the inflationary
4
BIS Review 57/2001
outlook  for  the  area  as  a  whole  changed.  But  real  interest  rates  remained  low  and  long-term  rates
declined. Moreover, the euro only ceased to depreciate well into the year, though it has subsequently
shown fresh signs of weakness.
The foregoing factors translated into a high rate of expansion of bank lending to the resident private
sector. This rate increased again  last  year  by  around 20%,  although  it has begun  to show signs of
easing  in  the  opening  months  of  the  year  2001.  Growth  was  particularly  marked  in  loans  for  the
purchase, construction and promotion of housing, against a backdrop of historically low real interest
rates and stiff competition among institutions in this market segment. Hence, in addition to boosting
domestic demand, the behaviour of credit has contributed to shaping a framework propitious to price
rises in the property sector.
These  relaxed  monetary  conditions  were  only  partly  countered  by  fiscal  policy,  which  adopted  a
moderately restrictive stance. Fiscal policy results were better than scheduled, which has enabled a
balanced budget to be forecast for the year ahead. Balanced public finances, which are so favourable
for  the  economy,  will  tend  to  become  entrenched  with  the  disciplining  procedures  envisaged  in  the
draft law on budgetary stability. Under this  legislation, any  extra budgetary policy leeway should  be
used to improve the general government financial balance.
Demand pressures contributed to inflationary tensions emerging. And these were accentuated by the
rise in oil prices. As a result, the 12-month growth rate of the consumer price index (CPI) stood at 4%
at the end of last year. In the early months of this year, the rate of increase of the CPI has stabilised at
around  this  figure,  as  oil  market  pressures  have  yet  to  disappear.  Adding  to  this  have  been  the
distortions in the market for meat products. At issue here in both cases are largely transitory factors
which  should  abate  in  the  coming  months.  This,  combined  with  the  deceleration  of  the  economy,
entails a significant change in the inflation outlook towards lower rates closer to the definition of price
stability formulated by the ECB, a definition which should continue to be the medium-term reference
for economic agents. There is a danger, however, that the feed-through of price rises to wages, via the
inflation  adjustment  clauses  that  do  not  exist  in  most  European  countries,  will  delay  the  expected
slowdown in consumer prices and, by exerting pressure on firms' costs, reduce the rate of growth and
of job creation.
The continuing inflation differential with the euro area average is a cause for concern insofar as it may
be indicative of problems of competitiveness. In the sectors (mainly manufacturing) most exposed to
foreign competition, excessive cost increases lead, because they cannot be fed through to prices, to
losses in profitability relative to foreign competitors. The sectors (mostly services) most sheltered from
competition can, by contrast, pass through cost increases in full  to prices and, indeed, harness the
buoyancy  of  demand  to  increase  margins,  thereby  contributing  to  maintaining  inflation  differentials.
This behaviour is harmful, above all, to the competitiveness of the economy as a whole, but also to the
development  of  those  industries  which  seek  to  draw  short-term  benefit  from  the  market  power
bestowed on them by restricted competition.
The Spanish economy  is in a  position to continue posting  a rate of expansion of around 3%  in  the
coming years, outpacing the euro area in this respect. But to achieve this it will be necessary to tackle
appropriately the imbalances that have emerged after a long phase of rapid growth. Failing to do this
would  jeopardise  the  economy's  competitiveness,  which  would  be  particularly  worrying  at  a  time  of
faltering world growth and heightening uncertainty.
Social  agents  must  adapt  their  behaviour  accordingly  to  the  patterns  of  nominal  stability  that  have
inspired EMU, extending the moderation and stability that have presided over the initial years of the
Monetary Union. It is thus a question of entrenching  a new culture  in  which  wage, rental  and other
income negotiations and price setting do not turn, as in the past, on a positive rate of inflation for the
economy as a whole but rather on supply and demand in each specific case.
The  year  2001  is  particularly  important  for  embedding  the  possibilities  of  growth  in  the  continuing
stability  that  has  made  the  current  phase  of  expansion  possible.  The  different  strands  of  economic
policy must thus strengthen the economy's flexibility and improve market workings.
From this encouraging though not risk-free outlook, I believe two issues may be highlighted. First, the
strengths and weaknesses of the job creation-intensive growth pattern we are following. And second,
the  importance  of  fostering  conditions  appropriate  to  increasing  medium-  and  long-term  growth
potential.
BIS Review 57/2001
5
Employment-intensive growth pattern
The growth pattern of the  Spanish economy in recent  years has  been characterised  by  intense  job
creation and, consequently, by a moderate increase in apparent labour productivity. During the period
1997-2000, real GDP ran at an average annual growth rate of 4.1%, and employment at 3.5%. The
increase in labour productivity was thus 0.6%. These figures contrast with those of the previous phase
from  1980  to  1996,  in  which  the  growth  rates  of  output  and  employment  were  2.5%  and  0.6%,
respectively, making the productivity increase 1.9%.
For an economy such as Spain's, where the labour factor is still under-utilised, it seems advisable to
follow  a job creation-intensive  growth pattern,  even  though  this  involves  a  phase  of  scant  apparent
labour productivity gains. This is provided that rates of investment and innovation are high and that the
foundations are laid for subsequent improvement. Indeed, this is what occurred in the US economy.
The  case  of  the  US  economy  is  illustrative  in  this  respect.  As  will  be  recalled,  the  United  States
underwent,  until  the  mid-nineties,  a  period  in  which  its  growth  was  based  on  employment,  posting
labour  productivity  rates  of  increase  which  scarcely  exceeded  1%  per  annum.  The  flexibility  of  its
labour  market  provided  for  greater  relative  growth  of  its  labour-intensive  services  sector,  at  the
expense of traditional manufacturing industry where labour requirements per unit of output are less.
The substantial labour productivity gains, the outcome of the strong and persistent rate of investment
and  the  diffusion  of  technological  innovation,  only  became  clearly  apparent  when  the  US  economy
reached a situation of virtually full employment.
If we compare this process with what has occurred in Europe in past decades, the greater rigidity of
European  labour  markets  can  be  seen  to  have  led  investment  to  be  channelled  towards  relatively
capital-intensive industries, slowing the expansion of the services industry. In fact, the services sector
employs 60% of European labour today compared with 76% in the United States. The lesser capacity
of Europe to generate employment translated into high unemployment rates (double that of the United
States, on average) and into a relatively higher increase in apparent labour productivity, at that time, of
over  1.5%. Consequently,  the European economies, and Spain among them, are currently facing  a
phase that the United States has already left behind, and one that should be geared to reducing the
prevailing high unemployment rate.
The  challenge  consists,  precisely,  of  squaring  the  current  job  creation-intensive  processes  with
increases in investment incorporating recent technological advances and providing for a better use of
productive  resources.  The  productivity  gains  arising  from  this  process  will  become  effective  and
manifest,  with  increasing  intensity,  as  current  unemployment  is  absorbed.  In  turn,  low  productivity
makes the current growth phase particularly vulnerable to wage increases which, as they cannot be
offset, pass through to greater unit labour costs.
Increasing growth potential
The temporary  advisability  of  following  a  job  creation-intensive  growth  model  should  not  lead  to  an
underestimation of the importance of boosting the factors underpinning the increase in the economy's
growth  potential,  in  which  connection  the  full  and  effective  use  of  the  resources  available  does  not
suffice. It is also necessary to increase such resources quantitatively and qualitatively via investment
in  human,  productive  and  technological  capital.  In  this  process  entrepreneurial  innovation  and  the
incorporation of the new communications and information technologies play a pivotal role.
This will require flexible economic structures, whereby the policy of reforms in various areas must be
pursued. The labour market is a case in point. Following the recent reforms, the focus should be on an
efficient co-ordination of collective bargaining so that wages may grow in a differentiated manner and
thus adapt to the specific conditions of firms. In turn, this differentiated wage growth will spur labour
mobility across firms, industries and regions with different employment conditions. Likewise, policies
aimed  at  increasing  labour  market  participation,  especially  of  those  groups  traditionally  outside  the
market, should be reinforced. Reform in the market for land use, which is characterised by a lack of
competition  and  transparency,  would  also  help  lift  obstacles  to  inter-regional  labour  mobility.  In
education, investment in vocational training and in improving  workers' skills must be stepped  up. In
particular, their adaptation to the new technologies is vital if the labour shortages in this area are to be
reduced.  Finally,  the  stock  of  both  private  and  public  productive  capital  must  be  increased  through
maintaining high rates of investment, equipping the country with the infrastructure and capital needed
for a sustained increase in productivity.
6
BIS Review 57/2001
It  is  thus  a  matter  of  seeing  through  the  policy  of  reforms  and  the  guidelines  recently  approved  by
Spanish  economic  policymakers.  This  is  of  paramount  importance  for  continuing  the  process  of
convergence with the per capita income levels of the euro area, a process supported to date mainly by
the robustness of employment. As we approach European rates of employment, continuing cuts in the
differences will only be achieved if the rise in our productivity exceeds that of the euro area.
In the medium run, we should seek to attain a mix of buoyant job creation and high productivity rates.
That  means  sustaining  a  high  growth  rate  in  a  durable  manner  without  this  giving  rise  to  upward
pressures in costs, margins and prices. But this is only possible if we have an economy whose market
workings and institutions are much more flexible than at present.
Financial stability
Moving on to financial stability issues, one of the salient phenomena of recent years is the growing
significance of financial markets and their ever greater interrelatedness to the real economy.
In Europe, the development of capital markets is leading to a more balanced banking-market model.
Household share ownership in the European Union has increased in recent years: whereas in 1995
they accounted for 26% of financial assets, this proportion had risen to 37% in 1999. And to this figure
we  must  add  indirect  holdings  via  mutual  funds,  pension  funds  and  other  forms  of  collective
investment, the popularity of which has increased visibly.
One  immediate  consequence  of  these  changes  has  been  to  tighten  the  linkage  between  financial
markets and the real sector. The fact that a growing portion of wealth is held in the form of securities,
whose  price  can  fluctuate  24  hours  a  day  on  the  world  markets,  has  evident  implications  for  the
dynamics of disposable income and consumption. In addition to this direct channel is that relating to
the cost of capital and its influence on investment by firms. Lastly, the securities markets also play a
key  role  in  the  formation  of  consumer  and  entrepreneurial  expectations.  Thanks  to  the  constant
information  flows  from  these  markets,  these  agents  continually  adjust  their  assessment  of  the
economic environment.
The  transmission  channels  from  the  financial  sector  to  the  real  sector  are,  therefore,  increasingly
flexible, rapid and complex. Two relevant and interrelated issues have arisen from discussions on this
area: the first is the extent to which the volatility of financial markets is being transmitted, also more
intensely  and  rapidly,  to  the  real  economy;  and  the  second  questions  whether  financial  markets
amplify fluctuations in the real economy. Expressed otherwise, considering both issues in conjunction,
what is being discussed is the extent to which the behaviour of the financial markets exacerbates the
volatility and cyclicality of the real economy.
Regarding the first issue, there are recent examples pointing in opposite directions. There have been
episodes, such as the Asian crisis, involving the intense transmission of financial turbulence to the real
sector. However, it should also be acknowledged that the developed economies have shown a notable
degree of resistance to certain financial disturbances. In this case, the stable course of real variables
against such a volatile financial background should largely be attributed to the following factors. First,
to the existence of healthy financial systems with sufficient room for manoeuvre to absorb the impact
of varying shocks. Next, to a greater diversification of holders of financial instruments and of financial
operators.  And  finally,  to  the  prompt  reaction  of  the  authorities.  Conversely,  when  these  conditions
were not present, pressures in the financial sector have tended to be transmitted relatively intensely to
the real sector.
The possible explanatory factors of this potential amplification of the cycle in the financial sector are
many-faceted and complex. These include most notably: heightened competition in the banking sector
and in financial markets, which in an upturn leads to riskier strategies that are only corrected when the
rise  in  bad  debts  highlights  their  consequences;  a  tendency  of  economic  agents  to  over-react  to
changes in their environment; herding, on occasions, which reinforces trends; and the use of common
assessment  and  risk  management  tools  and  a  short-termist  view  of  "shareholder  value".  All  the
foregoing  induce  sharper  fluctuations  in  asset  prices.  Prudential  regulations  may  also  occasionally
have proven conducive to an excessive emphasis on the short term when assessing risks.
What can the authorities do to counter these tendencies? In an area still open to discussion, several
options  present  themselves.  Firstly,  it  is  essential  to  encourage  within  financial  institutions  a  better
knowledge of the risks assumed, a long-term orientation to analyses and, consequently, more prudent
management.  Secondly,  it  is  advisable  to  promote  greater  heterogeneity  among  financial  market
BIS Review 57/2001
7
players to avoid mimetic behaviour. Thirdly, a better understanding and evaluation of the behaviour of
liquidity on markets is called for, on the part of both market participants and supervisors. Finally, it is
for  the  regulatory  authorities  to  introduce  rules  that  do  not  promote  short-termist  strategies,  but
encourage counter-cyclical behaviour. This matter is particularly pertinent in the discussion of the new
minimum capital regulation prepared by the Basel committee which, owing to its greater sensitivity to
risk, is liable to introduce elements of cyclicality.
The statistical provision, introduced for prudential reasons in the year 2000 by the Banco de España,
is  in  keeping  with  the  wish  to  subdue  cyclical  behaviour.  This  provision  draws  on  the  fundamental
principle that institutions should begin to recognise the expected losses associated with a loan as from
the  very  moment  it  is  extended,  as  there  is  a  non-nil  probability  of  default.  A  provision  of  this  type
introduces  counter-cyclical  elements  in  the  behaviour  of  credit  institutions  by  favouring  a  more
accurate evaluation of loan portfolios.
Before discussing developments on the financial markets last year, I wish to reiterate the idea that a
healthy and dynamic economy is only possible with solvent financial institutions and resilient financial
markets.  In  Europe,  in  addition  to  the  broad  issues  mentioned  earlier,  attaining  this  objective
necessarily requires firm progress and resolve in integrating financial markets.
Financial markets
The introduction of the euro is a catalyst for market competition and integration in the euro area. But
there are still obstacles preventing the process of integration of financial markets from moving at the
desired  speed.  Perhaps  the  two  extreme  examples  are,  on  one  hand,  the  money  market,  which  is
illustrative  of  an  integrated  European  market;  and,  on  the  other,  the  retail  banking  market,  as  an
example of scant integration.
Two initiatives have sought to tackle the limited headway made towards the single financial market.
The  first  is  the  European  Commission's  Financial  Services  Action  Plan,  which  has  given  political
impetus to legislative changes covering securities markets, pensions and investor safeguards, with the
aim  of  providing  a  durable  legislative  underpinning  for  the  single  financial  markets.  The  second
initiative, derived from the difficulty encountered in implementing the aforementioned Action Plan,  is
the so-called Lamfalussy report. Given  how slow and costly  the  promulgation  of  directives  is  in  the
securities  field,  this  report  proposes  a  genuine  regulatory  revolution.  This  will  involve  promoting
directives  whose  technical  aspects  can  be  amended  by  the  European  Commission  on  the  basis  of
recommendations from a committee of European representatives, further to the opinion of securities
supervisors. This outline, which could be used in the future for other financial areas, is considered a
sound means for achieving a truly integrated single financial market.
With these matters pending, integration among the various European financial markets continued in
the year 2000. While the horizon was clouded by the odd failure such as the breakdown of the merger
talks between the London and Frankfurt stock exchanges, other European securities markets entered
into alliances in the areas of both trading and of registration, clearing and settlement. In Spain, the
steps under way to integrate both the trading platform and the clearing and settlement systems may,
in  the  near  future,  lead  to  a  more  efficient  and  better  prepared  unified  market.  With  these
arrangements, Spain can successfully operate in an industry of great importance for our economy and
one which, in the future, is destined to undergo far-reaching change internationally.
The  Banco  de  España  has  always  encouraged  moves  towards  the  integration  of  the  dispersed
Spanish financial markets. Consequently, it supports and participates in such initiatives, which seek to
infuse  our  securities  markets  with  greater  competitiveness  and  to  give  a  more  prominent  role,  in
market management, to the institutions with the most significant trading interests on such markets.
Market integration in Spain is not only a means for ensuring a more efficient allocation of savings flows
towards more productive investment. In a single financial market it is not just banking institutions which
compete but the markets themselves. The future of the markets will hinge on their understanding the
deep-seated changes in their operating environment and the competition facing them ahead.
Before  moving  on  to  the  Spanish  banking  system,  let  me  briefly  refer  to  banks  in  Europe.  In  clear
contrast  to  the  integration  of  money  and  securities  markets,  European  retail  banking  remains
fragmented. And in recent years the burdens imposed by regulatory environments and supervisors on
institutions wishing to expand their activities have been apparent. This is a situation that runs counter
to the undertaking to achieve a single financial market and one which must therefore be tackled.
8
BIS Review 57/2001
Banking system
As  regards  the  banking  system,  Spanish  institutions  reaffirmed  their  maturity  and  performed
favourably  in  the  year  2000  against  a  somewhat  more  uncertain  international  backdrop  and  with  a
growing  degree  of  competition.  Nonetheless,  the  challenges  ahead  and  the  lower  expectations  of
growth called for a careful design of the most appropriate responses in the medium and long-term.
Mention should first be made of the 13% growth of bank balance sheets, on consolidated data, with
highly different performances in business at home and that abroad. While the banking system grew by
around 6% in the domestic market, foreign business climbed strikingly by 48% as a result of foreign
bank acquisitions. As earlier mentioned, there has been sharp growth in lending, offset in part by a
reduction  in  public  sector  indebtedness  to  banks.  The  remaining  portion  has  been  financed  by  a
notable  increase  in  deposits,  in  particular  time  deposits  (thanks  to  the  favourable  impact  of  the
personal  income  tax  reform),  by  a  14%  increase  in  capital  and,  finally,  by  resorting  to  euro-area
interbank market debt and to securities issues on international markets. Into the year 2001, the new
State  Treasury  management  system,  jointly  set  up  by  the  Directorate  General  of  the  Treasury  and
Financial  Policy  and  the  Banco  de  España,  has  provided  a  new  source  of  liquidity  for  Spanish
institutions, enabling them to reduce their indebtedness on the European interbank market by around
20%.
The expansion in business has allowed adequate levels of profitability to be sustained. This has been
possible thanks not only to entities shoring up their net interest income, after it had been narrowing
sharply for years, but also to their growing resort to commission charges. Against this, the downward
stickiness  of  operating  expenses  has  continued  and  remains  the  main  weakness  in  our  credit
institutions' profit and loss account.
The growth of business and the results on the profit and loss account have come about at a time of
capital soundness at most institutions, with default rates at historical lows.
That said, the forces for change in financial systems remain present, and that poses a challenge to
institutions and supervisors alike. There are several points for consideration here.
The first concerns the  heightening  competition  characterising  both  the  markets  for  deposits  and  for
loans. In the face of this, institutions have sought to avoid pressure on margins through the search for
higher profitability or, what amounts to the same, through adopting riskier strategies.
A  second  reflection  relates  to  the  heterogeneity  of  the  various  banks'  steps  to  seek  out  higher
profitability.  While  some  have  opted  to  expand  their  balance  sheet,  albeit  at  the  cost  of  narrower
margins, others have preferred to contain their activity and focus efforts on improving margins. In other
cases, industrial holdings have been the preferred means in the search for higher returns. Reaching
an optimum size via mergers and acquisitions has been another of the methods chosen. Lastly, the
internationalisation  of  activity  has  been  one  response  geared  not  only  to  attaining  greater  size,  but
also to gaining access to less mature financial environments, with more favourable net interest income
prospects. The increase in risk and the diverse solutions adopted, according to the particular strategy
involved, highlight the need for all institutions to make every effort to improve their management and
risk control systems.
The third reflection refers to loan defaults. Lending in Spain has been growing at a very high rate in
recent years. A large portion of the lending portfolio is thus relatively recent and has been extended at
the top of the economic cycle. It is often and rightly said that default problems are generated during an
economic upswing, when excessive optimism leads institutions to relax lending policies.
The figures for actual defaults and for specific provisions do not reflect appropriately the risks arising
from latent defaults in lending portfolios, which have grown most rapidly in recent years. This is the
reason  for  the  introduction  of  the  statistical  provision,  which  seeks  to  encourage  better  risk
management  and  to  approximate  the  average  provision  needed  throughout  a  cycle  on  an  adjusted
historical  basis.  Its  impact  on  profit  and  loss  accounts,  by  reducing  profits  at  times  of  plenty  as  at
present, and restoring them at times of high loan losses, is significant.
There are two further aspects of financial institutions' risk profile which merit discussion. The first is
credit  risk  concentration.  Institutions  must monitor  exposures  closely,  both  at  the  level  of  economic
groupings and at the sectoral level, and their managers should pay particular attention to appropriate
diversification.
The second is costs. If institutions are to have a healthy profit and loss account in the future, efforts to
rationalise and cut structural costs must remain a priority for managers. Such rationalisation is not only
BIS Review 57/2001
9
needed  in  costs  associated  with  the  network;  it  must  also  encompass  a  review  of  central  services
costs.  These  cuts  are  fully  compatible  with  the  ongoing  reinforcement  of  such  areas  as  risk
management, the adoption of new technologies, enhanced service quality, etc.
The  final  reflection  refers  to  the  quality  of  capital.  Spanish  credit  institutions  have  been  issuing
preference shares with growing frequency. The resort to preference shares is logical and acceptable,
provided  that  the  levels  involved  do  not  impair  the  quality  of  capital  and  provided  that,  at  the  retail
distribution  stage,  factors  such  as  the  potential  future  costs  in  terms  of  reputation  (which  are
sometimes so difficult to gauge) are taken into account.
To conclude this section, I shall refer to how the ongoing change towards a more complex operating
environment for institutions is affecting the definition of the regulatory and accounting framework at the
international level. There have recently been two major initiatives in this area, both with far-reaching
implications  for  bank  management  and  strategy:  the  new  Basel  capital  accord,  and  the  process  of
implementation of International Accounting Standards in the European Union.
The  main  features  of  the  new  proposal  of  the  Basel  Banking  Supervision  Committee  on  capital
adequacy, which replaces the 1988 capital accord that was in force in over one hundred countries, are
as follows. First, to acknowledge a greater differentiation between the different levels of credit risk, to
consider a selection of alternative methods for calculating capital and to attribute greater importance to
banks' internal systems, introducing incentives for better risk management and control.
Second,  and  thanks  to  greater  sensitivity  to  the  risks  assumed,  the  new  Basel  proposal  allows  for
readier convergence between economic capital (the level  of capital considered appropriate by bank
managers and shareholders) and regulatory capital (that required by the supervisor).
Finally, the aspect of the new Basel Accord I consider most important is the integration into a single
package of four basic elements: several capital calculation systems; quality of management, stressing
the  need  for  sound  internal  risk  management  systems;  system  validation  by  the  supervisor,  being
respectful of banks' responsibility for management; and lastly, transparency, so that the market takes
informed action.
I  believe  the  New  Accord,  currently  at  the  consultative  stage,  marks  a  step  forward.  It  merits  our
support, although work must continue so that the calibration of its parameters may result in meeting
the objectives set, namely to maintain an overall level of capital and to provide proper incentives.
Adapting to the new accord is a demanding task for all credit institutions, in whatever country. But I
believe the soundness of Spanish institutions makes them among the best positioned for this change.
The challenges posed by the new Basel agreement to supervisors are on no less a scale than those
faced by banks. Their implementation, scheduled for 2004, entails a new regulatory capital framework
for  supervisors  which  will  be  much  more  demanding  than  the  current  one  in  respect  of  human
resources and technical knowledge, making it necessary to objectify qualitative elements of banks and
their systems.
Given the range of regulations and supervisory practices at the international level, and the need for a
level  playing  field  accommodating  not  only  different  countries  and  sizes  but  also  investment  and
commercial  banks,  the  new  accord  requires  a  balanced  design  and  increased  international
co-ordination among supervisors.
As regards the introduction of the International Accounting Standards (IAS) in the European Union, the
aim  is  to  promote  the  convergence  of  accounting  practices  across  the  European  countries.  This  is
certainly a desirable goal, which should  pave the  way for progress towards the creation of a single
financial market. The practical experience of banking supervision over the last twenty years in Spain
has demonstrated that accounting regulation has been a fundamental element in achieving a solid and
stable financial system and efficient supervision. Moreover, accounting standards based on prudential
criteria  and  conservative  principles  are  not  only  essential  for  prudential  supervision,  but  also  for
individual investors, who thereby have a guarantee that the information they receive is well-founded.
This  is  why  it  is  considered  extremely  important  that  accounting  principles  be  reconciled  with  good
banking practices, with modern risk management techniques and with the nature and time horizon of
all types of banking operation.
10
BIS Review 57/2001
The Banco de España in the new setting
The changes in the Spanish economy over the last 15 years have altered its position in the world. The
data  on  the  growing  international  presence  of  Spanish  corporations,  the  increase  in  the  financial
resources flowing out of Spain, in particular towards Latin America, and Spain's greater presence in
international  economic  institutions  are  revealing.  All  this  is  turning  Spain  into  a  leading  player  with
increasing weight in the globalisation process.
The  development  of  the  role  of  the  Banco  de  España  in  future  will  turn  on  the  new  institutional
framework  deriving  from  Monetary  Union  (loss  of  monetary  sovereignty  and  membership  of  the
Eurosystem) and also on the new position of the Spanish economy in the international setting.
The objectives and responsibilities assigned by law to the Banco de España can be grouped into two
major categories: those relating to economic stability and those relating to financial stability, to which
should  be  added  important  additional  functions  such  as  the  management  of  reserves,  banknote
issuance, etc.
Among  the  activities  relating  to  economic  stability  are  those  arising  from  membership  of  the
Eurosystem, and the functions of monitoring, analysing and advising on the Spanish economy. The
latter will continue to be a fundamental part of the tasks entrusted to the Bank.
The  monitoring  and  analysis  of  the  Spanish  economy  traditionally  carried  out  by  the  Banco  the
España, as a basis for discharging its responsibilities, has acquired a new dimension with membership
of the Eurosystem. In the new setting, investigation and research have a twofold purpose. First, they
should  contribute  to  the  consolidation  of  a  solid  analytical  framework  for  monetary  policy
decision-making  and  to  the  constant  improvement  of  the  strategy,  instruments  and  procedures
employed by the Eurosystem to perform its functions. And second, they should inform the analysis of
the implications for the Spanish economy of the single monetary policy.
This  has  required  new  subjects  to  be  tackled  and  traditional  issues  to  be  viewed  from  a  fresh
perspective. Among the new concerns included on the research agenda I should like to highlight three.
First,  the  relations  between  the  national  economies  that  make  up  the  euro  area,  including  their
similarities and divergences, the particularities of their monetary policy transmission mechanisms, and
the national authorities' room for manoeuvre.
Second,  the  problems  involved  in  adequately  measuring  inflation,  a  key  variable  both  for
decision-taking and for the behaviour of agents, which may be distorted by an underestimation of the
improvements  in  quality  incorporated  into  goods  and  services.  This  distortion  may  be  particularly
significant in the case of products subject to continuous technical improvements, such as IT products,
capital  equipment,  means  of  transport,  etc.  In  this  respect,  we  are  collaborating  with  the  National
Institute of Statistics in an investigation of the techniques that could be used to correct this distortion in
certain Spanish sectors.
Third,  the  information  relating  to  the  financial  stocks  and  flows  of  the  Spanish  economy  and  the
behaviour of the various institutional sectors is being continuously improved.
In any event, although constant reflection is necessary in our daily work, we should not forget that the
main objective of all analytical work is to improve the tools for dealing with risks and problems in the
medium term. Examples of these are the conditions necessary to increase productivity and potential
growth, or the financial sustainability of pensions, which depends so heavily on productivity itself and
on the efficiency of the labour market.
The process of internationalisation that the Spanish economy has embarked upon in recent years has
gone beyond the European sphere to reach other areas including, in particular, Latin America. This
increasing international presence of Spain has made it all the more pressing and necessary to extend
and raise the profile of the Banco de España's participation  in the main international economic and
financial fora. It is here that issues are regularly discussed and decided which, due to their significance
and their  global  repercussions,  are  so  important  to  Spain's  interests.  This  is  why  the  functions  and
responsibilities  relating  to  the  analysis  of  international  economic  and  financial  issues  have  been
strengthened,  as  part  of  a  determined  strategy  to  develop  the  Banco  de  España's  international
relations.
A good example of this growing international presence is our membership of the Basel Committee on
Banking  Supervision,  Here  initiatives  are  being  discussed  that  are  of  great  importance  for  our
supervisory  activity,  which  I  have  already  mentioned  and  which  tie  in  with  the  second  group  of
activities of the Bank, which could be grouped under the general heading of financial stability. Included
BIS Review 57/2001
11
to 
framework  are 
factors  contributing 
here are tasks relating to banking regulation and supervision and to the payment system, and powers
in relation to securities markets, especially for public debt.
The increasing complexity and diversity of new products, the constant evolution of the risks incurred
by  institutions,  technological  innovation,  the  opening  of  previously  unknown  distribution  channels,
concentration via mergers, acquisitions and alliances, international expansion and the changes in the
international  regulatory 
the  growing  complexity  and
sophistication of banking business. These changes are obliging  institutions to  strive  continuously  to
adapt and improve their management and control systems, and this naturally has to be reflected in the
area of supervision.
In an increasingly complex and international operating environment, supervision should not be based
exclusively  on  traditional  rules  and  circulars  It  must  also  be  capable  of  incorporating  more  flexible
elements, including recommendations and codes of good practice. A good example is provided by the
institutions' areas of corporate governance and risk control. The Banco de España is encouraging all
credit institutions, whether or not they are listed on securities markets, to establish and comply with
codes of good governance.  It  is also stimulating the adoption of modern risk management systems
that have the support of top management and are understood and used integrally and rationally by the
whole organisation.
As regards prudential supervision, in my opinion several features are necessary in order for it to be
able  to  face  the  present  challenges.  First,  I  think  that  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  remit  will
increasingly be geared towards stimulating the sound management of institutions, giving particularly
favourable treatment to risk management structures, systems and culture. Second, it must be capable
of combining traditional supervision techniques, based on the valuation of assets and examination of
accounts,  with  new  techniques  of  a  more  qualitative  nature,  based  on  the  so-called  risk  approach.
Third, and depending on the priorities arising from the risk profile of the institutions, it must continue to
combine the remote monitoring of institutions  with  on-site  inspections.  Fourth,  it  will  be  essential  to
maintain  a  high  degree  of  co-ordination  with  the  supervisors  of  other  financial  sectors  and  of  other
countries, both through bilateral relations and through multilateral fora. Fifth, it must provide incentives
for  a  level  of  transparency  sufficient  for  markets  to  be  able  to  perform  their  scrutiny  role.  Finally,
investment  in  technological  resources  and  human  capital  will  be  fundamental.  All  this  assumes  the
development of deeper collaboration and dialogue with the institutions since, respecting the autonomy
of  their  responsibilities,  supervisors  and  supervised  share  an  interest  in  achieving  stable  and  solid
financial systems.
This  is  the  background  against  which  the  Banco  de  España  has  been  striving  to  strengthen  its
supervision techniques and to supplement the traditional methods with dynamic analysis of the quality
of management and of the mechanisms for the assumption, monitoring and control of risks by credit
institutions.  Without  abandoning  our  style  of  supervision,  based  on  close,  direct  and  continuous
contact  with  institutions,  we  have  embarked  upon  the  task  of  deepening  the  analysis  of  qualitative
aspects and of control. Such analysis was already conducted, but it will now be more systematic and
more closely integrated into the supervisory process.
In order to achieve this improvement in the supervisory approach, we are formulating, at the Banco de
España,  a  methodology  that  we  have  called  "SABER".  Besides  being  the  Spanish  acronym  for
supervision of banking activity under the risk approach [Supervisión de la Actividad Bancaria bajo el
Enfoque Riesgo], it indicates that the aim of the supervisor  is not only to  obtain the most complete
picture  possible  of  the  current  situation  of  each  institution,  but  also  to  be  able  to  make  the  best
possible prediction of its future evolution.
The Banco de España is also aware that the new circumstances require greater transparency on the
part  of  supervisors.  In  this  respect,  the  Banco  de  España  is  setting  up  additional  channels  of
communication and dialogue on supervision procedures and on the currently effective and proposed
regulatory and supervisory measures.
As  regards  payment  systems,  following  the  setting  up  of  TARGET,  the  Trans-European  payment
system managed by the central banks of the European Union, of which our Settlement Service forms
part, the Banco de España is focusing on other less operational aspects that are, notwithstanding, of
no less interest. I should like to mention specifically two: the oversight of payment systems, especially
in relation to real-time settlement in the main currencies and to the new payment instruments based
on electronic media, and co-operation with other countries, basically in Latin America.
12
BIS Review 57/2001
Replacement of national currencies by the euro
The introduction of the new euro notes and coins is an enormously important political project. For the
first time since the advent of Monetary Union, the physical euro will reach all sectors of the Union's
population. It is also an unprecedented logistical task, which has required the constant attention of the
Eurosystem and the Banco de España in co-ordination with the Ministry of the Economy and the credit
institutions and other sectors involved. Over the last twelve months a plan has been drawn up for the
distribution of euro notes and coins. Its ultimate purpose is to place the notes and coins close to their
ultimate users (industry, shops and the general public), so that a large number of transactions can be
carried out in euro from the beginning of January 2002 and the exchange process can be completed
by the end of February, as planned.
The production and distribution of notes and coins is proceeding satisfactorily and to schedule. The
National  Mint  is  complying  scrupulously  with  its  timetable  and,  to  ensure  smooth  distribution,  the
Banco de España has already begun to move the thousands of tons of notes and coins from central
depots to each of its branches in the provinces.
The  ultimate  success  of  the  process  will  depend  upon  the  collaboration  of  everyone  involved:  the
Ministry  of  Economy,  the  Banco  de  España  and  the  financial  system,  each  conducting  effectively,
within its sphere of responsibility, the logistical process; employers, especially in the distributive sector,
assuming  the  importance  of  the  historic  moment  and  acting  high-mindedly;  and  finally,  consumers,
endeavouring to adapt, being vigilant, and rewarding those firms and products that best perform the
change.
The Banco de España, like the other banks belonging to the European System of Central Banks, is
conducting a campaign explaining the new notes and coins in order to educate the public about the
process  of  exchange  and  the  technical  and  security  aspects  of  the  new  notes.  This  campaign  is
concentrating  especially  on  the  most  vulnerable  sectors  of  the  population,  such  as  the  elderly  and
children.
Throughout this – I fear already lengthy – speech, I have tried to stress certain features of the Spanish
economy and some of the challenges it faces, as well as the important role to be played by economic
agents. In the financial sphere, I have insisted that a healthy and dynamic economy is only possible
with  solvent  financial  institutions  and  strong  financial  markets.  Let  me  finish  by  acknowledging  our
commitment to these ideas of economic and financial stability.
When I took up my post in July last year, on behalf of the Deputy Governor and myself I asked – and
gave thanks in advance – for the collaboration and dedication of all the staff of the Banco de España.
The ensuing months have been an intense period during which the collaboration then requested has
been  exemplary.  Today  I  wish  to  repeat  my  request  for  collaboration  and  once  more  express  my
gratitude in advance. I think that we are all aware of the major task performed hitherto by the Banco
de España and that, for this work to continue, it is necessary to adapt to the new circumstances. I am
sure that between us all we shall manage to implement the necessary changes successfully.
Finally, I wish to convey my gratitude and recognition to each and every one of the members of the
Governing  Council  for  their  valuable  contributions  to  the  continuity  of  the  institution  at  the  time  of
change of  Governor  and  Deputy  Governor,  and  for  their  collaboration  and  support  during  the  initial
months of my term of office.
BIS Review 57/2001
13
