Laurence H Meyer: The securities activities of banks
Testimony of Mr Laurence H Meyer, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve
System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial 
the
Subcommittee  on  Capital  Markets,  Insurance  and  Government  Sponsored  Enterprises  of  the
Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, 2 August 2001.
Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit  and 
 I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  present  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  on  the  interim  final  rules
issued  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC  or  Commission)  to  implement  the  bank
securities provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act). The manner in which these rules are
implemented is extremely important to banks and their customers and well deserves your attention.
As the banking agencies detailed in our official comment to the Commission on the rules, we believe
they are, in a number of critical areas, inconsistent with the language and purposes of the GLB Act,
and  create  an  overly  complex,  burdensome,  and  unnecessary  regulatory  regime.  The  rules  as
currently  drafted  would  disrupt  the  traditional  operations  of  banks  and  impose  significant  and
unwarranted costs on banks and their customers.
In our comment letter, the banking agencies also objected to the Commission adopting the rules in
final form and making them effective beginning October 1 of this  year. The banking agencies urged
the Commission to treat the interim final rules as proposed rules and to give banks sufficient time after
modified  rules  are  adopted  by  the  Commission  to  implement  systems  and  make  other  changes
necessary to comply with the rules.
We support the Commission's recent actions to extend the public comment period on the rules until
September  4,  2001,  and  to  extend  the  effective  date  of  the  interim  final  rules  and  the  statutory
provisions  that  they  implement  until  at  least  May  12,  2002.  We  also  support  the  Commission's
statement that it will further extend the effective date for an appropriate period of time to provide banks
with  a  sufficient  transition  period  to  come  into  compliance  with  any  revised  rules  the  Commission
ultimately adopts. We believe these procedural steps are both necessary and appropriate to ensure
that the  public comment process, which  is so critical to the  development  of  fair  and  effective  rules,
allows for meaningful comment and the collection of much needed information regarding the practical
effects of the SEC's rules on the traditional activities of banks. Most importantly, we look forward to
engaging  in  a  constructive  dialogue  with  the  Commission  and  its  staff  and  to  assisting  them  in
modifying the substance of the rules in a manner that both gives effect to the Congress' intent  and
does not disrupt the traditional customer relationships and activities of banks.
Before highlighting some of the most significant provisions of  the  interim  final  rules  that  we  believe
must be modified, a brief background of the treatment of banks under the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 and the purposes of the GLB Act's bank securities provisions is useful.
History of the bank exception and bank securities activities
In  1934,  the  Congress  first  adopted  a  federal  scheme  requiring  all  entities  that  act  as  securities
brokers  or  dealers  to  register  with  the  SEC.  The  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  however,
specifically exempted all banks from the definitions of "broker" and "dealer" and, accordingly, did not
require  banks  providing  securities  services  to  their  customers  to  register  with  the  SEC  as  broker-
dealers. Although the ability of banks to underwrite, deal in, and purchase securities was limited by the
Glass-Steagall  Act  of  1933,  banks  continued  to  have  the  ability  to  buy  and  sell  securities  for  the
account  of  their  customers  and  to  buy  and  sell  securities  for  their  own  account  when  specifically
authorized by law. The Congress recognized that these permissible securities activities were already
supervised and examined by the appropriate federal and state banking authorities and that subjecting
these activities to an additional layer of regulation was not necessary or appropriate. In fact, one of the
primary purposes of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 was to subject nonbank stockbrokers and
securities  traders  to  the  type  of  government  supervision  and  examination  that  was  already  applied
under the banking laws to banks.
Long before 1934 and since,  banks  have  offered  their  customers  securities  services  in  a  variety  of
circumstances in connection with their banking activities. For example, banks have long bought and
BIS Review 70/2001
1
sold securities for their trust and fiduciary customers. These services are an essential part of the trust
and fiduciary operations of banks-operations that have long been considered a core banking function.
Banks that have discretionary investment authority over a trust or fiduciary account purchase and sell
securities  for  the  account  to  ensure  that  the  account  is  properly  diversified  and  managed  in  the
manner  required  by  the  governing  trust  agreement  and  applicable  fiduciary  principles.  Banks  also
provide  investment  advice  concerning  securities,  real  estate,  and  other  assets  to  non-discretionary
fiduciary accounts, and have long been able to execute securities transactions for these accounts.
Another core banking function is providing custody and safekeeping services. The five largest global
custodians are banks, and banks, both large and small, act as trusted custodians for the securities,
real estate, and other assets of customers. One of the most recognizable custody services provided
by  banks  is  for  Individual  Retirement  Accounts  (IRAs).  Under  applicable  Internal  Revenue  Service
regulations,  banks  may  act  as  custodians  for  IRAs,  and  bank-offered  custodial  IRAs  provide
consumers throughout the nation with a convenient and economical way to buy and sell securities for
retirement purposes on a tax-deferred basis. Banks, as part of their customary banking activities and
as an accommodation to their customers, also have long permitted customers that hold securities in
custody accounts at the bank to buy and sell securities related to the account. These services allow
customers to avoid the unnecessary expense of having to establish a separate securities account at a
broker-dealer  to  effect  such  trades.  Other  securities  services  traditionally  offered  by  banks  include
"sweeping"  deposit  funds  into  overnight  investment  vehicles,  such  as  money  market  mutual  funds,
privately  placing  securities  for  customers,  and  providing  transfer  agency  services  to  issuers  and
benefit plans.
Banks  have  offered  these  services  to  their  customers  without  significant  concerns  for  years.  It  is
important,  moreover,  to  highlight  that  these  activities  are  not  unregulated  –  they  are  supervised,
regulated, and examined by the relevant federal and state banking agencies. In the trust and fiduciary
area,  these  protections  are  enhanced  and  supplemented  by  well-developed  principles  of  state  and
federal  trust  and  fiduciary  law  that  provide  customers  with  strong  protections  against  conflicts  of
interests and other potential abuses. Bank examiners regularly examine a bank's trust and fiduciary
departments  for  compliance  with  these  fiduciary  principles.  These  examinations  frequently  are
conducted by examiners  who have received  special  training  in  trust  and  fiduciary  law  and  practice,
and the federal banking agencies assign banks engaged in fiduciary activities separate ratings under
the Uniform Interagency Trust Rating System. These ratings are based on an evaluation of, among
other  things,  the  capability  of  management;  the  adequacy  of  the  bank's  operations,  controls,  and
audits; the bank's compliance with applicable law, fiduciary principles and the documents governing
the account; and the management of fiduciary assets.
GLB Act
It was in the context of this existing regulatory framework that the Congress, during consideration of
the GLB Act, reviewed the blanket exception for banks from the definitions of "broker" and "dealer" in
the  Securities  Exchange  Act.  This  review  of  the  blanket  exception  was  not  undertaken  because
abuses  or  concerns  existed  concerning  the  traditional  securities  activities  of  banks.  In  fact,  banks
generally have conducted their securities activities responsibly and in accordance with bank-regulatory
requirements and other applicable law, including the antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws.
Rather,  the  review  of  the  bank  exception  was  undertaken  to  address  a  concern  that,  if  the  blanket
exception for banks was retained at the same time that the barriers hindering the affiliation of banks
and  securities  broker-dealers  were  removed,  securities  firms  might  acquire  a  bank  and  move  the
securities  activities  of  the  broker-dealer  into  the  bank  in  order  to  avoid  SEC  supervision  and
regulation. Some parties also expressed concern that banks might in the future significantly expand
their  securities  activities  outside  the  services  traditionally  provided  customers  under  the  blanket
exception. The Congress sought to balance these concerns with the desire to ensure that banks could
continue to provide their customers the securities services that they had traditionally provided as part
of  their  customary  banking  activities,  without  significant  problems,  and  subject  to  the  effective
supervision and regulation of the banking agencies.
The end result, the GLB Act, replaced the blanket exception for banks from the definitions of "broker"
and "dealer" with fifteen exceptions tailored to allow the continuation of key bank securities activities.
These  exceptions  were  broadly  drafted  and  were  intended  to  ensure  that  banks  could  continue  to
provide their customers with most, if not all, of the services that they traditionally had received from
banks. For example, these statutory exceptions permit banks, subject to certain conditions, to continue
2
BIS Review 70/2001
to (1) buy and sell securities for their trust and fiduciary customers, (2) buy and sell securities for their
custodial  clients  as  part  of  their  customary  banking  activities,  (3) establish  so-called  "networking"
arrangements  with  registered  broker-dealers  to  offer  securities  services  to  the  bank's  customers,
(4) sweep  deposit  funds  into  shares  of  no-load  money  market  mutual  funds,  (5) privately  place
securities  with  sophisticated  investors,  (6) issue  and  sell  to  qualified  investors  securities  that  are
backed  by  assets  predominantly  originated  by  the  bank,  its  affiliates  or,  in  the  case  of  consumer-
related receivables, a syndicate formed by the bank and other banks, and (7) broker securities in up to
500 transactions per year that are not otherwise exempt.
Interim final rules adopted by the SEC
The interim final rules as currently written are, in many respects, not consistent with the language or
purposes  of  the  GLB  Act  and  would  impose  unnecessary  costs  and  burdens  on  banks  and  their
customers. In the interest of time, I will focus only on some of our most significant concerns with the
substantive provisions of the rules. A more detailed discussion of our numerous concerns is included
in the comment letter issued jointly by the Federal Reserve, the OCC, and the FDIC.
Trust and fiduciary activities
We  are  most  concerned  with  the  provisions  of  the  interim  final  rules  that  implement  the  statutory
exception  for  the  trust  and  fiduciary  activities  of  banks.  In  our  judgment,  these  provisions  would
significantly disrupt the trust and fiduciary customer relationships and activities of banks. As I noted
above,  trust  and  fiduciary  activities  are  part  of  the  core  functions  of  banks,  and  banks  have  long
bought and sold securities for their trust and fiduciary customers under the strong protections afforded
by fiduciary laws and under the supervision and examination of the banking agencies.
In  light  of  this  history,  the  GLB  Act  specifically  permits  banks  to  effect  transactions  in  a  trustee
capacity,  and  to  effect  transactions  in  a  fiduciary  capacity  in  any  department  of  the  bank  that  is
regularly examined by bank examiners for compliance with fiduciary principles. To ensure that banks
did not attempt to operate a full-scale brokerage operation out of their trust department, the GLB Act
established two limitations. First, a bank relying on the trust and fiduciary exception must be "chiefly
compensated" for the securities transactions it effects for its trust and fiduciary customers on the basis
of certain types of traditional trust and fiduciary fees specified in the act. Second and importantly, the
act prohibits the bank from publicly soliciting securities brokerage business other than in conjunction
with  its  trust  activities.  The  Congress  did  not  expect  that  these  compensation  requirements  and
advertising  restrictions  would  interfere  with  the  traditional  trust  and  fiduciary  activities  of  banks,  nor
were these provisions intended to grant the SEC broad authority to regulate or "push-out" the trust and
fiduciary activities of banks. In fact, the Conference Report for the GLB Act specifically states that the
"Conferees expect that the SEC will not disturb traditional bank trust activities" under this exception.1
The  interpretation  of  this  exception  currently  reflected  in  the  interim  final  rules,  however,  would
significantly disrupt the customary trust and fiduciary activities of banks and is at odds with both the
language and purposes of the exception. Most importantly, the interim final rules provide that a bank
qualifies for the exception only if each of its trust and fiduciary accounts independently meets the act's
"chiefly  compensated"  requirement.  We  strongly  believe  that  the  act's  "chiefly  compensated"
requirement was intended to apply to a bank's aggregate trust and fiduciary activities and not on an
account-by-account basis. An approach focused on the bank's aggregate trust and fiduciary activities
is consistent with the nature and operations of bank trust departments and would – in conjunction with
the act's prohibition on banks publicly soliciting brokerage business apart from their trust and fiduciary
activities  –  effectively  prevent  banks  from  running  a  full-scale  brokerage  operation  out  of  their  trust
departments.
The  account-by-account  approach  adopted  by  the  interim  final  rules,  on  the  other  hand,  is  both
unworkable  and  overly  burdensome.  First,  this  approach  appears  premised  on  the  notion  that  an
individual  trust  or  fiduciary  account  that  engages  in  a  significant  number  of  securities  transactions
during  a  year  is  not  a  traditional  trust  and  fiduciary  account.  This  premise  is  flawed,  however.  It  is
entirely  natural  for  a  bank  to  engage  in  numerous  securities  transactions  for  a  trust  or  fiduciary
account. For example, there may be numerous securities transactions for an account when a trust is
initially established and the assets provided by the grantor are initially invested or when the investment
                                                     
1  See H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 106-434 at 164 (1999).
BIS Review 70/2001
3
strategy of a fiduciary account is altered to reflect changes in the beneficiary's investment objective.
An  account-by-account  approach  also  does  not  accommodate 
the  complex,  multi-account
relationships  that  a  bank's  trust  department  is  frequently  called  upon  to  establish  to  achieve  the
individualized wealth preservation and transfer goals of its customers.
The account-by-account approach also proves too much. To put this in context, a moderately sized
trust department may have on the order of 10,000 separate trust and fiduciary accounts and a large
trust  department  may  have  more  than  100,000  such  accounts.  Under  the  account-by-account
approach adopted by the interim final rules, changes in the amount of compensation received during a
year  from  a  single  trust  or  fiduciary  account  could  cause  a  bank  and  its  entire  trust  operation  to
become an unregistered broker-dealer, thereby opening the bank to the threat of enforcement action
by the SEC and, after January 1, 2003, suits by private parties for the rescission of securities contracts
entered into by the bank. Such a result is unreasonable, especially because a bank would not be able
to determine an account's compliance with the rules' "chiefly compensated" requirement until the end
of a year, and then may have only a single day to restructure its operations if the compensation from
one account did not meet the rules' requirements.
The proposed account-by-account approach also would impose significant and unnecessary burdens
on  banks.  Most  banks  do  not  have  the  systems  in  place  to  track  the  various  categories  of
compensation that they receive from each individual trust  and fiduciary account. In order to comply
with the rules, and to continue providing traditional trust and fiduciary services, banks would have to
establish complex and costly  systems and procedures for monitoring the amount and  types  of  fees
received  from  each  trust  and  fiduciary  account  and  these  costs  likely  would  be  passed  on  to
consumers.
The  Commission  recognized  the  significant  burdens  imposed  by  the  rules'  account-by-account
requirement and used its discretionary authority under other provisions of the securities laws to adopt
an  exemption  for  banks  that  comply  with  certain  conditions  established  by  the  Commission.  These
conditions, however, require the bank to establish procedures to ensure that each trust and fiduciary
account complies with the rules' chiefly compensated requirement, effectively maintaining the account-
by-account approach from which the exemption  was supposed to provide relief. In addition,  a bank
may  take  advantage  of  the  exemption  only  if  it  significantly  limits  its  receipt  of  fees  that  would
otherwise be permissible under the GLB Act.
The  rules  also  impose  restrictions  on  the  trust  and  fiduciary  activities  of  banks  that  simply  are  not
found in the statute and that are not consistent with the nature of the trust and fiduciary operations of
banks. For example, although the statutory exception is, by its terms, available for all accounts where
a bank acts as trustee, the rules suggest that the SEC will review bank-trustee relationships and may
determine that some of these relationships do not qualify for the exception. Accordingly, the rules not
only cast doubt on whether banks may continue to effect securities transactions for a wide variety of
traditional trust accounts, such as self-directed personal trust accounts and charitable trusts, but also
suggest that the SEC intends to review and regulate the types of trust relationships that banks may
have with customers. The interim final rules also place restrictions on when a bank will be deemed to
be  acting  in  a  "fiduciary  capacity"  that  were  not  included  in  the  statute  or  contemplated  by  the
Congress.
Finally,  the  rules  interpret  the  statute's  examination  requirement  in  a  manner  that  will  effectively
prevent many banks from taking advantage of the statutory trust and fiduciary exception at all. As I
mentioned  earlier,  the  Congress  required  that  any  securities  transactions  under  the  exception  be
effected either in the bank's trust department or in another department that is regularly examined by
bank examiners  for  compliance  with  fiduciary  principles  and  standards.  These  requirements  ensure
that  the  customer's  relationship  with  the  bank  continues  to  be  subject  to  the  fiduciary  examination
programs of the banking agencies that have effectively protected customers for years.
The interim final rules, however, allow a bank to effect transactions for a trust or fiduciary account only
if all  aspects of the  transaction  – including associated  data processing and  settlement  –  occur  in  a
department  regularly  examined  by  bank  examiners  for  compliance  with  fiduciary  principles  and
standards. Many bank trust and fiduciary departments outsource securities settlement and processing
functions to a third party or affiliate, or delegate these functions to other departments of the bank to
achieve  cost  and  operational  efficiencies.  The  customer  relationship  is  fully  protected  by  trust  and
fiduciary principles in this case, while the mechanics of the transaction are handled in the most cost-
efficient  manner.  However,  banks  that  have  structured  their  operations  in  these  ways  would  be
prohibited by the rules from taking advantage of the exception granted by the Congress, even though
4
BIS Review 70/2001
their  relationships  with  customers  are  maintained  in  a  trust  or  fiduciary  department  and  regularly
examined by bank examiners for compliance with fiduciary principles.
In our view, the end result of these narrow interpretations and burdensome requirements is that banks
will be forced to significantly restructure their traditional trust and fiduciary activities, and some banks
may well be required to cease providing these traditional banking services to customers. In addition,
customers  that  have  chosen  to  establish  relationships  with  banks  will  be  forced  to  terminate  these
relationships or have duplicate accounts at the bank and a broker-dealer, resulting in increased costs
and burden.2 We do not believe that this was the result intended by the Congress.
Custodial and safekeeping activities
Another  of  the  exceptions  included  by  the  Congress  in  the  GLB  Act  was  designed  to  protect  the
custodial and safekeeping services that banks have long provided as part of their customary banking
activities. In particular, the act allows banks, as part of their customary banking activities, to provide
safekeeping and custody services with respect to securities and to provide custodial and other related
administrative services to Individual Retirement Accounts and pension, retirement, and other similar
benefit plans.3 In this area, as well, the Commission has interpreted the exception in a manner that is
inconsistent with the language and purposes of the act and that prevents or significantly disrupts the
customary banking relationships and activities that Congress sought to preserve.
In particular, as I noted a moment ago, the act explicitly permits banks to continue providing custodial
and  related  administrative  services  to  IRAs  and  benefit  plans.  This  language  was  added  to  the  bill
during  the  House-Senate  Conference  to  resolve  any  ambiguity  concerning  the  ability  of  banks  to
continue to provide securities execution services to their custodial IRA customers and to benefit plans
that receive custodial and administrative services from the bank. Bank-offered custodial IRAs provide
consumers  throughout  the  United  States  with  a  convenient  and  economical  way  of  investing  for
retirement  on  a  tax-deferred  basis,  and  banks  have  long  executed  securities  transactions  for  these
accounts  subject  to  IRS  requirements  and  the  supervision  and  regulation  of  the  banking  agencies.
Banks  also  provide  benefit  plans  with  custodial  and  administrative  services,  including  securities
execution  and  recordkeeping  services,  under  the  direction  and  supervision  of  the  plan's  fiduciaries.
These  bank-offered  services  allow  plan  administrators  to  obtain  securities  execution  and  other
administrative services in a cost-effective manner, thereby reducing plan expenses and benefiting plan
beneficiaries.
The  Commission,  however,  has  stated  that  the  custody  exception  does  not  allow  a  bank  to  effect
securities transactions for its custodial IRA or benefit plan accounts. This position essentially reads the
explicit  authorization  adopted  by  the  Congress  out  of  the  statute,  is  completely  contrary  to  the
purposes  of  the  act,  and  would  disrupt  long-standing  relationships  between  banks  and  their
customers.
In  addition,  the  interpretation  of  the  custody  exception  adopted  by  the  Commission  would  prohibit
banks  from  executing  securities  transactions  for  their  custodial  customers  on  an  accommodation
basis.  Banks,  as  part  of  their  customary  banking  activities,  have  for  many  years  effected  securities
transactions as an accommodation to their custodial clients. These customer-driven transactions occur
only  upon  the  order  of  the  customer  and  allow  the  customer  to  avoid  having  to  go  through  the
unnecessary  expense  of  establishing  a  separate  account  with  a  broker-dealer  to  effect  occasional
securities trades associated with the customer's custodial assets at the bank.
In  an  effort  to  mitigate  the  adverse  impact  of  these  interpretations  on  the  banking  industry,  the
Commission proposed two exemptions that would permit small banks, on one hand, and all banks, on
the  other  hand,  to  continue  to  accept  orders  from  their  custodial  clients.  These  SEC-granted
exemptions, which could be revoked or modified by the SEC at any time in the future, would not be
necessary if the rules gave effect to the language and purposes of the custody exception adopted by
the Congress. Furthermore, these exemptions are subject to numerous and burdensome restrictions
that were not contemplated by the act and that will make it difficult, if not impossible, for many banks
to take advantage of the exemptions.
                                                     
2  The GLB Act already requires that banks send  any  U.S.  securities  trades  for  a  trust  or  fiduciary  account  to  a  registered
broker-dealer for execution. See 15 U.S.C. § 78c(a)(4)(C).
3  See 15 U.S.C. § 78c(a)(4)(B)(viii).
BIS Review 70/2001
5
to 
letters 
issued 
the  banking  and  securities 
Third-party networking arrangements
The  GLB  Act  also  permits  banks  to  establish  so-called  "networking"  arrangements  with  registered
broker-dealers,  under  which  the  broker-dealer  makes  securities  brokerage  services  available  to  the
bank's  customers.  One  provision  of  the  statutory  exception  permits  bank  employees  who  are  not
registered representatives of the broker-dealer to receive a nominal, one-time cash fee for the referral
of  customers  to  the  broker-dealer  so  long  as  payment  of  the  fee  is  not  contingent  on  whether  the
referral results in a securities transaction.
This exception was intended to reflect and codify the arrangements that the SEC staff has sanctioned
in  no-action 
industries  concerning  networking
arrangements.4  These  letters,  like  the  statutory  exception,  permit  bank  employees  to  receive  a
nominal,  one-time  fee  for  the  referral  of  customers  to  the  broker-dealer,  and  do  not  attempt  to
establish a rigid mechanism for determining what constitutes a "nominal" fee in every circumstance.
This flexible approach has worked well for both the banking and securities industries and has not, to
our knowledge, caused significant problems.
Despite  the  success  of  this  flexible  approach,  the  interim  final  rules  establish  a  rigid  and  complex
approach for determining whether a referral fee is "nominal." In addition, the rules impose, or request
comment  on,  other  restrictions  on  referral  fees  that  were  not  authorized  by  the  Congress.  For
example, the rules provide that a referral fee is nominal if it does not exceed one hour of the gross
cash  wages  of  the  employee  receiving  the  fee.  By  pegging  permissible  fees  to  the  hourly  wage  of
each employee, the rules create significant administrative problems and may conflict with state privacy
requirements that restrict access to information concerning an employee's salary. Although the rules
also allow a bank to pay referral fees in the form of "points" in a bonus program, the rules require that
any points awarded must not only be nominal, but also must be the lowest amount awarded for any
product  or  service  covered  by  the  bonus  program.  Thus,  for  example,  the  points  awarded  for  a
securities referral could not exceed the amount of points awarded for a safe deposit referral, even if
the points awarded for the securities referral were nominal in amount.
Failure to address all exceptions or adopt cure or leeway periods
 The interim final rules also fail to address the scope of a majority of the exceptions to the definitions of
"broker" and "dealer" that were adopted in the GLB Act. Given the fact that the Board believes that
many  of  the  SEC's  interpretations  of  the  scope  of  the  exceptions  it  has  chosen  to  address  do  not
comport with the unambiguous words of the GLB Act and the legislative intent of the Congress, we are
concerned about the manner in which the SEC will interpret the other exceptions. The Board fears that
if  the  SEC  does  not  adopt  rules  concerning  the  scope  of  all  of  the  exceptions,  it  will  aggressively
interpret some of the exceptions through enforcement actions and no-action letters, without banks and
other members of the public having the opportunity to comment on these interpretations.
The interim final rules also fail to provide any cure or leeway periods to banks that are attempting in
good faith to comply with the exceptions when they discover that some of their securities transactions
do not comply with the exceptions due to inadvertent errors or unforeseen circumstances. Given the
complexity of the exceptions, it is expected that banks that are attempting to conform their securities
activities to the exceptions will identify some securities transactions that do not meet the terms of the
exceptions.  In  some  circumstances,  banks  will  not  even  be  able  to  confirm  that  their  securities
transactions will comply with an exception at the time they are conducted. For example, banks will not
be  able  to  confirm  that  they  meet  the  "chiefly  compensated"  standard  in  the  trust  and  fiduciary
exception until they review all of their compensation earned at the end of the year. For these reasons,
the Board believes that the SEC must provide banks that have adopted policies reasonably designed
to  comply  with  the  exceptions  a  reasonable  period  of  time  to  cure  any  inadvertent  or  unforeseen
violations.  This  period  of  time  must  at  least  be  long  enough  for  a  bank  to  establish  an  affiliated
broker-dealer to which nonqualifying securities activities can be transferred.
Preserving regulatory roles established by the Congress
On  a  broader  level,  we  also  are  concerned  that  several  aspects  of  the  rules  appear  to  reflect  an
attempt by the Commission to regulate the banking activities of banks. For example, as I mentioned
earlier,  the  interim  final  rules  seek  to  limit  the  traditional  trust,  fiduciary,  and  custodial  activities  of
                                                     
4  See Chubb Securities Corp., 1993 SEC No-Act. LEXIS 1204 (Nov. 24, 1993).
6
BIS Review 70/2001
banks and would indirectly give the Commission the ability to regulate the scope and nature of these
activities. Similarly, there is language in the adopting release concerning the networking exception that
would appear to impose restrictions on employee bonus programs operated by banks in general, even
where the affected employees have no connection with any networking arrangement established with
a broker-dealer.
In addition, NASD Rule 3040, which is referenced in the preamble to the rules, purportedly provides
the Commission and the NASD the authority to review all the securities activities engaged  in by  an
employee  who  is  both  an  employee  of  a  bank  and  a  broker-dealer,  including  those  securities
transactions that are conducted as  part of the  bank's  traditional  banking  activities  and  protected  by
one of the GLB Act's exceptions. We anticipate that such dual employee arrangements will become
more common, as banks seek to modify their activities to ensure compliance with the GLB Act. We
believe that subjecting these activities, which the Congress has identified as part of the business of
banking, to dual regulation by both the banking agencies and the SEC would be inconsistent with the
principles of functional regulation and subject banks to unnecessary and duplicative regulation.
Conclusion
The  Board  believes  that  the  manner  in  which  the  bank  securities  provisions  of  the  GLB  Act  are
implemented is critically important to the ability of banks to continue to provide high-quality banking
services to their customers. We appreciate the steps the SEC has taken to extend the public comment
period on the interim final rules and delay the effective date of the rules and the statute. However, the
Board  believes  that  significant  substantive  changes  must  be made  to  the  interim  final  rules  so  that
they reflect the words of the statute and the intention of the Congress. The Board stands ready to work
with the SEC and the banking industry in revising the interim final rules.
BIS Review 70/2001
7
