T T Mboweni: Building Africa’s future
Address by Professor T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 6th Africa
Regional Girl Guides Conference, Cape Town, 2 July 2001.
 Introduction
1.
Good morning Premier, honoured guests, ladies and gentlemen. I thank you for inviting me here today
and I am honoured to be included on this occasion. Some of your responsibilities as members of the
World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts lie in preparing the young women of today for the
positions of strength and leadership they will occupy in the future.
These  young  women  will  be  the  ones  we  look  towards  for  guidance  and  leadership  in  the  coming
period. We have a duty to lead them, instil in them solid values, ideals and morals, among these a
respect for democratic authority  and education, such as  your organisation  upholds. If  we fail  in this
duty, we will be doing ourselves and future generations a great deal of disservice. It is vital that we
instil a sense of discipline in the youth in our care. It is this sense of discipline which will mould them to
grow  up  to  be  reliable,  respected,  and  independent-minded  adults.  I  commend  you  for  the  worthy
tasks you have both set for yourselves and achieved.
The youth you lead and nurture have a vital role to play in the future of this country and this continent.
They are the leaders of the African Renaissance. The future we envisage is very different to the reality
of today but it is heavily influenced by it. I will give a brief overview of where we stand in Africa and in
South Africa, particularly. And then I will discuss the possible path ahead of this continent and country
and how the young people you have under your wing could make a valuable contribution.
The need for change
2.
Your organisation is, as is this continent, in the throes of immense change. I was particularly struck by
a statement contained in one of your pamphlets, and that is: "Why change is necessary". Change is
inevitable, we cannot stop it. What we can do, however, is to manage change so that it becomes an
instrument for the better, not  worse,  of  all  our  people.  The  Girl  Guides  South  Africa  and  the World
Association of Girl Guides and Girls Scouts are well-placed. As part of an international organisation
you are in a prime position to reach beyond your national boundaries, to become citizens of the world
and draw on your immense human resources in making life a little brighter for all our people. There
are windows of opportunity within this process and it is up to all of us to identify those opportunities
and choose how we are going to take advantage of them, how we are going to turn night into day.
The transformation of South Africa to democracy is a good example of how change could be managed
for the good of all. It is painful for some, joyous for others, and the outcome could have been a costly
confrontation with destructive consequences. Yet, as most of  you know, some have referred to this
change as a miracle. But I fear that the time has come when we can no longer ride on the coat tails of
that "miracle", we in South Africa need to get down and do some serious work.
This continent and this country face a number of key challenges going forward. Just as you strive to
alter the face of your organisation to deepen certain values and to embrace others, so we as a country
and a continent broadly face the challenge of developing our people, and in so doing, propelling our
continent to the fore in the international arena.
When  President  Thabo  Mbeki  was  inaugurated  on  16  June  1999,  he  had  these  words  to  say:
"Recorded  history  and  the  material  things  that  time  left  behind  also  speak  of  Africa's  historic
contribution to the universe of philosophy, the  natural sciences, human settlement and organisation
and the creative arts. Being certain that not always were we the children of the abyss, we will do what
we have to do to achieve our own Renaissance.
"We trust that what we will do will not only better our own condition as a people, but will also make a
contribution, however small, to the success of Africa's Renaissance, towards the identification of the
century ahead of us as the African Century."
Indeed, our President’s words have encapsulated the growing awareness in this globalised world that
the  bettering  of  people’s  lives  must  accompany  efforts  towards  sustainable  economic  growth  and
BIS Review 62/2001
1
development.  No  longer  are  the  world’s  citizens  a  means  to  an  economic  end,  but  it  has  become
increasingly recognised that they must be part of the end result. The modern day measures of country
success  are  no  longer  solely  high  economic  growth  rates  and  balance  of  payment  surpluses,  but
include the broader development goals that these high growth rates and budget surpluses can help to
generate. In other words, the overriding challenge we face has become broader, deeper and infinitely
more complex than was thought of before.
This  growing  awareness  has  been  the  catalyst  behind  the  development  of  the  Millennium  African
Renaissance Programme or MAP. The Programme, which is being spearheaded by President Thabo
Mbeki, Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo and Algeria’s President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, is aimed
at  achieving  strong  sustainable  economic  growth,  boosting  Africa’s  share  in  world  exports  over  the
next  five  years  and  accelerating  the  achievement  of  various  development  goals.  The  Programme,
although still in its infancy, demonstrates a concerted collective effort on the part of African leaders to
overcome the continent’s poverty and drive the continent forward to become a significant role player to
be reckoned with in the global arena. The success of this Programme also relies on the goodwill, co-
operation (the G7 in particular) and willingness of our industrialised counterparts to join us.
While  the  Millennium  African  Renaissance  Programme  is  broad  in  focus,  we  must  not  omit  the
Southern African Development Community from this discussion. Many of the objectives contained in
the  SADC  treaty,  which  was  signed  in  1992,  are  echoed  along  these  broader  goals.  Among  the
objectives  are  to  achieve  development  and  economic  growth  within  the  framework  of  regional
integration, to alleviate poverty, enhance the standard and quality of life of the citizens of the region
and support the socially disadvantaged. The  SADC treaty  also  lists the promotion of self-sustaining
development on the basis of collective self-reliance and the interdependence of member states as one
of its objectives. In achieving these goals, SADC recognises that sound and co-operative economic
policies are key elements. South Africa has been given the task of co-ordinating SADC’s Finance and
Investment Sector. Within this the South African Reserve Bank plays a pivotal role in that it chairs the
Committee of Central Bank Governors in SADC.
The current development picture
3.
Let me take a moment to paint a picture of where Africa, and particularly Sub-Saharan Africa, stands
at present. Africa remains the world’s poorest continent. Currently, the world’s richest 20 per cent of
countries claim an 82 per cent share of global exports. The poorest 20 per cent of countries get a one
per  cent  share.  Similarly,  the  richest  20  per  cent  attract  two  thirds  of  the  world’s  foreign  direct
investment.  In  contrast,  the  poorest  20  per  cent  attract  a  meagre  one  per  cent  of  foreign  direct
investment.  These  1997  figures  from  the  Human  Development  Report  Office  highlight  the  stark
disparities  between  the  world’s  rich  and  poor.  And  the  accompanying  public  outcry  over  these
differences,  reflected  in  the  often  vociferous  and  violent  protests  at  IMF,  World  Bank  and  WTO
meetings  around  the  world,  serve  to  highlight  even  further  the  international  realisation  that  the
collective effort towards economic and social development must be intensified.
The World Bank’s World Development Indicators 2000 report concludes that the proportion of poverty-
stricken people can be halved by 2015. This assertion rests on two conditions, namely that economic
growth  resumes  and  that  inequality  between  the  world’s  poorest  and  richest  countries  does  not
increase. According to this report, a sixth of the world’s population, primarily in the developed world,
received  nearly  80  percent  of  world  income  while  the  poorest  57  percent  of  the  world’s  population
received only 6 percent of world income.
However,  there  has  been  some  progress  in  fighting  poverty.  In  East  Asia  the  proportion  of  people
living in extreme poverty has fallen sharply since 1987, mainly because of progress in China. But in
almost all  other  developing regions the number of poor people has been on the increase. In South
Asia the number of people living in extreme poverty rose from 495 million to 522 million, an increase of
5,1 percent. However, in Sub-Saharan Africa the number of very poor people increased by about 48
million to 291 million – that is an increase of some 16,1 percent. The report also points out that 17
developing countries managed to reduce their mortality rates of children under the age of five between
1990 and 1998. But in 13 countries the mortality rates worsened. Many of these are African countries
where armed conflicts and the spread of HIV/AIDS have compounded the evils of poverty.
In terms of economic growth, Asia once again scores highly. Over the years from 1990 to 1998, the
fastest growing region in terms of Gross National Product per capita was East Asia and the  Pacific
with growth averaging 6,4 percent. South Asia followed with 3,8 percent. The Middle East and North
2
BIS Review 62/2001
Africa  showed  small  gains  while  Sub-Saharan  Africa  fell  behind  with  a  negative  growth  rate  of  0,3
percent.  Still,  the  positive  aspect  is  that  the  service  industry  has  been  progressing  in  developing
countries.  This  includes  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  which  has  been  shifting  towards  the  service  sector.
However, the World Bank indicates that this has been at the expense of industry, with the share of
agriculture remaining more or less constant at 17 per cent.
The World Bank’s African Development Indicators for 2001 shows that growth on the continent slowed
significantly after 1998. Average per capita GDP fell by almost 1 per cent from 1998 to  1999  while
official aid to Sub-Saharan Africa fell from US$32 per head in 1990 to US$19 by 1998. This occurred
despite the improvements in some of these countries social and economic policies. The World Bank
gives this reason, and I quote: "The slowdown in growth was the result of regional and civil wars, poor
governance in some countries, and serious external shocks such as the rapid hike in oil prices at the
same time that export earnings from primary commodities collapsed."
The report cautions that growth needs to be above an annualised rate of 5 percent to prevent a rise in
the  number  of  poor  people  on  the  continent.  Some  progress  is  evident.  Fourteen  African  countries
have grown by an average 4 percent a year during the 1990s with a further 10 countries growing at
rates above 3 percent a year. This report concludes: "Africa’s future economic growth will depend less
on  exploiting  its  natural  resources,  which  are  being  depleted  and  are  subject  to  long-run  price
declines, and more on its labour skills and its ability to accelerate a demographic transition. "
South  Africa  is  ranked  as  having  a  medium  level  of  human  development,  according  to  the  United
Nations  Development  Programme  (UNDP).  This  is  a  similar  level  as  found  in  countries  such  as
Jordan, Sri Lanka, Turkey, Indonesia and Botswana. The Human development Index, compiled by the
United Nations Development Program, is a measure of what are termed "average achievements" in
basic human development. The HDI measures a country’s development in terms of income, education
levels and life expectancy. The value of the HDI ranges between 0 and 1. South Africa’s HDI of 0,628
as measured in 1998 is lower than Canada’s 0,932. It is slightly lower than all developing countries
index of 0,637 but higher than Sub-Saharan Africa’s 0,430.
However, if we look at the scenario which factors Aids into the results and compare it with a scenario
in  which  the  illness  is  not  taken  into  account  we  get  very  different  pictures  and  thus,  logically,  the
situations  will  produce  different  development  responses.  In  a  "no  Aids"  scenario,  South  Africa’s
Human Development Index is estimated at 0,647 for this year, but it falls to 0,597 in an Aids scenario.
In  2005  the  country’s  HDI  is  estimated  at  0,65,  and  falls  to  0,565  in  the  Aids  scenario.  And  the
estimates for 2010 show 0,654 for a non-Aids scenario compared with 0,542 for an Aids scenario.
This is one very grave hurdle that we all, as citizens of the world, are facing. The recent death of little
Nkosi Johnson who died at the age of 12 at the beginning of June 2001 highlighted a poignant and
personal account of suffering that is being played out in millions of homes around the world. Nkosi,
who was born with HIV-Aids, focused our attention on this very real problem and in his own way he
made his mark. Little boy Nkosi survived for a decade longer than the doctors expected. He stole the
hearts and minds of many  people  in  South  Africa,  and  undoubtedly  throughout  the  world,  when  he
walked  on  to  the  stage  at  the  13th  International  Aids  Conference  in  Durban  last  year  and  told  the
audience of his plight. Nkosi’s story shows us what we can achieve, no matter who we are or what age
we are. And in his own way, he extends a challenge to each one of us who are committed to making
our mark.
I commend the Girl Guide Association of South Africa on its HIV/AIDS programme. I am particularly
impressed that your Association had the foresight to tackle HIV/AIDS awareness nine years ago. And I
am similarly impressed about the work you are doing to make the lives of those afflicted a little easier.
Not only did little Nkosi Johnson make his mark at last year’s Aids conference in Durban, but the Girl
Guide  Association  of  South  Africa  did  too.  I  urge  you  to  persevere  in  your  partnership  with  the
Department  of  Health  on  their  HIV/AIDS  education  programme.  Education  can  move  mountains.
Empowering  the  youth  by  imparting  the  appropriate  knowledge  and  skills  will  help  them  to  protect
themselves and face the challenges of life.
In a bid to address the three-pronged scourge of low education, poor health and welfare services, the
South African government’s budgets over the past few years have focused increasingly on these key
areas. This does appear to be paying off to some extent. The rate of illiteracy has shown a downward
trend since 1985. From an illiteracy rate of 21  per cent among people 15  years and older  in  1985,
South Africa’s illiteracy fell to 16 per cent in 1997, according to the World Bank’s African Development
Indicators for 2000. In line with this, the number of pupils enrolling in primary schools has been on an
BIS Review 62/2001
3
upward slope. South Africa’s life expectancy at birth has also increased from 58 years in 1982 to 65
years in 1997. Infant mortality has dropped from 6,3 per cent in 1982 to 4,8 per cent in 1997.
But South Africa, and indeed Africa, needs to  boost  its savings rates.  Africa’s savings  amounted to
27,1 percent of GDP during 1975 to 1984, but for the 1990s the World Bank’s 2000 report estimates
the level at 17,6 percent. South Africa’s savings amounted to 15 percent of GDP last year. You, as an
organisation pride yourself on teaching your members the values of thrift and prudence. I would ask
you to go one step further. As you educate your members about the importance of savings, without
which the economy cannot reach prolonged high growth rates, educate them to be educators for the
wider community. We have a dearth of economic literacy on this continent and we need resourceful
people like yourselves to become well-versed in basic economic principles and make this knowledge
available to the communities you serve.
The pre-requisites for the success of the African renaissance
4.
So, where do we go from here? I have already mentioned some of the challenges we face. These are
surmountable. However, there are certain pre-requisites we, as a continent and a country, should aim
to  achieve  before  we  can  claim  any  success  along  the  road  of  the  African  Renaissance  and  its
broader goals.
After  meeting  with  sub-Saharan  African  leaders  earlier  this  year,  Horst  Kohler,  the  International
Monetary Fund’s managing director, mentioned that the prospects for rapid growth, which he argued
was indispensable for reducing poverty, will and I quote: "depend on the ability of those countries to
unlock  the  creative  energies  of  their  people.  African  leaders,"  he  said,  "know  that  there  is  no
alternative to integration into the global economy. This approach requires investment in human capital
and  infrastructure  as  well  as  the  right  economic  policies  and  institutions.  It  requires,  especially,  an
economic climate that encourages private sector investment."
The  collective  efforts  brought  together  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  Millennium  African  Renaissance
Programme  should  unlock  the  creative  energies  of  the  African  people,  it  should  give  Africa’s
leadership a  new focus and it  should  encourage  unwavering  efforts  to  eradicate  poverty,  and  bring
about democracy and good governance. I suspect that sustainable development rests on a complex
interplay of factors, an important one being good governance and accountability of a government to its
citizens, full participation by the citizens in the political life of their countries, as  well as sustainable
economic growth and development.
It is from a sound economic base, the optimum economic climate, that we can then progress to take
our  place  among  the  leaders  of  the  twenty-first  century.  Firstly,  we  should  contain  our  general
government deficits to not exceed more than 3 per cent of gross domestic product. South Africa has
had  mixed  success  against  this  criteria.  The  relatively  high  budget  deficits  and  high  government
expenditure during the late 1980s to the early 1990s were largely the consequence of bad economic
management based on multiple financing of apartheid programmes. I am happy to say that the budget
deficit  fell  below  3  per  cent  of  GDP  after  the  1997/1998  fiscal  year.  This  was  achieved  through  a
combination  of  budgeting  in  accordance  with  the  country's  most  pressing  needs,  strict  expenditure
control and improved tax collection. With a budget deficit of below 3 per cent, South Africa's finances
compare favourably with internationally acceptable levels and we could easily become member of the
E.U.
Secondly,  general  government’s  gross  debt  should  be  kept  to  less  than  60  percent  of  GDP.  South
Africa’s debt levels have in recent years stayed firmly below this level. Gross debt above this level is
deemed by the Maastricht Treaty participants as the level beyond which fiscal health is at risk.
Thirdly, countries should aim for flexible relatively stable exchange rates. And fourthly, price stability is
key to attracting  investment and boosting economic performance. The South African  Reserve  Bank
embraced  the  ethos  of  price  stability  when  we  adopted  an  inflation  targeting  framework  at  the
beginning of the year 2000. Under this framework the South African Reserve Bank aims to contain the
Consumer Price Index less mortgage costs (CPIX) measure of inflation, to between 6 and 3 percent
by 2002. In this way we should achieve a significant measure of price stability. Over the last 10 years,
inflation  has  come  down  steadily  from  the  double-digit  figures  of  the  1980s  and  the  early  1990s.
According to the latest figures CPIX is at 6,7 percent for April. Inflation has proved sticky over the past
year or so mainly because of high international oil prices.
4
BIS Review 62/2001
Conclusion
5.
By  containing  inflation  and  by  ensuring  that  price  stability  prevails,  the  Reserve  Bank  contributes
towards  creating  an  environment  in  which  individuals,  households  and  businesses  can  thrive.  The
views  of  serious  economists  have  changed  markedly  over  the  past  50  or  so  years.  It  is  now
recognised that high inflation cannot be good for economic growth. Following on this theoretically and
practically, the Bank makes its contribution towards the broad development goals we are all striving
towards. And this must be backed by robust and decisive decision-making institutions that are shaped
by good governance, transparency, accountability and democratic full participation by all the people in
the political lives of their countries.
The Girl Guide Association of South Africa and the World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts
have an equally important role to play. Just as little Nkosi Johnson highlighted his HIV/AIDS plight and
the plight of many others, so each and every one of us in our own small way can make a valuable
contribution to the communities we work in daily. As is human nature, we rarely realise how powerful
we can be. Many of us are more inclined to apathy than activity. But you are doing good work. You fall
into the many pockets of excellence scattered all over the continent of Africa today. As you go about
your  work,  we  challenge  you  to  nurture  in  these  young  women  the  patriotic,  peaceful,  democratic,
caring creative and entrepreneurial spirit which will spur on the dream of our African Renaissance. For
it  is  through  the  future  generations  of  leaders  who  can  think  creatively  and  democratically,  who
become innovators and find unique solutions to age-old difficulties that we could truly become a force
to be reckoned with. An African continent whose time has come. In closing, then, I say build on your
successes and embrace the challenges, both new and old. I wish you well in your endeavours.
Thank you for having me here. God bless.
BIS Review 62/2001
5
