Andrew Crockett: Issues in global financial supervision
Remarks  by  Mr  Andrew  Crockett,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and
Chairman  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  at  the  36th  SEACEN  Governors’  Conference  held  in
Singapore, 1 June 2001.
 The maintenance of financial stability used to be relatively straightforward in the days when banks and
other  financial  institutions  earned  protected  rents  and  supervisors  and  managers  could  focus  on
simple risk measures. Over the last decades, the world has become far more complicated. Firms are
running  more  complex  risks,  sectoral  distinctions  are  blurring  and  markets  are  integrating  globally.
This has made the  tasks  of  authorities  responsible  for  financial  stability  more  difficult  to  define  and
execute: there are more parameters to be considered, shocks come from many more corners, and the
manner in which supervisory actions affect supervised institutions is far more complex.
So how should supervisors and other authorities with responsibility for financial stability adjust? There
are substantive and procedural issues to be considered. One substantive issue is how the authorities
should respond to a more complex environment. In principle, there may be two options: to adjust to
the  existing  complexity,  or  to  try  and  shape  the  environment  so  that  it  is  compatible  with  existing
regulatory frameworks and prudential approaches. But the latter has costs and brings risks on its own.
Moreover, it may not be feasible given the international dimension of financial intermediation.
Another  challenge,  involving  both  substantive  and  procedural  issues,  and  domestic  and  as  well  as
international dimensions, is to devise rules that are consistent across sectors, leave no gaps, and are
implemented effectively and fairly. What supervisory and regulatory approaches are workable in more
complex  environment?  And  how,  procedurally,  should  the  rules  be  drawn  up  and  enforced?  One
response  to  the  latter  can  be  to  integrate  regulatory  and  supervisory  rule  making  and  enforcement
functions in a single body. The other is for the various authorities involved to deepen co-operation. At
the international level, a global super-regulator seems neither a realistic nor a desirable option relative
to an enhanced co-operative approach seeking consistency with adequate recognition of differences.
To  provide  some  background  to  these  issues,  I  will  begin  my  remarks  by  describing  some  of  the
characteristics that have resulted from the evolution of the financial sector in recent  years and  with
which the authorities now have to contend. I will then group the remainder of my remarks under two
headings: the implications for supervisory and other authorities; and the procedural issues that arise in
organizing supervisory oversight.
Nature of change in financial systems
I.
The  most  basic  forces  affecting  the  financial  sector  are:  the  quickening  pace  of  technological
innovation, especially in data processing and communication; and the growing acceptance of market
processes  as  the  basic  determinant  of  resource  allocation.  The  impact  of  technical  innovation  and
deregulation on banking and the rest of the financial sector has been profound. The range of products
and  services  have  widened  markedly.  Intermediation  costs  have  declined  enormously.  Financial
transactions  have  grown  rapidly  in  relation  to  GDP.  All  of  this  has  brought  considerable  benefits
through more efficient origination and allocation of capital, greater availability of capital for investment,
greater efficiency in the management of risks, etc.
Let me note six characteristics of this transformation that have important implications for supervision
and regulation. These characteristics have many common strands and channels of interaction.
First, firms are running more complex (and sometimes opaque) risks. Advances in the processing
of information and in finance theory have permitted the independent pricing of risk factors that were
previously bundled together in the same instrument. At the same time, the intensification of financial
intermediation  has  given  rise  to  an  explosion  in  the  demand  for  hedging  (and  position-taking)
instruments.  The  good  news  is  that  the  new  financial  instruments  have  enormously  improved  the
technology  of  risk-management.  The  downside  is  that  these  same  instruments,  if  not  properly
understood and used, increase the potential for loss, whether resulting from inadequate understanding
or deliberate leveraged bets.
BIS Review 49/2001
1
Second,  sectoral  distinctions  are  becoming  blurred.  To  a  degree,  this  reflects  the  greater
willingness to accept a free market philosophy. But more importantly, the ability to deconstruct and re-
combine  risks  has  enabled  financial  intermediaries  to  expand  and  compete  effectively  in  sectors
beyond their own. And they can do so under the regulatory umbrella or framework that provides the
greatest  benefit  and  flexibility.  To  be  sure,  this  can  helpfully  expose  regulatory  and  economic
inefficiencies.  But  where  it  is  motivated  principally  by  regulatory  arbitrage,  the  authorities  need  to
guard against it leading to a system wide reduction in capital adequacy or undue risk concentration.
A third related characteristic is greatly enhanced competition. This has been  a prime objective  of
much  of  the  deregulation  and  privatisation  that  has  taken  place  in  the  financial  industry.  But  the
competitive climate has been sharpened by other developments, too. A greater focus on shareholder
value has induced banks' managements to pay more attention to the rate of return on equity. This is
good  news  in  that  the  financial  industry  is  induced  to  use  its  capital  more  efficiently  and  financial
services have become cheaper to end-users. But it also means that the cushion against bad luck or
bad  judgement  is  thinner.  Franchise  values  are  much  smaller,  so  that  an  erosion  of  capital  more
quickly leads to the threat of failure (and the temptation to take unwarranted risks to stay in business).
Fourth,  the  source  of  financial  disturbances  has  become  more  become  more  unpredictable.
One  cause  is  capital  market  integration,  which  affects  a  country’s  financial  markets  and  institutions
whether or not the economy is entirely integrated. We have seen that capital flows can be volatile and
unpredictable.  Contagion  means  that  the  problems  of  neighbouring  or  more  distant  economies  can
rapidly become one’s own. Another aspect is the much greater diversity of actors in the financial
markets.  In  the  1970s  and  80s,  most  financial  intermediation  was  conducted  through  banks,  with
insurance companies and investment vehicles having well defined roles. But many different types of
institution,  including  non-financial  firms  are  now  involved  in  both  wholesale  and  retail  markets.  And
financial  institutions  based  outside  the  major  centres  have  come  to  play  a  more  important  role  in
international markets.
A  fifth  characteristic  is  that  financial  systems  appear  to  have  become  more  pro-cyclical  than
before,  capable  of  amplifying  credit  growth  and  leveraging  market  positions  more  intensely  than
before. In essence, the “marginal” risk that financial actors willingly engage is greater than before. To
a degree, this is a result of innovations in financial technology, including the process of securitisation,
which  allow  risks  to  be  better  distributed  and  managed.  The  more  widespread  use  and  trading  of
collateral  is  also  a  factor.  But  it  also  reflects  the  intensification  of  competition,  and  perhaps  a  view
among firms that they will be able to get out of risky engagements before they sour. Of course, pro-
cyclicality works in both directions: once the downturn sets in, the financial system seems more prone
to liquidity erosions and reduced credit supply than in previous episodes of stress.
The  final  characteristic  to  which  I  would  like  to  draw  attention  is  the  greatly  increased  speed  of
developments in the financial sector. The speed of transmission of news in the financial sector has
always been high relative to other sectors. Nowadays, market communication and execution can be
almost instantaneous. But what is also speeding up is financial sector actors’ judgement of strategic
opportunities  in  their  environment  and  their  moves  to  take  advantage  of  them.  New  and  cheaper
technology,  as  well  as  deregulation,  has  greatly  helped  this.  Business  models  get  adopted  and
discarded more quickly. This will test regulators and supervisors, for  whom the challenge  will  be  to
create rules of the game that are robust to fad, fashions and arbitrage.
There are several consequences  of  the  characteristics  I  have  mentioned  and  to  which  will  I  return.
However, one, consolidation, has itself become a characteristic of the present environment. I believe
consolidation  has  much  further  to  run  in  many  countries.  So  far,  it  has  mainly  taken  place  within
national  markets,  and  within  particular  sectors.  Looking  ahead,  however,  cross-border  and  cross-
functional mergers and alliances seem increasingly likely.
Implications for the authorities
II.
As  I  noted  at  the  outset,  a  substantive  issue  raised  by  the  foregoing  is  how  the  authorities  should
respond to the more complex environment that now prevails. In principle, there may be two options: to
adjust  supervision  and  regulation  to  a  more  challenging  environment,  or  to  try  and  shape  the
environment so that it is compatible with a more slowly evolving regulatory framework and prudential
apparatus.
The  latter  may  be  possible,  within  limits,  in  economies  whose  financial  markets  remain  relatively
heavily regulated and closed off from other markets. But one cannot ignore the difficulty, the costs and
2
BIS Review 49/2001
risks of deliberately preventing adjustment when the world outside is changing at an ever more rapid
pace. A gap that is created – as against one that is being slowly eroded – is one that may later be
much more difficult to close.
In  Asia,  as  elsewhere,  countries  are  following  different  reform  strategies.  Given  the  wide  range  of
initial conditions, there can be no single prescription. All the same, two key lessons of the past crises
are  by  now  widely  recognised.  The  first  is  the  need  to  liberalise  financial  activities  and  flows  in  a
manner  that  is  consistent  with  supervisory  and  infrastructural  capacity.  Firms,  supervisors  and  the
infrastructure all need time to adapt to a more demanding and complex market environment.
The second lesson is that a comprehensive approach is needed. The financial sector does not exist
in  a  vacuum.  Its  efficiency  and  stability  depend,  not  only  on  the  prudential  standards  applied  to
financial institutions, but on the robustness of the financial infrastructure that underpins transactions.
Weaknesses  in  the  financial  infrastructure  can  render  useless  the  most  careful  supervisory
oversight.  Weak  accounting  and  auditing  practices  are  a  major  source  of  problems.  Improved
insolvency arrangements are also critical: the absence of fully satisfactory bankruptcy arrangements
that  permit  the  orderly  restructuring  of  distressed  corporate  debt  has  been  an  important  factor
retarding market development, and intensifying financial crises in many South East Asian economies.
One area in which change is needed almost everywhere is corporate governance practices. Where
demands  for  reform  and  infrastructural  improvements  are  made  by  professionally  operating  boards
and management in anticipation of expanded business opportunities, the authorities should have few
qualms about embracing them.
While a sound infrastructure and strong corporate governance, including effective bank management,
are crucial elements in an overall adjustment strategy, equally important are adjustments in regulation
and supervision. Let me review the major changes that have taken place in this area.
An  important  trend  has  been  to  strengthen  the  risk  sensitivity  of  the  prudential  framework.
Banking  supervisors  have  focused  intensively  in  recent  years  on  detailed  aspects  of  sound  risk
management practices in financial institutions: first, the accurate measurement and monitoring of risk;
second, controlling and pricing exposures; and third, the holding of adequate capital and reserves to
meet  unexpected  losses.  This  work  is  very  apparent  in  the  proposed  revision  of  the  Basel  Capital
Accord. In the revised standardised approach, risk-weights will be more reflective of actual risk. And in
the internal ratings based approach, subject to safeguards, banks will be able to use their own credit
assessments. This is intended both to strengthen internal firm discipline and to reduce the “gaming”
that  became  rampant  under  the  old  Accord.  But,  as  supervisors  know  well,  the  parameters  of
increased risk sensitivity must be calibrated and implemented carefully so as to avoid increasing the
potential for discontinuities in adverse market circumstances.
A complementary trend has been, and continues to be, the strengthening of supervisory oversight.
This has implied a move away from direct control-type regulation on types of activities and financial
flows,  and  towards  supervision  –  a  move,  in  other  words,  away  from  compliance  with  portfolio
constraints,  and  toward  an  assessment  of  whether  the  overall  management  of  a  financial  firm's
business is being prudently conducted. There are several reasons for this shift (which is reflected in
pillar two of the revised Basel Accord). First, the rapid development of new instruments and methods
of  risk  management  make  mechanical  application  of  balance  sheet  ratios  inappropriate.  Second,
regulation  inevitably creates  incentives for financial  engineers  to  find  a  way  around  the  rules.  More
generally,  regulation  is  too  blunt  an  instrument  to  capture  the  technicalities  and  the  sophistication
required to control risk in a complex financial organisation.
To be effective, increased reliance on supervisory oversight requires an upgrading of supervisory
capacity, both in terms of staffing and skills. An effective supervisor must understand all aspects of a
financial  firm's  business,  and  can  foresee  the  multiple  sources  of  risk  it  is  likely  to  confront.  This
means  that  supervision  is  becoming  a  more  demanding  profession,  and  the  skills  required  of
supervisors are becoming greater and more diverse. Accounting  and  legal training, while  important,
are no longer enough. Supervisory authorities are going have to seek also staff with backgrounds in
economics and business management. Supervisors are becoming more like consultants, whose task
is to understand the bank's business and draw management's attention to underappreciated sources
of risk.
A third trend has been increased reliance on market discipline. Disclosure and transparency are an
important part of a more robust financial architecture, as the third pillar of the new Accord recognises.
There is still much to do, in Asia and elsewhere, to raise disclosure standards and to allow the market
BIS Review 49/2001
3
to provide the necessary discipline. Asia’s crises were a stark lesson that sweeping problems under
the carpet did not solve them. At the same time, supervisors need to take a balanced view of the utility
of market forces as an aid to stabilising behaviour.  Market participants may be subject to collective
misperceptions of risk, such as reflected in  the underpricing of risk in upswings.  And even if risk is
correctly perceived, private responses may not be appropriate from the viewpoint of systemic stability.
Private  behaviour  can  be  affected  by  expectations  of  official  action  (moral  hazard);  by  short  term
horizons induced by the nature of contracts; by differing interests as between principals and agents;
and  more  generally  by  the  combined  effect  of  forces  that  make  for  what  we  commonly  term  “herd
behaviour”.
Finally,  central  bankers  and  supervisors  are  increasingly  aware  that  generalised  financial  instability
usually has its roots in macroeconomic factors. Banks do not often get into serious difficulties all by
themselves. And if they do, we usually have remedies at hand. Crises typically occur because banks
are  jointly  exposed  to  a  common  macroeconomic  shock.  This  realisation  has  spurred  a  search  for
techniques  that  will  make  banking  systems  more  resilient  to  the  financial  version  of  the
economic cycle. Banks need to be encouraged to build up capital cushions in good times so that they
are available to protect their lending when the cycle turns down. By the same token, they would also
lessen the risk that the credit cycle would unnecessarily exacerbate the economic cycle and hence the
risk  of  financial  distress.  Among  such  techniques  are  stress-testing,  pre-provisioning,  cyclically
variable loan to value ratios, and so on. The strengthening of the supervisory review process (Pillar 2)
envisaged in the new Accord could provide a sounder basis for promoting these practices.
Monetary authorities, too, are beginning to recognise the complex two-way relationship between
monetary  and  financial  stability.  The  seeds  of  future  financial  instability  are  usually  sown  by
excessive  credit  expansion.  This  facilitates  the  build  up  of  leverage  in  the  financial  system  and
exposes  institutions  to  losses  when  the  credit  cycle  turns.  Monetary  policy  will  have  to  be  more
conscious in future of the risk of accommodating excessive credit expansion and the unsustainable
rise in asset prices that often accompanies it.
The organisation of supervisory functions
III.
As  I  noted  at  the  outset,  there  are  also  procedural  issues  to  be  considered  in  adjusting  to  a  more
complex environment. The blurring of distinction between institutions makes it increasingly important
to  have  consistency  in  the  supervisory  rules  and  enforcement  methods  that  apply  across  different
sectors. In its absence, there would be the twin dangers of regulatory arbitrage or competition in laxity.
This is an issue for an individual economy as much as for an increasingly integrated global financial
system.  Hence,  there  is  a  national  and  an  international  dimension  to  the  question  of  how  the
supervisory function should best be organised.
At  the  national  level,  two  quite  different  approaches  are  being  pursued:  to  bring  all  regulatory,
supervisory, and oversight functions together in a single entity, as the Scandinavians first did in the
late 1980s and others (e.g. Japan, the UK) have copied since; or, to keep the entities separate, but
create mechanisms that  ensure  appropriate  co-ordination  among  the  relevant  authorities.  Each  has
advantages and disadvantages.
At  one  level,  the  single  entity  solution  seems  attractive.  It  would  certainly  seem  preferable  if  the
preponderance of domestic institutions were themselves integrated financial conglomerates. (But even
then – as in Netherlands – the authorities can come to different conclusions). And integration might be
an attractive option where a history of supervisory or regulatory failure calls for adjustments that are
unlikely to obtain within an existing diversified structure.
But even if these conditions are met, it is not immediately clear which are the regulatory activities that
it makes sense to bring together and which to keep on a stand-alone basis. Should for example the
prudential  supervision  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  be  integrated,  but  market  regulation,
including  customer  and  investor  protection,  be  kept  separate?  Experience  with  how  well  integrated
regulators handle potentially conflicting objectives during episodes of significant turmoil might tell.
A single all embracing financial authority naturally prompts the question of where that authority should
reside.  This  is  now  the  subject  of  intense  debate  in  quite  a  number  of  countries.  And  where  such
entities have been created, they mostly  exist outside the central bank. This can be seen to have a
number  of  advantages:  Given  the  blurring  of  distinctions  between  different  types  of  financial
institutions,  the  retention  of  supervisory  responsibilities  within  the  central  bank  may  give  rise  to
perceptions that the lender of last resort function is being extended, with consequent risks of moral
4
BIS Review 49/2001
hazard. There could also be a conflict of interest with monetary policy, if central banks were induced to
be excessively expansionary in order to head off weaknesses at individual financial institutions. There
is also the issue of reputational risk. Finally, the central bank may be perceived as too powerful if it is
both independent and endowed with a broad range of functions.
There  are,  however,  arguments  for  retaining  at  least  some  supervisory  functions  within  the  central
bank. The central bank will have easier access to market information in the case of a crisis, and it will
be  easier  to  co-ordinate  monetary  and  prudential  policy  actions.  It  will  be  easier  to  assess  and
respond  to  the  build-up  of  systemic  risk  if  the  supervisory  authority  also  has  responsibilities,  and
hence  specific  know-how,  in  other  areas  of  the  financial  system  (e.g.  market  functioning  and  the
operation  of  clearing  and  settlement  systems),  as  do  central  banks.  And,  access  to  supervisory
information  can  help  the  central  bank  better  calibrate  monetary  policy  (e.g.  the  case  of  the
“headwinds” that confronted the US economy during the recovery of the early 1990s).
In these terms, there is no obviously “right” answer to this debate. Individual observers may have their
own  preferences,  but  at  the  end  of  the  day,  the  answer  probably  depends  on  country-specific
circumstances.  For  example,  how  independent  from  political  and  industry  pressure  can  a  separate
supervisor  be?  How  scarce  are  the  relevant  skills?  And  how  blurred  have  the  distinctions  between
different types of financial intermediary become? Some, such as Charles Goodhart*, have argued that
these  considerations  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  case  for  combining  supervisory  and  monetary
policy responsibilities in the central bank will generally be stronger in emerging markets.
But whatever is the answer to the question “Who should supervise?”, it is necessary to define tasks
clearly and in such a way that the tools are available to discharge them. One risk in the present trend
to  remove  supervision  from  the  tasks  of  central  banks  is  that  central  banks  could  be  left  with  a
responsibility  for  overall  financial  stability  that  is  neither  clearly  defined  nor  supported  with  the
necessary powers or access to information to discharge it. So where separate supervisory authorities
are being established, it is important to set up a structure that promotes the necessary exchange of
information and permits the central bank to influence the design of prudential rules. Much attention is
being given to this subject in the countries where new supervisory structures are being put in place.
Equally, however, where supervisory responsibility remains with the central bank, it is important that it
too develops close co-ordination with other relevant authorities.
A global super-regulator?
Of course, the issues to which the single regulator is a possible response at the national level exist at
the  global  level  as  well.  How  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  internationally,  both  in  terms  of
regulatory/prudential policy and enforcement? An approach sometimes discussed has been to set up
a  world  financial  authority,  with  powers  to  set  and  enforce  regulations  world-wide.  I  do  not  believe
such  an  approach  would  be  either  feasible  or  desirable.  It  is  not  feasible,  since  there  is  very  little
chance of sovereign legislatures ceding powers in the regulatory area to a supranational body. And it
would  not  necessarily  be  desirable.  A  single  regulator  could  well  be  too  monolithic,  disinclined  to
experiment  with  new  regulatory  approaches.  The  rules  it  would  create  might  not  take  adequate
account of the particularities of the financial sector in different jurisdictions. And insofar as all countries
had  to  agree  on  regulatory  initiatives,  there  would  be  a  risk  of  converging  on  the  lowest  common
denominator.
In my  view, the most promising approach  is  that  adopted  by  the  Basel  Committee  and  followed  by
most  other  standard-setting  bodies.  It  is  to  draw  up  a  set  of  standards  that  can  be  agreed  by
supervisors  in  the  most  advanced  jurisdictions,  whose  broader  adoption  is  encouraged  by  peer
pressure  and  market  forces.  It  is  remarkable  to  note  that,  while  the  Basel  rules  are  backed  by  no
formal legislation, nor has the Basel Committee any law-making mandate, its recommendations have
greater acceptance and force than many treaty-based agreements.
Of course many issues remain. One is to ensure that rules made by a restricted group are adequately
responsive to the circumstances of countries that are not members of the standard-setting group. This
can be achieved by a process of consultation and review, in which a much wider range of countries is
involved. Another issue is implementation. How can countries be encouraged to adopt the measures
that  will  strengthen  their  financial  systems?  Here  part  of  the  answer  seems  to  be  to  seek  greater
 CAE Goodhart “The Organisational Structure of Financial Supervision” FSI Occasional Paper No 1, BIS, Basel, 2000.
BIS Review 49/2001
5
support from the market. If markets reward high standards by easier access to funds at lower costs,
there is little doubt that strong internal pressures would be created to improve standards.
Perhaps  it  is  appropriate  here  to  say  a  word  about  the  Financial  Stability  Forum.  The  Forum  was
created  in  1999,  and  includes  senior  representatives  of  ministries  of  finance,  central  banks  and
regulatory  authorities  in  the  major  financial  markets,  as  well  as  representatives  of  the  main
international organisations and standard setting bodies. A key reason for setting up the Forum was the
realisation that there are many bodies whose activities contribute to financial stability and who have a
stake in its preservation.
The Forum, in other words, is a tangible recognition of the fact that financial stability requires vigilance
in a number of dimensions. Individual financial institutions have to be run on prudent lines, markets
have  to  be  open  and  transparent,  and  the  financial  infrastructure  has  to  be  robust.  All  of  these
objectives  have  to  be  pursued  at  a  global  level,  since  the  financial  industry  is  global  and  capital
markets are increasingly integrated. Yet there is no global authority that can act in all the areas that
are  required.  The  Forum  helps  to  fill  this  gap,  by  facilitating  the  co-ordination  of  efforts  by  the
numerous separate authorities having responsibilities in the field of financial stability.
Conclusion
IV.
In  summary,  prudential  regulation  is  becoming  more  complex  and  demanding,  as  well  as  more
important and fascinating. It is demanding a more comprehensive approach than hitherto. It is bringing
together multiple disciplines in an attempt to harness the forces of the market to improve the market’s
stability. It stresses greater risk sensitivity, flexible supervision, and more reliance on market discipline.
This is, of course, no more than a further important step along the road to a more efficient and resilient
financial system. But it is an important step. And it will work to the benefit of us all.
6
BIS Review 49/2001
