Willem F Duisenberg: The EURO. OUR money
Speech  delivered  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
Euro 2002  Information  Campaign  hosted  by  Suomen  Pankki  (Bank  of  Finland)  in  Helsinki  on
17 September 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you for inviting me here today. Before I proceed with my speech, I would like to express my
sincere condolences and those of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank to all those
whose lives were touched by last week’s terrorist attacks in the United States of America. The attacks
were so horrific – and tragic – that we are talking about the world being a different place now. That
may be so. But life – and that includes business life – has to, and will, go on.
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  the  Eurosystem  stands  ready  to  support  the  normal  functioning  of
markets  and  relevant  operational  systems  if  the  need  arises.  The  Governing  Council  reaffirmed  its
support at its meeting last Thursday. In this context, the Eurosystem conducted liquidity-providing fine
tuning operations last week. The ECB also agreed last week on a swap arrangement with the Federal
Reserve System to facilitate the functioning of the financial markets and to provide liquidity in dollars.
The  Eurosystem  is  co-ordinating  its  activity  with  the  Federal  Reserve  of  the  United  States  and  the
world’s other major central banks.
Furthermore, as a mark of respect, the European Union held a day of mourning last Friday. And as a
gesture  of  solidarity,  we  withdrew  all  TV  commercials  and  print  advertisements  by  the  Euro  2002
Information Campaign from the media on that day.
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  subject  of  this  conference,  the  Euro  2002  Information  Campaign.  The
conference is being hosted by Suomen Pankki and it is one of the last ones in the campaign being
conducted  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  twelve  national  central  banks  of  the  euro
area. Tomorrow, the Banca d’Italia, and in one month’s time, the Bank of Greece will conclude this
series  of  conferences,  which  has  brought  together  more  than  5,000  key  actors  in  the  euro  cash
changeover process. They have benefited from the exchange of views and information, for they have
been able to enhance their own preparations for the cash changeover. Moreover, the media attending
these  conferences  have  made  the  public  more  aware  of  the  impending  introduction  of  the  euro
banknotes and coins. My colleagues on the Executive Board and myself have been pleased to actively
contribute to these conferences.
In  just  over  100  days,  the  EURO.OUR  money,  will  be  in  our  pockets,  and  will  finally  become  an
everyday reality for all of us. In just over 100 days, we will be able to travel from one euro area country
to another, from Helsinki to the Mediterranean and the Atlantic, without having to change our money.
We will be able to compare prices for products and services much more easily; it’s an enormous step
that will give a major boost to competition and price transparency. In just over 100 days, companies
and organisations will be able to expand their markets and pursue their activities without having the
cost and inconvenience of dealing with several currencies. In just over 100 days, Europeans will feel at
home in many parts of Europe because, for the very first time, they will share the same banknotes and
coins.
The  general  public  sometimes  does  not  realise  that  the  euro  has  existed  as  a  currency  since
1 January 1999. The euro is already OUR money. Whenever we buy something with current national
banknotes of the euro area, we are in fact already paying in euro.
The introduction of the banknotes and coins represents an unprecedented logistical challenge for all
parties involved; almost 15 billion banknotes and around 50 billion coins are being produced and the
major part will be distributed, first to the banking sector and then to the retail sector before reaching
the  public.  These  two  steps,  known  respectively  as  frontloading  and  sub-frontloading,  started  on
1 September  and  entail  a  gradual  supply  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  to  different  sectors  of  the
economy in order to make the process as smooth as possible. Of course, there will be a considerable
demand  for  euro  banknotes  from  outside  the  euro  area  and  therefore  we  have  adopted  general
principles and a guideline for the frontloading of euro banknotes to non-euro area residents. Mr. Antti
Heinonen,  Director  Banknotes  at  the  ECB,  will  review  the  production  and  distribution  of  the  euro
banknotes in more detail later this afternoon.
BIS Review 77/2001
1
On 30 August, I unveiled the seven euro banknotes and their security features at a press conference
in  Frankfurt.  The  banknotes  show  windows,  gateways  and  bridges  –  symbols  of  openness  and
communication.  They  reflect  Europe’s  artistic  and  architectural  heritage  and,  at  the  same  time,  will
help  to  promote  a  feeling  of  solidarity,  to  bring  about  new  opportunities  and  to  strengthen  ties  and
transactions between the nations of Europe.
But transactions need to be trustworthy. The new banknotes include state-of-the-art security features,
which will make the euro one of the world’s safest currencies. These features will provide reassurance:
they will enable both the public and professional cash handlers to check the banknotes quickly and
easily. The needs of blind and partially sighted people have also been carefully considered: they will
be able to identify the banknotes with confidence. The seven euro banknotes differ in size and colour,
and the value of the banknote is printed in large, bold numbers. This will make it easier for all of us to
recognise the banknotes when they enter into circulation on 1 January 2002.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  will  be  a  watershed  in  Europe’s  history;  it  will  be  a  unique  event  that
requires our fullest support.
It is crucial that we, the European Central Bank and the twelve national central banks of the euro area,
do  our  utmost  to  ensure  that  euro  banknotes  and  coins  are  well  received  by  the  public.  A  rapid
acceptance will very much depend on how well we communicate about OUR money with “our” public.
The more effectively we communicate, the more we will convince Europeans that Europe is not some
abstract  and  remote  idea,  but  an  immediate  and  dynamic  reality.  The  quality  of  the  information  we
provide  will  determine  how  well  the  public  copes  with  the  cash  changeover  and  gets  used  to
denominations that may differ from national ones.
That’s why the Governing Council of the ECB has launched an information campaign. We have the
support of Publicis, a communication agency which we selected for this historic task, and the national
central  banks  of  the  euro  area,  which  are  implementing  the  information  campaign  and  also
supplementing it with their own euro-related communications at the national level.
Our  campaign  covers  the  practical  aspects  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins.
Moreover,  it  is aimed not only at  people inside  the euro  area,  but  also  at  those  outside  it,  such  as
tourists, travellers as well as the citizens of countries where the predecessor currencies to the euro are
used widely as parallel currencies. In order to reach such a broad public, the information campaign
uses  various  groups  and  institutions  as  partners  or  “multipliers”.  They  include  banks,  retailers,
educational institutions, the tourism industry and the media.
I would like to highlight the key role these partners have played and are still playing. Here in Finland
and in the rest of Europe partners in the Euro 2002 Information Campaign from both the public and
private  sectors  are  contributing  to  this  important  communication  effort  by  conveying  information  on
euro  banknotes  and  coins  to  their  staff,  customers  and  other  target  groups.  We  have  over
2,600 organisations  which  have  signed  a  partnership  agreement  with  the  ECB  and  the  12  national
central banks of the euro area.
I would also like to stress that the media are receiving special attention in the campaign. For them, we
have produced a total of six media kits, each marking a specific milestone in the countdown to the
euro.  These have been, and will be, distributed to more than 3000 media companies in the euro area
in the course of 2001. The media kit marking today’s milestone, is E -100 [“e minus one hundred”], or
100 days to go, and focuses on the final visual appearance of the euro banknotes and their security
features. Furthermore, we are paying particular attention in the campaign to  vulnerable groups  who
need and will receive tailor-made information and training.
We  have  now  reached  the  crucial  period  in  terms  of  communication  on  the  euro.  Our  mass  media
campaign, with TV and print adverts across the euro area and beyond, has just been launched. The
communication offensive will continue into the first weeks of 2002, when the changeover will be taking
place and people will have the euro banknotes and coins in their hands and pockets. They will then be
more receptive to messages about the euro.
In Finland, you can watch our TV commercials for the very first time today, and see our print adverts
as from 3 October. The creative concept here focuses on the positive spirit which comes from being
part  of  a  broad  community  with  a  single  currency,  and  is  reflected  in  the  slogan,  the  EURO.OUR
money.
Because we cannot afford to miss a single opportunity to inform three hundred million Europeans, two
hundred million public information leaflets,  in 11 languages, have been  produced, enough for every
2
BIS Review 77/2001
household  in  the  euro  area.  The  leaflet  is  entitled  Getting  ready  for  the  euro,  and  shows  the  euro
banknotes,  with  details  of  the  security  features  and  of  the  changeover  plan  for  each  country.  The
leaflet  is  tailored  to  the  needs  and  circumstances  of  each  country  and  will  be  distributed  by  the
national central banks through a variety of channels.
I  would  also  like  to  mention  our  initiative  to  help  the  children  of  the  euro  area  learn  about  euro
banknotes  and  coins.  Seven  million  posters,  each  including  a  competition  designed  to  raise
awareness of the euro, will soon be sent to primary schools. The competition, which runs until mid-
November, must be one of the largest ever held for children aged between 8 and 12 in Europe. The
lucky winners, our 24 “euro superstars”, two from each euro area country, will receive their prizes at an
event that will take place in Frankfurt on 31 December.
Finally, let me turn to the ECB itself. It is still a young central bank just 3 years old. Its mandate is to
guarantee price stability by conducting a single monetary policy for the 12 countries and 300 million
people in the euro area. The public perception of an institution sometimes differs sharply from, and
even oversimplifies, the complex reality. This is also the fate of the ECB. Its tasks are indeed complex,
involving  monetary  policy  decisions  and  operations,  statistics,  payment  systems,  legal  issues,  etc.
However, its primary objective as laid down in the Treaty of the European Communities is very clear:
price stability in the euro area, in other words, safeguarding the value of the euro banknotes and coins
and keeping inflation under control. Keeping control of inflation was and remains our main focus. The
ECB  has  so  far  fulfilled  its  mandate  successfully  and  aims  to  do  so  in  the  future  for  the  benefit  of
Europe’s citizens. Of course, the impact of the cash changeover on price developments in the coming
months needs to be carefully monitored. Price transparency and market competition are likely to limit
inflationary pressures stemming from the cash changeover. Still, I would like to appeal to all economic
operators,  including  governments,  to  strictly  apply  the  rounding  rules.  We  cannot  afford  such  a
momentous event to be overshadowed by unjustified price increases. Any increases would undermine
confidence  in the  euro  and damage the credibility  of those abusing the cash changeover in such  a
way. The ECB is also asking the public to keep a close eye on prices during the changeover period
and is encouraging consumers and various organisations to follow up any – may I say – abuse of the
occasion.
I am repeating myself, but it is important to be aware that on 1 January 2002 we are not introducing
the euro. The euro has been OUR money since 1 January 1999. What we are doing is introducing the
euro banknotes and coins. Then, for the very first time, twelve countries in Europe will be sharing one
currency: the EURO.OUR money. Or, as you say in Finnish, EURO YHTEINEN RAHAMME.
BIS Review 77/2001
3
