Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy - the importance of credibility and confidence
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Norges Bank, at the Annual National Meeting of the
Association of Economists, held in Gausdal on 25 January 2001.
 Introduction
The  primary  responsibility  of  monetary  policy  is  to  contribute  to  nominal  stability.  Nominal  stability
creates a more favourable operating environment for economic activity, and the prices of goods and
services will be better conveyors of information. Consequently, changes in the distribution of income
and  wealth  as  a  result  of  variable  price  inflation  are  avoided.  Nominal  stability  is  important  to
developments in the real economy, and is the most valuable contribution monetary policy can make to
economic growth.
Using  this  as  a  starting  point,  I  would  like  to  speak  today  of  the  importance  of  confidence  and
credibility  with  regard  to  monetary  policy.  I  will  also  evaluate  the  monetary  policy  that  has  been
conducted  for  the  last  couple  of  years  in  relation  to  the  guidelines  for  monetary  policy  and  our
interpretation of them.
Expectations and confidence
Expectations  regarding  the  future  play  a  large  part  in  all  economic  activities.  Enterprises  make
decisions  on  production  volume,  investments,  hiring  and  prices  on  the  basis  of  expectations
concerning  future  demand,  prices  and  costs.  Households  make  purchases  on  the  basis  of  their
expectations with regard to future income, wealth, prices and job security. Chart 1 illustrates a possible
relationship between households' assessment of prospects for the future and their consumption. Trade
unions  base  their  wage  negotiations  on  expectations  regarding  price  inflation  and  developments  in
employment over the next few years. Expectations play an important part in financial markets. Equity
prices and exchange rates may fluctuate widely as a result of changes in the expectations of market
participants.
Because expectations are of such importance to economic planning and decisions, it is essential that
there  is  confidence  in  the  nominal  anchor.  This  makes  it  possible  to  achieve  nominal  stability  with
smaller disturbances in the real economy and lower unemployment.
BIS Review 7/2001
1
Although  nominal  stability  is  a  prerequisite  for  sound  developments  in  the  real  economy  over  time,
conflicts  may  develop  in  the  short  term.  Such  conflicts  may  occur  if  there  are  disturbances  on  the
production or supply side of the economy which give rise to higher price and cost inflation that does
not actually reflect increased pressures in the economy. Examples of such disturbances are cost-push
shocks  resulting  from  negotiations,  or  weaker  productivity  growth.  When  disturbances  of  this  type
occur on the supply side of the economy, there may be a trade-off between fluctuations in nominal
prices and wages and fluctuations in production and employment. A trade-off of this kind is illustrated
in Chart 2. The chart shows that using strong instruments to achieve an inflation target or exchange
rate target in the short term results in more pronounced fluctuations in the real economy. By allowing
greater  flexibility  with  regard  to  the  short-term  achievement  of  goals,  it  is  possible  to  achieve  more
stable  developments  in  the  real  economy.  But  confidence  in  the  nominal  anchor  must  not  be
undermined. This may lead to a less favourable trade-off, as illustrated in the chart by the broken line.
If there is insufficient confidence  in monetary  policy, economic agents may expect higher  price and
cost inflation to persist. This will be taken into account when setting wages and prices. The result will
be  a  wage  and  price  spiral.  Experience  shows  that  this  in  turn  leads  to  slower  growth  and  lower
employment. A lack of confidence therefore entails a risk of higher unemployment. In consequence,
monetary policy must also focus on movements in nominal variables when the economy is subjected
to supply-side shocks in order to prevent the economy from entering a vicious circle. The building of
confidence in nominal developments must be given sufficient priority.
If  there  is  confidence  in  monetary  policy,  economic  agents  will  expect  the  rise  in  price  and  cost
inflation to be of short duration. Higher prices will then not feed through to prices for other goods and
to wages to the same extent, and there will be less risk of a recession. Confidence in monetary policy
therefore results in a better trade-off between nominal fluctuations and fluctuations in production and
employment.
I  have  been  talking  about  supply-side  shocks  to  the  economy.  However,  there  are  many  types  of
shock where there is no conflict between stable nominal developments and stable developments in
the  real  economy.  For  example,  a  sharp  decline  in  overall  demand  may  give  rise  to  a  deflationary
recession. In such a situation, an expansionary monetary policy may contribute to both nominal and
real economic stability.
Whether disturbances arise on the supply side or the demand side, it should be possible to use the
interest  rate  to  influence  economic  developments.  The  interest  rate  is  an  instrument,  rather  than  a
target variable. A passive monetary policy will lead to both price and exchange rate instability and to
greater fluctuations in production and employment. However, an active monetary policy does not imply
attempting  to  fine-tune  economic  developments. We  must  be  mindful  of  the  uncertainty  associated
with  economic  developments  and  the  effects  of  monetary  policy.  Normally,  interest  rate  changes
should be made gradually to allow us to acquire more information, for example about the effects of
previous interest rate changes.
2
BIS Review 7/2001
Uncertainty and credibility
According to Norges Bank's mandate, monetary policy is to be aimed at maintaining a stable krone
exchange  rate  against  European  currencies,  based  on  the  range  of  the  exchange  rate  maintained
since the krone was floated on 10 December 1992. In the event of significant changes in the exchange
rate, monetary policy instruments will be oriented with a view to returning the exchange rate over time
to its initial range.
In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank focuses on the fundamental preconditions for achieving
exchange rate stability against the euro. First, price and cost inflation must be brought down towards
the corresponding aim for inflation for the European Central Bank (ECB). At the same time, monetary
policy must not in itself contribute to deflationary recessions as this could undermine confidence in the
krone.  There  are  few  significant  differences  between  Norway's  actual  response  pattern  and  that  of
countries with explicit inflation targets. Price and cost inflation must be steered towards that aimed at
by the ECB. However, in Norway fiscal policy has traditionally had  an  important role in stabilisation
policy.  This  has  reduced  the  burden  on  monetary  policy.  In  addition,  the  Norwegian  wage
determination system has probably contributed in periods to dampening the impact of shocks hitting
the economy.
Monetary policy influences price and cost inflation with a time lag of perhaps one to three  years. In
consequence,  projections  for  price  and  cost  inflation  with  a  horizon  of  a  couple  of  years  play  an
important part in the setting of interest rates.
From  the  time  interest  rate  decisions  are  taken  until  the  interest  rate  has  an  impact  on  prices  and
costs,  various  types  of  disturbance  occur  which  influence  price  and  cost  inflation.  Thus  it  is  not
possible  to  maintain  full  control  over  developments  in  prices  and  costs.  Actual  price  and  cost
developments  normally  deviate  somewhat  from  earlier  projections.  On  the  basis  of  the  deviation
between actual price inflation and Norges Bank's projections over the last few  years, an uncertainty
interval for price inflation can be calculated.
How can monetary policy be credible when it is so difficult to control price inflation? The answer is to
be found in two factors. First, economic agents base their decisions on the probable inflation outcome.
Although  there  is  considerable  uncertainty,  monetary  policy  will  be  credible  if  the  outcome  they
consider  most  probable,  and  thus  base  their  decisions  on,  is  consistent  with  the  nominal  anchor.
Second, confidence is linked to the response pattern. If price inflation in Norway is higher than that
aimed at by the ECB as a result of shocks, there must be confidence that monetary policy instruments
are oriented towards bringing price  inflation  down  towards  the  level  implied  by  the  nominal  anchor.
Thus temporary deviations do not necessarily lead to a loss of credibility.
Confidence in low and stable inflation contributes to greater stability in the krone exchange rate than
would otherwise be the case. However, this cannot prevent changes in the krone exchange rate if the
BIS Review 7/2001
3
Norwegian economy is subjected to substantial disturbances in the real economy other than those in
the euro area and such disturbances are not countered by fiscal or incomes policy.
Monetary  policy  cannot  function  effectively  without  good  interplay  with  fiscal  policy.  In  the  euro
countries, the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact provide guidelines for fiscal policy,
including requirements to reduce government debt and to record a budget surplus during upturns and
the establishment  of  limits  on  deficits  during  recessions.  Sweden  has  placed  a  cap  on  government
expenditure  in  the  medium  term,  and  is  systematically  reducing  government  debt.  The  UK  is
complying  with a  guideline  stating  that  public  consumption  should  not  be  debt-financed.  They  have
also  placed  a  cap  on  government  net  debt.  The  US  has  created  a  significant  budget  surplus,  and
government debt is being reduced.
In Norway it is important that the annual budgets are anchored in a long-term strategy which takes into
account that oil revenues may fluctuate from one year to the next. It is an advantage if fiscal policy can
also  be  used  to  counter  fluctuations  in  demand  and  production.  Given  the  policy  objective,  the
government  budget  should  not  have  a  procyclical  effect.  It  would  be  undesirable  for  government
budgets  to  contribute  to  increased  demand  for  labour  at  times  when  price  and  wage  inflation  is
appreciably higher than the rate in other countries.
Transparency in monetary policy
In  order  to  contribute  to  greater  credibility  and  confidence,  Norges  Bank  places  emphasis  on
transparency  with  regard  to  its  interest  rate  policy.  Transparency  promotes  predictability  in  the
behaviour  of  the  central  bank  and  helps  reduce  uncertainty  for  economic  agents.  The  Norwegian
economy is accordingly less subject to doubt and speculation about the setting of interest rates, there
is greater stability in expectations formation and movements in market interest rates are smoother.
The President of the European Central Bank, Willem F. Duisenberg, has defined transparency as "the
extent to which the external presentation of the decisions corresponds to the internal decision-making
process."
At the press conferences held in connection with our monetary policy meetings, we provide an account
of the background  to  the  interest  rate  decision. We  usually  include  a  statement  of  bias,  ie  whether
there is a greater probability that the next change in interest rates will be an increase or a reduction.
The Bank's inflation reports contain Norges Bank's projections for inflation for the next two years. The
annual  report  provides  a  review  of  the  use  of  instruments  and  the  basis  for  decision-making.  An
evaluation  is  also  presented  of  how  well  we  have  succeeded  in  attaining  our  monetary  policy
objectives.
4
BIS Review 7/2001
It  would  appear  that  transparency  in  our  interpretation  of  the  Bank's  mandate  and  our  response
pattern  may  have  contributed  to  somewhat  greater  monetary  policy  predictability.  Chart  5  suggests
that money market rates now change less when Norges Bank changes its key rates than in the past.
Another, and at least  equally  important,  aspect of transparency  is that transparency concerning our
mandate,  our  interpretation  of  it,  our  response  pattern  and  our  evaluation  of  the  economic  outlook
places restrictions on our own freedom of manoeuvre. This helps to ensure that the central bank is
consistent over time.
Monetary policy in recent years
Has monetary policy been successful? Has it contributed to satisfying the preconditions for a stable
krone  exchange  rate?  Before  I  attempt  to  answer  these  questions,  I  will  briefly  review  the  actual
conduct of monetary policy and the decision-making basis.
The period between December 1992, when the fixed exchange rate regime was formally abandoned,
and 1996 was characterised by balanced growth and a stable krone exchange rate. However, in 1996
the  economy  began  to  show  signs  of  overheating.  Coupled  with  an  increase  in  oil  prices,  this
contributed to appreciation pressures on the krone. Interest rates were kept at a low level to counter
BIS Review 7/2001
5
appreciation pressures, and fiscal policy was not sufficiently tight to curb pressures in the economy.
Developments since the  beginning  of  1997  show  that  the  exchange  rate  is  no  longer  suitable  as  a
short-term operational objective of monetary policy. Norges Bank cannot fine-tune the exchange rate.
As mentioned, Norges Bank therefore places emphasis on satisfying the fundamental preconditions
for stability in the krone exchange rate over time in its conduct of monetary policy.
Instability increased further in 1998. In addition to domestic problems of overheating, which translated
into  strong  cost  inflation,  1998  was  marked  by  financial  crises  in  Asia,  Russia  and  Brazil,  falling
commodity prices and general unrest in international financial markets. After it became clear in August
that Russia would not, in practice, be servicing its foreign debt, market participants became highly risk-
averse. The unrest also spread to European financial markets and to Norway. Investors moved their
funds  to  Germany,  the  US  and  Switzerland.  The  currencies  of  countries  with  less  liquid  and  more
volatile  financial  markets,  such  as  Norway  and  Sweden,  depreciated.  The  Norwegian  krone
depreciated from around 101 against the ECU index at the beginning of the year to 115 in October,
the weakest rate since the objective of exchange rate stability against the ECU was adopted.
Norges Bank responded to the sharp depreciation of the krone by raising its key rates in several steps
through 1998. Following the last increase in interest rates on 25 August, the sight deposit rate stood at
8.00 per cent, 4.50 percentage points higher than at the beginning of 1998. Kjell Storvik stated a few
days later that "The interest rate level which has now been established should, in addition to directly
contributing to stabilising the krone exchange rate, dampen price expectations, which in turn implies
that expectations of a further depreciation will gradually recede."
During the autumn, it appeared that the effects of the depreciation of the krone on inflation would not
be as great as assumed originally. First, the krone had depreciated less against an average of trading
partners' currencies than against the ECU. Second, price inflation in the global economy fell. At the
same time, it appeared that the turnaround in the real economy would be considerable. Low oil prices
amplified the fall in investment in the petroleum sector.
At the beginning of 1999, the outlook for the Norwegian economy seemed fairly bleak. In this situation,
the possibility that Norway would enter a recession of a type that would further reduce confidence in
the krone was considered a definite risk. This is why Norges Bank decided at the beginning of 1999 to
reduce  interest  rates.  Owing  to  the  uncertainty  associated  with  economic  developments  and  the
effects  of  interest  rate  changes,  Norges  Bank  adopts  a  gradual  approach  to  the  setting  of  interest
rates. Interest rates were therefore reduced in five steps by a total of 2.50 percentage points in the
period  from  28  January  to  23  September  1999.  The  lowering  of  interest  rates  contributed  to
strengthening the krone.
6
BIS Review 7/2001
In mid-1999, Norges Bank considered the risk of a recession of a type that would reduce confidence in
the krone to be substantially reduced. In addition to the reduction in interest rates, this was partly due
to  brighter  prospects  for  international  growth  and  higher  commodity  prices.  However,  we  still
envisaged a growth pause in the Norwegian economy. The projections for price and cost inflation in
the next few years were then in accord with the corresponding aim for inflation for the ECB. Following
the last decision to reduce the interest rate on 22 September 1999,  we signalled that our forecasts
indicated a greater probability that the next interest rate change would be a reduction, although we did
state that there was little room for further reductions in interest rates.
Through the latter half of 1999, economic indicators suggested that we had underestimated economic
growth. The projections for price and cost inflation in the mainland economy over the next few years
were revised up. This was why Norges Bank, following its monetary policy meeting on 16 March 2000,
at  which  interest  rates  were  left  unchanged,  signalled  for  the  first  time  that  the  next  interest  rate
change was more likely to be an increase. On 12 April 2000, Norges Bank decided to increase the
sight deposit rate by 0.25 percentage point to 5.75 per cent.
The decision to raise our key rates was taken in a period when the krone had depreciated against an
average of trading partners' currencies, but was stable and strong against the euro, primarily reflecting
the weakness of the euro. Given the prevailing situation in the Norwegian economy, we were of the
view  that  an  unchanged  interest  rate  would  not  contribute  to  bringing  price  and  cost  inflation  down
BIS Review 7/2001
7
towards the corresponding aim for inflation of the ECB. An unchanged interest rate would therefore
undermine the objective of a stable exchange rate over time. At the same time, growth in the economy
was so strong that a higher interest rate would not increase the risk of a deflationary recession to any
significant  extent.  The  interest  rate  increase  of  0.25  percentage  point  was  in  itself  modest. We  did
indicate, however, that it was more likely that the next change in interest rates would be an increase.
Growing evidence of continued pressures in the economy emerged during the summer of 2000. The
wage settlement resulted in an increase in labour costs of about 5 per cent in both 2000 and 2001.
The projections for price and cost inflation in the years ahead were revised up as a result of the higher
rise  in  labour  costs,  a  weaker  effective  krone  exchange  rate  and  stronger  external  inflationary
impulses.  It  appeared  that  the  growth  pause  in  the  Norwegian  economy  would  be  shorter  than
expected.
Against the background of an upward revision of the projections for price and cost inflation in the next
few years, Norges Bank decided on 14 June to raise the interest rate by 0.50 percentage point. This
was followed by another increase of 0.50 percentage point on 9 August. We then indicated that it was
more likely that the next change in interest rates would be an increase, but also stated that substantial
steps had been taken in the adjustment of the interest rate that was appropriate on the basis of our
analyses.  Following  the  next  decision  to  increase  interest  rates  by  0.25  percentage  point  on
20 September,  we  indicated  that  the  probability  that  the  next  change  in  interest  rates  would  be  a
reduction was the same as the probability of an increase. The sight deposit rate has since remained at
7.00 per cent.
In the December 2000 Inflation Report, it was estimated that price inflation would decline gradually in
the years ahead, but remain higher than 2 per cent in 2003 and 2004. However, the projections were
based on the assumption that interest rates move in line with market expectations, as implied by the
forward rate curve. The market had factored in a decline in interest rates over the next two years. It
thus appeared that market participants had a different perception of the probability of a reduction in
interest rates than the one expressed by Norges Bank. The technical assumption of a fall in interest
rates influenced the projections. In the report, we also indicated that given an unchanged interest rate,
projected price inflation would be below 2 per cent from the end of 2002.
Has monetary policy been successful?
It is not possible to find a simple performance measure that makes it easy to determine in retrospect
whether  monetary  policy  has  been  successful.  As  noted  earlier,  confidence  and  credibility  are
important for achieving the objectives of monetary policy. The degree of confidence and credibility will
be an indication of how successful monetary policy has been.
Confidence and credibility cannot be measured directly. There are,  however, various indicators that
provide  some  information.  Credibility  is  reflected  in  the  accord  between  the  public's  expectations
8
BIS Review 7/2001
concerning  future  nominal  developments  and  the  nominal  anchor.  One  test  might  be  whether
economic  agents  expect  inflation  to  be  reduced  towards  the  corresponding  aim  for  inflation  for  the
ECB. The ECB's primary  objective  is  the  maintenance  of  price  stability,  which  it  has  defined  as  an
annual increase of below two per cent in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices.
Inflation expectations cannot be measured precisely, but a rough estimate may be obtained through
surveys.  Chart  11  shows  market  participants'  expectations  concerning  inflation  over  the  next  ten
years, according to Consensus Forecasts.
With a proviso regarding the accuracy of such measures, the survey indicates that price inflation is
expected to be reduced in the years ahead and approach the interval aimed at by the ECB. In its latest
survey of 8 January 2001, Consensus Forecasts' projection for inflation was 2.0 per cent in 2001.
Changes  in  long-term  interest  rates  are  another  indicator  of  inflation  expectations.  Implied  forward
rates,  which  measure  market  expectations  concerning  future  short-term  rates,  can  be  derived  from
long-term  rates.  If  Norwegian  long-term  forward  rates  are  substantially  higher  than  corresponding
rates  in  the  euro  area,  this  may  be  an  indication  that,  over  time,  market  participants  expect  higher
price inflation in Norway than in euro countries. However, because interest rate expectations cannot
be  directly  observed,  some  uncertainty  with  regard  to  the  calculation  method  must  be  taken  into
account.
BIS Review 7/2001
9
Chart  12  shows  movements  in  the  long-term  forward  rate  differential  against  Germany.  A  positive
forward rate differential reflects to some extent a relatively small market for Norwegian  government
bonds compared with other countries. The yield on Norwegian government bonds is therefore normally
higher than the yield on corresponding German bonds in order to compensate for liquidity risk.
The forward rate differential is generally low, indicating that in the long run inflation in Norway is not
expected  to  be  substantially  higher  than  in  euro  countries.  As  with  the  information  provided  in
Consensus  Forecasts,  forward  rates  also  indicate  that  participants  in  financial  markets  have  a
reasonable degree of confidence in monetary policy.
The degree of confidence in monetary policy is also reflected in the foreign exchange market. Waning
confidence  results  in  a  weaker  and  more  unstable  krone  exchange  rate.  Chart  13  shows
developments in the market's evaluation of the probability distribution for the krone exchange rate one
month ahead. A flat curve reflects considerable uncertainty. The curves, which are derived from prices
for  currency  options,  show  that  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  future  krone  exchange  rate  is
considerably less today than at the beginning of 1999.
Both  surveys  and  financial  indicators,  such  as  forward  rates  and  prices  for  currency  options,  can
provide  information about  confidence  in  monetary  policy.  Even  though  such  information  is  useful,  it
does  not  provide  a  sufficient  basis  for  evaluating  whether  monetary  policy  has  been  successful  in
relation to the objective set out in the Exchange Rate Regulation. In order to evaluate in retrospect the
monetary policy that has been conducted, we can also examine developments in actual inflation and
the krone exchange rate. It should  be mentioned, however, that  we cannot solely consider  whether
developments in inflation and the exchange rate have been satisfactory in relation to the objective. We
must also, on a discretionary basis, evaluate whether the exchange rate and inflation could have been
stabilised at lower real economic costs.
When assessing monetary policy in retrospect, the decision-making basis that existed at the time must
be taken into account. The decision-making basis may change as a result of revisions to data or new
information  about  economic  developments,  or  our  interpretation  of  the  information  available  may
simply change.
Even though it is difficult to find a simple and precise performance measure, some general evaluation
criteria may be identified. If the krone exchange rate  is stable at approximately  the initial range,  as
defined in the Exchange Rate Regulation, and inflation is approximately on a par with the level aimed
at by the ECB, it may be said that monetary policy, on the basis of the objective established, has been
successful. With a weak exchange rate and high inflation, it is natural to raise critical questions about
monetary policy. It may then have been too expansionary. Similarly, with a strong exchange rate and
with inflation close to zero or deflation, monetary policy has probably been too tight.
If  price  and  cost  inflation  is  on  a  par  with  the  level  aimed  at  by  the  ECB,  one  of  the  fundamental
preconditions for exchange rate stability has been satisfied. The exchange rate may nevertheless be
10
BIS Review 7/2001
regarded as "too strong" or "too weak" in relation to the initial range. This may be because conditions
in the real economy imply a real appreciation or real depreciation of the krone. The reason for these
exchange  rate  changes  may  be  a  deterioration  or  improvement  in  the  cost  competitiveness  of  the
Norwegian  business  sector.  For  example,  a  greater  use  of  petroleum  revenues  in  the  government
budget  may  mean  that  the  internationally  exposed  sector  has  to  be  scaled  back  in  order  to  create
room  for  higher  domestic  consumption.  The  equilibrium  level  for  the  krone  exchange  rate  may
therefore  change.  In  this  situation,  Norges  Bank  should  have  carefully  evaluated  the  reasons  for
exchange rate movements. If there is reason to believe that the exchange rate will remain strong or
weak  for  a  prolonged  period,  Norges  Bank  will  have  to  decide  whether  to  notify  the  government
authorities that measures other than those available to the central bank may be necessary.
We  can  imagine  situations  in  which  the  interest  rate  had  to  be  kept  at  a  high  level,  leading  to  a
deflationary recession, in order to allow the krone exchange rate to remain close to its initial range for
a period. However, this situation would hardly be stable. As long as economic fundamentals do not
support  the  krone  exchange  rate  at  the  initial  range,  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  this  would  persist.  If
monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  a  deflationary  recession,  it  could  not  be  characterised  as
successful even if the krone has been stable around the initial range for a period, because this would
have created the basis for future fluctuations in the exchange rate. Similarly, a krone exchange rate
around the initial range combined with high inflation will not be sustainable. Monetary policy could not
be said to have  been successful in relation to  the  guidelines because,  also  in this case,  it must be
assumed that it was partly responsible for creating the basis for an unstable krone exchange rate at a
later stage.
The  Norwegian  economy  may  be  exposed  to  economic  disturbances  that  contribute  both  to  higher
inflation and to a temporary appreciation of the krone exchange rate. In this situation, monetary policy
should  have  attempted  to  counter  a  sustained  higher  level  of  inflation  because  higher  inflation
provides the basis for subsequent krone instability. However, Norges Bank should in advance  have
notified the government authorities, which should also have evaluated other measures for stabilising
economic developments.
The  Norwegian  economy  may  also  be  exposed  to  negative  events  that  provide  the  prospect  of  a
deflationary recession and a depreciation of the krone. For example, a fall in oil prices may influence
the  economy  in  this  direction.  Monetary  policy  should  in  retrospect  be  evaluated  on  the  basis  of
whether it has contributed to countering deflationary tendencies. In such a situation, as well, there may
be  reason  for  Norges  Bank  to  notify  the  government  authorities  that  measures  other  than  those
available to the central bank are necessary.
The evaluation criteria I have outlined are summarised in the matrix in Chart 14. At the beginning of
1999, the krone was weak, interest rates were high and there was a considerable risk of a recession of
the type that would further reduce confidence in the krone. We could thus easily have ended up in a
situation  that  is  represented  by  the  box  in  the  upper  left-hand  corner  of  the  matrix.  Norges  Bank
decided to reduce interest rates in order to stimulate the economy. As I mentioned earlier, the krone
BIS Review 7/2001
11
appreciated  when  interest  rates  were  reduced,  indicating  that  the  decision  resulted  in  increased
confidence in the krone.
Following  the  interest  rate  reductions  in  1999,  the  krone  exchange  rate  against  the  euro  was
approximately at its initial range, while price inflation was approximately on a par with the level aimed
at by the ECB. We were thus in the situation represented by the box in the middle of the matrix. During
the autumn of 1999 and spring of 2000, however, there was growing evidence that the growth pause
in  the  Norwegian  economy  would  be  shorter  than  assumed,  and  it  appeared  that  price  and  cost
inflation was picking up. In order to contribute to satisfying the fundamental preconditions for stability
in the exchange rate, Norges Bank decided to increase interest rates. This occurred at a time when
the krone exchange rate against the euro had strengthened further and was stronger than the initial
range. There was thus a risk that we would end up in the situation represented by the box in the lower
right-hand  corner  of  the  matrix,  in  other  words  the  exact  opposite  of  the  situation  expected  at  the
beginning of 1999. The fact that in the first case we decided to lower interest rates, even though the
krone was weak against the euro, while in the second case we decided to increase interest rates, even
though the krone was strong against the euro, reflects the symmetry in our response pattern.
In this period, movements in the euro exchange rate against the US dollar have influenced the krone
exchange  rate  against  the  euro  without  this  being  driven  by  conditions  in  the  Norwegian  economy.
This is a factor that we have not emphasised when setting interest rates.
If we look at the two-year period as a whole, consumer price inflation has averaged about 2.7 per cent.
However,  a more accurate impression of inflationary  impulses is obtained  when  we exclude  factors
that have only a short-term effect on inflation, such as changes in indirect taxes, electricity prices, the
revision of the house rent index and changes in petrol prices. The underlying rise in consumer prices
has averaged about 2.3 per cent in this period. It is nevertheless relevant to raise the question as to
whether  monetary  policy  in  general  has  been  too  expansionary.  I  would,  however,  point  out  that
monetary policy must be evaluated in relation to the decision-making basis that existed at the time the
decisions  were made. Given the decision-making basis prevailing in 1999, it  seemed  likely  that  the
Norwegian  economy  would  experience  a  growth  pause  and  that  price  and  cost  inflation  would  fall.
Moreover,  the  international  financial  market  was  fragile  as  a  result  of  the  many  financial  crises  the
previous  year. As new information gradually pointed to higher growth in Norway and internationally,
coupled with the prospect of higher-than-expected price and cost inflation, we raised the interest rate.
It may be that the combination of the decline in interest rates in 1999 and the  brighter international
growth outlook, partly reflected in higher oil prices, had an impact on expectations formation that we
underestimated.
Today, the krone exchange rate is approximately in the initial range, while inflation is higher than the
level  aimed  at  by  the  ECB.  However,  the  interest  rate  is  oriented  towards  bringing  price  and  cost
inflation down towards this level. If price and cost inflation remains too high, this will translate into a
weak and unstable krone exchange rate sooner or later.
12
BIS Review 7/2001
Conclusion
In  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  we  have  two  objectives.  First,  we  have  a  long-term  perspective
where  building  confidence  and  credibility  is  important  for  ensuring  nominal  stability.  Second,  the
conduct of monetary policy is based on day-to-day discretion. The exercise of this discretion, however,
is  limited  by  Norges  Bank's  mandate  and  our  interpretation  of  it.  Furthermore,  we  have  ourselves
contributed to restricting the exercise of discretion by being transparent in our response pattern, our
analyses of economic developments and our assessment of the results of the monetary policy that has
been conducted. We hope, and believe, that this contributes to consistency over time and makes an
important contribution to building confidence and credibility.
Thank you for your attention.
References:
Duisenberg,  Willem  F.  (2000):  "Making  monetary  policy  in  a  broad  monetary  union",  BIS  Review
2000/88.
Eitrheim,  Øyvind,  Espen  Frøyland  and  Øistein  Røisland  (1999):  "Can  the  price  of  currency  options
provide an indication of market perceptions of the uncertainty attached to the krone exchange rate?",
Economic Bulletin 3/1999, Norges Bank.
Kloster,  Arne  (2000):  "Estimating  and  interpreting  interest  rate  expectations",  Economic  Bulletin
3/2000, Norges Bank.
Storvik, Kjell (1998): "Current economic and monetary policy issues", address given by Kjell Storvik,
Governor  of  Norges  Bank  at  the  43rd  annual  general  meeting  of  FOREX  NORWAY  on  28  August
1998.
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (1997):  "Inflation  forecast  targeting:  Implementing  and  monitoring  inflation
targets", European Economic Review 41, pp. 1111-1146.
BIS Review 7/2001
13
