Joseph Yam, JP: The Hong Kong Monetary Authority’s main initiatives in the
area of banking supervision
Speech by Mr Joseph Yam, JP, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA), at a
lunch with representatives of the Finance Constituency organised by Dr David Li, held in Hong Kong
on 15 January 2001.
The speech outlines the latest state of play on the HKMA’s current initiatives in the area of banking
supervision,  as  well  as  responding  to  some  points  raised  by  Dr  Li  on  behalf  of  the  Finance
Constituency.
 1. 
I  would  like  to  thank  David  Li  for  arranging  today’s  lunch  with  representatives  of  the  Finance
Constituency. The number of live  issues in the realm of  bank  supervision,  some  of  which  have
been set down in David’s letter in advance of this lunch, is currently quite considerable, so it is
useful to have this opportunity to get together to exchange views. As you will know, it is very much
our style to work in close collaboration with the banking industry on developing our policies rather
than to adopt a confrontational approach, and long may this continue.
2.  Let me run through what I see as the HKMA’s main initiatives in the bank supervision area in the
next twelve months, in the course of which I will try to pick up some of the points made in David’s
letter. I see there being three main initiatives, namely:
1.  deposit protection;
2.  deregulation and other market reforms; and
3. 
the credit reference agency.
3.  On deposit protection, we are now coming to the end of the consultation period on the consultants
report – in fact there are just two days left, so if you want to make a submission, you will have to
hurry!  Once  we  have  collected  in  everyone’s  comments  we  will  carefully  review  them  and
determine  whether  to  recommend  going  ahead  with  such  a  scheme  and,  if  so,  exactly  how  it
should be structured. As you will be very aware, the views of the banks on this issue are mixed,
whereas LegCo has given a clear endorsement, and most other parties are also in favour. But,
assuming we do go ahead, this is really only the beginning, and there will be a lot of work to be
done on the design features. For example, should coverage of the scheme be limited to $100,000,
or should it be $200,000? Should funding be ex-ante or ex-post? Should premiums be risk-based?
None of these issues have been decided yet, so we welcome any constructive comments and will
certainly consider them carefully.
4.  One particular question that has been raised is whether deposits with RLBs and DTCs should be
covered. The consultant suggested  not,  primarily  on  the  grounds  that  excluding  them  would  be
consistent  with the institutional coverage of the current priority claims provisions.  Moreover,  the
aim of deposit protection is to protect small retail depositors, i.e. depositors with deposits of less
than $100,000, and DTCs and RLB do not have such depositors. However, the issue of whether
their exclusion from coverage might adversely affect the business of RLBs and DTCs needs to be
considered. Certainly one might argue that as the first $100,000 of deposits of over $100,000 with
licensed banks would be covered, the same should apply to deposits with RLBs and DTCs. This is
something that we will consider further in the light of the views that have been expressed.
5.  Moving on to the  issue of deregulation, July,  of course, will see  the  full  abolition  of  controls  on
interest rates. This is highly significant, as such controls are surely inimical to Hong Kong’s free
competition  ethos.  Certainly  this  change  in  the  status  quo  will  provide  certain  challenges  for
institutions, but in the long run the competition, innovation and efficiency that the removal of such
barriers will engender will help to keep Hong Kong’s banking sector competitive and profitable. We
also, as you know, hold the view that some greater consolidation among the local banks would be
desirable  from  this  point  of  view,  although  we  have  not  forced  the  issue.  This  is  something,
however, to which we would urge bank owners to give careful thought.
It is clear that as part of the  process of deregulation of interest rates banks will  be  considering
revising certain fees and charges. This, of course, is understandable. If deregulation is to improve
competition and efficiency, banks must be free to adjust their pricing not just on interest rates but
6. 
BIS Review 3/2001
1
7. 
also on fees and charges. I have absolutely no argument with this. However, I very much hope
that  banks  will  display  some  sensitivity  on  this,  and  will  bear  in  mind  the  public  interest.  They
should also ensure that their pricing is transparent, and that customers have good notice of any
changes.
In  addition  to  interest  rate  deregulation,  there  are  a  number  of  other  market  reform  measures
originating  from  the  consultancy  report  published  a  year  or  so  ago  which  are  still  being
progressed. For example, later this year we will consider whether there should be some further
relaxation of the restriction on the opening of branches by foreign banks which have entered the
market since 1978. We also plan to review whether the three-tier system of authorisation might be
reduced to two tiers, although we do not plan to visit this issue until next year – i.e. 2002 - and
have quite an open mind on this. This is rather later than we originally intended. But it reflects the
fact  that  we  believe  that  the  present  system  is  working  reasonably  well  and  that  there  is  no
pressing  need  to  change.  We  are  also  heavily  preoccupied  with  deposit  insurance  and  the
outcome of that exercise may influence the way in which the three tier structure is modified – most
obviously, whether the deposit threshold for DTCs should continue to be set at $100,000.
8.  Also on the back burner for the time being is consideration of whether there should be any change
to the minimum paid-up capital requirements for locally-incorporated AIs. This obviously is tied in
to some extent with the reform of the three-tier structure, as if we did amalgamate the RLBs and
DTCs into a single class we would have to decide what the minimum paid-up capital requirement
for the class should be. This is something we will have to consider in due course, but we are of
course  well  aware  that  a  higher  requirement  would  have  implications  for  some  of  the  smaller
DTCs, and we will certainly have regard to this. Aside from any change related to the reform of the
three-tier structure, we don’t at  present have  any other plans in relation to the minimum capital
requirements, although at some point we may want to consider updating them in line with inflation.
9.  On the third initiative I mentioned, the credit reference agency, some of  you may know that we
have  established  a  working  group  to  take  this  initiative  further.  The  consultation  we  conducted
indicated that there was quite widespead support for such an agency, although having said that it
is fair to say that there was quite a diversity of opinion on various aspects. The working group will
investigate  this  further  and  try  to  arrive  at  a  recommended  way  forward.  But  we  hope  that
something  can  be  done  in  this  area,  as  most  seem  to  agree  that  such  an  agency  would  be
beneficial.
10.  So that brings me to the end of what I see as the three main initiatives, but let me also comment
on  a  few  other  outstanding  matters.  First  is  the  vexed  question  of  the  approval  of  managers.  I
must confess we have been a little taken aback by some of the reaction to this proposal, which
seems to question our motives for seeking such a power. All I can say is that we have no ulterior
motives. We simply feel that if individuals are to fill important positions in banks then steps should
be taken to ensure that they are fit and proper for the position. Clearly it is the banks’ responsibility
to select individuals and satisfy themselves as to their credentials, and you can be assured that
we have absolutely no desire to second-guess these decisions. However, it is a fact that we may,
on occasion, have access to information on an individual which the bank does not have. We would
see  ourselves,  therefore,  as  acting  as  very  much  a  second  line  of  defence  –  and  only  in
exceptional  cases.  A  number  of  banks  see  the  logic  in  this  and  support  our  proposals.  Others
remain  less  enthusiastic.  But  we  are  consulting  the  industry  further  on  this  and  I  hope  that
something that is acceptable to all can be arrived at.
11.  Next is the issue of the review of the Code of Banking Practice, in relation to which it is suggested
in David’s letter that some people are unhappy about the stance taken by the HKMA. On this, I am
afraid, I have rather less sympathy than on other issues with those who raise concerns. I do not
believe that any of the changes promoted in the Working Group, such as in relation to credit cards
and also to fees and charges, are unreasonable. Indeed, most banks seem to have accepted the
rationale  for  changes  such  as  the  $500  card  loss  limit,  which  brings  Hong  Kong  into  line  with
international practice. I believe that the banks must appreciate that issues relating to terms and
conditions  and  other  aspects  of  customer  service  are  a  legitimate  matter  of  public  interest  and
concern. In the past, it is true, the HKMA has not been as closely involved in consumer matters.
This, however, is something that is changing, not because we particularly desire it but because it
seems to be what the public expect. We plan, therefore, to review our involvement in this area so
as to determine exactly what our role should be.
2
BIS Review 3/2001
12.  Finally,  there  have  been  concerns  expressed  that  the  HKMA’s  supervision  has  become  more
intrusive and that requests for information are sometimes excessive. This is certainly something
we are aware of, however I should point out that we don’t ask for information just for the sake of it.
If we ask for some new information, or for an institution to increase the frequency of its reporting,
there is always a very good reason for it. I know that we asked for a lot of additional information,
particularly following the onset of the Asian financial crisis, but I make no apology for this, as I can
assure you it was necessary for our monitoring of the banking sector, and of individual institutions,
through the crisis. But having said that, we are of course very well aware of the burden that this
places  on  institutions,  and  can  assure  you  that  we  will  continue  to  keep  our  information
requirements under review with this in mind. We are also aware of the need to ensure that our
staff deal with the banks with the appropriate degree of sensitivity, that they only make requests
which are reasonable, and that they try to explain why particular things are required. This is quite
a challenge for us, but it is something we must work on nevertheless.
13.  This brings me to the end of my remarks. I have not said anything on the bankruptcy laws or tax
issues, which were two issues I was asked to addresss, but I don’t think there is much I can say
on these areas except that we appreciate the banks’ views and will reflect these to the appropriate
authorities as appropriate. Certainly we are aware of the rising trend in personal bankruptcies and
the possible impact of this on delinquencies, and this is something we are watching closely. We
are also in dialogue with the Privacy Commissioner and other parties to try to get the scope of the
credit data that can be released to credit agencies increased,  which  would perhaps  help in this
area.
14.  I hope these comments have been of interest to you all. Let me end on a positive note. We are all
part  of  a  highly  successful  industry  here  in  Hong  Kong.  As  banking  regulator,  it  is  the  HKMA’s
objective  to  promote  a  safe  and  stable  banking  system.  To  achieve  this  we  need  the  banking
industry to be successful, profitable, competitive, innovative, and responsive to change, and this
surely is your objective too. So let’s continue to work together on initiatives such as those I have
discussed today so as to ensure the continued prosperity of our industry.
15.  Thank you.
BIS Review 3/2001
3
