Stephen Grenville: Monetary policy: the end of history?
Speech by Mr Stephen Grenville, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Monetary
Authority of Singapore’s 30th Anniversary Conference on Central Banking in the New Economic and
Financial Landscape, Singapore, 20 July 2001.
 This session has a more philosophical theme, about the broad sweep of monetary policy. So I would
like to use the opportunity to look at some history – where we have come from; where we are; and
where we might possibly be going.
It  would  be  hard  to  exaggerate  the  changes  of  monetary  policy  in  the  past  thirty  years  or  so.  The
question I want to ask, given these extraordinary historical changes, is whether we have now reached
the  ”end  of  history”  in  the  sense  that  Francis  Fukijama  had  in  mind  when  he  talked  about  political
systems, which had evolved so that one successful system dominates and displaces others. Has this
happened  with  monetary  policy?  Before  I  get  into  any  detail  here  I  want  to  record  a  summary
answer – that monetary policy has reached a satisfactory state where it has a clearly defined ”best-
practice”  framework  which  is  performing  well;  but  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  think  we  have  reached
some nirvana, from which no further perfecting is possible. So the short answer is ”no” – there is more
history to come.
Where we have come from
When I first studied economics, going back more than thirty years, my recollection is that we thought
about monetary policy in the following terms:
 
monetary  and  fiscal  policy  were  near-perfect  substitutes,  used  in  tandem  to  achieve  the
same short-term goal – the smoothing of the business cycle. If the cycle could be smoothed,
all would be well in the best of worlds, with inflation under control and growth as good as it
could be;
the analytical framework behind this was a non-vertical Phillips curve – i.e. there was some
trade-off between real output and inflation, although  we did  not think much about  whether
this trade-off would remain in the longer term;
monetary policy worked through regulation and quantitative controls (which were, it should
be said, quite effective in this simple world);
low interest rates were widely regarded as a ”good thing”, perhaps because the number of
borrowers was greater than the number of rentiers, but more probably because we thought
that  growth  and  investment  were  in  themselves  good  things,  and  that  these  would  be
encouraged  by  low,  stable  interest  rates.  It  may  also  be  relevant  that  governments  were
reluctant to inflict losses on bond-holders, and wanted to borrow more, cheaply;
there  was  not  too  much  concern  about  international  integration,  particularly  in  the  capital
market. To the extent that we worried about the external sector, it was always in terms of the
current account and the pressure that might come on the (fixed) exchange rate;
there  were,  of  course,  financial  crises  in  those  days,  but  they  seemed  to  have  a  different
nature. I was reminded of this when I read the recent quote of one banker who, when asked
why his bank had come through the U.K. 1973 secondary banking crisis so well, replied that
”it was simple: we only lent to people who had been to Eton”. Things happened differently in
that gentlemanly and old-fashioned world;
the  close  working  relationship  between  the  central  bank  and  the  government  might  be
illustrated  by  quoting  H C Coombs’1  endorsement  of  the  Montagu  Norman  view  ”that  a
central  bank should be like a good  wife. It should manage its household  competently  and
quietly; it should stand ready to assist and advise; it can properly persuade and cajole and
                                                           
1 Coombs, H C (1971), Other People's Money, Australian National University Press, Canberra.
BIS Review 67/2001
1
on occasions even nag; but in the end it should recognise that the government is the boss.”
(p. 63)2.
The transition
All this came to an end in the 1970s, with stagflation, the disappearance of the Phillips curve trade-off,
exchange rate collapses and subsequent floats, and large and disruptive foreign capital flows around
the world. There was a relatively brief flirtation with monetarism (to a large extent a direct response to
the high inflation of the 1970s). Its  basic  tenet  – a  stable  money  demand  function  and  control  over
money supply – could not be maintained in practice. Monetarism may well have provided some kind of
”heat-shield”  which,  for  example,  helped  the  Americans  get  inflation  down  in  the  Volcker  deflation
period of 1979-1983. Its empirical foundations, however, were not stable enough to allow it to be the
continuing basis of policy. But there were three lasting legacies of this period:
 
monetary policy was seen as a separate, specialised function, with a comparative advantage
clearly distinguishable from fiscal policy;
it required a nominal anchor;
the framework should constrain the decision-making process (i.e. it was not just a technical
or analytical construct). Without this, the authorities might be led astray by siren voices. This
was formalised in the idea of ”time inconsistency”, although much of the discussion in this
literature provided a woefully inadequate representation of the motivation of central banks.
 Meanwhile,  the  twin  snowballs  of  financial  deregulation  and  globalisation  were  rolling  forward,
gathering weight and altering the landscape as they went.
The current system
We took aboard the three legacies, while abandoning money targeting. For many of us, the alternative
was  to  aim  directly  for  the  target  of  price  stability.  In  the  formalised  version  of  this  – inflation
targeting – there are a variety of attractive characteristics:
 
a properly specified inflation target is  achievable  (i.e.  under  the  control  of  the  authorities),
unlike a money target;
it  addresses  the  issue  of  the  political  decision-making  process,  and  its  proclivity  to  be
diverted  by  biases  which  will  be  inflationary  in  the  long  run.  The  central  bank  needs
protection from these forces, in the form of independence;
at  the  same  time,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  democratic  process  to  provide
unelected officials with decision-making capacity of this nature without any guiding or limiting
rules.  Central  to  this  paradigm  (although  by  no  means  uniquely  associated  with  inflation
targeting) is a high degree of accountability and  transparency  on the  part of the monetary
authorities.  They  have  to  explain  themselves  not  only  to  the  Parliament  (as  the  source  of
their ultimate authority), but also to the public at large and to financial markets in particular.
Markets have  become not only the transmission path  of monetary policy, but are  also  the
guardians  and  watch-dogs  on  monetary  policy,  ready  to  sound  the  alarm  should  the
authorities stray from the straight and narrow;
these  inflation  targets  also  provide  an  anchor  for  price  expectations  (thus  addressing  the
problem of the shifting short-term Phillips curve).
   This model was pioneered by New Zealand (who introduced it, not as a specific model tailored to the
unique  needs  of  monetary  policy,  but  rather  as  part  of  a  process  of  reforming  governance  and
accountability, where the various arms of policy would be given clear goals and expected to achieve
them).  Many  of  us  (in  due  course,  the  New  Zealanders  included)  found  that  this  narrow  version  of
inflation targeting was unsuitable for one reason or another and we have adopted more sophisticated,
less  rigid  or  narrow  versions,  principally  addressing  the  issue  of  how  much  variance  in  inflation  is
tolerated. While there may not be a long-term trade-off between inflation and output, there is a trade-
                                                     
2
Views about the appropriate relationship between governments and central banks have changed almost as much as those
about men and women!
2
BIS Review 67/2001
off between inflation variability and output variability – to try to adhere too closely and too constantly to
a narrow  inflation target  is likely to  be  unnecessarily disruptive of  output.  Various  inflation  targeters
have addressed this problem with different specifications of the target, but it is notable just how similar
most of us have become.
In addition to the dozen or so countries which are card-carrying inflation targeters, there are a number
of others which have systems generically quite similar, if less formalised (as is the case in the United
States – see the recent speech by Larry Meyer3). And, of course, there are others who have chosen a
different  nominal  anchor  – Singapore,  where  the  exchange  rate  provides  the  equivalent  and
analogous anchor, with the same ultimate objective.
Where are we going?
With so many countries having evolved to quite similar systems, have we reached the ”end of history”?
I think, for the moment, we have reached some kind of stable resting point: certainly in Australia we
are very satisfied with the performance of this framework. We regard this system as having reached
an advanced stage of evolution, with the formal exchange of letters between the Treasurer and the
Governor in 1996, endorsing the framework which had then been in existence for some years. It can
no doubt be tweaked in various operational ways, but we would regard these as minor modifications,
rather  than  full  upgrades.  So  there  is  no  obvious  or  compelling  logic  which  would  move  us  to  a
subsequent stage of history.
Of course, ”things” happen, and they may happen so as to invalidate the inflation targeting framework.
One  way  we  might  be  knocked  off  this  framework  is  if  the  problematic  task  of  forecasting  inflation
proves  too  difficult  – in  effect,  if  the  lags  in  monetary  policy  are  longer  than  our  ability  to  forecast
inflation.  Similarly  (observing  Japan  at  present)  it  is  possible  that  an  economy  could  find  itself  in  a
period of prolonged deflation, with monetary policy apparently not able to counter these forces.
However, I cannot help thinking that the real issue lies elsewhere. With continuing success, the feeling
will  arise  that  it  is  all  a  bit  too  easy:  that  the  old  inflation  monster,  now  tamed,  seems  a  bit  of  a
pussy-cat and not, by itself, of such enormous importance to justify devoting monetary policy solely to
its control. Just about the whole of the world (whether inflation targeters or not) has reduced inflation
to manageable levels. It seems at least possible that people will begin to regard this task as so easy,
and  so  assured  of  success,  that  monetary  policy  could  be  asked  to  do  more.  I  can  think  of  two
directions in which we might be asked to do more.
First, we have established a wide consensus that monetary policy can do something to smooth the
course of the business cycle, but this should not be the primary goal. But if inflation control begins to
look  easy,  people  may  ask  central  banks  to  focus  the  power  of  monetary  policy  more  fully  in  the
direction of smoothing the cycle. I do not propose to say more about this, other than to observe that
this can, at least in principle, be encompassed within the inflation targeting framework, recognising the
legitimate trade-off between inflation variability and output variability. But we also need to remember
how much more painful it is to have to wind inflation back down, once price expectations have been
disturbed.
More interesting, in the current debate, is whether monetary policy should do more to achieve financial
stability. A clear dichotomy or specialisation has developed, in which monetary policy is seen as the
instrument for maintaining price stability, and prudential regulation is ”assigned to” financial stability.
This dichotomy is increasingly reflected in the vogue of separating the central bank from the prudential
regulator.
But financial stability is under constant bombardment – reflected in the increasing complexity  of the
Basel II rules; the pressure to widen the reach of financial regulation; the increasing recognition that
financial stability problems are coming not just from institutions, but from markets and their evolution;
and  the  difficulty  of  staying  ahead  of  the  evolution  of  ever-more-complex  financial  instruments  and
products  (driven  by  competition  and  sometimes  by  the  objective  of  getting  around  prudential
regulations). The LTCM experience is a reminder of how the leading-edge players will be constantly
pushing beyond the regulators’ capacity to understand, let alone react effectively. On top of this we
see the evolution of markets, often driven by the desire to minimise risk to individuals, taking actions
which may make the overall system more vulnerable  – the examples here  are the  various forms  of
                                                     
3 
“Inflation  Targets  and Inflation Targeting“,  remarks  by  Governor  Laurence  H Meyer  at the  University  of  California  at San
Diego Economics Roundtable, San Diego, California, 17 July 2001. (Also published in BIS Review no 65, 17 July 2001).
BIS Review 67/2001
3
equity insurance which were put in place prior to the 1987 equity correction, and (more recently) the
increasing  use  of  VaRs  (value-at-risk  models)  and  various  risk  management  procedures  which  will
tend to ensure correlation of changes of opinion (the herd changes direction simultaneously) and of
mistakes. All this is happening in a world of enormously increased capital flows.
In  this  world,  it  will  be  surprising  if  we  are  not  asked  whether  monetary  policy  can  make  a  bigger
contribution to maintaining financial stability. The obvious  place to start  would  be  with  asset  prices.
Asset prices already have some role in inflation targeting, in as far as they impinge on the prospect for
CPI inflation. But looking at the experience of Japan during the 1980s (and perhaps the United States
more recently), it might be asked whether monetary policy should do more to directly influence asset
prices which (in the case of Japan) were a central cause of financial instability and the subsequent
decade-long stagnation. Asset ”bubbles” are clearly enormously disruptive: the issue in debate is not
the  desirability  of  minimising  them,  but  whether  they  can  be  identified  beforehand  and  whether  the
instrument  available  is  suited  to  the  task.  Without  a  clear  mandate  to  do  this,  and  an  analytical
framework for identifying a bubble, it would be a bold central bank which deliberately set out to burst
the bubble, knowing that many in the economy were enjoying the euphoria.
How are these issues to be resolved? One hopes that the answer is: with analytical and intellectual
endeavour; and with common sense not coloured or distorted by dogma. Given the importance of the
issues  at  stake,  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  history  of  monetary  policy  has  ended,  with  no  further
evolution likely or possible.
4
BIS Review 67/2001
