Eva Srejber: The transmission mechanism
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, Second Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Umeå University,
Umeå, 15 May 2001.
 The Riksbank has a statutory duty to maintain price stability. However, it has the power to decide how
to operationalise monetary policy and the monetary policy strategy that is to guide the monetary policy
decisions.  In  the  annual  assessments  of  the  performance  of  the  Riksbank  made  by  the  Riksdag
Finance  Committee,  both  the  objective  and  the  strategy  adopted  have  won  acceptance.  Monetary
policy is governed by an inflation target expressed as the annual rate measured by CPI is to be limited
to 2 per cent with a tolerance interval of ± 1 percentage point.
However, the decision to define price stability as a reduction in the value of the krona by two per cent
per year in relation to the basket of goods and services consumed by Swedish households is by no
means self-evident. In principle, another rate of price increases, other weighted combinations of goods
and services, financial assets or currencies could serve as the anchor in relation to which the value of
the krona is to be kept stable. When the inflation target was adopted in 1993, conditions did not favour
a return to any form of fixed exchange rate. The decision that had to be made then was how best to
design monetary policy to cope with the transition from a high to a low-inflation economy while, at the
same  time,  creating  suitable  conditions  for  returning  to  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  CPI  was
deemed to be the best known measure of inflation and this was one reason why it was very suitable in
a situation where confidence in stable prices was to be attained. An inflation rate of two per cent was
considered to be well in line with inflation in the rest of the EU and this was adopted to create a basis
for stabilising the nominal exchange rate of the krona in relation to the European currencies.
By monetary policy strategy I mean the entire framework used to comply with the ultimate objective
that  monetary  policy  is  intended  to  achieve.  Besides  operationalising  the  target,  this  concerns,  for
instance, how the system is to be designed to enable the central bank to influence interest rates and
how open and clear monetary  policy  is  to  be.  It  is  also  about  taking  decisions  on  any  intermediate
objectives and the time horizon in which fulfilment of the objective is to take place.
The decision on monetary policy strategy fundamentally rests on conceptions of how the mechanisms
operate  that  permit  the  central  bank  to  determine  the  value  of  money  –  what  is  known  as  the
transmission  mechanism.  For  the  most  part,  however,  there  is  little  knowledge  of  these  very
complicated mechanisms. The rapid development in the financial markets means moreover that the
conditions for monetary policy are continually changing. It is therefore natural for the rules of action
and  strategies  that  govern  monetary  policy  to  be  discussed  and  evaluated.  I  am  going  to  begin  by
giving  a  short  review  of  how  the  transmission  mechanism  is  usually  described  and  to  discuss  the
changes that have taken place. Against this background, I will then briefly describe how the Riksbank
conducts its monetary policy.
What is the role of money?
The  quantity  theory  describes  in  a  simple  way  how  inflation  is  determined.  In  this  theory,  the  price
level  is  determined  by  the  quantity  of  money  in  the  economy.  Production  is  determined  over  a
somewhat longer period by access to labour and by the development of productivity; monetary policy
does not affect production in the long term. It is intuitively easy to understand that at a given level of
production the price level will increase if the quantity of money increases and vice versa if the quantity
of money decreases. In an economy where only banknotes and coins serve as means of payment, the
central bank can control inflation by determining the quantity of banknotes. This is conditional on the
central bank knowing how much is required at a given price level in order for a particular quantity of
goods to be produced and circulated - the speed or velocity of circulation must be known in order for a
money quantity target to be used to control price movements.
Developments  in  the  financial  markets  in  general  and  of  the  payment  system  in  particular  have,
however,  led to  a reduction in the importance  of banknotes and coins as a means  of  payment,  i.e.
money. An increasing proportion of payment flows takes place by transfers between accounts and the
ability of the central bank to influence the quantity of money in the economy is largely only through its
ability to affect the demand for money by the general public. The quantity of money required by the
BIS Review 40/2001
1
general public depends on its demand for transaction funds for the purchase of goods, services and
financial assets, which in turn is affected by the interest rates encountered by the general public. For
instance, lower interest rates increase demand for money when businesses' demand for capital goods
and households' demand for consumption increases. Thus, demand for goods and services are both
sensitive to interest rates and largely reflect one another.
By controlling the interest rate, the central bank thus affects both the demand for goods, services and
financial assets and the demand for money. Banknotes, coins and bank deposits can immediately be
transformed into means of payment and are therefore often used to define the quantity of money. The
banks  can  increase  the  quantity  of  money  by,  for  instance,  increasing  lending  or  by  purchasing
securities from the general public since a large part is returned as liquid deposits.
However,  the  quantity  of  money  in  the  form  of  deposits  and  banknotes  and  coins  that  the  general
public decides to keep as a liquidity buffer in readiness for coming transactions is also affected by the
stability of the value of other assets and how rapidly they can be transformed into means of payment.
Having funds in a current account at a bank or keeping banknotes in a mattress does not produce a
return. It is therefore better, of course, to, for instance, purchase interest-bearing treasury bills which
can be rapidly converted into transaction funds when wishing to make a payment.
The ability to borrow money quickly also affects the willingness to keep a liquidity buffer in the form of
banknotes,  coins  and  liquid  bank  deposits.  Efficient  second-hand  markets  and  access  to  overdraft
facilities  have,  for  instance,  affected  the  needs  of  the  public  to  keep  a  liquidity  buffer.  The  public's
need for transaction funds for purchase of shares has probably also increased and it is likely that it
varies with developments in the stock market. Many factors have thus contributed to changes in the
rate of circulation of money1 and it has therefore become more difficult to predict.
To sum up, the role of money for the level of prices in the economy has not fundamentally changed.
What  has  happened  is  that  the  trend  in  the  financial  markets  has  meant  that  it  has  become  more
difficult for the central banks to use the quantity of money as  an  intermediate target for an  ultimate
price stability objective. Most central banks therefore now use the quantity of money as one indicator
of  inflation  among  others.  However,  there  are  considerable  differences  between  the  assessments
made by different central banks of the importance of the quantity of money as an indicator of price
trends.  The  European  Central  Bank  –  the  ECB  –  notifies,  for  instance,  a  reference  value  for  the
increase  in  the  quantity  of  money  that  is  considered  to  be  compatible  with  their  price  stability
objectives.
The influence of monetary policy on the output gap
The difficulty of using the quantity of money as  an  intermediate target for an  ultimate price  stability
objective  has  contributed  to  an  increasing  number  of  central  banks  moving  over  to  direct  control
through an inflation target. Put simply, they use the mechanisms that enable the inflation target to be
described as follows: A change in the  instrumental rate affects GDP  which in turn  has an effect on
inflation.  If  GDP  increases  at  a  rate  that  makes  full  use  of  production  resources,  inflation  is  not
changed although if demand is so high that production resources are under pressure, then inflation will
increase. When resources are under pressure, it is said that there is a positive output gap and vice
versa when there are free resources in the economy. When growth is balanced, it is said that GDP
increases  in  accordance  with  its  potential  growth  path.  According  to  this  simple  model,  the  central
bank is able to affect inflation through its ability to affect the output gap.
The  emphasis  here  is  not  on  the  effect  of  the  interest  rate  changes  on  demand  for  money,  for
instance, to be able to make payments for investments and consumption, but directly on the effect that
the interest rate has on the real demand.
The  channels  that  enable  the  steering  interest  rate  to  have  an  effect  on  the  output  gap  can  be
categorised in different ways:
The most important channel  is probably the  interest rate channel. A change  in the steering interest
rate directly affects the shortest market rate. The banks can normally finance a  deficit and  invest  a
surplus  at  that  rate.  The  shortest  market  rate  and  market  expectations  on  future  changes  in  the
instrumental  rate  therefore  constitute  the  alternative  cost  of  the  banks'  financing  or  the  alternative
                                                     
1  The quantity theory: ,m*=y+p-v shows a demand function for money in the logarithmic form of M/P=1 (Y,i) where M is the
volume of money, Y is the real GDP, i is the interest rate and V=Y(M/P) is the rate of circulation, i.e. the velocity.
2
BIS Review 40/2001
return on the bank's loans and holdings of securities. The banks' lending rate and the interest rate on
securities are therefore affected by the actual and expected  instrumental rate.  Monetary policy thus
also has a direct effect on the interest rates encountered by the general public.
i. 
Investment  and  consumption  decisions  are  affected  directly  by  the  interest  channel.  The
required return on investment is reduced at a lower interest rate at the same time as saving
is less profitable.
Interest  rate  changes  also  have  an  income  effect  through  interest  income  and  interest
expenditure on existing assets and liabilities.
Interest rate changes also affect share prices and real estate prices  – lower  interest rates
increase demand for shares and properties and prices increase. An interest rate reduction
also affects household wealth through higher share and property prices which in turn affect
consumption decisions.
ii. 
iii. 
The interest rate channel therefore affects demand for goods and services and thus the output gap
with some time lag through many complicated mechanisms. Changes in the use of resources or the
output gap then affect inflation in turn, with some time lag.
The impact of changes in the instrumental rate on demand and inflation may also be affected by the
lending rate set by the  banks. The channel  that  is  mediated  by  the  behaviour  of  the  banks  can  be
generally  referred  to  as  the  credit  channel.  Higher  interest  rates  may,  for  instance,  reduce  the
willingness of the general public to keep funds deposited in current accounts, which have a very low
return. Deposits have a very low financing cost for the banks and if they have to finance an increased
proportion of their lending in another way, the banks may compensate for this by a higher lending rate.
However, it is uncertain how the behaviour of the banks affects the impact of monetary policy.2
Changes  in  the  instrumental  rate  have  an  effect  through  the  "exchange  rate  channel"  partly  by
changes in the nominal exchange rate for the krona affecting the relative prices for net export. Higher
interest  rates  should  thereby  strengthen  the  domestic  currency  and  make  domestic  goods  more
expensive relative to other goods and vice versa. Higher interest rates thereby dampen export at the
same time as import becomes cheaper and increases. Lower demand for domestic goods contributes
to reducing the use of resources and subduing inflation. A stronger nominal exchange rate dampens
consumer prices at the same time since part of consumption is directed towards imports when prices
are dampened. However, lower import prices also increase the real purchasing power which per se
contributes to increasing purchasing power. In economies with diversified industry an increase in the
interest rate thus also leads via the exchange rate channel to lower inflation. The strength of the effect
depends inter alia on income and price elasticities and on the composition and size of foreign trade. In
certain cases the positive effect on incomes from stronger currency can even predominate and vice
versa.
Changes in the nominal exchange rate probably have less impact on import and export prices if the
changes are not considered to be lasting. In a floating exchange rate regime, it is therefore probable
that  changes  in  the  nominal  exchange  rate  will  not  have  such  a  great  effect  as  in  the  case  of  a
devaluation or revaluation in a fixed exchange rate regime.
The role of inflation expectations
The channels I have now pointed out operate in most cases through demand and the output gap. One
channel  that  is  probably  very  important  and  which  does  not  operate  through  resource  use  in  the
economy  is  the  effect  of  monetary  policy  on  inflation  expectations  and  its  impact  on  price-setting
conduct  and  how  price  changes  are  received  in  the  economy.  There  is  scarcely  any  doubt  that
inflation expectations played an independent role prior to the inflation target achieving credibility in the
mid-1990s. Now that the inflation target appears to be well known and generally accepted and inflation
expectations  are  well  in  line  with  the  inflation  target,  the  role  of  expectations  in  the  transmission
mechanism  is  not  so  self-evident.  However,  stable  and  low  inflation  expectations  should  affect
businesses' pricing and wage formation. If the players in the economy are confident that inflation really
will be held at a low level, this could also lead to companies not considering that they have to change
                                                     
2  See Kerstin Hallsten, "Bank loans and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy", Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper
Series no. 73-1998.
BIS Review 40/2001
3
their prices so often, for instance, in the event of changes in costs that are perceived as temporary. If
the expectations are not met, there is a risk that price changes will be large when they finally occur.
Stable  inflation  expectations  can  thus  lead  to  inflation  not  varying  continuously  with  the  output  gap
which  paradoxically  can  make  the  conduct  of monetary  policy  more  difficult.  In  recent  years,  it  has
been difficult to find clear and reasonable correlations between the demand situation and inflation for
Swedish data. The monetary policy decisions are based on forward-looking assessments of inflation
and  here  the  assessment  of  the  relationship  between  the  expected  output  gap  and  inflation  is  an
important  determining  factor.  A  lower  correlation  could  depend  on  inflation  expectations  having
stabilised in recent  years. Individual companies can, for instance, hold  back price increases  even  if
resource use has increased, if they believe that their competitors are not intending to raise their prices.
As long as inflation expectations are not affected, prices  will not be changed. If the forward-looking
inflation assessments that serve as the basis for monetary policy decisions, assume, for instance, that
the correlation between growth and inflation will continue to be as low as has been observed, this can
result in changes in the output gap not leading to any immediate monetary policy response. The risk is
that inflation expectations will then accelerate and that inflation will increase. In the same way, prices
may be slow to respond in the case of falling resource use. In other words - if monetary policy does
not act as expected on fluctuations in resource use, the correlation between growth and inflation can
again increase. Presumably the relation between the output gap and inflation varies both with the level
of the output gap, with the speed of the change in the output gap and with the expectations on central
bank behaviour.
The Riksbank's monetary policy strategy
An important part of the Riksbank's monetary policy inflation target strategy is clarity  and openness
about the bases on which monetary policy decisions are made. The intention is to create support for
the price stability target and understanding of what governs interest rate decisions. This clarity means
that  the  Riksbank's  interest  rate  decisions  are  often  expected  and  this  increases  the  ability  of  the
Riksbank  to  affect  the  somewhat  longer  rates  through  its  analysis.  This  openness  should  also
contribute to stabilising inflation expectations.
The monetary policy decisions are based on forward-looking inflation assessments of CPI and UND1X
–  a  price  index  adjusted  for  certain  temporary  effects.  These  assessments  are  reported  in  the
Riksbank's inflation reports which are published four times a year. The minutes of the monetary policy
meetings  which are held between six and  eight times a year  are published  with  a  couple  of  weeks
time-lag.
Inflation  assessments  are  made  with  a  two-year  time  horizon  while  paying  some  attention  to  the
potential  developments  in  the  third  year.  Important  determining  factors  for  inflation  are  the
development of demand and the output gap. A number of inflation indicators are used, however, to
make the assessments. The quantity of money has no special role in the analysis although it is used
as one of many indicators.
The reason for decisions resting on forward-looking assessments of inflation is that monetary policy
has an effect with some time lag. The major part of the effect of an interest rate change is expected to
occur after one to two  years although  monetary  policy  is  assumed  to  have  some  effect  before  and
after this time horizon.
The channels that allow monetary policy to have an effect on inflation are assumed to a large extent to
operate through the output gap which means that a change in interest rates will first affect resource
use which will then only have a tangible effect on inflation later. Normally, inflation assessment puts
most weight on the next one to two years in the conduct of monetary policy. However, the perspective
that monetary policy aims at also depends on the expected economic situation.  If inflation  diverges
considerably  from  the  objective  in  the  coming  period,  this  may  weigh  more  heavily  than  a  small
deviation  later  on.  Likewise,  an  anticipated  higher  or  lower  inflation  after  the  one-to-two  year
perspective can be weighed in.
Since the impact of a change in interest rates on inflation in the first year can be assumed to be small,
large  changes  in  interest  rates  are  required  to  have  an  effect  on  inflation  already  in  the  first  year.
Attempts  to  affect  inflation  already  within  a  year  would  in  the  view  of  the  Riksbank  lead  to  major
fluctuations in employment and production.
4
BIS Review 40/2001
The correlation between  interest rate changes, GDP and inflation  is, however, not so  unambiguous
and clear.  There  may  be  considerable  uncertainty  on  the  time  lag  and  the  strength  of  the  effect  of
monetary policy on inflation. It is probably the case that the strength of the effects and the time lag will
vary.  As  I  previously  discussed,  it  is  also  uncertain  what  role  inflation  expectations  play  in  the
transmission mechanism.
Should monetary policy take asset prices into consideration?
A discussion that has become pertinent due to the great increase in the price of IT and technology
shares in particular that preceded the economic downturn in the United States as well as in Sweden
 –  is  the  extent  to  which  it  is  reasonable  and  possible  to  counteract  the  building-up  of  financial
imbalances by monetary policy. If monetary policy is exclusively focused on an inflation target, asset
prices are taken into account to the extent that they affect inflation by wealth effects and stimulation of
investments  and  consumption.  Appreciation  of  the  currency,  temporary  productivity  gains  and  loan
financing  of  financial  assets  can,  however,  lead  to  the  accumulation  of  major  financial  imbalances
without  this  being  fully  visible  as  inflationary  pressure.  This  was  the  case  in  Japan  in  the  1980s,
Thailand  in  the  1990s  and  in  the  United  States  today.  Unmotivated  increases  in  asset  prices  will
sooner or later lead to corrections, however. The strong boom in growth  will  then be replaced by a
deep and prolonged downturn. If the level of debt is high in the initial position and confidence in the
economy is weak, it may be difficult for monetary policy to affect demand and inflation in this situation,
which has been the case in Japan in recent years.
Some analysts consider that both prices and production would develop in a more stable way over time
if monetary policy counteracted exaggerated price increases in shares and other financial assets. It is
said  that  it  is  not  much  more  difficult  to  determine  when  share  prices  indicate  unrealistic  future
increases in profit than it is to determine how quickly production in an economy can grow in the long
term. And such assessments  are  of  key  importance  to  all  monetary  policy  decision-makers.  Others
think that besides it being difficult to determine when asset prices are exaggerated, it is doubtful how
large an effect an increase in interest prices would have. This is particularly the case with regard to
share prices in small countries since the stock markets are so internationalised.
Clarity and flexibility
What I have discussed here shows that monetary policy decisions cannot be made on the  basis of
mechanical rules of action. The transmission mechanism is complicated and probably not stable over
time either. Regardless of the monetary policy strategy adopted, monetary policy decisions must rest
on  uncertain  assessments.  This  may  relate  to  assessments  of  the  output  gap  and  the  correlation
between growth and production, the rate of circulation of the quantity of money and the effects of large
increases in asset prices.
Monetary  policy must then be  conducted  in  a  flexible  way  based  on  the  available  information.  This
means, for instance that assessments of whether financial imbalances are being built up and the risks
that  are  associated  with  this  must  be  taken  into  consideration  in  some  way  when  monetary  policy
decisions  are  made.  And  even  if  the  possibility  for  an  individual  central  bank  to  influence  a  strong
international  stock  exchange  increase  through  interest  rate  hikes  is  very  limited,  nothing  will  be
improved  by  an  excessively  expansive  monetary  policy.  The  increase  in  share  prices  is  moreover
often followed up by a price increase in the real estate market and in contrast to the stock exchange,
this is local and thereby to a greater extent dependent on the national interest rates. A more in-depth
analysis of the quantity of money and expansion of credit can give leads as to what happened with
household  and  corporate  balance  sheets  and  in  the  financial  institutions,  In  certain  periods,  it  can
therefore be justified to give the analysis of lending and monetary policy increased weight.
The complexity of the transmission mechanism combined with the necessity of clarity and openness
sets considerable challenges for monetary policy decision-makers. It is important to avoid simplifying
to  such  an  extent,  in  the  endeavour  to  create  understanding  of  what  one  is  doing,  that  one
compromises one's freedom of action.
BIS Review 40/2001
5
