Lee  Hsien  Loong:  Financial  centres  today  and  tomorrow:  a  Singapore
perspective
Address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary
Authority of Singapore, at the International Monetary Conference, Singapore, 4 June 2001.
Mr Sandy Warner, President, IMC
Ladies and Gentlemen:
 Introduction
I welcome all the delegates to this first IMC of the new century. Please allow me to share with you a
Singapore  perspective  on  financial  centres  as  they  are  and  as  we  expect  them  to  be  in  the  years
ahead.
In the last few  decades the pattern  of international financial activity  has  undergone  major  changes.
Starting with a high concentration in a very small number of financial centres, activity then spilt over to
more  locations.  But  now  with  globalisation  revolutionising  the  financial  industry,  and  expanding  the
worldwide  network  of  financial  markets  and  activities,  paradoxically  the  trend  again  seems  to  be
towards concentration, with fewer mega financial centres, complemented by smaller centres with more
specialised focuses.
In Europe, London is the premier full-service centre, with others like Frankfurt and Zurich occupying
strong niches - Frankfurt in the derivatives business and Zurich in private banking. In America, New
York is pre-eminent with Chicago playing a specialised role in financial futures, and Boston in asset
management. Both London and New York are not just continental but global financial centres, where
the top financial institutions have congregated and capital markets run broad and deep.
Asia does not have the equivalent of a London or New York. Tokyo is mainly domestic in orientation,
while the smaller centres of Hong Kong and Singapore play more of a regional role.
The economics of concentration
This trend towards a mega financial centre complemented by smaller specialised centres in each time
zone  has  persisted,  even  though  technology  has  allowed  market  players  to  obtain  information  and
transact on it, virtually anywhere. Why has this concentration in activity happened?
Firstly,  technology  has  itself  created  tremendous  economies  of  scale.  This  is  especially  so  in
commoditised  markets  such  as  foreign  exchange  and  electronic  financial  services,  and  in
infrastructural facilities for payments and settlements, back-office processing and call centres.
Secondly,  critical  mass  of  talent  has  become  more  important,  with  the  growing  complexity  and
multi-faceted  nature  of  finance.  Talented  and  enterprising  investment  bankers,  fund  managers  and
currency traders work best when  they can interact  with  other  equally  bright  and  capable  people,  to
strike deals, develop new products, exploit investment and business opportunities, and service clients.
Executing financial deals requires a combination of top talent  not  only  in finance  and  business,  but
also in law, accounting, project management, and information technology. Few centres have the full
spread  of  necessary  skills;  fewer  still  have  a  critical  mass  of  them.  And  for  all  the  wonders  of
telecommunications and the internet, there is no substitute as yet for face to face interaction between
two parties making a complex deal.
Thirdly, issuers and investors in capital markets are placing a growing premium on liquidity. Capital
markets thrive on breadth and depth; and the broadest and deepest markets are those that transcend
national boundaries. Companies raising funds seek liquid markets, which attract investors and lower
the  cost  of  borrowing.  So  it  is  that  many  Asian  companies  issue  bonds  in  the  Euromarkets,  and
technology  companies  worldwide  aspire  to  be  listed  on  NASDAQ.  Investors  in  turn  seek  liquid
markets, because in rapidly changing conditions, the ability to move in and out of markets at minimal
cost is critical.
BIS Review 50/2001
1
Fourthly, as a result of globalisation, small differences in conditions can translate into large differences
in outcomes. Market participants have always placed a premium on sound and responsive regulatory
systems.  They  seek  jurisdictions  that  provide  stable  and  resilient  financial  systems,  and  fair  and
efficient  markets,  at  minimal  regulatory  cost  and  impediment  to  innovation.  They  prefer  conducive
business environments  which  offer  good  market  infrastructure,  favourable  tax  treatment,  and  stable
economic and political conditions. And talent has always preferred attractive living conditions. They
value  good  schools,  safe  homes,  clean  environments,  vibrant  social  and  cultural  activities,  and
competitive remuneration.
In the New Economy, both financial capital and talent have become more mobile. More open financial
markets and more liberal regulatory regimes have enabled institutions to choose where to reside and
operate. Countries have realised that people are the key success factor in the new economy. They
have opened their doors wide to the immigration of talent, and created a single global market for those
whose skills are in demand. So the premium on sound regulation and good living conditions has gone
up.
Location
However, the trend towards concentration is unlikely to end in the extreme of only one or two global
financial hubs. Location still matters even in the globalised financial landscape of the New Economy.
Physical proximity to potential clients will remain important, especially in capital market origination, the
M&A business or private banking, where personal services and physical interactions with clients are
essential.  Indeed,  the  growing  customisation  of  finance  to  suit  local  conditions  and  meet  individual
client needs will mean that regional financial centres will continue to play a complementary role.
Competition among financial centres will not be a zero-sum game of winner takes all. Smaller centres
can coexist with the mega centres, focusing on different niches and serving different regions. There
are thus collective gains to be shared through co-operation. Linkages between key financial centres,
both across and within time zones, can help the centres to reap the benefits of integration while at the
same time preserving close access to local communities. Similarly, there is an important role for closer
regulatory  co-operation  and,  where  appropriate,  harmonisation  of  standards,  particularly 
in
cross-border listing requirements, ongoing supervision, and accounting and disclosure.
For the regions they serve, international financial centres make good economic sense. They provide
easy access to funding and hedging opportunities, links to other key centres, and markets with liquidity
and reach, especially for emerging economies.
Financial  centres  tend  to  prosper  when  their  hinterlands  are  buoyant.  When  the  hinterland  is  in
difficulty, the financial centre will be adversely affected, but it still plays an important role in facilitating
the process of recovery. As confidence recovers and investor interest returns, the financial centre will
be an important conduit for the funds required for rehabilitation and growth.
Thus  as  Asian  economies  make  progress  in  putting  themselves  in  order,  they  will  need  access  to
global  capital  for  corporate  restructuring  and  new  investments.  Singapore's  financial  centre  will  be
ready to play that role, whether the capital is to be raised through loan syndication, debt securitisation,
private equity, or bond issuance.
Financial centres in Asia
Looking ahead, the trend towards concentration of financial institutions and activities in fewer major
centres is likely to persist. However, it is not easy to predict which specific cities will emerge as leading
centres. This will depend not only on the static comparative advantage of the different cities, but also
on  the  dynamic  competitive  advantages  created  by  their  policies  and  strategies.  Incumbents  will
always have an advantage, but no lead is totally unassailable, as London found to its dismay in 1998
when within a few months Frankfurt snatched away the trading of German bund futures.
London and New York will continue to be key global players. In Asia, while Tokyo will always be big
and significant, the role of the other centres is still unclear. Hong Kong, Singapore, Sydney, and in the
longer term Shanghai are in play. Each has its advantages and limitations, stemming from differences
in their geographic and political situations, and their regulatory and corporate environments. They will
surely compete amongst themselves to gain market share and critical mass, and anchor in Asia some
of  business  which  presently  goes  to  London  and  New  York.  But  in  my  view  they  also  have
2
BIS Review 50/2001
considerable  scope  for  co-operation,  as  each  will  occupy  a  distinct  market  niche  and  none  can
dominate in all aspects of finance.
Singapore  will  never  have  the  advantage  of  Tokyo's  large  economic  base.  Nor  do  we  have  Hong
Kong's physical proximity to China. But we seek to provide a world-class regulatory environment that
responds to the needs of global markets and global institutions, and the most efficient infrastructure for
businesses  to  use  as  a  platform  for  all  of  Asia.  Singapore  plays  host  to  some  6,000  multinational
corporations and the financial institutions that are their global advisers, many of which use Singapore
as their regional headquarters. And our strategic location at the heart of Southeast Asia and within 7
hours  of  key  markets  in  Northeast  Asia,  South  Asia,  and  Australia  positions  us  well  to  serve  as  a
financial centre for all of Asia.
Singapore
While the external environment is not within Singapore's control, our strategies and policies are. We
believe that the right strategies and policies will help us to capitalise on opportunities and overcome
disadvantages arising from our size. There are no secrets to the strategies, because the factors for
success are not unique to Singapore. The challenge is in their execution  and implementation. Here
are five things that we have set out to do in order to excel as a financial centre in the New Economy.
Enhance business environment
First,  we  are  seeking  to  further  enhance  our  conducive  pro-business  environment.  Economic  and
political  stability,  an  efficient  and  impartial  legal  system,  comprehensive  and  up-to-date  market
infrastructure, and fiscal discipline that allows low taxes are key preconditions, more important than
special incentives for the financial sector. Singapore has established a reputation for delivering these
preconditions, which we will maintain and improve upon in future.
Build talent pool
Second, we are building up our talent pool. In a knowledge-intensive industry like financial services,
Singapore will not get anywhere without world-class talent. We are making a concerted effort to attract
foreign talent who can make a contribution to Singapore, and to integrate them into our economy and
society. We are also nurturing home talent to its full potential through a good education system for the
young and ongoing training opportunities for those in the workforce.
As  Asian  companies  begin  to  use  more  complex  strategies  and  products,  our  financial  institutions
need  the  expertise  to  advise  on  these  sophisticated  techniques.  From  time  to  time  they  will  fly  out
experts from London or New York to service clients, but we must also build up our own indigenous
capabilities.
To make  the  most  of  our  talent,  we  must  create  an  environment  which  encourages  innovation  and
enterprise, rewards those who venture and succeed, and is tolerant of honest failure. This depends in
part on the culture of the society, which takes time to change. But it is also affected by the regulatory
and legal environment. Here we are working to remove impediments to enterprise, for example in the
tax treatment of stock options.
Singapore has long offered a good, wholesome living environment for international talent wanting to
work or sink roots here. We are now paying greater attention to the less tangible aspects of the quality
of  life.  Our  arts  and  entertainment  scene  has  livened  up  considerably  in  recent  years.  I  would  still
hesitate to describe Singapore as funky, but certainly it is a far cry from being boring.
The outcome of all our efforts is that one is beginning to hear a distinct buzz in Singapore.
Develop sound and responsive regulation
Third, specifically for the financial sector, we are constantly improving our regulatory and supervisory
regime. Good regulation commands a premium. The rules must be aligned with the underlying risks,
and  kept  constantly  updated,  following  global  best  practices.  Prudential  oversight  must  be
complemented by enhanced corporate disclosure and market discipline.
BIS Review 50/2001
3
The  regulator's  touch  has  to  be  sufficiently  flexible  and  light,  to  let  market  forces  work,  innovation
thrive,  and  the  industry  develop.  But  the  regulator  must  also  be  vigilant  in  enforcing  prudential
safeguards,  with  firmness  where  necessary.  A  lighter  touch  does  not  mean  a  laxer  approach,  and
maintaining high standards of integrity, transparency and enforcement is more important than ever.
Foster competition
Fourth, we are opening up to, rather than sheltering from, global competition and the winds of change.
To  develop  as  a  financial  centre,  we  must  attract  global  players  to  locate  here  and  carry  out  more
activities  in  Singapore.  We  have  therefore  been  levelling  the  playing  field  for  local  and  foreign
competitors, and opening up hitherto closed parts of the financial industry, including domestic banking,
insurance, and securities trading.
We are completely open in the insurance industry and will be so in the securities industry as well from
next year. We have, however, proceeded more cautiously in banking, where we consider it crucial for
systemic  stability  to  have  strong  Singaporean  banks  retain  a  significant  market  share.  Here  our
approach is to liberalise in a phased manner so as to inject more competition and spur the stronger
Singapore banks to upgrade  and compete, and not to  put  off liberalisation  while  waiting for smaller
players to become strong and confident enough.
We introduced the first banking liberalisation measures two years ago. We are now finalising a second
banking liberalisation package, which we will announce at the end of this month.
Promote key markets and activities
Finally,  we  are  actively  promoting  the  development  of  specific  markets  and  activities,  which  have
stronger  growth  potential.  An  example  is  the  wealth  management  industry.  Another  example  is  the
debt markets, which until recently were underdeveloped all across Asia.
However, we should focus our resources first on activities where we have a natural advantage, or can
build up a capability. We must push in the same direction as market forces, and not against them. Our
main approach to developing the financial centre should therefore be to establish a level playing field
with transparent rules and the right environment, so that market forces can operate and innovation can
flourish. Active promotion of specific activities complements this.
Conclusion
The major changes in the financial industry compel financial centres to adapt and evolve, or else be
bypassed and rendered irrelevant. Singapore aspires to be one of the financial centres in Asia, and a
node  in  the  global  network  of  financial  markets.  By  implementing  the  right  policies  and  strategies
vigorously,  we  hope  to  develop  and  grow  as  a  financial  centre,  serving  Asia  and  contributing  to  its
development and prosperity.
4
BIS Review 50/2001
