 Lucas Papademos: The completion of the changeover to the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Euro  Information 
Conference, Athens, 17 October 2001. 
 I would like to welcome you to the third session of the Euro Information Conference. Your presence 
here attests to the importance you attach to the successful changeover to the euro, our new currency, 
our money. It is a particularly great pleasure for me to welcome the Minister of National Economy and 
Finance,  Mr  Yannos  Papantoniou,  and  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr  Willem 
Duisenberg, to whom I express my warmest thanks for their participation. I would also like to thank the 
other  distinguished  speakers  and  colleagues  who  participated  in  the  first  two  sessions  of  the 
Conference. 
I 
We have now reached the last lap in what has been a long and arduous journey culminating in the 
introduction of the single European currency. About 75 days from today, the euro banknotes and coins 
will be put into circulation and the withdrawal of the national currencies of the 12 euro area countries 
will  begin.  The  euro  will  thus  become  a  visible  and  tangible  reality  for  some  300  million  European 
citizens and numerous other economic agents worldwide. 
In  the  current  juncture  of  increased  uncertainty  about  international  developments  and  economic 
prospects, the interest of the public in the introduction of euro banknotes and coins may reasonably 
have been reduced. This does not mean, however, that the completion of the changeover to the euro 
does not constitute a high priority for us all. And it is of particular importance, especially in a period of 
uncertainty,  to  prepare  ourselves  in  time  and  adequately,  so  that  the  changeover  to  the  single 
currency is smooth and successful. 
Creating Monetary Union in Europe and introducing the euro has indeed been a long, complex and 
unprecedented process. This vision first took shape over 35 years ago. The official political decision 
and  commitment  of  the  EU  Member  States  came  nearly  ten  years  ago,  with  the  signing  of  the 
Maastricht Treaty on 7th February 1992. A long period of extensive preparations followed to ensure 
that  the  appropriate  economic  and  monetary  conditions  were  established  and  to  complete  the 
necessary  institutional  and  technical  adjustments  for  the  establishment  of  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union in Europe. The euro came into being as a currency in scriptural form in eleven EU countries on 
1st January 1999.  After joining EMU, Greece also adopted the euro as its currency  on 1st January 
2001. 
The  introduction  of  the  euro  in  scriptural  form  was  a  particularly  difficult  venture,  but  it  was  also  a 
significant step towards the creation of the European monetary union and the implementation of the 
single  monetary  policy.  The  venture  was  difficult  as  it  required  many  and  complex  institutional, 
technical and operational adjustments of central banks, credit institutions and financial markets. It was, 
however, a significant step, as in this way the money market was integrated and the monetary regime 
in 11 EU countries was radically  and irrevocably changed. Equally  difficult from a technical point of 
view and important for the economy and the conduct of monetary policy was the adoption of the euro 
as Greece’s currency in January 2001. 
Consequently,  the  euro  is  already  with  us  and  is  actually  the  single  currency  adopted  by  12  EU 
countries.  This  reality,  however,  is  not  sufficiently  visible  to  the  general  public,  which  uses  national 
banknotes  and  coins  in  its  day-to-day  transactions.  That  is  why  many  people  consider  the  euro  a 
“virtual”  currency.  Moreover,  since  the  euro  does  not  exist  in  physical  form,  many  firms  and 
organisations have not fully adjusted their accounting and IT systems to the single currency. With the 
circulation of euro banknotes and coins on 1 January 2002, the changeover to the single currency will 
be  completed  and  it  will  become  a  visible,  tangible  and  irreversible  reality.  The  last  stage  of  the 
transition will produce further specific benefits for consumers and firms. It will also favourably affect the 
international acceptance and external value of the euro. At the same time, I believe that it will enhance 
and speed up the overall process of European cooperation and unification. 
  II 
Completion of the changeover to the euro with the entry into circulation of euro banknotes and coins 
and the withdrawal of national currencies is also a complex undertaking, possibly more difficult than 
the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  scriptural  form.  It  requires  a  wide  range  of  preparatory  work  by  the 
monetary and economic authorities and credit institutions in general. This work involves not only the 
production  and  distribution  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  but  also  institutional  and  operational 
adjustments in the public sector. At the same time, however, this venture calls for the preparation and 
adjustment of those who will actually use the single currency: citizens, firms, organisations and other 
economic agents. The successful completion of the changeover to the euro thus calls for concerted 
efforts,  preparations  and  cooperation  between  all  parties  involved,  at  both  the  European  and  the 
national level. I would first like to briefly reflect on the role of the Bank of Greece in this process. I will 
then focus on some of the challenges that we will be facing, but also on the benefits that will arise from 
the completion of the changeover to the euro. 
The Bank of Greece is responsible for the production of the euro banknotes and coins to meet cash 
requirements on Greek territory. In cooperation with the commercial banks, the Bank of Greece will 
also be responsible for the withdrawal of the drachma banknotes and coins. This is an enormous task 
not only because of the large volume of drachma banknotes and coins that have to be exchanged, but 
also because in the case of Greece only one year will have elapsed between the adoption of the euro 
in scriptural form and the actual circulation of the new currency in physical form, compared with three 
years in all the other euro area countries. It is estimated that some 650 million drachma-denominated 
banknotes and 7,000 tonnes of drachma coins, of a total value of 3 trillion drachmas, will have to be 
withdrawn in Greece. Owing to the shorter time available for production, some of the needs inevitably 
had to be met by importing banknotes and coins from printing works abroad. Most of the production 
needs  have  nevertheless  been  met  by  the  Bank  of  Greece  Printing  Works  in  compliance  with  the 
common standards for the production of high-quality currency incorporating a large number of security 
features. To ensure the sufficiency of stocks in the event of extraordinary needs, we have taken steps 
to have a total of 617 million euro banknotes and 1,600 million euro coins (or 8,300 tonnes of euro 
coins) ready for circulation. 
In  the  case  of  Greece,  the  volume  of  banknotes  and  coins  in  circulation  is  relatively  large  in 
comparison with the size of its economy and with many other euro area countries, because cash is 
widely  used  in transactions. This is reflected in the ratio  of currency  in circulation over GDP,  which 
amounts to 6.4% compared with 5.4% in the euro area on average. This percentage may seem quite 
high, but is not very far from the respective percentages of some other euro area countries such as 
Germany (6.2%) or Italy (6%), and is well below that of Spain (9%). Moreover, Greece does not lack 
alternative savings instruments; indeed, the share of currency in circulation in the broader monetary 
aggregate M3 is small (6%) and smaller than the euro area average (6.9%). Against this background, 
it is fair to assume that established behavioural patterns, saving patterns in particular, should not pose 
any  particular  constraints  on  the  substitution  of  the  euro  for  the  drachma  -  at  least  no  more  than 
elsewhere in the euro area. On the other hand, the geography of the Greek territory does make the 
frontloading of euro cash to banks and the public more difficult.  
The  Bank  of  Greece  now  has  the  required  stock  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  and  is  presently 
frontloading  to  banks  according  to  schedule.  Sufficient  amounts  of  euro  cash  have  already  been 
delivered to the 27 branches of the Bank of Greece across the country. Another part of the euro stocks 
will be supplied to commercial banks through 96 branches of the National Bank of Greece, with which 
the Bank of Greece holds cash surpluses from funds under its management. Frontloading is at present 
free  of  charge.  The  counterpart  of  frontloaded  euro  banknotes  and  coins  will  be  debited  to  banks 
gradually in the course of January 2002, so as to help them deal with the costs of frontloading and 
supplying. Let me add that the Bank of Greece is in a position to meet part of the demand for euro 
banknotes in neighbouring Balkan countries and, in cooperation with the respective central banks, is 
planning  the  frontloading  of  euro  banknotes  in  the  region.  It  is  estimated  that  the  public  in  these 
countries are currently holding significant amounts of legacy currencies, predominantly German marks 
worth at least 6 billion marks, which will have to be exchanged for euro.  
Until the end of the year and while the central bank will be frontloading euro banknotes and coins to 
banks, the latter will assume the task of supplying the economy with the new currency: they will be 
sub-frontloading euro coins (as from 1 November 2001) and euro banknotes of lower denominations 
(5 and 10 euro) to retailers (as from 1 December). Starting from 17 December 2001, the public at large 
will  be  supplied  with  13  million  starter  kits,  containing  euro  coins  of  all  denominations.  Meanwhile, 
banks are completing the adjustment of their information systems and the technical preparations that 
  will enable ATMs to dispense euro cash as from 1 January 2002. From mid-January 2002 onwards all 
ATMs of banks will operate in euro only. What we have heard so far during the first two sessions of 
this Conference confirms that the Greek banking system is in an advanced state of preparedness for 
the changeover. I believe that, with close cooperation between the Bank of Greece, commercial banks 
and the Hellenic Bank Association, the necessary preparations will have been accomplished by the 
end of the year and that the banking system, on its part, will have established the proper conditions for 
a seamless transition to the euro. 
III 
As already mentioned, however, a successful transition also hinges on the preparation of the public at 
large,  retailers  and  other  economic  agents.  These  have  therefore  to  be  familiar  with  the  euro 
banknotes  and  coins  and  with  the  overall  changeover  process.  The  2002  Information  Campaign, 
prepared  and  conducted  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  euro 
area,  is targeted at citizens and  business firms of the euro area and beyond and its objective is to 
raise awareness of the euro banknotes and coins, by providing comprehensive practical information. 
The campaign involves various actions, as the President of the ECB Mr Duisenberg will later explain in 
greater  detail.  Still,  I  would  like  to  make  two  points.  First,  that  the  campaign  relies  heavily  on  the 
participation  of  public  and  private  organisations  and  enterprises  which  have  become  “europartners” 
and act as “information multipliers”. Today's Conference, which has been organised in the context of 
the 2002 Information Campaign, brings together more than 100 europartners. We are looking forward 
to  having  a  closer  cooperation  with  them  over  the  next  weeks.  Second,  as  you  may  have  already 
noticed,  the  first  TV  commercials  and  advertisements  in  the  press  are  here,  as  part  of  the  2002 
Information Campaign which will gradually gain momentum and will culminate around the turn of the 
year, with the distribution of information leaflets.  
Furthermore, the Bank of Greece has scheduled additional information briefings and events intended 
to complement the joint European campaign. Such briefings and events include: 
• 
additional  TV  spots  concerning  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  physical  form  and  the 
adjustment to the new monetary environment; 
the  production  and  distribution  of  a  board  game  called  “Euroraces”  intended  to  familiarise 
children  and  their  parents  with  the  new  currency,  as  well  as  of  a  comic  book  entitled 
“Eurocles” for older children; 
public expositions of 100 works of art in the shape of enlarged euro coins, made of polyester 
and painted by children from all the euro area countries; 
the production of 1 million “euro converter cards”, with information on the banknotes’ security 
features; 
additional information conferences on the euro throughout Greece  with the participation of 
Bank of Greece officials. 
    I  believe  that  the  joint  Eurosystem  Information  Campaign,  the  complementary  information  events 
scheduled  by  the  Bank  of  Greece,  as  well  as  the  programme  jointly  organised  by  the  Ministry  of 
National Economy and the European Commission will, by the end of the year, succeed in addressing 
the awareness gap which continues to exist with regard to the completion of the changeover to the 
euro. 
IV 
A  general  conclusion  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  previous  sessions  of  this  Conference  is  that  the 
necessary  technical  preparations  and  operational  adjustments  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro  are 
progressing satisfactorily in the banking and the business sector. This, combined with the anticipated 
improvement in public awareness, seems to indicate that the transition to the euro will be a smooth 
one. This encouraging conclusion  does not leave room for complacency, nor does it mean that  the 
changeover  does  not  entail  costs  for  the  preparation  and  adjustment  to  the  new  monetary 
environment. Adjustment costs are to some extent inevitable owing to the nature and the scale of the 
task. However, we must strive to minimise these costs, through adequate and systematic preparation 
and information. At the same time, we must bear in mind that the costs and possible inconveniences 
  associated  with  the  completion  of  the  changeover  to  the  euro  are  only  temporary,  while  the 
advantages to be reaped will be both considerable and permanent. 
The macroeconomic and microeconomic benefits for Europe and Greece from the introduction of the 
euro are numerous, and have been enumerated in detail in the past. I do not intend to go over them 
here, even though I have the impression that all of the parties involved may not be fully aware of them. 
I would, however, like to focus on two points which are directly related to the present conjuncture and 
to the conversion procedure to the euro in physical form, and which specifically concern Greece. Our 
economy  has  already  drawn  numerous  benefits  from  Greece’s  adoption  of  the  euro,  since  this 
adoption  presupposed  stability  and  led  to  it.  Greece  has  achieved  a  high  level  of  monetary  and 
exchange  rate  stability  in  the  long  run,  which  promotes  economic  growth.  The  shielding  of  the 
economies of Greece and of the other euro area countries from exogenous shocks proved adequate 
in the aftermath of the tragic events of 11th September. The sudden and significant rise in uncertainty 
caused  by  the  terrorist  attacks  on  the  United  States  was  not  accompanied  by  the  tensions  on  the 
foreign  exchange  markets  that  we  had  become  accustomed  to  seeing  in  the  past.  Apart  form  the 
macroeconomic  benefits,  however,  the  upcoming  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  will 
ensure  full  transparency  of  prices,  enhance  consumer  awareness  and  increase  competition.  As  a 
result, inflationary pressures will be contained in the medium run. And, of course, the conversion costs 
between various currencies, which are quite considerable for consumers, especially in sectors such as 
tourism, will be eliminated.  
In order to fully reap these benefits, consumers should try to become familiar not only with the physical 
appearance of the euro banknotes but also with the new scale of values. They should try to think of 
monetary values, not as amounts of drachmas but as amounts of euro. On the other hand, enterprises 
should introduce the new currency to their everyday transactions the soonest possible and refrain from 
any non-transparent pricing policies that could later weaken their competitive position.  
One type of cost that might arise from the introduction of the euro - and which should be avoided or 
minimised - refers to unwarranted price increases on the occasion of the redenomination of prices as 
from  1  January  2002.  European  Commission  surveys  reveal  that  euro  area  citizens  are  concerned 
about this possibility. These concerns are also related to the fact that familiarisation with the new scale 
of values - what is expensive and what is not, in euro - is a learning process that will take time and 
require effort, alertness and patience on the part of citizens. However, so far there is no evidence that 
some  enterprises  might  try  to  take  advantage  of  consumers'  lack  of  experience  and  increase  their 
prices even before the beginning of 2002. In any case, competition is expected to protect consumers 
from unjustified price increases, as anyone who would charge higher prices would be faced with a loss 
of  customers.  Furthermore,  enterprises  are  obliged  by  law  to  indicate  prices  both  in  euro  and  in 
drachmas, as well as to display, in their place of business, a conversion table from the drachma to the 
euro  and  vice-versa.  This  should  help  consumers  become  familiar  with  the  new  scale  of  values. 
Rounding rules must be strictly observed. Consumers, however, should be vigilant, in order to avoid 
any speculative increase in prices.  
The physical introduction of the euro is an unprecedented event in European history. Its success does 
not hinge uniquely on concerted efforts of authorities at the European and the national level, but also 
on the preparation and cooperation of everyone of us. Citizens and enterprises should be prudent and 
calm  during  the  physical  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  withdrawal  of  the  drachma,  and  be 
understanding  and  patient  in  the  face  of  any  minor  problem  that  may  arise,  since  short-term 
adjustment costs will be more than offset by significant, long-lasting benefits. 
 