 David Dodge: Brief outlook for economic growth and inflation in Canada 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  before  the  House  of 
Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, 7 November 2001. 
 We are pleased to appear before this Committee, on the occasion of the release today of our autumn 
Monetary Policy Report, which provides our latest assessment of the outlook for economic growth and 
inflation in Canada. Mr. Knight and I hope to be able to return for future issues of the Report, every six 
months.  
Right now, all national economies face difficulties—difficulties stemming from the further weakening of 
the world economy and from the terrorist acts in the United States. As businesses, governments, and 
individuals in Canada—and around the world—strive to come to terms with the implications of those 
acts, the main preoccupation is, naturally, with the near term. But, as I said in a speech in Moncton 
two  weeks  ago,  at  times  like  this,  it  is  also  very  important  that  we  step  back  and  look  past  current 
developments, to the longer-term trends and potential of our economy.  Viewed from this angle, the 
outlook  is  brighter.  The  progress  that  we  have  made  over  the  past  decade  in  strengthening  our 
economic foundations is remarkable. And it should stand us in good stead, no matter what short-term 
turbulence and uncertainties we face.  
True, at the moment, we are beset by tremendous uncertainties. And I would like to turn to those now, 
as I discuss the economic outlook and the steps that the Bank is taking to support growth in Canada.  
When I appeared before you in May 2001, the incoming information was broadly in line with the Bank's 
expectations  of  a  modest  pickup  in  growth  in  the  second  half  of  2001  and  further  strengthening  in 
2002.  Among  the  factors  that  would  bring  this  about,  we  counted  the  completion  of  the  inventory 
adjustment,  tax  cuts,  the  easing  in  domestic monetary  conditions,  and  a  recovery  in  U.S.  business 
investment.  
But,  by  midsummer,  evidence  began  to  accumulate  that  the  expected  rebound  in  U.S.  investment 
would be delayed and that the economic slowdown there would be deeper and more protracted than 
previously expected. Economic activity outside North America had also begun to show more clearly 
the  effects  of  weaker  U.S.  growth  and  of  the  ongoing  global  retrenchment  in  the  information  and 
telecommunications sectors. In Canada too, there were signs that domestic demand, which had held 
up through the first part of 2001, was softening and that the inventory adjustment, particularly in the 
electrical and electronic sectors, was less advanced than expected.  
Accordingly, we revised down our projections for the second half of 2001 and the first half of 2002. 
And, at the end of August, we lowered interest rates to support domestic demand growth and to keep 
inflation near the target of 2 per cent over the medium term.  
The terrorist acts in the United States, and their worldwide fallout, greatly heightened the degree of 
uncertainty, further dampening near-term growth prospects. To underpin confidence in the face of this 
uncertainty,  we  took  the  exceptional  step  of  lowering  interest  rates  by  ½  of  a  percentage  point  on 
17 September, outside our regular schedule of fixed announcement dates.  
The  ongoing  economic  consequences  of  the  terrorist  acts  are  very  difficult  to  assess.  These 
developments are unlike anything we have ever experienced in North America, and it will take some 
more time to understand their full implications.  
If  we  consider  the  direct  effects  of  the  attacks,  their  immediate  impact  on  consumer  and  business 
confidence, and adjustments to address increased security risks, the Bank expects that output growth 
in Canada will be close to zero or slightly negative in the second half of 2001. For all of 2001, this 
implies growth of about 1½ per cent.  
As we look to 2002, the timing and strength of a recovery will depend crucially on geopolitics and on 
how  soon  confidence  returns  to  normal  in  North  America.  But  once  the  uncertainty  stemming  from 
terrorist  acts  dissipates,  I  expect  that  healthy  growth  in  output,  investment,  and  employment  will 
resume, given Canada's sound economic fundamentals.  
At present, one can envisage two scenarios with respect to confidence. In the first, confidence could 
be restored quickly, and robust growth could resume, supported by the substantial monetary and fiscal 
BIS Review 91/2001 
 1
 stimulus already in place. In the second, confidence could stay weak for some time and, consequently, 
growth would remain sluggish through most of 2002.  
Under  either  scenario,  by  the  end  of  2002,  our  economy  would  still  be  operating  at  levels  that  are 
below capacity. Core inflation is thus expected to fall to about 1½ per cent by the second half of 2002. 
Total CPI inflation is also expected to decline to about 2 per cent by the end of 2001 and to move 
below that during 2002, if energy prices remain at or below their early-September levels.  
Based on these considerations, on 23 October, we again lowered our key policy interest rate by ¾ of a 
percentage point. The cumulative reduction of 3 full percentage points since January aims to support 
growth and to keep inflation close to the 2 per cent target over the medium term.  
Given the many unknowns in the current environment, we will continue to monitor the situation very 
closely and adjust our outlook in the light of new information.  
2 
 BIS Review 91/2001
