Michael C Bonello: Overcoming the competitiveness challenge - Malta’s
economic imperative
Address by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, to the Malta Chamber of
Commerce National Competitiveness Conference, held in Qawra, 5 October 2001.
 That competitiveness is the key to survival  is a maxim that applies as much to firms as to national
economies. Countries tend to be competitive when they pursue sound macroeconomic policies and a
market-oriented growth strategy. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine a firm, however efficient it might be,
remaining competitive for long in a country  which does not provide  a congenial policy environment.
The focus of my remarks will, therefore, be on how national competitiveness could best be promoted.
For this purpose it is first necessary to enquire why it is that competitiveness has become such a vital
issue and why we simply must not fail to overcome the challenge.
The imperative derives from a combination of exogenous and endogenous factors, both structural and
cyclical. Perhaps the single most important structural factor is globalisation. Advances in information
technology and communications have greatly reduced the costs of doing business internationally. The
removal of barriers to the free movement of goods and also of some services has been followed by a
large increase in cross-border trade. Firms are thus no longer guaranteed captive national markets.
The process of global economic integration has been driven even faster by foreign direct investment
(FDI). Indeed, the volume of global FDI has almost quadrupled since 1980, a much faster progression
than world trade, which barely doubled. For the FDI host countries this has meant not only an increase
in output and employment, but often also a transfer of technology and know-how that has considerably
strengthened  their  economies.  In  this  respect,  the  experiences  of  Ireland  and  Portugal  immediately
spring to mind.  Thus,  failing  to  compete  in  a  globalized  world  is  likely  to  result  not  merely  in  lower
sales but, more importantly, also in less investment and, therefore, in weaker growth prospects.
In sum, globalisation implies increased opportunities but also risks. The opportunities cannot be seized
and the risks minimized, however, without an appropriate strategy. For this reason many countries are
to-day actively engaged in improving their market positioning and their cost structures relative to their
competitors in order to exploit opportunities for increasing their value added.
Some of the more interesting dynamics engendered by globalisation are taking place at the regional
level. Economic integration is proceeding rapidly in Europe, Asia and the Americas and, as a result,
the region rather than the nation state is gaining pre-eminence as the locus for policy-making in the
political sphere and for investment in the economic sphere. Regional integration is, therefore, rapidly
becoming  a  key  vehicle  for  gaining  access  to  world  markets  and  for  attracting  foreign  investment.
There is a growing realization that countries which remain outside  of regional alliances are likely to
become increasingly marginalized.
The external dimension of the economic imperative is further reinforced by domestic considerations.
These  arise  mainly  out  of  the  small  size  of  the  economy  and  its  lack  of  natural  resources,  which
translate into a high degree of openness. Malta depends heavily on imports for its consumption and
investment  needs,  and  equally  critically  on  exports  to  generate  the  foreign  exchange  required  to
service its import bill. Imports and exports each account for around 100% of GDP. Such dependence
on international trade is clearly a source of vulnerability.
Most  business  activities  in  Malta  are  thus  inevitably  exposed  to  the  full  force  of  international
competition.  Producers  for  the  domestic  market  face  import  competition  while  export-oriented  firms
face an ever-tougher competitive environment as new countries enter the global market-place. In the
export-oriented  sector,  there  is  a  predominance  of  foreign  direct  investment  that  often  provides  the
technical and marketing expertise which is a prerequisite for success. A loss of competitiveness would
thus be doubly damaging. In the first instance, there would be a drop in domestic output in favour of
imports and a contraction in export revenues. In the longer term, as Malta became a less profitable
location, there would be a decline in new foreign investment and a consequently negative impact on
growth prospects.
Apart from these structural factors, the need for competitiveness is accentuated by the current phase
of the economic cycle. For most of this year the world economy has been on the brink of a recession.
Following the recent tragic events in the United States, recessionary pressures are likely to intensify.
BIS Review 83/2001
1
Some analysts are predicting that growth this year may be as low as 2.2%, with recovery likely to take
over a year.
Against this backdrop of slowing global demand growth, competition will become even more intense,
as buyers will be better able to pass the burden of cost reductions on to sellers, while investors will be
ever more cautious about the risks they face and about securing reasonable rates of return. Indeed,
there  have  already  been  widespread  job  losses  in  many  countries  as  companies  retrench  and
economise  on  costs.  I  need  hardly  point  out  that  in  these  conditions  competitiveness  is  critical  for
survival.
Given  Malta’s  dependence  on  foreign  markets,  we  need  to  understand  the  implications  of  these
developments.  And  the  more  so  since  the  Maltese  economy  is  itself  in  the  down  phase  of  the
economic cycle. Real economic growth dropped from an average of 5.5% between 1990 and 1995 to
4.2%  thereafter.  Given  the  deteriorating  external  environment,  the  growth  rate  for  this  year,  and
probably even for 2002, is unlikely to reach 4%. And yet, if Malta is to converge sufficiently rapidly to
the  level  of  development  of  its  main  trading  partners,  it  will  be  necessary  to  achieve  a  consistently
higher growth rate.
We, therefore, need to ask ourselves whether strong growth in Malta is sustainable. To the extent that
it is generated by an expansion in the fiscal deficit, growth is potentially reversible as fiscal deficits and
growing public debt cannot be sustained indefinitely. The deficit averaged 4.5% of GDP in the first half
of the 1990s, but surged to 8.4% of GDP  in the second.  Substantial progress to consolidate public
finances has recently been made and the deficit has dropped to around 6% from a peak of 11% in
1998. While this fiscal restraint may curb demand growth in the short run, it is restoring the long-run
viability of the economy that would be threatened by a growing public debt. Suffice it to say that the
cost of servicing this debt has reached levels comparable to expenditures on health and education. In
this context the planned use of privatization proceeds to reduce the public debt is commendable.
By  stimulating  aggregate  demand,  budget  deficits  also  encourage  consumption  at  the  expense  of
saving,  thereby  leaving  fewer  resources  to  finance  investment,  the  only  lasting  source  of  long-term
growth.  Expenditure  on  foreign  goods  and  services  would  rise,  leading  to  a  deficit  on  the  current
account of the balance of payments. The current account deficit averaged 2% of GDP in the first half
of  the  1990s,  worsening  to  8%  of  GDP  in  the  second.  Protracted  deficits  on  the  external  current
account are clearly not sustainable in view of their impact on the external reserves and the extent of
foreign borrowing. In the long run, this could necessitate drastic reductions in consumption levels or
curtailed investment.
These developments in the growth rate and in the twin deficits highlight the need to critically evaluate
the economy’s overall performance and its prospects. The recent IMF mission has done just that and
we at the Central Bank concur with its findings. The IMF team concluded that while there do not yet
appear to be clear signs of a loss of competitiveness, there are warning signals. What then are we to
do? What viable strategic options are available to seek to overcome the obstacles that threaten the
continued enjoyment of current living standards?
In  difficult  times  such  as  these  some  might  be  tempted  to  seek  shelter  from  external  shocks  by
pursuing  an  inward-looking  growth  policy.  Numerous  experiences  of  countries  far  larger  than  ours
have  shown  that  this  course  of  action  only  serves  to  promote  inefficiencies  that  would  defeat  the
original  purpose.  Malta’s  own  experience  during  the  early  1980s  amply  confirms  this  fact.  The
fastest-growing economies have been those who faced international competition head-on and pursued
outward-oriented policies designed to achieve integration into a globalizing world economy. Malta itself
recently reaped the benefits of a similar approach when the removal of protective levies last year was
followed by an increase in output and employment in the hitherto protected sectors.
Others advocate fiscally-led growth through an expansion in expenditure or a reduction in taxes. In this
context, it must be understood that government expenditure puts money in people’s pockets without
necessarily expanding the economy’s supply capabilities. Aggregate demand would thus grow at the
expense of higher inflation or an increase in imports. This policy would be appropriate if the economy
were in a situation of severely depressed  demand relative to  its supply capabilities. In an economy
operating at relatively high employment levels with a deficit in the external current account, however, a
fiscally-driven expansion in aggregate demand would only produce short-lived growth. At this juncture,
therefore, the best contribution that fiscal policy can make to the economy’s growth prospects lies in
the further consolidation of public finances, a policy stance that has already contributed positively to
Malta’s standing with credit rating agencies and the IMF.
2
BIS Review 83/2001
Some commentators think it is possible to stimulate the economy via monetary policy, that is through
the lowering of interest rates. As I have often had occasion to explain, the intermediate objective of
monetary  policy  in  Malta  is  to  maintain  a  stable  exchange  rate  by  pegging  the  lira  to  a  basket  of
currencies  of  low  inflation  countries.  This  restrains  volatility  in  import  and  export  prices,  thereby
contributing to lower costs; mitigates domestic inflationary pressures and contributes to export price
competitiveness.  If  we  are  to  continue  enjoying  the  benefits  of  the  exchange  rate  peg,  our  interest
rates will have to shadow those prevailing in the currency basket countries, especially as restrictions
on international capital flows are being lifted. The alternative would be to risk outflows of funds and a
possible financial crisis.
There will, of course, be circumstances when a cut in interest rates is compatible with the sustainability
of the peg. When this is the case, the Central Bank will not hesitate to reduce interest rates, as it did
recently.  But  those  who  argue  in  favour  of  pursuing  growth  through  monetary  expansion  should
remember that investment is not interest-rate sensitive. Investment decisions are based on a range of
factors of which the cost of money is but one. Similarly, bank interest represents only a small fraction
of production costs.
Finally,  some  people  would  have  us  devalue  the  currency  in  an  attempt  to  stimulate  growth  by
improving export price competitiveness. This option carries with it the real prospect of higher import
prices and, therefore, a significant cut in real wages and wealth. To the extent that this is not followed
by  compensatory  measures,  it  would  indeed  help  to  increase  exports  and  restrain  consumption
demand and hence, imports. But it would also imply a decline in living standards. The extent to which
the benefits of improvements in cost competitiveness would be reaped in a situation where the export
sector is already operating close to full capacity is also doubtful. Past experience, however, suggests
that  a  devaluation  would  be  followed  by  a  nation-wide  rise  in  wage  levels  as  the  partial  wage
indexation system came into play, and this would generate price inflation and erode competitiveness.
In  Malta,  therefore,  devaluation  would  impose  immediate  costs  and  leave  no  long-term  benefits,
besides weakening the credibility of the lira. It is for these reasons that changes in the exchange rate
level are only a last resort option for an economy like ours.
It should be clear, therefore, that isolationist policies and expansionary fiscal, monetary and exchange
rate measures cannot be relied upon to generate sustainable economic growth. There are indeed no
easy fixes. The only viable option is to compete successfully in the global market-place. I believe that
this objective should be approached by pursuing a virtuous triangle of mutually-reinforcing policies:
i) 
increasing the amount of resources available in the economy and the efficiency with which
they are employed, by cutting costs and raising productivity;
focusing on the market niches in which we can excel;
ensuring the best international market access for our products and services.
ii) 
iii) 
On  the  last  of  these  points,  there  is  at  present  a  lively  debate  on  the  pros  and  cons  of  different
arrangements  with  our  main  trading  partner,  the  EU.  While  not  wishing  to  enter  the  debate  at  this
point, I cannot fail to observe that the uncertainty surrounding this issue is causing considerable harm
to Malta’s economic prospects. It is in our common interest that the direction the country is to take be
clarified  as  soon  as  possible.  And  this  within  a  realisation  that  with  Malta’s  main  competitors
themselves  seeking  closer  trade  ties  with  the  EU,  we  cannot  afford  to  fall  behind.  It  is  also  well  to
remember  that  some  of  the  losses  resulting  from  closer  trade  arrangements  with  the  EU  would  be
incurred  in  any  case  since  Malta  would  have  to  give  up  trade  protection  measures  by  virtue  of  its
existing and impending WTO obligations. As I mentioned earlier on, isolationism is counter productive
in the presence of the growing wave of globalization and regional integration.
As for seeking profitable market niches, this task is best left to the private sector itself provided that it
is  allowed  to  operate  in  a  congenial  business  environment,  unfettered  by  excessive  costs  or
bureaucratic  red  tape,  and  where  resources  can  find  their  most  productive  use  through  a  properly
operating price mechanism. Apart from promoting such an environment, the State can assist through
the  provision  of  information  and  assistance  in  the  taking  and  sharing  of  business  risks.  This  would
involve  the  undertaking  of  appropriate  restructuring  and  business  promotion  measures  by  State
agencies in  collaboration  with  the  private  sector,  as  is  being  done  by  the  MDC,  METCO  and  IPSE
among others.
Gone, however, are the days when policy-makers would make the decisions that should rightfully be
made  by  the  private  sector  based  on  efficiency,  productivity  and  profit  considerations.  Excessive
interference  by  the  State  has  bred  inefficiency  and  a  string  of  unsustainable  corporations.  Indeed,
BIS Review 83/2001
3
State intervention aimed at rectifying some kind of market failure has often resulted in welfare losses
that are greater than those associated with the failure it was meant to correct. The Maltese taxpayer is
still paying the price of past mistakes in this respect.
On the other hand, the private sector must do its utmost to become more competitive without relying
on  subsidies,  protection  or  unsustainable  monopolistic  positions.  In  the  past,  business  used  to
agglomerate around what were perceived to be the safest and most profitable propositions, such as
real estate development and importation. These activities have, unfortunately, also proved to be less
productive than others. A fresh, export-oriented approach based on investment, innovation and higher
value added is necessary for survival in today’s competitive global environment.
This ties in very closely with the third factor involved in sustaining competitiveness, namely the need to
increase  the  amount  of  resources  in  the  economy  and  the  productivity  with  which  they  are  used.
Productivity  growth  is  perhaps  the  single  most  important  objective  for  it  determines  how  fast  the
economy can grow. And faster growth not only lifts living standards, but it also boosts tax revenues
and makes it easier to do many socially desirable things, such as paying for tomorrow’s pensions.
Turning  first  our  attention  to  the  labour  market,  human  capital  is  the  most  valuable  resource  this
country possesses. We must nurture it and use it as productively as possible. Towards this end, our
labour  supply  and  our  work  practices  must  be  flexible  enough  to  rapidly  adapt  to  changing  market
needs. Training and development must be an on-going process, especially in the skills that are most in
demand. In this respect, there are significant synergies that are potentially exploitable through better
co-operation generally between Government, employers and unions, and specifically between the new
MCAST and the private sector.
In Malta’s case particularly, being competitive means above all ensuring that production costs do not
exceed those of our competitors. And because the cost of labour represents a major proportion of total
costs, it is important that increases in its cost are matched by improvements in productivity. Moody’s
latest report on Malta observes that “Productivity gains (in Malta) are lagging behind (those) in Malta’s
trading  partners,  partly  because  a  backward-looking  wage  adjustment  system  puts  a  floor  under
inflation”. Automatic wage increases across the board awarded through indexation and not matched
by productivity gains can be very harmful because, by tending to reduce cost competitiveness, they
put existing jobs at risk and also weaken Malta’s attractiveness as a location for investment.
Labour  market  behaviour  can  also  be  distorted  by  over-generous  social  security  systems  that  may
encourage  a  culture  of  dependence  rather  than  one  of  self-help.  Unemployment  schemes,  for
instance, could benefit from less emphasis on cash handouts and an  increased  focus  on  retraining
and  on  improving  employability.  Loose  contributory  rules  may  entice  workers  to  seek  underground
employment  to  avoid  making  contributions  without  necessarily  having  to  renounce  to  pension  and
other entitlements.
In the area of social security especially, the country is faced with hard choices. The resources devoted
to this area have a high opportunity cost in terms of foregone spending on, say, education and health.
I  believe  the  time  has  come  to  redefine  the  concept  of  need  and  reschedule  our  social  priorities
because it is clear that we can no longer afford to provide such a wide range of services for free to all
irrespective of income levels. Moreover, we must ensure that whatever programmes are implemented,
these are done in the most efficient and cost-effective manner possible.
Which  brings  us  to  another  important  labour  market  issue  that  needs  to  be  tackled,  namely
employment in the public sector, where the extent of human capital absorbed is excessive and where,
consequently, productivity is on average lower than in other sectors. Apart from imposing a tax burden
on  the  rest  of  the  economy,  this  is  effectively  reducing  the  supply  of  potential  skills  to  the  private
sector, thereby not only limiting its growth but also increasing the cost of its labour input.
Turning next to the product markets, competitiveness can only be hurt if goods and services are not
properly priced to reflect the demand for them and the use of resources in providing their supply. This
may take place, for instance, through excessively high prices engendered by monopoly situations and
cartel pricing. High inland freight costs, for instance, are contributing to erode the competitiveness of
our exporters as well as to inflate domestic price levels. Another example is the provision of free goods
and  services  by  the  State.  This  may  encourage  an  excessive  demand  which,  in  turn,  can  only  be
accommodated  through  higher  expenditure,  which  then  absorbs  resources  that  could  otherwise  be
productively used by the private sector.
I  think  it  should  by  now  be  clear  that  enhancing  the  economy’s  competitiveness  is  in  everybody’s
interest. As I have suggested, securing this objective requires a number of wide-ranging reforms to the
4
BIS Review 83/2001
labour  market,  the  wage  indexing  mechanism,  the  educational  system,  the  social  security  system,
public sector employment levels and bureaucratic procedures, the provision by the State of free goods
and  services  and  monopoly  practices.  These  involve  making  difficult  choices  between,  on  the  one
hand, a status quo that shelters categories of individuals to the detriment of the growth, and indeed
the  sustainability  and  livelihood,  of  the  rest  of  the  economy  and  ultimately  even  of  the  sheltered
individuals  themselves;  and,  on  the  other,  reforms  that  may  cause  pain  in  the  short  run,  but  which
could secure the entire community’s livelihood by ensuring the economy’s competitiveness. A short-
term oriented approach would likely lead to bad choices which we and future generations would come
to regret.
And this brings me to my concluding point, which is in the form of two questions. If there seems to be
such a wide consensus regarding the presence of inefficiencies in our economy and about the need to
eliminate  them,  why  has  Maltese  society  been  so  lethargic  in  undertaking  this  vital  task?  Are  we
doomed to end up like the ancient civilisation dwelling on Easter island, which prospered for hundreds
of  years,  living  off  a  tree  whose  reproductive  cycle  exceeded  the  life-time  of  an  individual,  and  for
which reason no one had ever bothered to replant as existing trees died off?
The second question probably provides a clue towards understanding the issue surrounding the first. If
a section of society makes a sacrifice to reform, the benefits derived in the process may accrue to the
rest of society in a greater proportion than to the people making the sacrifice. The obvious solution to
this  dilemma  would  be  for  all  sectors  of  society  to  share  in  the  costs  and  benefits  of  reform  in  an
equitable manner. And this is where Government and all the other social partners have a crucial role
to  play.  It  is  to  take  the  lead  in  agreeing  on  a  programme  of  reforms  and  carrying  their  respective
constituencies with them. The Malta Council for Economic and Social Development could, I believe,
provide a congenial forum for this purpose.
But  try  we  must  because  the  challenge  is  a  formidable  one  and  we  should  not  labour  under  any
illusion that  it can  be  wished  away.  This  is  not  a  time  for  carrying  on  as  usual.  Nor  is  it  a  time  for
behaving as though the universal laws of economics or current world realities do not apply to us. Least
of all should the impression be given that it is somehow possible to have all the gain without any of the
pain. We all know, for instance, that virtually all public sector expenditures are in the nature of fixed
charges  to  revenue  in  the  form  of  wages,  social  benefits  and  other  handouts,  subsidies  and
debt-servicing costs, leaving relatively few discretionary items of expenditure. This probably explains
why we hear many calls for cuts in Government spending, but no specific proposals on where and how
much to cut. Likewise, the rigidities which pervade the labour market and work practices have become
so fundamentally ingrained in the behavioural patterns of society that they have assumed the status of
acquired  rights.  A  number  of  institutions  remain  characterised  by  outdated  cultures  and  practices,
while  a  sizeable  part  of  the  population  remains  stubbornly  dependent  on  subsidies  and  artificial
protection.
Under such circumstances it is clear – and recent electoral experience has underscored the fact – that
the quest for competitiveness cannot, and indeed should not, be attempted by the Government alone.
The change in culture and behaviour that this requires can only be successfully undertaken through
the joint efforts of all the  interested  parties.  Faced  with  similar  circumstances,  other  countries  have
successfully injected a new dynamism into their economies on the strength of a broad consensus on
reform measures among the political and social forces. I sincerely hope that we in Malta can similarly
find the inner strength and conviction to put aside our differences and unite on these vital issues that
are clearly our common concern.
BIS Review 83/2001
5
