Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa: Clearing and settlement of securities – a European
perspective
Speech of Mr Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the Symposium of the Deutsche Bundesbank “Payment and Securities Settlement Systems in
Germany  against 
International  Developments”,  Frankfurt,
5 September 2001.
the  Background  of  European  and 
 1.
• 
   2.
• 
   Introduction
I would like to thank the Deutsche Bundesbank for giving me the opportunity to present my
views  on  a  subject,  clearing  and  settlement  of  securities  transactions,  which  is  currently
"burning", although it has long been considered of secondary importance.
Indeed,  securities  clearing  and  settlement  used  to  be  considered  pure  "paperwork"
- necessary for the business, but not very attractive from an intellectual or policy perspective.
Now,  however,  there  is  increasing  awareness  that  "processing"  has  turned  into  a  highly
dynamic  field  which  requires  careful  strategic  analysis  and  decision-making,  a  field  where
there are plenty of new profit opportunities and challenging developments.
The  increased  interest  in  the  subject  is  reflected  in  the  high  number  of  fora  where  it  is
discussed. At a global level, central banks and securities regulators will soon  publish their
"Recommendations  for  Securities  Settlement  Systems".  Moreover,  the  G-30  has  started
developing views on the design of the future infrastructure in this field. At the European level,
the  commitment  undertaken  by  the  European  Commission  under  the  Financial  Services
Action Plan to fill the regulatory gaps by 2005 and, more recently, the process of regulatory
reform  suggested  by  the  Report  of  the  Wise  Men  (adopted  by  the  Stockholm  European
Council) pave the way for further progress.
Today, I would like to provide a perspective on some of the recent developments. I will first
describe the traditional situation and the changes currently taking place. I shall then discuss
the future European/euro area securities infrastructure. To do so I will touch upon some very
debated issues: integration and consolidation; open architectures; natural monopolies; and
use of central bank money. Finally, I will devote a few words to the role authorities can play,
with a view to facilitating progress towards a new securities infrastructure for Europe.
The clearing and settlement of securities in Europe
Traditionally  countries,  coinciding  with  currency  areas,  developed  their  own  coherent
"domestic" infrastructure in terms of securities trading, clearing and settlement systems. This
was the case in the EMU countries before the euro, and this is still the case in the United
States, Japan, and many other countries.
In  general,  there  has  been  one  central  securities  depository  (CSD)  per  country  providing
custody services. CSDs were often established by the law and were given a legal monopoly
in the local market. The transfer of securities was taking place in the books of the CSD and
the transfer of cash on the accounts of the central bank. This structure resulted from legal
provisions, but also contributed to economic efficiency by allowing scale and network effects.
The CSD was generally closely connected with the trading, clearing and settlement system
in  a  vertically  integrated  structure,  usually  based  on  common  ownership.  Services  were
provided  in  two  layers.  The  CSD  provided  clearing,  settlement,  safekeeping  and  other
services  to  its  settlement  members.  In  turn  some  of  these  members,  also  called
"custodians", provided the same services  to  end-users  and  offered  additional  value-added
services, such as credit facilities or securities lending services. Finally central counterparties
(CCP) used to limit the provision of netting facilities to derivatives products.
The  world  that  I  have  just  described  is  no  longer  the  one  of  today.  What  are  the  forces
driving  the  change?  How  do  they  affect  the  market  players  and  the  market  structure?  On
these I would like to provide some views.
BIS Review 81/2001
1
     3.
• 
   2
The  main  forces  that  are  reshaping  the  securities  industry  are:  technological  progress,
deregulation,  and  globalisation.  In  the  euro  area,  the  euro  is  an  additional,  very  powerful,
force, which, in my opinion, makes the pace of change much faster. As a result, there are
several "trends" in the market structure that need to be considered.
A  first  trend  is  the  increasing  blurring  of  specialisation,  i.e.  of  the  borderline  between  the
roles and services of different market players: custodians, clearinghouses and (I)CSDs. All
market players are seeking to provide new services and to reach new markets. Every player
has  become  a  potential  competitor  to  all  the  others.  For  instance,  CSDs  are  establishing
links  between  each  other  and  acting  as  custodians  to  one  another.  Custodians  are
increasingly  providing  settlement  functions.  International  central  securities  depositories
(ICSDs) are merging with domestic CSDs and have started providing credit  and securities
lending  facilities.  Central  counterparties  are  expanding  their  services  to  all  securities
markets.
A  second  trend  is  the  struggle  to  be  at  the  centre.  The  legal  monopoly  CSDs  have
traditionally  had  is  no  longer  a  guarantee  that  these  institutions  are  "central".  To  reach  a
central status, market players must achieve a critical mass that will allow them to exploit the
economies of scale inherent in securities clearing and  settlement.  The  attempt  to  become
the central institution is behind proposals for consolidation put forward so far. From the "hub
and spokes" proposal which Euroclear made two years ago to the more recent "Euro CCP"
proposal by the European Securities Forum, the ambition has been the same: to reach the
centre. However, nobody volunteers to leave the central position to a competitor.
Finally, in the euro area, the "limes" is changing from political to currency borders in order to
take  full  advantage  of  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency.  The  notion  of  "domestic
system"  more  and  more  refers  (appropriately  I  would  say)  to  systems,  which  are  mainly
based on one currency, whereas global systems remain multi-currency.
Against this background a new European securities structure will take shape. It is too early to
say  how  this  structure  will  exactly  be. We  can  say,  however,  that  its  future  shape  will  be
largely determined by five important issues. First, should we try to achieve integration and/or
consolidation?  Second,  do  we  need  an  open  architecture?  Third,  is  the  clearing  and
settlement  industry  a  natural  monopoly,  and  what  degree  of  concentration  do  we  need?
Fourth, is a euro area, domestic infrastructure needed for payment systems and securities
(trading,  clearing  and  settlement)  systems?  Finally,  do  we  still  need  settlement  in  central
bank money?
Integration and consolidation
First  of  all,  some  further  clarification  is  needed  in  the  terminology.  Indeed,  the  terms
"integration" and "consolidation" are often used as synonyms, but do not always refer to the
same thing.
Integration enables the service users to pay the same price for the same product or service,
regardless  of  their  location.  In  particular,  the  costs  of  clearing  and  settlement  should  not
distort  investment  decisions.  Thus,  it  should  not  make  a  difference  to  a  final  investor  in
Finland, for instance, to buy or sell a security issued in Finland or France in terms of clearing
and  settlement  costs.  Along  the  same  lines,  it  should  not  make  a  difference  to  a  Finnish
commercial bank whether it uses Finnish or French securities as collateral to obtain central
bank credit.
Consolidation  describes  the  process  of  concentration  in  the  service  providing  industry.  It
concerns not only structural aspects such as mergers and acquisitions, but also outsourcing,
alliances, 
institutions.  As  such,
consolidation not only facilitates integration, but may also help to reduce the cost of trading,
clearing  and  settlement  by  making  use  of  scale  economies  and  network  externalities.
Therefore, consolidation is a key concept for the integration and hence the rationalisation of
the euro area.
While no one seems to deny the need for further consolidation and integration, there is no
consensus on the way forward. In principle, two extreme configurations, or end points, can
be  identified  for  integration.  One  is  open  access:  it  means  that  all  custodian  banks  and
joint  ventures,  and  reorganisations  within 
financial 
BIS Review 81/2001
 4.
• 
   5.
• 
central  banks  have  direct  or  remote  access  to  all  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  In  an
environment  with  multiple  systems,  however,  this  approach  is  complicated  and  costly
because it would imply that every bank would need to have accounts with every system.
The other extreme way  of achieving  integration is full consolidation,  i.e. to create  a  single
service providing structure. If there were only one single provider for trading, clearing, and
settlement in the euro area, differences attributable to location would necessarily disappear.
However,  a  monopolistic  market  structure  also  suffers  from  deficiencies,  to  which  I  shall
return later.
The need for an open architecture
If  instead  of  speaking  about  end  points  we  speak  about  paths,  then  two  paths  of
consolidation  are  often  distinguished.  Horizontal  consolidation  affects  institutions  providing
the  same  services;  for  instance,  at  the  trading  level,  the  merger  of  several  exchanges  or
trading  platforms  into  a  single  one.  Vertical  consolidation  affects  institutions  providing
different services in the value chain. The typical example is the establishment of structures
(so-called "silos"), where trading, clearing, and settlement are proposed to customers as a
package.
A  common  argument  in  favour  of  local  silos  is  that  they  enable  local  markets  to  be  more
competitive by providing better and cheaper services. Furthermore, it is often argued that the
consolidation  in  the  euro  area  can  be  attained  only  with  a  two-steps  approach,  i.e.  after
consolidation has been achieved at the local level.
However,  in  the  new  domestic  (euro  area)  environment  local  silos  may  also  present
drawbacks in terms of fragmentation and lack of competition. In order to foster competition,
the  use  of  a  particular  clearing  facility  should  not  be  compulsory  for  users  of  a  particular
trading platform or of a particular securities settlement system. Similarly,  trading  platforms
should  not  be  able  to  prevent  other  trading  platforms  from  having  access  to  clearing  and
settlement systems they are linked to.
Against  this  background,  many  market  players  and  some  public  bodies,  such  as  the
European Commission, consider essential to establish an open architecture in the securities
infrastructure. Ideally, customers should have the choice to participate in any of the layers of
the  value  chain.  This  means  that  each  entity  in  one  of  these  layers  should  no  longer  be
allowed  to  discriminate  in  its  access  policy.  Open  access  does  not  mean  that  all  trading
platforms should be obliged to set-up links with all the clearing and settlement systems. In
some  cases,  the  implementation  of  such  links  could  actually  be  technically  difficult  and/or
costly to achieve. Once the possibility  is granted,  it  would  be  left to market participants to
identify the links that need to be established, according to the principles of free competition
within the European Community.
Are clearing and settlement natural monopolies?
In  clearing  and  settlement,  as  in  other  network  industries,  the  tendency  towards  a  fully
consolidated infrastructure is driven by positive externalities, economies of scale, economies
of scope and need for common standards.
Network externalities allow for the value of services and products offered on the network to
rise exponentially with the number of users. Thus, an increase in the number of participants
in  the  clearing  and/or  settlement  system  will  also  increase  the  range  and  the  level  of  the
services provided to existing members.
The existence of high fixed investment costs resulting in economies of scale makes a single
infrastructure  for  clearing  and  settlement  more  efficient  than  several  systems  serving  the
same market.
The economies of scope, deriving from the need to provide trading, clearing and settlement
services  in  a  sequential  way,  can  be  fully  exploited  in  case  of  vertical  integration  of  the
various infrastructure used in the value chain of a securities transaction.
BIS Review 81/2001
3
Finally, by ensuring the adoption of a single standard, the existence of a single  integrated
infrastructure eliminates the costs and risks associated with the need for the users to access
several networks with different and incompatible standards.
But fully consolidated networks also present certain negative externalities:
First, a high degree of consolidation implies that failure of the network has high systemic and
contagion risks and costs. Failure of one part of the  network could lead to failure of other
parts  of  the  integrated  network,  resulting  in  contagion.  Robustness  or  system  integrity  is
therefore critical to the safety and soundness of networks.
Second, in a monopoly situation, the lack of competition does not per se provide adequate
incentives to the providers to innovate and enhance their product or service, once high fixed
investment  costs  have  been  borne.  This  can,  in  turn,  determine  excessive  prices  for  the
users or unjustified barriers to entry for new potential providers.
The policy approach towards network industries has changed over the time. Until the 1980s,
there seemed to be general agreement that most segments of the network industries were
natural  monopolies.  However,  during  the  1990s,  a  shift  in  the  regulation  paradigm  of  the
network industries occurred and competition was introduced in many segments. As a result,
many  network  industries  lost  their  status  as  public  institutions  and  were  transformed  into
corporations and eventually privatised.
Recent  experience  in  the  development  of  network  industries  suggests  that  network
externalities  and  economies  of  scales  do  not  necessarily  imply  a  monopoly.  In  fact,
advances in technology may increase the contestability of the market by facilitating the entry
of new service providers. In telecommunication and railways, for instance, it is argued that
the  segment  providing  the  network  could  be  separated  from  the  segment  providing  the
service to the end-consumers. Owing to the large fixed costs necessary to set up a network,
only the former is regarded as a natural monopoly and should remain subject to some form
of regulation. The latter can be open to competition.
Even  in  this  new  approach  to  competition  in  network  industries,  a  minimum  level  of
concentration of the infrastructure (or minimum level of users) may be required in order to
permit optimisation of the conditions for providing the services. For instance, in the case of
telecommunications, a minimum level of subscribers is necessary in order to attain as many
connections  as  possible  via  a  single  entry  point  (the  telephone  set).  This  minimum  level
cannot  be  quantified  in  abstracto.  It  needs  to  be  determined  on  a  case-by  case  basis
according to the types and costs of the services in the industry.
A domestic infrastructure for the euro
The introduction of the euro has been pushing the emergence of a coherent infrastructure for
the  euro  area,  as  demonstrated  by  the  consolidation  currently  taking  place  in  the  field  of
stock exchanges, payment systems and securities clearing and settlement systems.
Mainly  because  of  exchange  rate  risks,  securities  transactions  tend  to  concentrate  within
currency  areas.  Indeed,  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  eliminated  currency
segmentation, investment behaviour has begun shifting from a national to a euro area wide
approach. As a result, the number of intra euro-area securities transactions has substantially
increased. The securities industry increasingly needs a "domestic" infrastructure for the euro
to cope with the new conditions.
The fact that the geographical scope of a market infrastructure is the currency area is due
not only to business reasons but also to policy reasons. Central banks have an interest in a
coherent infrastructure for the currency for which they are responsible. Indeed, the definition
of a domestic system in currency rather than in political terms enables the  Eurosystem  to
address regulatory concerns efficiently. Moreover, it enables the central bank to address the
liquidity problems that may be triggered by payment, clearing, and settlement systems.
The infrastructure for the euro should be located in the euro area, as it is the case for core
infrastructures in  any  monetary  area.  Indeed,  current  market  initiatives  are  pointing  in  this
direction, and central banks have a general interest in the infrastructure for their currency to
be located within their area of jurisdiction.
BIS Review 81/2001
    6.
• 
   4
   7.
• 
     The location of the infrastructure for euro-denominated transactions in the euro area allows
securities  clearing  and  settlement  systems  to  be  properly  regulated  and  overseen.  This
would  help  the  Eurosystem,  as  the  central  bank  of  the  euro,  to  ensure  the  smooth
functioning  of  payment  systems,  to  implement  monetary  policy  efficiently  and  to  pursue
financial stability. These are also the reasons why existing and possible future international
agreements between central banks and securities regulators (for instance, the CPSS/IOSCO
Recommendations) give a prominent role to "home" authorities.
The existence of a domestic infrastructure is not, of course, in contrast with the emergence
of "international" or "global" infrastructures, such as the Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS)
Bank in the field of payment systems or the International Central Securities Depositories in
the field of securities settlement. International infrastructures are superimposed on domestic
ones and are not designed to replace them.
Co-operation between domestic systems at a global level is important. A key concept in this
respect  is  interoperability.  Interoperability  enables  co-operation  between  systems  at  a
technical level by agreeing on common processes, methods, protocols,  and networks. But
also in case of the multi-currency global systems dealing with the euro, the Eurosystem, as
the  central  bank  of  the  single  currency,  will  be  associated  with  their  oversight,  given  its
interest in the smooth functioning of such systems.
Settlement in central bank money?
The issue of central bank money is currently debated in several fora, not only with reference
to  securities  settlement  systems.  Technological  developments,  and 
in  particular
developments in the field of electronic money, have re-opened the debate on the need for
central banks to provide the ultimate means for settlement.
Provision of settlement means for payment system has been the primum movens of central
bank history, remaining important all along. Modern central banks, in fact, have their origin in
the  transition  from  a  payment  technology  based  on  commodity  money  to  one  based  on
fiduciary money. Payments made in fiduciary money differ from those made with commodity
money in that they are carried out by transferring liabilities of a third party. Hence, the value
of  these  liabilities  and  the  cost  of  effecting  payments,  namely  the  "quality"  of  payments,
depend  to  a  large  extent  on  the  standing  of  the  third-party  issuers,  their  organisational
efficiency, and the structure of the money market.
One may wonder what kind of impact securities clearing and settlement systems (SCSSs)
have on the issuance of money by central banks. The exponential growth of securities trades
and the increasing use of securities to collateralise obligations can give an idea of how a key
role of the central bank is affected by these systems. But here I do not wish to focus on how
important  SCSSs  are  for  central  banks,  but  on  how  important  central  bank  money  is  for
SCSSs.
In  the  traditional  configuration,  each  domestic  CSD  settled  the  cash  leg  of  securities
transactions in the account of its central bank. Today, many argue that in a multi-currency
environment  settlement  in  central  bank  money  is  unpractical  because  there  is  no  "global"
central bank able to provide finality in a variety of currencies.
International fora, such as the CPSS, have recognised that in a multi-currency environment,
commercial  bank money  can  be  used  as  settlement  mean,  provided  that  it  carries  limited
risks  and  these  risks  are  properly  addressed.  A  practical  example  of  central  bank  co-
operation  to  meet  the  challenges  of  global  systems  is  CLS.  CLS  will  settle  in  commercial
bank money for practical reasons (i.e. different time zones), but a wide range of risk control
measures have been put in place in order to control risks and, in particular, the concentration
of financial risks on a single entity.
But the role of central bank money is also challenged when turning from global to domestic
systems. I believe this is due to one of the trends pointed out earlier. The struggle to be at
the centre applies not only to securities, but also to cash. Every commercial bank (or CSD)
would like to be in the position of the central bank in order to exploit the monopoly over the
money supply and obtain additional profits. But, likewise, no commercial bank would like to
see a competitor  occupying the position of the  central  bank.  Neutrality  is  a  critical  feature
BIS Review 81/2001
5
that only central banks can provide to the securities industry, where every player competes
with every one else. Only an element that is external to the banking system can occupy a
central  position,  since  there  are  asymmetries  of  information  that  would  make  competition
with  the  rest  of  the  system  unfair.  And  the  evolution  of  central  banking  in  the  last  two
centuries has been based on the progressive emergence of a convention  whereby central
banks do not compete with the banking industry.
The  central  bank  owes  its  special  position  within  the  payment  systems  industry  to  its
comparative advantage in sustaining confidence  in  what are ultimately  "fiduciary" payment
technologies.  This  comparative  advantage  derives  from the  central  bank  being  part  of,  as
Adam Smith once said of the Bank of England, the "machinery of state". Even if money was
not generated by law, its progressive evolution gave rise to central banks, which perfected it
and adjusted it to the manifold and varying needs of commerce.
I  noted  earlier  that  silos  do  not  provide  freedom  of  choice  to  market  participants.  I  would
consider a system that settles exclusively  in the accounts of a private  bank or a CSD not
different  from  a  silos,  because  it  de  facto  obliges  participants  who  wants  to  trade  certain
securities to hold an account with, and extend credit to, that institution. An open architecture
should also apply to the settlement asset. It is debatable whether settlement in central bank
money  should  be  imposed  on  any  market  participant.  But  no  system  should  prevent  its
participants from settling in central bank money, especially if the system aspires to become
systemically important.
The role of public authorities
Let me now briefly turn from the profile of a future system to the role I envisage for public
authorities.
There  is  clear  theoretical  and  empirical  evidence  that  market-driven  solutions  are  best  at
allocating  resources  efficiently.  This  also  holds  true  for  establishing  an  efficient  securities
infrastructure.
That said, there are at least three main reasons for public authorities to be involved in the
process. First, integrated  efficient and safe securities clearing and settlement  systems  are
one  of  the  necessary  conditions  for  integrated  capital  markets,  the  sound  execution  of
monetary  policy,  the  smooth  functioning  of  payment  systems  and  the  preservation  of
financial  stability.  Second,  the  fact  that  the  process  of  consolidation  should  remain  in  the
hands of the private sector does not mean that there are no public policy issues at stake. In
this connection, it might be better for the market if public authorities took position at an early
stage. Finally, because of the complexity of the consolidation process, the risks entailed and
the  different  interests  at  stake,  the  final  outcome  of  the  current  process  of  reshaping  the
securities industry will be the result not only of competitive pressure, but also of co-operation
between market participants and public authorities and, eventually, policy decisions.
The role of public authorities spans three main fields: removing obstacles to consolidation,
setting standards, and  ensuring an integrated regulatory  and oversight framework. Let  me
briefly examine each of them.
First,  removing  obstacles  to  consolidation.  In  its  report  on  the  regulation  of  European
markets,  the  Committee  of  Wise  Men  underlined  that  public  policy  should  focus  on
competition issues and on removing impediments which make consolidation difficult. Indeed,
obstacles to open access to clearing and settlement functions should be removed, as well as
legal  barriers  to  clearing  and  settling  securities  transactions  via  systems  located  in  other
jurisdictions.  This  would  facilitate  competition  between  different  clearing  and  settlement
systems across the EU, without favouring any particular model of consolidation and leaving
this process in the hands of the private sector.
This  goal  will  be  achieved  only  by  granting  market  participants  the  right  of  access  to  all
different layers of the post-trading infrastructure. Different criteria of admission to regulated
markets,  central  clearing  counterparties  and  settlement  systems  may  lead  to  potential
protectionism. A process of convergence and further harmonisation of the requirements for
admission to these systems may be considered far-reaching, at this stage. However, these
criteria should be objective, transparent and non-discriminatory. Common organisational and
BIS Review 81/2001
  8.
• 
     6
    to  establish  standards 
for  securities  settlement  systems.  The 
functional requirements, including risk management, could be laid down to achieve a level
playing-field  of  different  systems  and  facilitate  their  access  to  foreign  market  participants.
The European  Commission is trying to address these  issues  by  amending  the  Investment
Service Directive.
Second,  setting  standards.  Securities  clearing  and  settlement  systems  are  a  critical
component  of  the  infrastructure  of  global  financial  markets.  Weaknesses  in  clearing  and
settlement arrangements can be a source of systemic disturbances to securities markets and
to other systems. Because of its statutory responsibilities in the fields of monetary policy and
payment  systems,  the  Eurosystem  has  an  interest  in  the  smooth  functioning  of  securities
clearing and settlement systems. Irrespective of the arrangements with other authorities, the
establishment  of  standards  for  risk  management  is  therefore  essential.  Against  this
framework, the CPSS-IOSCO Joint Task Force has undertaken a  comprehensive  work,  in
order 
final  set  of
recommendations will be available before the end of the current year.
Third,  ensuring  an  integrated  regulatory  and  oversight  framework.  The  process  of
consolidating the supervision of clearing and settlement activities and the increasing use of
links  challenge  the  present  supervisory  framework.  The  competence  of  oversight  remains
with the  authorities of the country  of origin of the system. However, co-operation  between
competent authorities for the oversight of trading venues and post-trading systems should be
strengthened, both domestically and at the international level. Securities secondary markets
may require prompt interventions by authorities to ensure their stability and functionality. This
can  only  happen  if  a  network  between  competent  authorities  for  the  efficient  and  timely
exchange of information is in place.
Securities clearing and settlement systems fall under the competence of both central banks
and  securities  or  banking  supervisors  and  thus  deserve  joint  consideration.  Securities
regulators  and  central  banks  have  already  initiated  a  discussion  of  issues  of  common
interest.  The  fruitful  experience  of  the  CPSS-IOSCO  Joint  Task  Force  on  Securities
Settlement Systems is an incentive to conduct similar work at the EU level.
For  this  purpose,  the  Eurosystem  welcomes  the  establishment  of  a  framework  for  co-
operation with securities commissions, and in particular with the newly established European
Securities  Regulators  Committee.  This  framework  for  co-operation  is  primarily  aimed  at
assessing  if  and  how  the  CPSS-IOSCO  recommendations  should  be  adopted  and
implemented throughout Europe.
Conclusions
9.
My intention today was to discuss the future European securities infrastructure and to say a few words
about the possible ways to progress. Of course, I have not provided a plan, because it is the primarily
role of the market to search and implement solutions. However, I have tried to identify some elements
that in my view should be part of any solution. Let me briefly recapitulate them in six points:
1. 
The  integration  process  in  Europe  implies  consolidation  of  the  existing  infrastructure  for
clearing and settlement.
Consolidation  should  in  the  first  place  occur  in  the  euro  area.  Far  from  excluding  the
development of global infrastructures, consolidation at the euro area level is a pre-condition
for global co-operation.
The  system  of  the  euro  area  will  have  to  combine  the  advantages  of  a  consolidated
infrastructure  (economies  of  scale  and  network  externalities)  with  those  of  an  open  and
competitive environment (level playing-field for both participants and providers).
Central bank money will continue to play an important role to ensure the smooth functioning
of payment and settlement systems and a level playing-field between the different actors.
Consolidation will be the combined result of the three forces of competition, co-operation and
policy action;
Public  authorities  play  a  role  in  three  fields:  removing  obstacles  to  consolidation,  setting
standards, and ensuring an integrated regulatory and oversight framework.
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
BIS Review 81/2001
7
