Glenn Stevens: The monetary policy process at the Reserve Bank of Australia
Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens Assistant Governor, Economic Group of the Reserve Bank of Australia,
at  the  Economic  Society  of  Australia  (Victorian  Branch)  Forecasting  Conference,  Melbourne,
10 October 2001.
The references for the speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of Australia’s website.
 Introduction
Thank  you  to  the  Victorian  Branch  of  the  Economic  Society  for  another  invitation  to  speak  at  your
conference  here  in  Melbourne.  You  have  heard  a  number  of  thoughtful  presentations  this  morning
about  the  state  of  the  world  and  the  outlook.  I  have  little  to  add  to  that,  and  do  not  intend  to  offer
comments on the conjuncture.
I have chosen instead to speak on something which is less immediate, but about which I have found
there to be a good deal of interest at times, namely the procedural elements of the monthly monetary
policy process inside the Reserve Bank. You may think that this is a bit tedious,  but there  have on
occasion been claims that the whole process is somehow mysterious, and that more information about
it should be divulged. This view is, I suspect, most often put by people who do not agree with particular
policy outcomes. But there is, nonetheless, a case for having an account of the process on the record.
I  aim  to  show  that  there  is  nothing  mysterious  about  the  monetary  policy  process,  by  outlining  the
routine the staff and management of the Bank go through each month in formulating their view about
the  economy,  and  the  recommendation  to  be  taken  to  the  Board  meeting  –  which  of  course  is  the
critical  decision  node.  I  will  be  speaking  from  the  perspective  of  someone  heavily  involved  in  the
process, including taking part in the Board meeting, but not as a decision maker – only an adviser.
Hence  I  do  not,  it  should  be  clear,  pretend  to  speak  for  the  Board  members,  nor  will  I  address
questions  of  governance,  or  the  Reserve  Bank’s  communications  with  the  Government.  As  a  staff
member rather than a Board member, I am not in a position to comment on such matters.
I shall try to make a few points which I think are important along the way, and I will end with a few
observations  about  the  policy  process.  Before  setting  out,  let  me  emphasise  that  I  have  not  come
today to deliver any particular message about the short-term outlook for monetary policy.
The meeting schedule
The decision process revolves around the Board meeting schedule. As you know, the Reserve Bank
Board  meets  eleven  times  each  year  to  consider  monetary  policy.  For  the  past  twenty  years,  the
meetings have been held on the first Tuesday of each month, except in January. Of course, meetings
can be convened at any time, if needed, and the Board can be contacted by phone in the event of
some urgent matter. Such events are rare, though they have occurred occasionally in the past. It has
come to be regarded as a good thing, however, that policy decisions are, in normal circumstances,
taken at meetings with a known schedule. Such a schedule for decision-making meetings, as well as
for regular documents (such as the quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy) is increasingly the norm
internationally.  Even  some  countries  that  do  not  have  a  decision-making  board  have  established  a
fixed timetable for making and announcing decisions on monetary policy. This is quite efficient, in that
it helps financial markets and other observers in allocating their own resources – they know when to
pay attention! – and lessens unnecessary speculative activity.
Internal processes
The monthly schedule naturally provides the rhythm for the staff’s efforts. In the case of the Economic
Group, the process begins about  two  weeks or so before the  Board meeting date (that is,  not  long
after  the  previous  meeting  has  finished).  Relevant  desk  staff  who  monitor  the  data  flow  begin  the
preparation  of  comprehensive  documents  giving  details  of  all  the  relevant  information.  This
documentation ultimately forms part of the detailed briefing paper on the economy presented to the
Board, and is  updated continually  as the information comes in (some of the key data, like the CPI,
typically come in quite late in the process).
BIS Review 84/2001
1
At  the  same  time  as  the  documents  are  in  preparation,  there  is  a  sequence  of  meetings.  Around
twelve days prior to the Board meeting, we in the Economic Group hold a staff meeting to focus on the
available economic information. We review data on the rest of the world, domestic economic activity,
prices, wages, the labour market, and financial conditions. The full range of economic data is  quite
extensive:  we  track  over  2000  data  series  on  the  Australian  and  international  economy.  Hence  the
focus has to be on those pieces of information that are most significant and potentially view-changing.
We  are  also  exposed  to  relevant  pieces  of  analytical  or  research  work  which  can  inform  our
assessment of the economy’s development. At this meeting, there is a good deal of questioning about
various  elements  of  the  figures,  and  in  particular  about  apparent  contradictions  or  tensions  which
inevitably arise in the short run data flow.
Much  of  the  process  of  data  analysis  for  the  purposes  of  policy  advice  is,  in  fact,  of  the  nature  of
detective work: trying to fit all the pieces together in a way which makes the most sense. Usually, this
proceeds by forming a working hypothesis about what is occurring in the economy, then being on the
lookout for anomalies, and then hunting down why those anomalies are occurring, which may in turn
lead to a revision of the original hypothesis. For example, is a key variable moving the way it should
be, given our view of the outlook? If not, can a sensible reason for this be found? If it can’t, perhaps
our working hypothesis is in need of amendment.
One such question in recent months was: why were imports so weak? Was it because the exchange
rate was doing a lot of work to shift demand to domestic production? Was it that much of the impact of
the business sector inventory run-down was being reflected in imports? Or was domestic demand in
fact much weaker than we thought? Or all three of the above to some extent? Another was whether
the  large fall  in full-time employment  in July  was  consistent  with  other  information  about  the  labour
market (it wasn’t). Yet another was  whether the large fall recorded  in business credit  in July  was a
genuine signal or was affected significantly by technical changes in the way the data are compiled and
shifts in seasonal patterns driven by changes to the tax system. In this case, statistical doubts don’t
seem to be enough to remove the impression that business credit is quite weak.
The analysis is not entirely focused on official statistics. As you know, the Bank has in the past year
upgraded  its  economic  liaison  capacity,  establishing  Regional  Offices  in  Melbourne,  Perth  and
Brisbane. We have recently added an economist in Adelaide, who is attached to the Bank’s Branch in
that  city. While  we  have  for  many  years  undertaken  regular  liaison  with  major  retailers,  the  Offices
have  been  quite  active  in  developing  additional  contacts  in  the  business  community,  state
governments, industry groups and  academia. Their  work is coordinated  from  Sydney  and  we  make
considerable effort to ensure the results are integrated into Head Office’s evaluation of the economy.
Each  month,  an  economist  from  one  of  the  Offices  has  the  responsibility  of  distilling  the  insights
gained from the collective liaison effort into a document, and will travel to Sydney to present the results
at  the  staff  meeting.  To  date,  we  have  been  pleased  both  by  the  reception  our  liaison  visits  have
received,  and  by  the  insights  we  have  gained  into  some  topical  issues  on  which  there  is  no  timely
official data to which we can appeal.1
In all of this, we are aiming to come to as comprehensive an understanding as we can of the state of
the economy and its likely trajectory in the period ahead. We are ultimately seeking an assessment of
the likely state of aggregate demand, supply and prices – which, of course, is the key focus for policy
under an inflation-targeting framework.
As part of making this assessment, and of forming a view about whether the stance of policy ought to
be altered, it is important to have a clear view of exactly what the current stance of monetary policy is,
and  what  effect  it  is  likely  to  be  having  on  the  economy,  bearing  in  mind  the  widely-acknowledged
lags. To gauge this we start by doing relatively simple things, like looking at the level of interest rates
– in  nominal  and  real  terms –  compared  with  history,  examining  the  pattern  and  strength  of  credit
growth,  the  state  of  asset  markets,  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate  and  so  on.  In  all  this,  we  make
allowance as best we can for the state of the business cycle, and for structural changes which may be
affecting  the  course  of  these  variables.  We  place  a  good  deal  of  weight  on  the  range  of  financial
variables in the economy – monetary policy works, after all, by changing financial prices.
I would make one other observation that I think is important here, and that is that we believe it is very
important to keep in mind the level of interest rates, not just their changes. Many commentators, of
course, do the reverse – they focus heavily on the changes in rates. This is understandable in that a
change in monetary policy is much more interesting news to report than no change. And, naturally, the
way  in  which  a  particular  movement  (or  non-movement)  will  be  received  by  markets,  the  business
community  and  the  general  public  is  an  important  tactical  consideration  for  the  policy  makers.  But
2
BIS Review 84/2001
while the changes in rates make the news, it is surely the level which does most of the work on the
economy.
Consideration of the current stance of policy can be supplemented by two other  pieces of analysis.
The first is the output of a suite of Taylor rule-type calculations. As I am sure you know, Taylor rules
are a simple formula which give a benchmark for the real short-term interest rate, conditional on the
latest information about output relative to estimated potential output and inflation relative to the target
rate (and conditional on an assumption of a so-called "neutral" real interest rate). Staff research over
the  years  has  identified  a  couple  of  Taylor  rule  formulations  which  we  think  are  worth  checking
periodically. We also compile and monitor monetary conditions indexes – which combine interest rates
and exchange rates – though we have significant reservations about the use of these indexes in more
formal ways.2
The  second  additional  piece  of  analysis  is  a  simulation  exercise  using  a  small  macro-econometric
model of the economy developed by Economic Research Department. This model can be used as a
forecasting tool (as an input to, or cross check of, the central staff forecasts which are predominantly
judgemental – and much more detailed – in nature). It can also be used in "optimal policy mode". That
is, given the current state of the economy, and given the objectives for policy (the inflation target and a
preference for avoiding undue instability in real GDP), the model can be asked: what is the path for
interest  rates  over  the  relevant  horizon  which  will  minimise  the  variance  of  the  objective  variables
around their targets?
Now I do not want to leave you with the impression that the staff unquestioningly accept these results
and  rush  breathlessly  off  to  the  Governor  to  suggest  interest  rates  immediately  be  adjusted  in
accordance  with  them.  Such  technical  work  is  undertaken  with  a  view  to  informing  our  judgement,
rather than as a substitute for it. The model results can some times be sufficiently counter-intuitive (at
least  to  me)  that  we  spend  a  lot  of  time  questioning  how  they  came  about,  which  usually  means
examining  properties  of  the  models  which  produce  the  results.  But  that  process  can  be  quite
illuminating,  in  that  it  prompts  us  to  confront  the  implications  of  assumptions  we  make,  either  in  a
formal model or in our heads, about the way the world works.3
Nor do I wish to leave the impression that there is a single model of the economy which commands
complete support, in every detail, from everyone in the Reserve Bank. That has never been, and will
never be, so. I personally think we should be unashamedly eclectic in our use of models. Recognising
that  there  is  more  than  one  way  to  think  about  things,  comparing  the  results  from  those  different
approaches, and thinking about why they occur, is vastly preferable to being tied too tightly to a single
model or view of the world. We have, in fact, examined a range of model approaches over the years,
and routinely use more than one piece of modelling to inform key forecasts, including in particular for
inflation. Incidentally, before the clamour for more detail of the nature of these models grows too loud,
I should state that the models, and the Taylor rule research we have carried out, have all been in the
public domain for some time.4
While all this is occurring in the Economic area, our colleagues in the Financial Markets Group have
had a parallel process going on,  with a  particular focus on assessing  developments in  international
and  local  financial  markets.  Once  the  two  areas  have  had  a  chance  to  form  preliminary  views,  the
senior management of the two Groups meet to compare notes. This is important for ensuring that for
the  Bank  as  a  whole,  our  reading  of  the  economy  and  the  policy  options  has  integrated  financial
developments with the "real" side data as far as possible, and that the policy options worked up have
taken proper account of financial market dynamics and expectations.
Board materials
At  this  point,  it  is  useful  to  say  something  about  the  documents  for  the  Board  meeting.  Economic
Group prepares a paper called "The Economy and Monetary Policy", which summarises our analysis
of economic conditions, provides a summary of the outlook and sets out the policy issues we believe
the  Board  should  have  in  mind  for  the  forthcoming  meeting.  The  paper  has  a  four  to  five  page
overview essay prepared by the senior management. It also has detailed supporting  documentation
including tables, charts, and forecasts etc as attachments, prepared by the staff. A companion paper
from the Financial Markets Group containing a comprehensive treatment of developments in financial
markets is also prepared. About a week prior to the Board meeting, draft versions of these papers are
circulated to a Policy Discussion Group (PDG), made up of the most senior management of the Bank,
and the Governor and Deputy Governor.
BIS Review 84/2001
3
The  Governor  then  convenes  a  meeting  of  that  Group  to  discuss  the  policy  situation  and  the  draft
papers.  The  discussion  is  fairly  broad  ranging,  and  benefits  from  the  fact  that  a  number  of  senior
colleagues attend who are familiar with the broad issues associated with monetary policy, but whose
every-day job is to think about other things. These people bring a fresh perspective to the issues and
offer quite substantive comments on the drafting of the papers, and the recommendations contained
therein. This process helps to tighten up our thinking.
Following the  PDG meeting, the papers are finalised  and sent out to Board members ahead of  the
weekend, so that they have time to peruse them prior to the  Board meeting  on the Tuesday of the
following week.
In our system, the final decision on what we will recommend to the Board is taken by the Governor,
having heard the views expressed by the staff. On occasions where he feels the answer is sufficiently
clear ahead of the Board meeting, the papers will contain a clear policy recommendation. On  other
occasions, where things are more finely balanced, the papers might set out the issues but leave the
policy recommendation open, with a firm recommendation presented at the Board meeting itself.
The Board Meeting
The  RBA  Board  is  charged  with  making  decisions  on  monetary  policy,  subject  to  the  legislation
governing the Bank. Hence the decision process involves a recommendation to the Board, which they
consider at their meeting.
The  Board  meeting  occurs  during  the  Tuesday  morning,  and  usually  concludes  by  lunchtime.
Supplementing the written material, the Board receives quite extensive presentations on the economy
and on the financial markets. At this point, I have to reiterate that my involvement at the meeting is in
the  capacity  of  a  staff  member.  Obviously,  I  cannot  and  do  not  pretend  to  speak  for  the  Board
members on the details of the meeting’s conduct, or on what they might make of the material we give
them. But I can say that they can (and do) ask a great many questions, offer their own interpretation of
events and, of course, bring perspective from their own regular activities. They also bring from their
experience an instinctive grasp of the problem of decision-making under uncertainty, which is at the
heart of monetary policy making.
After the presentations are made and questions addressed, the Governor will invite a discussion of the
recommendation, and whether or not members support it. Once a decision has been reached, we go
from  there.  On  occasions  where  the  decision  is  to  change  interest  rates,  we  spend  much  of  the
Tuesday afternoon working on the statement which will announce the change the following morning.
Apart from the process of writing up the minutes, this completes the policy round.
Reflections on the process
All of this is, I hope, roughly what you would expect would happen. The purpose of recounting it all is
to  show  that  there  is  no  mystery  in  this  process.  The  staff  of  the  Bank  evaluate  the  data,  the
management help the Governor form a judgement, and he puts a recommendation to the Board. The
Board consider that, make their decision and then the Bank implements that decision, explaining it as
necessary.
Do we have a secret set of information, unavailable to other people, on which the Board are invited to
base their decision? No, we don’t. Virtually all of the statistical information processed by the staff of the
bank is public. There is very little data we have that you don’t have, apart from knowing the shape of
those  data  we  are  responsible  for  compiling  (such  as  the  financial  aggregates)  before  they  are
published.  The  liaison  information  is,  by  its  nature,  given  by  individual  firms  and  organisations  in
confidence  and  hence  cannot  normally  be  made  public,  but  I  think  most  people  would  accept  that
restriction.
So  the  decision  process  does  not  rely  on  a  superior  information  set  to  that  which  the  market
possesses. Indeed, it seems to me that, ideally, financial markets and other interested parties would
understand our policy framework sufficiently well that, most of the time, the flow of data would be the
main thing which shifts expectations about future policy moves. There will always be, of course, room
for differences of opinion about the importance of a particular piece of information, and the markets will
not always be able to pick the exact interpretation the decision makers will place on it. Hence there will
be  some  surprises.  Nonetheless,  given  a  good  understanding  of  the  framework,  which  I  think  now
4
BIS Review 84/2001
exists, there should normally be a reasonable degree of predictability of the general course of action
the Bank will take over time, even if not necessarily month by month.
This is helped, we trust, by the efforts made over the years to explain our evaluation of the full range of
economic and financial data. The Statements on Monetary Policy, appearing four times each year, and
now on a schedule known in advance, have become increasingly bulky over time as we have tried to
make our analytical coverage of the economy and financial markets more comprehensive. They are
probably too big to read at one sitting for most people, but the main messages are well flagged and
the detail, we hope, repays careful reading by interested observers.
It is also worth noting that the compilation of these Statements every third month coincides with the
build up to that month’s Board meeting. The same (scarce) people work on that document as on the
material  for  the  Board.  Hence  it  will  hardly  surprise  you  to  learn  that  the  analytical  and  descriptive
material  in  the  Statement  bears  a  rather  strong  resemblance  to  that  in  the  Board  papers.  In  other
words, the analysis available to the Board that month is, for the most part, in the public domain within
days  of  the  meeting  (the  pattern  we  have  evolved  towards  is  for  the  Statement  to  be  released  the
Monday following the Board meeting). Since the themes in the economy tend to evolve gradually most
of the time, moreover, the analysis is usually not that different to what was said to the Board in the
preceding  month  or  two.  The  material  in  the  Statement  on  the  policy  considerations  behind  recent
decisions is also very similar, as you would expect, to the arguments put in the Board papers.
I would add that the policy process does not rely as heavily as some believe on specific forecasts. This
is a point I have made before but bears repeating. In policy making, we have to be forward looking. So
there has to be a forecast as a benchmark for thinking about the future. But it would be a mistake to
focus only on the point forecast; it makes much more sense to think of the central forecast as simply
the modal point on the distribution of the possible outcomes, with a sequence of progressively  less
likely outcomes on either side. Nor is that distribution necessarily symmetric – it may be skewed one
way or the other.
A useful forecast, then, is one which contains not just a single number, but also some sense of the
balance  of  risks:  is  it  more  likely,  for  example,  that  inflation  will  be  above  the  central  forecast  than
below it? The policy implications of such a distribution of risks might be quite different to those of the
same central forecast but with the distribution of risks skewed in the other direction. This is why some
central banks have presented their forecasts in terms of so-called fan charts, which are an attempt to
quantify both the degree of (im)precision in the forecast and the extent of skewness in the distribution
of possible outcomes. We do not use fan charts per se, but we do try to consider alternative scenarios
to the central forecast. We attempt to use the results of that process to articulate some sense of the
balance of risks – both on the inflation outlook and on growth prospects – in the published statements.
This is very important because it is to that balance of risks that policy makers will want, quite properly,
to respond. The future is, by definition, uncertain and so policy is never a matter of simply making a
point forecast and solving for the "correct" interest rate that goes with that forecast. It is also about
thinking through what might go wrong with the forecast, and formulating some notion of what response
is appropriate in the event that things do go off track, or even to the risk of such an event.
The fact that policy makers seek to respond to risks, as opposed to waiting for problems to build up
before responding, is what makes for a degree of controversy on some occasions. If the economy is
already  in  recession,  or  if  inflation  is  already  high  and  rising,  and  policy  has  not  yet  made  any
response, almost everyone will agree that something  should  be  done  –  in  fact,  they  will  agree  that
something should already have been done. But there is a lot more room for disagreement over what
should be done when policy is seeking to head off possible problems in advance, because on these
occasions  the  evidence  for  a  problem  is  almost  certainly  far  from  conclusive.  Such  evidence  may
never emerge clearly if a pro-active policy is successful in heading off the problem. And, of course,
policy makers seeking to be pre-emptive do run some risk of responding to perceived problems which
do not, in the end, eventuate.
But in all these cases, the policy maker will be seeking an answer to the question: which mistake, of
those I could possibly make, would I be likely to regret most? The policy maker is then likely to try to
make reasonably sure that that particular mistake is not being made, perhaps at some risk of making
another  but,  less  costly,  mistake.  This  question  is  likely  to  be  most  important  near  business-cycle
turning points, when interest rates are already a fair way from their normal level, and when holding on
to an unusually high or low setting for too long is likely to have more significant consequences than
other errors which might be made. It is also likely to be important when a large shock comes along,
with the potential to fundamentally change the whole outlook.
BIS Review 84/2001
5
Another  way  of  putting  this,  in  slightly  more  technical  language,  is  that  policy  making  involves
consideration  both  of  the  shape  of  the  distribution  of  forecast  outcomes,  and  of  the  "loss  function"
which the policy maker is carrying around in his or her head. I believe this is what Dr Greenspan had
in mind when he said the following:
"The center of the forecast distribution, of necessity,  is still important to  our deliberations but, more
than many people realize, policymaking is to a substantial extent focused on the potential deviations
from the central forecast and the costs should those outcomes prevail. In short, our policy behavior is
the result of examining the implications of the interaction of probability distributions and loss functions.
We  do  not  engage  in  the  formal  mathematics  of  such  a  model,  of  course,  but  we  do  follow  its
underlying philosophy."5
Conclusion
The  degree  of  scrutiny  of  the  monetary  policy  process  these  days  is  an  order  of  magnitude  more
intense than it was when I started my career at the Reserve Bank nearly twenty-two years ago. That is
fair enough,  in  that decisions taken in the RBA Board room are important in  the  life of  the  nation’s
economy,  and  the  RBA  operates  independently  of  the  political  process,  albeit  within  clearly  agreed
goals.  A  requirement  for  an  official  organisation  to  have  a  fairly  transparent  process  and  to
communicate the basis for decisions is part and parcel of operating in a free society.
Yet sometimes the discussion about monetary policy proceeds as if there is a degree of mystery about
the process, and it has to be admitted that in times past, central bankers cultivated this to some extent.
What I have tried to do today is to de-mystify the process, and show that it involves what most people
would expect: it examines data and evaluates competing hypotheses about the economy’s current and
likely future performance. With due consideration for the uncertainty surrounding these assessments,
it tries to develop a sense of the balance of risks, so as to provide a basis for coming to an informed
decision on interest rates each month. The analysis comes into public view on a regular basis through
the published Statements, and is based overwhelmingly on data which is known to everyone. All of
this is in the context of a framework for monetary policy – a medium-term inflation target – which is I
think well understood.
You may, as I suspected at the outset, have found all of this terribly dull. If so, I have achieved my
objective of making clear that the process is what common sense would expect, with no mystery. No
one would claim that all our processes are perfect. We are always, of course, on the lookout for ways
of improving them. I’m sure you will have plenty of suggestions in the question time.
6
BIS Review 84/2001
