 M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: How the central bank sees monetary policy in the 
new world economic environment  
Speech by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, made at the Shangri-La 
Hotel, Bangkok, 29 November 2001. 
 Your Excellencies 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Introduction  
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Thailand  Board  of  Investment,  the  Department  of  Export  Promotion  and 
Tourism, as well as the Nation Group for inviting me to speak at this conference. I believe that it is 
important in these times of increased global uncertainty for the Bank of Thailand to share with you and 
the public our assessment of the current economic situation and outlook, as well as our thinking on the 
future  course  of  monetary  policy.  The  opportunity  to  do  so  today  is  therefore  timely  and  greatly 
appreciated.  
In short, today I would like to discuss what I see as the challenges facing Thailand in the period ahead 
and what we, at the Bank of Thailand, are prepared to do to meet those challenges. In so doing, I will 
briefly review the progress of the past few months, and say a few words on the appropriate policy mix 
which needs to be implemented to help steer the Thai economy through these difficult times.  
is 
in 
therefore 
financial  markets, 
interdependencies,  especially 
The new world environment 
Let me begin by outlining two key aspects of the current world economic environment that I think are 
important.  The  first  one  is  more  fundamental  and  concerns  the  closer  degree  of  financial  and 
economic  integration  between  countries.  Globalization  of  the  world  economy  has  been  driven  by  a 
variety  of  forces  including  rising  trade  in  goods,  increased  international  capital  flows,  greater 
technological spillovers, and growing labor mobility. While these factors have brought about a more 
efficient allocation of resources across national borders and facilitated higher growth and development 
across  countries,  they  have  also  created  a  world  environment  in  which  shocks  have  become  more 
global in nature and where crisis in one country can easily affect others. The end product of greater 
international  economic 
the 
enhancement of the underlying international business cycle linkages.  
Which brings me to the second aspect of the world economic environment that I would like to touch on 
today.  This  aspect  concerns  the  immediate  state  of  the  world  economy.  The  globalization  of 
information technology (IT) production has meant that the correction of the unsustainable boom in IT 
spending has had a particularly widespread impact on the world economy. All the major industrialized 
countries  are  experiencing  a  synchronized  slowdown  in  their  business  cycles,  adversely  affecting 
countries in the Asian region who rely heavily on exports of high-tech products. These developments 
have been accompanied by a steep decline in the growth in world trade. Falling commodity prices and 
increased  competition  in  world  markets  have  also  put  pressure  on  the  external  sector  as  exporters 
grapple with both weaker volume and lower prices. Finally, the re-pricing of assets in world equity and 
bond markets have created unfavorable conditions for raising capital and have, to some extent, held 
back consumption through the negative wealth effects. Access to world capital markets has become 
more limited for developing countries and  we  have  observed a major reduction in capital flows  into 
these countries.  
Over the past few months, the external environment seems to have deteriorated quite considerably. 
The events of September 11th and the developments thereafter have put global financial markets on 
edge  while  exacerbating  the  already  weak  US  economy,  primarily  through  the  effect  on  consumer 
confidence. Global demand continues to stagnate while difficulties in Latin America have heightened 
market uncertainty, increased investor’s risk aversion and tightened financing to emerging markets. In 
such a situation, it is important for the Government to come forward and play a major role in stabilizing 
and supporting the economy. In this light, I believe that the authorities here in Thailand have done a 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 1
 commendable  job  in  providing  the  economy  with  timely  fiscal  support  while  adhering  to  fiscal 
discipline.  
Fiscal  policy  has  been  expansionary  and  the  decision  to  increase  budget  spending  this  year  was 
warranted. The central government deficit of 159 billion baht (equivalent to 3.2 percent of GDP) for the 
2001 fiscal year provided the needed support for economic activity and the budget disbursement rate 
of 88.4 percent relative to the targeted 89 percent was an improvement from the past.  
In regards to monetary policy, the global slowdown and heightened market uncertainty has increased 
Thailand’s external vulnerability prompting the Bank of Thailand to pay increased attention to the issue 
of external stability; particularly Balance of Payments and International Reserves. Healthy outlook in 
the country’s external financial position is always useful in maintaining investor’s confidence in times of 
greater uncertainty. The one time increase in the 14-day repurchase rate in June to 2.5 percent was 
partly  intended  to  foster  increased  support  to  Thailand’s  external  stability  in  the  face  of  a  more 
challenging global environment.  
Indeed,  since  then  distortions  in  the  interest  rate  structure  have  been  corrected,  the  negative 
differential between domestic and international interest rates has been reversed, capital outflows seem 
to have decelerated, the baht has become more stable, our real effective exchange rate continues to 
be  competitive,  the  level  of  international  reserves  remains  at  a  comfortable  level,  with  reserves  to 
short-term debt ratio as high as 140%, and inflationary pressures are well contained-headline inflation 
for the third quarter stood at 1.5 percent year on year, while core inflation remained well below target 
at 1.6 percent.  
With  a  firmer  position  on  macroeconomic  stability,  the  economy  is  expected  to  grow  by  around 
1.3-1.8 percent this year. However, the economic recovery process remains fragile and is now being 
undermined by the weakening global environment as well as declining consumer confidence.  
Looking to the future: More to be done  
Going  forward,  I  believe  we  are  faced  with  significant  challenges.  Unfortunately  the  most  pressing 
concern also happens to be one that we have the least control of, that is the external demand. With 
uncertainty  regarding  the  timing  of  economic  recovery  in  the  United  States,  Japan  still  having  to 
undergo real and arduous reforms, and Europe not yet stepping up as the locomotive engine for the 
resumption of world growth, prospects for an export led rebound remains clouded. With these regions 
together  constituting  over  52  percent  of  the  market  share  for  Thai  products,  exports  in  2001  are 
expected to fall in value by approximately 6 percent compared to last  year. Assuming an economic 
rebound in the US, Japan, and Europe by mid-2002, exports should grow by around 3-5 percent in 
2002. Real GDP growth is projected to be between 1-3 percent in 2002.  
Against the backdrop of increased uncertainty and weak external demand, safeguarding our economic 
recovery  will  require  steady  resolve,  more  reliance  on  domestic  demand,  and  a  supportive  set  of 
measures  and  reform.  The  main  challenge  for  local  authorities  is  to  ensure  proper  coordination  of 
fiscal and monetary policies as well as the acceleration of structural reforms efforts in the banking and 
corporate sector to facilitate a pickup in domestic demand, enhance confidence, and bolster foreign 
investment. Mr. Bosworth did mention yesterday that to resolve the crisis, bad loans must be placed in 
asset management  companies  and  then  AMCs  must  get  rid  of  them. This  is  one  of  the  top  priority 
policies of this government. Almost all NPLs of government banks have been transferred to AMCs, 
and all multi-creditor NPLs of private commercial banks have been transferred to the TAMC. And we 
will  speed  up  our  effort  to  clear  them  out.  However,  please  be  informed  that  when  similar  financial 
crises  occurred  in  the  US  in  1982,  the  US  economy  was  not  in  as  bad  a  shape  as  Thailand  has 
experienced  in the past four  years. At that  time, Japan,  Europe  and the  Middle-Eastern  economies 
were strong and contributed certain capital flows into the US economy. But now, under current world 
economic conditions, where every country has its own problems to solve, we know well that we cannot 
expect foreign investors to help us clear this NPL mess, so we have to help ourselves. I do not see 
why we cannot do it. And we will do it.  
Back  to  the  economic  forecast  for  next  year.  One  important  source  of  growth  in  2002  will  be  fiscal 
spending, and the projected central government deficit of 224 billion baht or 4.4 percent of GDP strikes 
a good balance between improving the economic infrastructure, raising external competitiveness, and 
fostering economic recovery. It is very important, however, that the fiscal stimulus program meets its 
spending target.  
2 
 BIS Review 99/2001
 Safeguarding  the  recovery  would  require  timely  as  well  as  effective  disbursements  of  the  58  billion 
baht  emergency  spending  plan.  The  proposed  reduction  in  the  corporate  tax  rate  for  companies 
seeking  listing  in  the  stock  market  as  well  as  those  already  listed,  and  the  postponement  of  the 
restoration  of  the  VAT  rate  until  September  2002  will  further  set  the  stage  for  more  support  in  the 
revival  of  domestic  demand.  Additional  stimulus  will  come  from  the  71.3  billion  baht  village  fund 
designed to boost investment and facilitate job creation in rural areas. It is important to emphasize that 
the planed increase in fiscal spending does not compromise the Government’s commitment to fiscal 
discipline.  Total  public  debt  will  remain  below  60  percent  of  GDP  while  debt  service  (principle  and 
interest) will account for less than 16 percent of the budget.  
In regards to monetary policy, the inflation targeting framework gives the Bank of Thailand sufficient 
flexibility  to  respond  quickly  to  fast  changing  domestic  and  external  developments.  With  inflation 
remaining  subdued  and  likely  to  remain  contained  in  the  range  of  1.5-2.5  percent  for  2002,  the 
emphasis in the near future will be to strike a proper balance between domestic growth and external 
stability.  
While the current stance of monetary policy under the inflation targeting framework with emphasis on 
external stability is accommodative and appropriate given current conditions, the Bank of Thailand is 
constantly monitoring developments and will move decisively should circumstances change. In light of 
the  information  currently  available,  and  against  the  background  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  long-run 
goals  of  price  stability  and  sustainable  economic  growth,  I  believe  that  the  risks  at  present  are 
weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future. 
Such  weaknesses  could  come  from  further  retrenchment  of  business  and  consumer  confidence, 
undershooting of fiscal expenditure targets,  and slower than  expected recovery  in the  industrialized 
countries. Whatever risk ultimately materializes, we would make timely and decisive adjustment of our 
monetary  policy.  With  strong  international  reserves,  at  140%  of  short-term  debt,  we  can  afford  to 
adjust our monetary policy to support growth, if needed.  
At this juncture, I would like to stress that the Bank of Thailand remains committed to the open and 
transparent monetary policy framework that has served us well since May 2000. Let me emphasize 
that inflation targeting is a framework, not a rule. Just as the case of a real-life anchor, inflation targets 
keep the economy  on the  desired growth  path  in  the long run,  while permitting it to respond  in the 
short run to unpredictable tides and currents. As long as the inflation rate is within the targeted range, I 
believe monetary policy is allowed sufficient flexibility to address other challenges currently facing our 
economy.  
Given the supportive policy mix, the recovery process in Thailand should remain on track for next year. 
However,  with  monetary  policy  geared  at  safeguarding  the  recovery  while  keeping  sight  of  external 
stability, and fiscal discipline imposing limits to further government spending, there is not much room 
to maneuver on the domestic front. To substantially improve long term profitability, increase investor 
confidence, and enhance the success of economic recovery, the nation also needs to be unified in the 
pursuit  of  real  corporate  restructuring,  improved  financial  sector  discipline  and  reform,  as  well  as 
stronger legal framework for the resolution of debt negotiation and restructuring.  
Need for closer regional cooperation 
In  addition,  the  growth  outlook  remains  dependent,  importantly,  on  a  revival  in  world  demand  and 
improved global financial environment. In this respect substantial risks and uncertainties persist, as the 
world  remains  vulnerable  to  further  unexpected  developments.  This  is  a  possibility  that  we  must 
consider and be prepared for.  
We must therefore consider other possibilities in meeting the challenges that may arise in the face of 
deteriorating external environment. Such alternatives would ideally incorporate increased and closer 
cooperation among governments at the regional level. This makes good sense since the countries in 
the Asian region are very open by nature and would all feel the impact of further slackening in world 
demand.  There  certainly  seems  to  be  some  scope  for  closer  coordinated  efforts  to  improve  the 
resilience of our economies to external shocks.  
As previously mentioned, one of the major vulnerabilities lies in the area of capital flow, especially for 
developing countries. In this regard, the regional swap arrangements already signed by a number of 
countries  are  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  By  strengthening  the  credibility  of  central  banks,  such 
arrangements  have  the  scope  to  impart  positive  impacts  in  terms  of  reduced  volatility  in  regional 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 3
 financial markets. In light of the large pool of savings and international reserves the region currently 
has, there may be room for further initiatives on this front.  
In  addition,  there  seems  to  be  scope  to  better  mobilize  regional  savings  and  improve  intra-regional 
capital  flows.  In  the  past,  the  savings  rates  of  countries  in  the  Asia-Pacific  regions  have  been  very 
high.  But  most  of  these  savings  were  channeled  first  to  the  United  States  and  Europe  before 
eventually returning to Asia. I believe that we should look into ways to better channel these regional 
savings so that they help to cushion our countries from excess volatility of capital flows. I am glad that 
yesterday  Mr.  Kuroda  proposed  the  establishment  of  a  co-operation  on  capital  flows  and  the 
streamlining of foreign exchange policy among the ASEAN plus three group. Thailand welcomes this 
move which would not only help reduce excess volatility of capital flows for countries in the region, but 
also provide exchange rate stability to support intra regional trade, which constitutes about 50% of our 
exports. We are willing to move forward with ASEAN plus three in this direction. You may take this as 
an official response, as I have already discussed this issue with our Minister of Finance.  
Conclusion  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Before ending, I would like to emphasize again that Thailand has gained significant ground since the 
aftermath of the 1997 crisis. Macroeconomic stability has been restored, progress has been achieved 
in  financial  restructuring  and  strengthening  bank  supervision,  and  external  vulnerability  has  been 
substantially reduced. At this juncture, however, there is no room for complacency. The key challenge 
facing  the  authorities  is  to  maintain  macroeconomic stability  while  accelerating  the  pace  of  reforms 
amidst  the  global  slowdown  and  heightened  market  uncertainty.  Through  careful  management  of 
domestic  policies,  greater  regional  cooperation,  as  well  as  consolidation  of  restructuring  efforts, 
Thailand and the surrounding region should weather the global slowdown and return to a sustainable 
growth path.  
I would like to thank you once again for the opportunity to address this distinguished forum and wish 
you all the best. Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 99/2001
