M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Thailand's Monetary Policy - its obstacles and
challenges
An address by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Seminar on
"Where  does  Thailand  stand  now?"  Bangkok  Post – Tradex  Economic  Forum  Bangkok,
26 September 2001.
 Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The  tragic  terrorist  attack  in  the  United  States,  and  the  repercussion  on  the  financial  markets  all
around the world, reinforced what we already witnessed in the 1997 Asian crisis – that the financial
world has become closely inter-twined, globalised and integrated. Disturbances in one market readily
spread to and affect all the others.
This is the kind of challenge facing policymakers in setting monetary policy these days.
Past Achievements
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me briefly review the economic developments.
Thailand  has  faced  a  number  of  difficulties  and  fought  hard  in  the  last  four  years.  We  have  gone
through unprecedented adjustments and improvements on both economic and financial reforms. The
Thai economy has gradually  recovered.  The  growth  rate  of  GDP,  which  was  a  contraction  close  to
11% in 1998, has now been maintained in a positive territory for more than two years; 4.2% in 1999,
4.4% 2000 and  would  highly  likely  be  positive  again  this  year,  even  though  at  lower  percentage  of
growth.
Macroeconomic and financial stability has been restored. Inflation has also been stable at a low level
of 1.4% in August, whilst foreign reserves have also regained the healthy level at 32.6 billion US$ at
end of 2000 and have been maintained at that level up to now. Total external debt has declined from
109 billion US$ at end of 1997 to 73 billion US$ now. Political environment no longer appears as an
obstacle towards the recovery path.
As far as the financial sector is concerned, sovereign and commercial banks credit ratings have been
stable. Prudential and supervision standards such as rules on loan classification, and asset valuation
have  steadily  moved  towards  international  standards.  Commercial  banks  have  also  progressively
recovered, with an increase in capital adequacy ratio reaching over 14 percent. Thai banks' earning
performance showed a steady improvement, with a net operating profit of 7 Billion Baht during the first
half  of  2001,  a  significant  improvement  from  3.6 Billion Baht  for  the  whole  of  last  year.  Debt
restructuring also progressed well, with the NPL ratio dropping from a high 45% at the end of 1998 to
39% in 1999, 18% in 2000, and reaching around 12% recently, in spite of some re-entry NPLs.
Development for Monetary Policy
Before I go on to  discuss obstacles and challenges, let  me  briefly  recap  on  the  changes  that  have
taken place regarding monetary policy since the 1997 crisis.
After Thailand floated our currency in 1997, the Bank of Thailand recognized the need to search for a
new and appropriate nominal anchor for monetary policy. We also recognized that the central bank's
credibility  is  crucial  in  assuring  the  public  on  the  smooth  operation  of  our  economy.  The  Bank  of
Thailand decided to adopt inflation targeting as the framework for our monetary policy.
Inflation targeting is not simply setting an inflation target. It is instead an approach that emphasizes
(a) a forward looking economic forecasts using the most reliable economic models, (b) transparency in
communicating  to  the  public  the  reasoning  for  policy  stance,  and  (c) accountability  to  ensure  that
promises of price stability are upheld.
BIS Review 81/2001
1
We have chosen to target core inflation, a measure which excludes volatile components, namely raw
food and energy prices. Our target range has been set between 0 to 3.5 percent until 2002.
When  I  stepped  in  as  a  Governor  in  June,  bearing  in  mind  that  our  current  account  surplus  was
decreasing  (due  to  a  reduction  of  external  demand)  and  international  reserves  may  be  affected,  a
review  of  the  monetary  policy  was  made.  It  was  however  agreed  that  inflation  targeting  framework
should remain for price stability is still very important to prevent the economy from another crisis.
However additional attention was emphasized on certain elements. International reserves which seem
to be treated as exogenous factor under the framework have been brought into consideration, with the
belief that healthy reserves are needed to maintain investor's confidence amidst the current slowdown
of world economy. An increase of repurchase rate (14 days) from 1.5% to 2.5%, with the aim to correct
the distorted structure of local interest rates, did help to reduce the gap between local interest rate and
LIBOR, making it less attractive for capital outflow.
More  important  is  the  emphasis  on  the  managed  float  concept  to  limit  short-term  volatility  of  Baht
exchange rate which did help to lessen the fear that Baht would depreciate further. Whenever Baht
swings to the weak position, such fear would lead to the prepayment of US$ loans by private sector or
even by states enterprises which were really prepared to do so before I stepped in. It is noteworthy
that Baht had stabilized as well as strengthened, which made it possible to stabilize exchange rate as
well as accumulating US$ into official reserves.
On this point I would like to further clarify our monetary policy. Some analysts interpreted that the BOT
has changed from inflation targeting framework to exchange rate targeting. This is very wrong. If we
would target our exchange rate to maintain fixed relation to any currency or group of currencies, we
would stand a good chance of losing our official reserves which is really against my firm belief that
while global economy as well as our economy are slowing down, healthy international reserves must
be maintained to avoid another crisis.
Obstacles and challenges
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I can safely say that we have now a credible framework for our monetary policy. It has proved to be
well  functioning,  inflation  is  being  taken  care  of,  Baht  exchange  rate  has  been  more  stable  and
provided a better working environment for real sector, and international reserves have not reduced in
spite of regular repayments to the IMF. And the framework has up to now been well accepted by the
Thai public. But a good and credible policy still has its obstacles and challenges.
Let me now turn to discuss the obstacles and challenges.
The biggest, the most important, and the most worrisome challenge that we face right now is the world
economy. A month ago, the world economy was already weak, with the United States uncertain about
the timing of a recovery, Japan still having to undergo numerous reforms, and Europe not yet acting
the role of the engine of locomotive for the resumption of world growth.
A  month  ago,  East  Asian  countries  were  already  seeing  their  exports  fast  softening,  especially  in
electronic and communication products. These countries were only on the verge of emerging from the
depth of the biggest crisis in recent memory. And then disaster struck!
The  abominable  terrorist  attacks  in  the  US  would  affect  some  businesses  more  that  others.  It  will
certainly affect some business sectors very hard - airline and hotel industry, insurance, some area of
financial services.
The American consumer confidence index by the University of Michigan during the past 4-5 years was
always above the 100 point level. It dropped to 91.5 in August. How will the terrorist attack affect this
fragile state of mind?
US business investment during the past 4-5 years expanded at the rate of 8-9 % per year. It slowed to
only 1.7%  in the first half of this  year. How  will  the  tragic  event  that  occurred  slow  this  down  even
further?
The price of Dubai crude, which is the reference price of Thai import cost, before the attack was at the
US$ 24-25 per barrel level. After the attack, it briefly touched US$ 29 before turning back. How much
will the volatile oil price cool down the world economy?
2
BIS Review 81/2001
These  are  very  difficult  questions  to  answer.  They  are  difficult  questions  to  answer  under  normal
circumstances.  But  when  you  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  United  States  soon  will  undertake
operations  against  the  terrorists,  and  what  events  may  unfold  out  of  that,  these  questions  become
many times much more difficult to answer.
I am comforted, however, by the quick actions of financial authorities in all the major countries to try to
shore up the situation.
The Federal Reserve acted quickly to set up US$ 90 billion swap facilities with many central banks to
facilitate market transactions. Ample liquidity was provided by all countries to market participants. Swift
interest rate cuts were implemented in both the USA and Europe.
In Thailand, what can we do in the face of these uncertainties?
I think it is most important, in these times of uncertainty, for the Bank of Thailand to act as the linchpin
to the public policy. We have to set the anchor that stabilizes the economy.
It  is  fortunate  that  certain  elements  of  our  inflation  targeting  policy  has  been  modified,  allowing
increased degree of management of the foreign exchange rate which facilitates trade and improves
capital  flows.  The  practice  which  was  intended  to  take  care  of  official  reserves  while  the  global
economy  is slowing down now  happens to  be  the  correct  policy  practice  to  be  further  enhanced  to
cope with addition weaknesses and uncertainties.
More  careful  management  of  our  international  reserves  is  required  so  that  we  can  fulfil  our  debt
obligations under the IMF program, and still be left with a strong and healthy level of reserves.
This  will  be  achieved  through  a  vigilant  watch  on  the  markets,  keeping  close  dialogue  with  market
participants, gathering intelligence and acting in a timely manner.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am here today not to give you a false promise that the BOT could provide policy measures that could
lead  to  the  recovery  of  the  Thai  economy,  but  to  assure  you  that  our  existing  policy  measures  are
suitable  with  the  situation  and  we  would  do  our  best  not  to  allow  Thailand  another  crisis  of  similar
cause and magnitude as that of 1997.
While the BOT is assuring a stable environment for private real sector, I will urge the private sector to
work harder, to improve their management system and corporate governance, to  better learn  about
their markets, to better control and lower their costs, and to invest in training and technology.
Only by doing so, will they be able to not only survive, but also ready to grow and take advantage of
the world recovery when it comes.
Thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 81/2001
3
