Willem F Duisenberg: The ECB and the accession process 
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Frankfurt 
European Banking Congress, Frankfurt, 23 November 2001. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  first  thank  the  organisers  of  this  Frankfurt  European  Banking  Congress  for  giving  me  the 
opportunity  to  address  such  a  distinguished  audience.  Today  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  a  few 
thoughts about the process of EU accession from a central banker's perspective, and review some of 
the issues that are of particular relevance to the ECB. 
Little  more  than  ten  years  after  the  beginning  of  the  transition  to  market  economies  in  Central  and 
Eastern European countries, the successful model of European integration is in the process of being 
extended. This testifies to the attractiveness of the European Union as a sound framework providing 
both  political  stability  and  economic  progress.  In  a  few  weeks'  time,  on  1  January  2002,  a  new 
milestone will be reached when the euro, our money, becomes truly tangible. The introduction of the 
euro banknotes and coins indeed constitutes a historic event in the process of European integration, 
and  represents  a  key  accomplishment  in  the  already  long  European  experience.  The  changeover 
comes as we approach a situation in which inflation should fall below 2% and price stability should be 
restored. In line with our forward-looking strategy we have cut interest rates on the basis of reduced 
risks  to  price  stability.  Recent  data  are  in  line  with  expectations  and  confirm  our  decision  of 
8 November which took account of all relevant information. 
As President of the ECB, I would like to confirm that the euro will indeed eventually "go east". As many 
as  12 countries  from  central,  eastern  and  southern  Europe  and  the  Mediterranean  are  currently 
negotiating accession to the EU. They have made remarkable progress, both in negotiations and in 
strengthening  their  economies  and  policy-relevant  institutions.  However,  the  road  towards  EU 
membership and, later, the adoption of the euro still poses a number of significant challenges.  
What are these challenges? Let me focus briefly on three economic areas in which notable differences 
still  prevail  between  accession  countries  and  EU  Member  States:  first,  real  convergence,  second, 
nominal convergence and, finally, the structure and functioning of the financial sector. 
By  "real  convergence",  I  mean  the  broad  adjustment  through  structural  reforms  and  economic 
development of the economies towards structures prevailing in the EU. This requires, inter alia, the 
completion  of  the  market  economy  transition  agenda,  further  privatisation  in  some  sectors,  and  the 
strengthening  of  the  institutional  and  legal  framework.  Real  convergence  is  seen  as  facilitating 
economic cohesion among Member States once they have joined EMU, thereby helping to minimise 
the  risk  and  effects  of  asymmetric  shocks.  Hence,  in  order  to  enhance  the  process  of  real 
convergence as much as possible, accession countries should ensure that they make progress in the 
restructuring  of  their  economies  and  gradually  align  them  with  those  of  the  euro  area.  Real 
convergence is often interpreted as a catching-up in real income with the EU. Such a narrow measure 
is, however, only a rough proxy for the concept of real convergence I was referring to. Indeed, different 
income levels can be compatible with Monetary Union, as we know from our own experience in the 
euro area.  
As for nominal convergence, accession countries have achieved a remarkable process of disinflation 
during the last decade. Inflation is expected to reach around 6% on average by the end of this year. 
Nevertheless,  further  progress  on  disinflation  might  turn  out  to  be  more  complicated  in  the  coming 
years. First, several macroeconomic and microeconomic factors as well as transition-related factors 
will  continue  to  push  up  inflation  in  many  accession  countries.  Second,  what  is  known  as  the 
"Balassa-Samuelson effect", that is, the potential inflationary pressures arising from higher productivity 
growth  in  catching-up  economies,  has  also  been  held  responsible  for  higher  inflation  in  accession 
countries. However, research has shown that this effect should not be overestimated. These factors 
should  be  borne  in  mind  when  designing  monetary  policy  strategies.  In  this  context,  disinflation  in 
accession countries should be promoted, at a pace determined by the overall economic situation and 
in  particular  by  the  need  for  these  countries  to  foster  real  convergence.  In  addition,  the  Maastricht 
inflation criterion should not be regarded as an immediate requirement, but rather as a medium-term 
objective  for  the  central  banks  of  the  accession  countries.  This  should  not  mean,  however,  that 
BIS Review 98/2001 
 1
accession countries do not have to pay attention to progress in nominal convergence. On the contrary, 
a  balanced  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  stance  and  wage  increases  supported  by  productivity  gains 
should  favour  the  disinflation  process  of  accession  countries,  and  allow  them  to  make  progress  on 
nominal and real convergence in parallel. 
As  a  specific  topic  that  is  of  great  relevance  to  the  ECB  in  the  accession  process,  I  would  like  to 
mention the structure and functioning of the accession countries' financial sector. Significant progress 
has been made  in restructuring and consolidating the banking sector over  the  past few  years. This 
progress  has  been  achieved  through  the  large-scale  privatisation  of  state-owned  banks  and  the 
extensive  opening-up  of  the  banking  sector  to  foreign  ownership.  This  process  has  contributed  to 
greater  financial  integration  with  the  EU  and  significant  gains  in  terms  of  efficiency  and  stability. 
However,  the  level  of  financial  intermediation  remains  relatively  low  and  the  provision  of  bank 
financing represents a much smaller share of GDP in the accession countries than in the euro area 
countries. Furthermore, the financial sector of accession countries remains dominated by the banking 
industry, as capital markets are not yet fully developed. From an ECB perspective, further deepening 
of the accession countries' financial markets is needed to ensure the proper transmission of monetary 
policy impulses once they join the euro area, and it may also help these countries make full use of 
their growth potential.  
Coping with any of the three challenges which I have just mentioned will have a significant impact on 
the design of monetary and exchange rate policies. Taking into account the different starting points 
and  progress  made  so  far  in  addressing  these  challenges,  accession  countries  may  well  pursue 
different  approaches  in  the  pre-accession  phase.  Once  in  the  EU,  however,  there  is  a  clear  path 
defined in the Treaty that should be followed by all EU Member States towards the adoption of the 
euro. 
First, immediately upon EU accession, the new Member States have to treat their exchange rate policy 
as  a  matter  of  common  interest.  Furthermore,  in  view  of  the  final  objective  of  adopting  the  euro, 
accession countries are expected to join ERM II at some point following accession to the EU.  
Most accession countries  have already  expressed their intention to join the mechanism as soon as 
possible after their entry into the EU. However, it should be clear that ERM II membership does not 
need to happen immediately after EU accession in all cases, nor does ERM II membership need to be 
limited to only two years, which is the minimum for adoption of the euro. A longer membership of ERM 
II  may,  in  some  cases,  be  helpful  since  it  would  allow  countries  to  retain  the  exchange  rate  as  an 
instrumental  policy  variable  during  the  catching-up  process.  Participation  in  ERM  II  should  thus  be 
seen as a meaningful and flexible framework for increasing convergence with the euro area, and for 
tackling the challenges faced by accession countries on the road towards the adoption of the euro. 
Finally, after having outlined the path along which the euro will go east, I would also like to say a few 
words about a path which I am confident will not be followed – and that is unilateral euroisation. Such 
an adoption of the euro outside the Treaty process would not be welcome as it would run counter to 
the important process of convergence prior to the adoption of the euro outlined in the Treaty. Unilateral 
euroisation would also imply circumventing the process of multilateral assessment of new members by 
current EU Member States and as such would be difficult to reconcile with the co-operative spirit of a 
community of fellow members. From the other perspective, I believe it would also not be in the interest 
of accession countries, as it would imply relinquishing monetary and exchange rate policy instruments 
at  a  very  early  stage  of  convergence  for  these  economies.  It  would  further  deprive  the  countries 
concerned of a lender of last resort function and non-negligible seignorage revenues. Finally, it would 
make the integration of the central banks concerned into the Eurosystem operational framework much 
more difficult, if not impossible. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I should like to end my remarks here by saying that the Eurosystem is fully 
aware of the future implications of the ongoing accession process for the fulfilment of its own statutory 
objectives. As the historic  process of reunifying Europe unfolds before our eyes, let me assure  you 
that the ECB is ready and looking forward to playing its part. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2001
