 Klaus Liebscher: Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) - an important pillar of 
stability for the International Financial System 
Speech  by  Mr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  at  the  symposium 
“The role of international institutions in globalisation”, Centre for the Study of International Institutions 
CSI, Innsbruck, 16 November 2001. 
 It was with great pleasure that I accepted the invitation to take part in the symposium on “The Role of 
International  Institutions  in  Globalisation”  and  to  deliver  some  thoughts  about  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union and its role in the international financial system.  
But first of all I would like to congratulate Dean Prof. Chen and Prof. Socher for their faculty initiatives 
to set up the “Centre for the Study of International Institutions”. I strongly do hope that this new centre 
will  contribute  to  a  better  understanding  for  the  functioning  as  well  as  the  need  of  international 
institutions like the IMF, the Worldbank, the BIS and others safeguarding the economic developments 
in a world of liberalisation and globalisation. 
I really do wish you all the success needed for! 
It has always  been the duty  of monetary  authorities to secure both monetary and financial stability. 
Yet, issues of monetary and financial stability have moved up prominently on the agenda, due to the 
growth of financial services, both in volume and in depth, the financial crises of recent years or the 
terror attacks of September, 11. With the globalisation of capital flows the vulnerability of countries to 
financial  crises  has  increased.  International  institutions,  especially  the  IMF,  have  in  recent  years 
played an important role in crisis prevention and crisis management.  
The  crises  in  Asia  and  other  regions  have  directed  attention  towards  the  phenomenon  of  financial 
contagion  both  from  the  side  of  politicians  as  well  as  academics.  Through  the  global  network  of 
financial  markets  a  crisis  in  one  part  of  the  world  may  quickly  spread  via  a  chain  reaction  to  other 
places, with the potential to destabilise the global financial system. These crises have transformed the 
international  agenda:  At  the  global  level  plans  for  a  new  international  financial  architecture  have 
abounded  and  the  future  role  of  institutions  like  the  IMF  and  the World  Bank  has  been  widely  and 
intensively  debated.  Prominent  economists  like  Paul  Krugman,  Joseph  Stiglitz,  Stan  Fischer,  Barry 
Eichengreen and, of course the Meltzer Commission have formulated quite diverse and controversial 
proposals. 
In this context I will focus my deliberations to the role of EMU and how the euro can provide for more 
stability for the International Financial System. EMU represents new opportunities and challenges for 
financial  institutions  and  markets.  Up  to  now,  one  can  distinguish  essentially  between  four  types  of 
stability effects which the  euro's arrival  has brought: exchange rate stability,  price stability, financial 
stability and fiscal stability. To these four, let me add a fifth stability aspect given that EMU and the 
euro  provide  and  will  provide  an  anchor  of  stability  for  Central  and  Eastern  European  Accession 
Countries. 
Exchange Rate Stability 
First, exchange rate stability is directly related to the Single Market for goods and services, as well as 
development of financial markets in the European Union. The single currency has completely removed 
exchange rate risks for exporters and importers, debtors and creditors across the 12 countries of the 
euro  area. Cross-border trade, investment and financial  transactions are fostered and, in particular, 
small  and  medium-sized  companies  are  encouraged  to  enter  the  euro  area-wide  markets.  These 
developments increase competition, improve resource allocation and the investment climate and thus 
contribute to higher long-term potential growth in the euro area. 
This - if I may say so - internal "exchange rate" stability aspect has often been overshadowed by the 
disproportionate interest in US dollar/euro exchange rate. The dollar/euro exchange rate movements 
have, in fact, been fully in line with the dollar's historical fluctuations vis-à-vis the European currencies 
prior to the introduction of the euro. More importantly, the weight of the fluctuating part in exchange 
rate "baskets" is, in all Member States, now much smaller than in the past.  
BIS Review 93/2001 
 1
 For example, for Austria as a small open economy the external stability of the currency was of prime 
concern.  With  the  introduction  of  the  euro  this  has  changed  significantly  because  external  trade  is 
much less important for the euro area than it was for Austria.  
Other than Austria which prior to the introduction of the euro followed a policy of tying its currency to 
the DEM, the  Eurosystem does not  have an exchange rate target. While Austria’s stability  oriented 
currency policy made sense for a small open economy, it would not be wise to try to maintain a fixed 
exchange rate between the international currencies in an era of globalisation of financial markets and 
full liberalisation of capital transfers.  
The euro area economy is far less open than the economies of the individual euro area countries. This 
tends to limit the impact of external economic developments and in particular of exchange rates and 
external  prices  on  domestic  euro  area  prices.  Thus,  the  exchange  rate  channel  of  monetary  policy 
transmission is less important for a large, relatively closed currency area, like the euro area, than for 
small open economies. However, as statistics show, the euro area is still more open than the United 
States.  In  2000,  exports  of  goods  and  services  represented  19,1 %,  whereas  imports  represented 
18,7 % of the euro area’s GDP. This is more than the United States with a ratio of 10,7 % for exports 
and 14,4 % for imports. 
In  such  an  environment,  only  a  stability  oriented  and  credible  economic  policy  can  contribute  to 
sustainable and economically viable exchange rates. Of course, exchange rate developments cannot 
be  ignored  –  the  second  pillar  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  also  contains 
information from the foreign exchange markets. Long-lasting and identifiable deviations from estimated 
“equilibrium”  exchange  rates  can  have  very  negative  consequences  for  an  economy  such  as  a 
massive  misallocation  of  resources.  But  so  far,  regrettably,  there  is  no  clear  consensus  in  the 
economic  literature  on  how  to  calculate  equilibrium  exchange  rates.  Given  this  and  the  general 
observation that we still move within the framework of what has happened over the past 30 years, the 
importance of the external exchange rate stability is somewhat overstated. 
It has also to be emphasised that the tragic events of September, 11 did not inject any turbulence into 
currency  markets  but  the  euro/dollar  exchange  rate  continued  to  trade  around  its  previous  level. 
Hence, even though it may be too soon to make a firm statement but the very existence of the euro as 
well as the actions taken by the Eurosystem in conjunction with the Federal Reserve System are likely 
to have stabilised markets. 
Price Stability 
Second,  as  to  price  stability,  most  analysts  agree  that  the  monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  ECB 
Governing Council have been appropriate. Since the beginning of EMU, the euro-area has achieved 
low inflation and expectations thereof and thus interest rates have been low. The Governing Council 
has made its decisions on the basis of its primary goal, price stability. It is worthwhile to restate the 
mandate of the Eurosystem. The primary objective of the Eurosystem, as the Treaty of the European 
Union defines it, is to maintain price stability in the euro area.  
The Governing Council of the ECB has defined price stability as "year-on-year increases in the HICP 
for  the  euro  area  of  below  2%".  Furthermore,  it  was  made  clear  from  the  outset  that  price  stability 
should  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term.  By  unambiguously  assigning  the  primary  objective  of 
price stability to an independent central bank, the Treaty recognises that focusing monetary policy on 
the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  ensures  that  monetary  policy  will  make  the  best 
possible contribution to improving economic prospects. 
This  view  is  rooted  in  the  fact,  supported  by  practical  experience  and  empirical  evidence,  that  the 
benefits  of  price  stability  for  growth  are  substantial.  Without  putting  forward  all  the  arguments,  the 
maintenance of price stability helps to allocate resources efficiently both across uses and across time. 
Inflation causes economic agents to confuse transitory with permanent price changes, and therefore 
distorts  their  decision-making  process.  In  evaluating  investment  opportunities,  firms  need  to  have 
confidence  in  the  signals  conveyed  by  relative  price  changes,  and  to  discriminate  between  relative 
price  adjustments  and  general  changes  in  the  overall  price  level.  This  process  is  facilitated  in  a 
situation  of  overall  price  stability.  Price  stability  therefore  improves  the  transparency  of  the  relative 
price mechanism and can promote an adequate environment to increasing the growth potential of the 
euro  area  economy.  Moreover,  as  experience  has  shown,  stable  prices  minimise  the  inflation  risk 
premium, thereby lowering long-term interest rates and helping to stimulate investment and growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2001
 In order to maintain price stability, the Eurosystem has designed a monetary policy strategy wherein 
risks to price stability are assessed on the basis of two pillars. The first pillar assigns a prominent role 
to monetary developments. The second pillar is a broadly based assessment of a wide range of other 
economic  and  financial  indicators.  This  all-encompassing  and  systematic  approach  guarantees  that 
the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  takes  into  consideration  all  relevant  pieces  of  information  when 
assessing the outlook for price stability in the medium term. 
The Eurosystem´s two-pillar monetary policy strategy was particularly chosen to cater for a period of 
transition and uncertainty. The two-pillar strategy allows us - and indeed compels us - to follow closely 
and  systematically  a  wide  range  of  monetary,  economic  and  financial  indicators  which  may  give 
indications  on  future  inflation  and  economic  developments  at  large.  It  easily  accommodates  the 
advisable shift in the relative weight attached to various variables.  
What is more, the two-pillar strategy does not pretend the existence of certainty and stable economic 
relationships where there are in reality no such things. In this sense, it is a very honest strategy. To be 
transparent to the public, though, it requires special communication efforts by the Eurosystem. 
By  all  means,  the  two-pillar  strategy  is  in  my  firm  conviction  clearly  superior  –  particularly  at  the 
present juncture of considerable model uncertainty – to any mechanical rule-based approaches. The 
latter are usually taylored to specific views of how the economy operates and are therefore less likely 
to perform well in periods where these views might have to be adapted. Monetary policy rules usually 
derive  their  policy  recommendations  from  a  very  narrow  set  of  economic  indicators  only.  In  many 
cases  they  rest  heavily  on  the  output  gap  and  the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate,  which,  as  I  have 
pointed out, are potentially very unreliable concepts at the present juncture.  
introduced  a  market-oriented,  modern  and 
Financial Stability 
Third,  the  financial  stability  of  the  euro  area  has  been  enhanced  by  the  single  currency;  the  latest 
developments have provided indisputable proof of this.  
Generally,  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  has  proved  highly  efficient.  The 
Eurosystem  has  successfully 
flexible  operational 
framework. The money market has clearly benefited from this in its refinancing operations. Short-term 
interest  rates  have  totally  converged  and  the  money  market  within  the  euro  area  has  become  fully 
integrated. As a result, we have an efficient and liquid euro money market, and banks benefit from the 
conformity of market conditions. 
The euro money market has widely used daily reference indices for interest rates, notably EONIA for 
overnight transactions and EURIBOR for transactions with longer maturities. These euro area indices 
were swiftly accepted on the market and form a common basis for pricing. Market participants are now 
able to manage their day-to-day funds in an efficient manner, incurring relatively low costs. 
The rapid integration of the euro area's money market was also supported by the developments in the 
payment systems infrastructure, above all the establishment of the TARGET system operated by the 
ESCB,  which  links  the  national  real-time  gross-settlement  systems  with  the  ECB's  Payment 
Mechanism. The smooth functioning of the settlement of cross-border payments allows banks to trade 
safely  throughout  the  euro  area.  Therefore  the  money  market  has  gained  a  clear  cross-border 
orientation, and some large banks have started to act as "money center" banks, based on a euro area-
wide scope of activity. 
The  broadening  of  the  market  and  the  increasing  share  of  cross-border  transactions  have  had  a 
positive  impact  on  the  provision  of  liquidity:  The  wider  euro  area  money  market  can  now  absorb 
liquidity shortages more easily than before, as banks can borrow more readily from foreign institutions 
or vice versa. 
When the terrorist attacks in the United States triggered some threats to the short-term functioning of 
the global financial market in the very beginning, the mere existence of the single currency and the 
consequent  integration  and  deepening  of  the  euro  area  financial  markets  contributed  to  financial 
stability not only in Europe. In addition, in the days following the attacks, the Eurosystem was able to 
react quickly and efficiently and succeeded in stabilising the markets and creating confidence in their 
functioning.  The  Eurosystem’s  decision  to  immediately  provide  extra  liquidity  in  euro,  and  in  co-
operation with the US Federal Reserve System and the euro area national central banks, in dollars, 
contributed to the rapid return to normal of the euro area as well as international markets. 
BIS Review 93/2001 
 3
 The euro area is not an island and global developments do affect the euro area economy of course. 
Hence, one of the requirements of a globalised world is a frequent exchange of information and views 
among  policy-makers.  The  Eurosystem  currently  participates  in  the  meetings  of  international 
organisations,  such  as  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-
operation and Development (OECD)  and the Bank for International  Settlements (BIS), and different 
fora,  such  as  the  G7  and  G10.  These  exchanges  are  important  to  better  understand  economic 
developments and to fully analyse the spill-over effects in the economy arising from different policies. 
In a longer term context, the launch of the single currency and the establishment of a strong monetary 
policy  player  on  the  global  scene  have  contributed  to  the  efforts  to  enhance  co-operation  in  the 
regulation and supervision of financial market institutions, as well as in the oversight of payment and 
settlement systems, both at the European and the global level. 
Fiscal Stability 
The  fourth  stability-related  aspect  in  the  euro  area  is  the  discipline  of  fiscal  policies.  The 
macroeconomic  policies  pursued  in  the  euro  area  at  present  are,  on  the  whole, more  conducive  to 
price stability, fiscal prudence and structural changes than at any time in the 1970s, 1980s or early 
1990s.  The  convergence  criteria  to  the  third  stage  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  have  already 
been important in ensuring a stable environment.  
They have also set a kind of standard beyond the euro area, above all in the EU Member States which 
have  not  yet  adopted  the  euro,  but  also  in  the  12 candidate  countries  actively  negotiating  for 
membership  of  the  European  Union.  In  addition,  the  institutional  set-up  and  different  permanent 
procedures within the European Union aim to promote further the stability-oriented policies.  
The multilateral surveillance and the Stability and Growth Pact are important tools here. The fact that 
the developments of all Member States' public finances are continuously scrutinised in detail by the 
ECOFIN Council implies peer pressure and shared responsibility.  
Increasing competition together with this shared responsibility has also strengthened the incentives to 
improve the efficiency and viability of public sector, labour markets and pension system structures. 
At present, there are no major imbalances in the euro area which would require long-term adjustment. 
Economic policies in the euro area as a whole remain geared towards price stability, the objectives of 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  wage  moderation  and  structural  reform.  Further  positive  effects  on 
economic growth should stem from the impact of tax reductions in several member countries and from 
the fact that financing conditions are favourable.  
Thus,  while  it  is  natural  for  an  economic  slowdown  to  have  adverse  effects  on  Member  States’ 
budgets, it is important that especially those countries with a budget position still not close to balance 
or  in  surplus  and/or  with  high  public  debt-to-GDP  ratios  adhere  to  their  medium-term  consolidation 
plans. The current slowdown should not substantially change the scope for reaching the medium-term 
commitments  they  made  under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  in  the  context  of  their  stability 
programmes. A medium-term perspective and continuous consolidation are essential for the conduct 
of fiscal policy in all euro area countries. This would give a firm signal to investors and consumers, 
thereby supporting confidence and contributing to a recovery. 
While it may be perceived as more difficult to advance in these areas in an environment of weaker 
economic activity, the need to properly address rigidities should be much more obvious now than at 
times of buoyant growth. The current weakness should therefore be taken as a challenge to be met by 
stepping up reforms rather than allowing efforts to abate. 
Stability Anchor 
Finally, let me turn to the fifth stability aspect. EMU and the euro are an anchor for stability for Central 
and Eastern European Countries (CEECs), among them several applicants for EU accession.  
A more detailed analysis shows that the euro has become particularly important as a unit of account in 
international goods and service trade in the CEECs. Moreover, the euro is likely to play an ever larger 
role  on  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  forex  markets.  The  same  is  true  of  the  euro  as  an 
investment and issuing currency for private users in the CEECs and, in the longer term, for pricing of 
goods and on the stock exchange. 
4 
 BIS Review 93/2001
 Even  today,  the  euro  is  a  key  currency  for  Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  In  most  of  the  CEECs' 
monetary policy strategies, exchange rates play  a  vital role and,  wherever they are  not a formal or 
informal intermediate target, they are at least a key monetary policy indicator. In nearly all cases it is 
the euro upon which the CEECs' currencies are oriented, or to which they are formally linked.  
European  integration  will  only  be  truly  successful  if  it  reaches  out  to  the  whole  of  Europe.  It  is  the 
concept  of  stability  orientation  that  urges  us  to  complete  European  unification.  If  we  manage  the 
enlargement process successfully, this will also be conducive to our endeavor to guarantee stability for 
the whole euro area. Such a mutual improvement is desirable in a very broad sense: political stability, 
financial  market  stability,  macroeconomic  and  –  in  the  particular  interest  of  the  Eurosystem  –  price 
stability.  
There  is  no  doubt  that  enlargement  will  encourage  stability,  growth  and  employment  in  a  wider 
Europe.  There  is  a  consensus  that  the  accession  countries  will  reap  substantial  growth  and 
employment benefits from their membership in the European Union. Still, let me also add a word of 
caution  in  this  context:  It  may  take  quite  a  while  before  new  entrants  will  be  in  a  position  to  fully 
harvest these benefits. A fair share of realism is called for to avoid disappointment. 
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe have made successful and impressive progress on their 
way  to  EU  membership.  Yet  more  remains  to  be  done.  Sustainable  monetary,  fiscal  and  structural 
policy  reforms  are  of  prime  importance  in  this  context,  as  they  help  to  establish  the  required  real 
convergence  with  the  European  Union  –  a  precondition  for  smooth  accession  to  the  EU.  These 
reforms  comprise,  for  example,  sustainable  low  rates  of  inflation,  sound  public  finances,  stable 
currencies, flexible labor markets and efficient financial markets. 
Finally,  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  involved  in  accession  negotiations  will  be 
confronted  with  the  basic  question  of  how  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  features  in  the  overall 
context  of  enlargement.  As  far  as  we  can  judge  today,  we  see  the  economic  and  monetary  policy 
integration  of  the  candidate  countries  proceeding  in  three  steps:  In  a  first  step,  the  candidates  will 
accede to the European Union, then they will participate in ERM II, the exchange rate mechanism of 
the Union, and in a last step, they will introduce the euro as their national currency. 
Let  me  point  out  very  clearly  that  the  fulfillment  of  the  Maastricht  convergence  criteria  is  not  a 
prerequisite  for  membership  in  the  European  Union.  But,  of  course,  this  does  not  mean  that  the 
convergence  criteria  are  wholly  unimportant  for  the  accession  countries  today.  While  they  may  not 
represent  criteria  with  which  to  judge  a  country's  readiness  for  Europe,  they  may  be  signposts  for 
stability-oriented  policies,  which  of  course  must  be  devised  in  line  with  the  particular  situation  the 
countries are in. To fulfill the convergence criteria is a necessary condition for participation in EMU. 
Future candidate countries for EMU must, as the current members have done, fulfill the convergence 
criteria of the treaty, not more but also not less.  
From  an  overall  perspective,  I  clearly  welcome  the  European  Union's  plans  for  enlargement,  as 
enlargement  will  help  extend  the  zone  of  stability  in  Europe,  strengthen  Europe's  international 
competitive position and will thus contribute substantially to prosperity, security and peace in the long 
term.  
September 11th and their implications for monetary policy and international co-operation 
In  his  well-known  address  to  the  American  Economic  Association  in  1968,  Milton  Friedman1  stated 
that:  “The  first  and  most  important  lesson  that  history  teaches  us  about  what  monetary  policy  can 
do...is that monetary policy can prevent money from being a major source of economic disturbance. 
The Great Contraction might not have occurred at all, and if it had, it would have been far less severe, 
if the monetary authority had avoided mistakes.”  
The  terror  attacks  in  New  York  and  Washington  on  September  11th  had  immediate  repercussions 
across  the  world,  in  particular  in  financial  markets.  In  dealing  with  the  immediate  impact,  the 
Eurosystem acted both in close co-operation with the Federal Reserve and on its own. The world’s 
leading central banks took prompt action to alleviate the ensuing liquidity crunch by providing markets 
with liquidity and subsequently cutting interest rates to prevent market crashes. They have thus acted 
as mature players that successfully forestalled crisis and injected confidence into battered markets. 
                                                      
1  Milton Friedman (1968), „The Role of Monetary Policy“, American Economic Review, vol. 58, no.1. 
BIS Review 93/2001 
 5
 Are  any  general  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  this  experience?  Will  concerted  policy  actions  among 
central banks be more frequent in the future? It may sound confusing but such joint actions should be 
restricted  to  truly  exceptional  circumstances  and  extreme  events.  In  addition,  any  such  concerted 
action  must  be  consistent  with  the  principles  of  sound  monetary  policy.  Even  in  exceptional 
circumstances, the euro area’s monetary policy must always remain clearly focused on the mandate of 
the Eurosystem and its primary objective of maintaining price stability in the domestic economy. What 
may differ in such circumstances, however, is the time profile of the appropriate policy actions best 
serving that objective and the degree of co-operation among central banks in coming to a common 
understanding of the situation in the case of an emergency. 
Without doubt, central banks can make an important contribution to limiting the international economic 
consequences that an extreme event like the September terrorist attacks may entail. However, apart 
from the immediate tasks of central banks in terms of ensuring the continued functioning of markets 
and of payment systems, the main contribution of central banks remains what it always has been: the 
maintenance of price stability. Confidence in the maintenance of price stability is the foundation for the 
effective functioning of a market economy.  
Fostering trust and confidence in lasting price stability become not less but more important in the wake 
of extreme events and in the presence of unusual uncertainty. This remains the best contribution that 
monetary policy can make to securing a solid basis for growth and “domestic” as well as international 
stability. 
Asking  monetary  policy  to  do  more  or  to  serve  other  purposes,  risks  creating  illusions  about  what 
monetary policy can do. As it has been aptly put by the Governor of the Bank of England, Sir Eddie 
George, in a recent speech: "It is important that the limitations of monetary policy - what it can and 
what  it  can't  hope  to  achieve -  are  clearly  understood.  Otherwise  expectations  are  likely  to  be 
disappointed,  and  disappointed  expectations  may  lead  to  building  pressure  for  alternative  policy 
actions, which may not in the event be in our longer-term economic interest." 
This view on what monetary policy can do - and more important what it cannot do - is basically shared 
by all major central banks. Based  on this "common understanding", central  banks are thus likely to 
come to very similar conclusions on the appropriate course of policy given the respective mandates 
and prevailing conditions in the respective economies. Concerted actions should not come into conflict 
with  the  mandates  and  monetary  policy  strategies  pursued  by  the  participating  central  banks. 
Otherwise  co-operation  could  lead  to  increased  uncertainty  about  the  future  course  of  policy  and 
compromise longer-term stability. 
This lesson  also seems to stem from historical experience. On the  whole, since the end  of Bretton 
Woods  efforts  at  policy  co-ordination  have  been  confined 
to  addressing  specific  unusual 
circumstances such as severe currency misalignments.  
Conclusion 
In concluding and summing up my remarks, I strongly believe that the best contribution that a large 
economy like the euro area can make to the international financial system is to ensure macroeconomic 
stability "at home" by pursuing policies which lead to sustainable non-inflationary growth in the euro 
area. Given the size of the economy of the euro area, a stability-oriented policy will help to create a 
favourable environment conductive to non-inflationary growth at the global level. 
6 
 BIS Review 93/2001
