Lars Heikensten: Stabilisation policy - experiences and challenges
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Swedish
Taxpayers Association, 80th anniversary, Stockholm International Fair, 4 October 2001.
 First  of  all,  congratulations  on  your  anniversary.  For  an  80-year-old  you  look  relatively  fresh.  The
organisation I represent first saw the light of day 333 years ago, though despite appearances I haven’t
been there from the start.
Today I shall be dwelling a good deal on the past to see what lessons we can draw from 80 years of
stabilisation  policy.  Economic  developments  impose  new  policy  requirements.  Over  the  years,  the
instruments and objectives of economic policy have been put to the test and renewed in the light of
experience. I shall be taking  you on a conducted tour of the  business  cycles  to  see  what  they  can
teach us about the current situation.
Strong belief in spontaneous recovery
Let me start in 1921, the year in which Marcus Wallenberg Senior initiated what subsequently became
the Swedish Taxpayers Association. That was in a period when both economic growth and inflation
were fluctuating widely. Not counting wars and bad harvests, the crisis Sweden went through was the
deepest in modern times.
When trade picked up after World War One and demand grew, prices had risen sharply. The strong
economic upswing led in time to overheating, with shortages of fuel, raw materials and labour. The
high demand for labour brought unemployment down to 4–5 per cent of trade union membership. In
the period from 1917 to 1920 the annual rate of wage increases averaged about 25 per cent. In 1919
and 1920 the balance of trade showed massive deficits of about 5–6 per cent of GDP.
Sweden’s  inflationary  economy  elicited  mounting  criticism.  Knut  Wicksell,  one  of  our  best-known
political economists, took an active part in pointing to the grave injustices that rising inflation caused by
skewing  contracts  that  had  been  concluded  earlier.  Something  ought  to  be  done,  he  said,  but  no
serious efforts to stabilise the economy were actually made.
The subsequent adjustment occurred suddenly and unexpectedly. When the international boom came
to  an  end,  demand  slumped.  From  1920  to  1922,  manufacturing  output  in  Sweden  dropped  about
40 per  cent  and  GDP  about  35 per  cent.1  Unemployment  shot  up  to  25 per  cent.  The  Swedish
economy  went  into  a  deflationary  spiral.  The  price  level  fell  about  35 per  cent  from  1920  to  1922.
Wages also plummeted;  for  an  industrial  worker,  for  instance,  the  wage  level  fell  more  than  35 per
cent in the course of about 18 months. Firms were caught in a vice, squeezed on all sides by steeply
falling  prices.  As  always,  the  firms  that  suffered  most  were  those  with  inflated  profits,  over-valued
assets and large misplaced investments.
The  abrupt  plunge  into  a  depression  was  followed  by  an  equally  sudden  recovery.  Manufacturing
output rose around 1922 and annual growth in the following years up to 1929 averaged as much as
4 per cent.
So what was the attitude to economic policy in those days? On the whole, the depression, with falling
prices  and  rising  unemployment,  was  seen  as  a  necessary  evil,  a  purgatory  that  would  result  in  a
spontaneous recovery to economic balance.
As  regards  stabilisation  policy  in  one  form  or  another,  the  primary  responsibility  rested  with  the
Riksbank. In practice, however, policy was passive and tardy. A look at the wholesale price index from
1913  to  1920  shows  that  the  increase  in  Sweden  was  almost  twice  that  in  the  United  States,  for
example. In time, the interest rate was raised and the supply of credit was restricted. However, the
tighter monetary stance was then retained even after activity had turned downwards. The reason was
that the Riksbank tried to bring the Swedish krona back to its par value in 1913 in order to rejoin the
gold standard. As a result, at the beginning of 1921 the interest rate was around 6 per cent at a time
when prices were falling about 20 per cent.
                                                     
1
Schön, L (2000), En modern svensk ekonomisk historia (A modern Swedish economic history), SNS Förlag, Stockholm.
BIS Review 81/2001
1
Fiscal policy was based on other criteria than those of stabilisation policy. Built-in stabilisers did exist,
for instance in the form of unemployment support, but the benefits were low in order to strengthen the
incentive to search for new employment. This did work – when the upturn came in February 1922 the
number of persons on relief work or the dole was over 100,000; by the  end  of 1923 the figure  had
dropped to 6,000 – but the flexibility did, of course, exact a price in the form of social hardship.
Stabilisation policy’s emergence
In contrast to the lack of an active economic policy in the period around 1920, decision-makers in the
1930s had high ambitions, underpinned by a nascent stabilisation policy theory.
The course of economic events in connection with the crisis of 1930–33 partly resembled what had
happened in Sweden a decade earlier. An international boom with unduly high hopes of future profits
had  led  to  markedly  inflated  asset  prices.  The  party  ended  in  a  financial  crash  and  Wall  Street’s
collapse  in  October  1929.  A  number  of  banks  had  to  close  their  doors.  On  top  of  all  this,  the  US
Federal Reserve imposed credit restrictions.
In Sweden, the depression was not as deep as the one in the early 1920s, though unemployment did
rise  to  much  the  same  level,  about  25 per  cent.  The  major  difference  was  that  the  economy  was
successfully  piloted  past  a  steep  price  fall.  Sweden  left  the  gold  standard  in  September  1931.  The
Finance  Minister,  Felix  Hamrin,  declared  that  monetary  policy’s  objective  would  be  to  “use  all  the
available instruments to maintain the Swedish krona’s domestic purchasing power”. Deflation was to
be  combated  just  as  vigorously  as  inflation.  So  the  Riksbank  seems  to  have  been  the  world’s  first
central bank to base its policy on price stability.2 Our work today with an inflation target is accordingly
set in a proud tradition.
When Sweden came off the gold standard the krona rapidly depreciated by about 30 per cent. Export
producers found this particularly welcome as it immediately improved their competitive position.
The  increased  unemployment  in  the  early  1930s  elicited  a  debate  about  economic  policy.  Ernst
Wigforss,  the  Social  Democrat  Finance  Minister,  saw  unemployment  as  a  function  of  insufficient
purchasing  power  in  the  economy.  To  rectify  this,  he  proposed  public  work  projects  with  market
wages,  financed  with  short-term  government  borrowing.  This  was  a  departure  from  the  earlier
concentration on monetary policy as perhaps the only effective instrument for stabilisation policy.
Wigforss’ proposal also differed from the previous policy of keeping unemployment benefits at a low
level so as not to compete with regular wages. Another innovation was the focus on domestic demand
instead of on a need to stimulate employment by adjusting prices and wages.
The new direction of policy was nurtured with ideas from the Stockholm school of economics, which
included Erik Lindahl, Bertil Olin, Gunnar Myrdal and Erik Lundberg. Their ideas had been developed
concurrently with those of John Maynard Keynes. The notion that government ought to intervene in a
market economy in order to rectify imbalances permeated economic policy for many years.
Diminishing confidence in the new approach
Keynesianism and its analytical methods spread rapidly. Economists in the 1950s and 1960s devoted
a lot of time to computing the multiplier effects of various government measures. For a time it looked
as  though  the  economy  could  be  steered  by  pulling  different  levers  and  thereby  overcoming  the
problem  of  a  market  economy’s  instability.  The  Phillips  curve,  presented  in  the  late  1950s,
demonstrated  a  negative  relationship  between  nominal  wages  and  unemployment.  This  further
boosted  the  belief  that  the  economy  could  be  adjusted  at  will,  leaving  politicians  to  opt  for  their
preferred combination of unemployment and inflation. The significance for growth of a fixed value of
money fell into oblivion.
In the 1950s and 1960s, Keynesian stabilisation policy seemed to be successful in many countries,
not least Sweden. Economic growth was high, supported for example by the post-war reconstruction
of Europe, and it was also stable, with only small cyclical fluctuations. Growing budget deficits were
                                                     
2
Berg, C &  Jonung, L (1999),  Pioneering  price  level  targeting:  the  Swedish  experience  1931–1937.  J of  Monetary
Economics, 43:3.
2
BIS Review 81/2001
tolerated during downward phases but it then proved increasingly difficult for governments to balance
the budget over the business cycle.
In  the  early  1970s,  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  for  international  exchange  rate
cooperation meant that the earlier constraints on  economic policy  no  longer applied. Countries  with
growing  current-account  and  budget  deficits  were  now  able  to  obtain  finance  in  the  emerging
international capital markets.
Economic policy in many Western countries, Sweden included, drifted further and further away from
Keynes’s  basic  tenets.  Inflation,  which  in  the  Bretton  Woods  era  had  averaged  around  4 per  cent,
soon rose to twice that. When unemployment began to increase in connection with the oil crises in the
1970s  it  was  evident  that  Keynesianism  faced  a  crisis.  It  offered  no  solution  to  the  problem  of
stagflation.
Earlier ideas were now revived and new approaches were developed. The difficulties decision-makers
face over adjusting imbalances in good time had already been highlighted by economists, above all in
the United States, in the late 1960s. There is a considerable risk, for example, that a demand stimulus
when activity is low will not have time to act before an upturn has occurred. Policy is therefore liable to
accentuate cyclical fluctuations instead of smoothing them.
Perhaps  the  most  pungent  criticism  came  from  those  who  argued  that  in  practice,  firms  and
households act in the light of their economic policy expectations. If, for example, the government tries
to stimulate demand by increasing transfer payments and thereby the budget deficit, households will
simply save the additional benefits because they expect that, sooner or later, the public sector deficit
will have to be financed and this entails either increased taxes or decreased transfers. There would be
no increment to demand because households strive to keep consumption stable over time. The only
effect is liable to be increased uncertainty about the future.
The  criticism,  which  presupposed  that  economic  agents  are  rational,  also  concerned  the  labour
market. In that the Phillips curve disregards a central explanatory variable – inflation expectations – it
is  not  stable  over  time.  A  demand  stimulus  that  pushes  inflation  up  erodes  real  wage  levels.
Employees  will  therefore  demand  compensation  for  the  price  increases  and  the  attendant  loss  of
purchasing power. That means that the additional  employment  which  the  stimulus  was  designed  to
generate will never materialise.
Moreover, Keynesian economic policy had already been criticised in the 1930s on  the  grounds that
stimulating demand in a downturn is considerably easier than tightening policy in an upswing.
Economic  developments  in  Sweden  from  the  1970s  onwards  provided  plenty  of  support  for
Keynesianism’s critics. Inflation rose at the same time as keeping total unemployment down proved
increasingly  difficult.  Public  spending  expanded  continuously  and  particularly  in  downward  phases.
Government debt grew even though tax pressure rose. A fundamental loss of competitiveness  was
countered with repeated devaluations.
Back to price stability
In a number of industrialised countries, economic policy was realigned in the years around 1980. The
aim  was  to  provide  a  good  foundation  for  stable  growth  by  keeping  inflation  low.  In  Sweden  the
corresponding realignment did not occur until the turn of the 1980s. After almost two decades of high
inflation, the costs were considerable. The financial excesses that had characterised the late 1980s in
particular  were  ruthlessly  exposed  when  the  inflation  bubble  burst.  GDP  fell  about  5  per  cent  and
unemployment rocketed from levels around 2–3 per cent to two-digit figures.
After a series of heavy attacks, the Swedish krona was left to float in 1992. The fixed exchange rate
regime was replaced by a return to price stability as the policy objective, now in the form of a 2 per
cent  inflation  target.  Since  1999,  price  stability  is  enshrined  in  law  and  the  Riksbank  is  more
independent in the pursuit of this goal.
While low inflation is admittedly not an ultimate goal for economic policy in general, it is an important
prerequisite for generating growth that is stable and high. History clearly demonstrates that a high and
fluctuating  rate  of  inflation  is  incompatible  with  a  permanent  improvement  in  standards  of  living.  A
commitment  to  price  stability  is  therefore  one  of  the  foundation  stones  of  any  economic  policy  that
aims for rising prosperity and high employment.
BIS Review 81/2001
3
The years since the policy realignment have been successful. But this is not only because stabilisation
policy is now being conducted differently, with a clear focus on price stability and a balanced budget. It
is also a result of all the measures that were introduced around the turn of the 1980s to improve the
workings of the economy. These included the deregulation of capital markets, “the tax reform of the
century”, a realignment of housing policy and so on. Since the upturn in 1993, annual GDP growth has
averaged  3–4 per  cent,  while  inflation  has  stopped  at  1 per  cent.  This  is  impressive,  not  least
compared with the 1970s and 1980s, when growth averaged little more than 2 per cent and inflation
over 8 per cent. Moreover, open unemployment has fallen in just four years from 9 to less than 4 per
cent.
Today,  when  Sweden  again  faces  an  economic  downturn,  the  initial  position  is  considerably  better
than earlier. Inflation is low. There is no sign of large financial imbalances. Foreign trade is generating
surpluses. The government budget  is also  in surplus  and  government  debt  has  been  reduced  from
about 80 per cent of GDP to 50–55 per cent.
An economic policy synthesis
This brief review clearly illustrates the interaction of theory and practice over the years. New features
in  economic  development  raise  new  questions.  New  theories  provide  answers  that  are  sometimes
incorporated in practical politics. This influences developments and raises new questions. In view of
this, there is every reason to be humble. We are no doubt as far from the end of history in this field as
in others.
Perhaps one can discern the outlines of a synthesis between the classical approaches and the ideas
of Keynes. As I see it, such a synthesis can rest on three pillars:
• 
The basic condition for a good economic development is markets that function properly, with
rules that are clear and firm.
A  stable  value  of  money  combined  with  sustainable  public  finances  makes  an  essential
contribution to an economic development that is favourable and stable.
A policy with this direction that is implemented consistently can, with the aid of certain direct
cyclical measures, help to stabilise economic activity.
  As I have chosen to focus today on issues to do with cyclical activity and stabilisation policy, I have not
said much about the first of these pillars but that does not imply a value judgement. On the contrary,
the  reforms  of  taxation,  regulations  and  so  on  have  presumably  played  a  crucial  part  in  the  good
development in the 1990s, both in Sweden  and elsewhere. At the same time, recent developments
bring out some of the problems we now face. Markets are evidently liable to malfunction in the sense
that prices deviate markedly from what is reasonable in the long term. Stock markets have provided
evidence of this in recent years and it is also very much the case with the krona’s exchange rate. The
result can be considerable fluctuations not just in financial markets but in the real economy, too. It is
here that I believe the major challenges lie today, both for economic theory and for us more practical
decision-makers.
I have already discussed the other two pillars. Attempts to raise demand and employment in the short
term  entail  considerable  risks,  as  we  saw  in  the  three  decades  before  1990.  The  neo-classical
theories, not least those based on rational expectations, have provided a number of explanations for
this. But that hardly means that Keynes is dead. Within a policy framework for macroeconomic stability
and  given  sound,  long-term  rules  for  the  market  economy,  there  ought  to  be  room  for  cyclical
stabilisation, though not for fine tuning.
With a fixed exchange rate regime, monetary policy has to concentrate on maintaining the given rate
and  leave  the  stabilisation  of  demand  mainly  to  fiscal  instruments.  In  the  first  place  that  implies
creating enough room – sufficiently large reserves – for the automatic stabilisers to be able to act in
downward  phases.  The  European  Community’s  Stability & Growth  Pact  is  designed  to  this  end,  for
example. It is also a question of economic agents being able to rely on inflation remaining low.
With a flexible exchange rate, a large part of the responsibility for stabilisation policy rests in practice
with the central bank. Strong confidence in monetary policy and in the ability of the central bank to fulfil
its  objectives  is  of  primary  importance  here.  It  will  then  normally  be  feasible  to  lower  interest  rates
when economic downturns are imminent and vice versa. In that way, a policy focused on price stability
will normally also help to stabilise economic activity.
4
BIS Review 81/2001
When opinions differ, it is  now  usually a  question of practical judgements. Are the  budget  reserves
sufficiently large for the automatic stabilisers to be given their head? Can one be sure that confidence
in the inflation target will not weaken if the interest rate is lowered still more? Perhaps demand can be
stimulated  deliberately.  Timing  these  matters  is  still  not  easy  and  there  is  a  large  risk  of  cyclical
tendencies being reinforced instead of the opposite. But few of us would be prepared to relinquish the
possibility entirely.3
Current challenges
So  what  does this  imply in relation to the present  situation  in  Sweden?  How  should  we  handle  the
combination of clearly slowing activity, persistently large uncertainty as to the direction in which we are
travelling,  an  exchange  rate  that  at  present  is  unprecedentedly  weak  and  inflation  above  the
Riksbank’s target?
First let me repeat that the initial position is relatively favourable, even though the strong upswing in
recent  years  would have been an appropriate time to press forward  with the  work of improving  our
economy’s long-term growth potential. Just a few years ago, not many people would have believed, for
instance,  that  our  public  debt  would  fall  below  the  EU  average.  The  remarkably  high  growth  has
contributed to this but so has a relatively tight stance based on clear principles for budget policy. Given
a downturn of the magnitude most people now foresee, there is a risk of the budget surplus slipping to
less than 2 per cent. That need not be dramatic, however. What matters is that the 2 per cent target is
met over the business cycle. But the deficit that would be permissible – without endangering long-term
confidence in fiscal policy – if activity were to go on weakening is an open question that we should be
reluctant to put to the test. Budget policy’s other foundation stone, in addition to the targeted surplus,
is the spending ceiling. This has been observed to date but the safety margins have shrunk. Additional
savings  will  therefore  be  needed  if  activity  weakens  as  much  as  now  seems  likely.  To  exceed  the
spending ceiling the first time it is exposed to serious strains  would  harm  confidence  in  the  budget
system that has been established.
For monetary policy the situation is also relatively good. Inflation has been low for a number of years,
frequently lower in fact than the Riksbank’s 2 per cent target. Now that it has crept up above 2 per cent
in recent months and thus exceeds our target, I am not aware that anyone has taken this as a sign
that we do not take the target seriously. Inflation expectations, as measured by a variety of indicators,
have also been well in line with our target. This is the fruit of the  policy  we have followed. Had  we
continually stretched the limits in the past, there would have been less room in which to take prompt
action, as we did a fortnight ago, for instance.
As you are all probably aware, the interest rate hike of 0.25 percentage points in July, to 4.25 per cent,
was  controversial.  Let  me  therefore  underscore  that  the  move  was  taken  just  because  we  were
concerned that the confidence we had established in the commitment to low inflation would be eroded
when inflation rose rapidly and unexpectedly, clearly exceeding  our target,  at the same time as the
exchange rate weakened dramatically. In many respects this development was confined to Sweden.
When we lowered the interest rate in September, the situation was different. It is true that the krona
was still weak and inflation above the target, but the terrorist attacks in the United States threatened to
almost paralyse an entire world and subdue activity even more.
Looking ahead, there are no grounds for ruling anything out. The repo rate depends as usual on our
assessment of inflation one to two years ahead. The current assessment is being made against the
background,  for  example,  of  international  economic  activity  that  threatens  to  be  weaker  than  we
foresaw in the Inflation Report in May. By itself, this points to a more favourable picture of inflation. On
the other hand there is, for instance, the weak exchange rate. For a time, moreover, inflation has been
higher  than  we  counted  on.  To  some  extent  this  has  to  do  with  more  transitory  price  increases  for
certain goods. But even when these are excluded, inflation has continued to creep up. The ultimate
conclusion  from  our  assessment  is  something  to  which  we  will  be  returning  in  connection  with  the
publication of the year’s third Inflation Report on 16 October.
                                                     
3  The current debate in the United States is of interest in this context. Even before the tragic events on 11 September, policy
had considerable elements of neo-Keynesianism. In a column in Business Week (1 October 2001), Robert Barro, a leading
neo-classicist, put forward arguments that I am sure would have earned a gold star from Professor Keynes.
BIS Review 81/2001
5
