 Christian Noyer: Banking in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 30th Anniversary 
of the Association of Foreign Banks' Representatives, Frankfurt, 8 November 2001. 
 I  am  very  grateful  for  the  invitation  to  speak  to  you  on  the  occasion  of  the  30th  anniversary  of  the 
Association  of  "Foreign  Banks'  Representatives  in  Germany".  Your  Association  has  117  members 
from a large number of countries. Several of the member institutions are counted among the 30 major 
European banks, or among banks from elsewhere with important operations in Europe.  
For many banks represented by your Association, the topic of my speech "banking in the euro area" is 
part of day-to-day business. It is also day-to-day business for the European Central Bank (ECB) and 
the  Eurosystem  as  a  whole,  as  we  conduct  our  monetary  policy  operations  and  run  the  TARGET 
large-value payment system.  
The further integration of the European banking system and financial markets is in the interests of both 
banks and the central bank. For banks, it means the liquidity benefits of deeper and wider markets and 
lower costs when operating in several countries. From the central bank perspective, it enhances the 
efficient and consistent implementation of the single monetary policy.  
We  already  enjoy  the  benefits  of  a  common  euro  area  banking  system  in  important  respects.  An 
integrated money market exists for liquidity transfers in euro; banks are inter-connected in a common 
payment  system  infrastructure;  and  wholesale  securities  market  activities  and  corporate  finance 
services do not recognise geographical borders. However, at the retail level, international banks must 
still  treat  each  country  as  an  individual  market.  This  is  because  of  localised  demand  and 
country-specific  banking  products,  and  differences  in  conduct-of-business  and  consumer  protection 
rules. The remaining differences in regulatory and supervisory practices can also play a role. I believe 
that  few  institutions  understand  this  as  well  as  you  do,  as  you  still  have  to  cope  with  the  task  of 
navigating business through various national environments.  
I  should  like  to  explore  this  double  feature  of  euro  area  banking  today.  On  one  hand,  there  is  the 
challenge  for  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  to  respond  to  the  emergence  of  a  common 
wholesale  banking  system  in  order  to  maintain  financial  stability.  On  the  other  hand,  greater 
integration, also in the retail field, remains an important policy objective. I should like to address the 
two aspects in turn, starting with wholesale banking and then moving on to the retail side. 
A common wholesale banking system 
I  share  the  view  that  a  common  currency  and  a  common  central  bank  actually  determine  a  unified 
banking system. In a nutshell, access to  a common source of central  bank liquidity  and a common 
money  market  –  as  well  as  confidence  in  the  common  currency  –  create  strong  interconnections 
between all banks operating in the single currency area. This is the case irrespective of whether we 
have pan-European banks, or whether discrepancies remain in local retail markets. The case of the 
United States is illustrative. Even when strong inter-state banking limitations were in place – restricting 
retail banking activities to small local markets – the US banking system was, nevertheless, commonly 
viewed as a single system.  
Illustrative facts 
The  progress  made  with  integration  in  wholesale  activities  has  been  rapid  and  remarkable.  First,  a 
common euro money market has been in place since the early days of the euro. A large number of 
financial  products  can  be  traded  easily  with  minimal  price  distortions,  small  enough  to  prevent 
arbitrage across countries. Likewise, data on cross-border trade flows provide a strong indication of 
market unification. In the case of the predominantly used unsecured interbank contracts, the share of 
counterparties from other euro area countries has more than doubled after the introduction of the euro. 
In addition, a large proportion of the activity in euro is conducted with counterparties outside the euro 
area, especially in London. The share of cross-border transactions is somewhat lower in the case of 
repo transactions, because of remaining legal and tax barriers and settlement difficulties. All in all, less 
BIS Review 91/2001 
 1
 than 40% of all interbank market activity is now conducted with domestic counterparties. In 1998, the 
share was still over 60%. 
Second, the wholesale payment infrastructure for the euro area – including TARGET, Euro I and Euro 
Access Frankfurt – is already very unified. Payment flows in these systems again indicate a significant 
increase  in  cross-border  interbank  trading  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  In  terms  of  value, 
cross-border transactions currently account for 40% of all kinds of TARGET payments, for instance. 
The  degree  of  integration  is  certainly  lower  for  securities  settlement,  even  though  a  process  of 
consolidation has been taking place. 
Third, the degree of integration of securities market activities is usually misjudged, since attention is 
focused  on  the  costs  and  difficulties  of  individual  investors  when  investing  abroad.  The  picture  is 
completely different for wholesale activities. The corporate finance markets for major customers are 
actually already quite highly integrated. To give an example, the share of domestic book-runners for 
bonds issued by euro area companies dropped from over 80% in 1995 to 36% in 2000. As in many 
other  securities  and  derivative  market  activities,  the  market  structure  relies  on  large  European  or 
global financial groups. The same trend towards a high level of integration also holds true of wholesale 
asset management, with investments being increasingly diversified across borders. 
In terms of volume, growth has been very impressive in the euro-denominated securities markets, until 
the  very  recent  slowdown  and  increased  market  uncertainty  after  the  tragic  events  in  the  United 
States.  The  deepening  of  the  markets  has  been  particularly  strong  for  bonds  –  euro-denominated 
bonds issued by private entities doubled during 1999, and market activity remained quite strong until 
the summer of this year.  
Challenges stemming from integration 
Two  major  challenges  for  authorities  in  charge  of  financial  stability  emerge  from  the  common 
wholesale banking system: vulnerability to common shocks and potential contagion of major problems 
across many countries, should such problems arise.  
Let  me  take  the  issue  of  common  shocks  first.  Clearly,  integration  opens  up  a  wide  range  of 
opportunities for growth and contributes to increasing the resilience of the system. It brings along a 
wider range of funding sources and – on the asset side – the degree of diversification of exposures 
increases. But integration also renders financial institutions more exposed to common shocks. For the 
largest banks, area-wide risks affecting specific lines of business increasingly  matter more than the 
home country-related risks.  
One  way  of  illustrating  this  point  is  to  take  a  look  at  banks'  share  price  development.  Since  the 
beginning  of  the  year,  the  share  prices  of  almost  all  major  European  banks  have  declined.  The 
30 largest banks have lost, on average, around 25% of their value. The overall deterioration in global 
macroeconomic conditions and financial market volumes has affected all institutions, as banks' profit 
outlook has deteriorated following the likely increase in provisioning needs and reductions in income 
from market-related activities.  
However,  the  stock  market  changes  for  these  30  banks  range  widely  from  a  small  plus  to  very 
significant  minuses  of  over  50%.  In  line  with  the  notion  that  the  home-country  risks  have  lost  in 
importance, banks' nationality is no longer a very relevant determinant of the size of the stock market 
reaction.  To  give  you  just  one  example,  large  retail-oriented  banks  have  suffered  only  a  mild 
deterioration,  while  the  share  prices  of  wholesale  and  market-oriented  banks  from  even  the  same 
countries  have  declined  quite  substantially.  In  general,  the  greatest  stock  market  reductions  have 
occurred  for  banks  with  substantial  dependence  on  declining  investment  banking  activity,  or  with 
significant  credit  exposure  concentrations  on  certain  industries  –  such  as  the  technology  sectors  or 
airlines – or troubled emerging markets. These represent common risk elements for euro area banks.  
Let  me  turn  to  the  second  issue  of  the  spreading  of  problems.  The  common  wholesale  market  is 
clearly  a  driving  force  behind  efficiency  and  further  integration.  Market  participants  have  generally 
expressed that they are satisfied  with the  way the market works. Banks are able to borrow liquidity 
from one another  across borders, instead of having to resort to central  bank funding. The common 
money  market  can  also  absorb  larger  disturbances  than  before.  However,  banks  operating  in  the 
common wholesale system form a network, which could facilitate a rapid propagation of shocks across 
the euro area. A major problem at a key financial institution is likely immediately to be transmitted to 
other  countries,  through  large  and  well-capitalised  counterparties,  or  via  the  effects  on  liquidity  and 
prices in securities markets.  
2 
 BIS Review 91/2001
 Responses by central banks and banking supervisors 
While  responsibility  for  financial  stability  remains  vested  in  the  national  authorities  –  even  in  the 
countries  participating  in  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  –  the  need  for 
co-operation among national authorities has increased because of the concerns I have just mentioned. 
In fact, EU authorities have shown awareness that close co-operation is essential both for a strategy of 
risk reduction and for the prompt and effective management of any problematic events. Let me refer to 
some of the main issues pertaining to the activities of central banks and banking supervisors. 
First, as to the Eurosystem responsibilities, the operational tools established for the common monetary 
policy  allow  market-wide  liquidity  shocks  to  be  dealt  with.  The  quick  and  successful  reaction  to  the 
consequences of the terror attacks in the United States was a sign that the institutional framework is 
able to address the consequences of common shocks.  
Already in the evening of 11 September, the ECB announced that it was ready to provide additional 
liquidity. Indeed, the euro money markets showed some signs of tension on 12 September, because of 
banks' caution about lending funds due to uncertainty regarding their own liquidity needs. The ECB 
ensured  the  availability  of  adequate  liquidity  through  a  quick  tender  operation,  restoring  a  normal 
functioning of the market, in the same way as, for instance, the Federal Reserve accomplished this for 
the dollar money market. In addition, the ECB and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York negotiated 
a US dollar/euro swap agreement on 12 September. The purpose of the agreement was to channel 
US  dollar  funds  to  European  banks,  which  are  not  counterparties  of  the  Federal  Reserve  for  its 
discount  window operations. European banks faced difficulties  in raising short-term US dollar funds 
due to the disruption in the US financial system.  
Second, as to the co-operation between central banks and banking supervisors, the ECB, the national 
central  banks  and  the  banking  supervisory  authorities  of  all  EU  countries  have  recently  signed  a 
Memorandum of Understanding. It establishes arrangements for co-operation and sharing information 
with respect to risks in large-value payment systems.  
Third,  as  regards  banking  supervisors,  the  EU  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  has  recently 
reached the conclusion – also endorsed by the finance ministers – that, while the existing institutional 
arrangements for supervision and crisis management are adequate, cross-border co-operation needs 
to be fostered. The co-operative bodies of banking supervisors in the European Union – the Banking 
Supervision  Committee  of  the  ESCB  and  the  Groupe  de  Contact  –  are  currently  addressing  this 
recommendation. 
The opinion of the ECB is also that the existing arrangements can provide an adequate and flexible 
basis  for  safeguarding  financial  stability  at  the  European  level.  We  have  also  stressed  that 
co-operation needs to be enhanced in order to ensure the effective execution of prudential supervision 
and corrective action in crises. For the single monetary policy, it is important that financial stability is 
effectively maintained. 
Let me make some remarks also about the supervisory arrangements at the national-level. After the 
reform carried out in the United Kingdom to establish a single all-encompassing financial supervisory 
authority outside the central bank, proposals to set up a single supervisory authority have been put 
forward in several euro area countries. Tendencies to separate supervision from central banking have 
also  emerged.  In  almost  all  euro  area  countries,  central  banks  have  traditionally  been  in  charge  of 
supervisory functions. 
In some euro area countries, adjustments have already been made. In Austria, an all-encompassing 
financial supervisory authority will be established, but the central bank will still be in charge of certain 
banking  supervisory  tasks.  In  Luxembourg,  a  supervisory  authority  has  been  created  outside  the 
central  bank.  Changes  are  also  underway  or  being  discussed  in  Germany,  Belgium,  Ireland,  and 
Finland.  
The  Eurosystem  has  recently  expressed  the  view  that  continuing  to  have  national  central  banks  in 
charge  of  supervisory  responsibilities  would  offer  clear  benefits.  This  would  be  an  appropriate 
response to the challenges triggered by the euro, as it would enhance the capability to monitor risks to 
financial stability from an area-wide perspective. In  any  alternative arrangement, the  involvement of 
central banks in prudential supervision and ample information sharing would be necessary in order to 
achieve the necessary interaction between the two bodies.  
A central bank supervisor is in a position quickly to assess systemic risks. These could be generated, 
for example, by a failure of a large and complex financial institution through payment and settlement 
BIS Review 91/2001 
 3
 systems and securities markets. We have also considered that the traditionally expressed arguments 
in favour of separating prudential supervision and central banking would not be very convincing in the 
specific euro area conditions. For instance, the concern of conflicts of interest  with monetary policy 
and a lack of domestic accountability should not be overstated in our setting where monetary policy is 
centralised and supervision remains national.  
Still dispersed retail markets 
Despite the progress I have mentioned, the markets for retail financial services are still defined quite 
strongly along national, or even local, lines. In these markets, for instance, interest rates are based on 
local  competitive  conditions,  as  you  know  very  well.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  there  is  no 
international competition. The fact that this Association has now existed for thirty years is a clear sign 
that financial institutions have already been international for a long time.  
Internationalisation of retail operations 
Until now, branches and subsidiaries abroad have been preferred to large-scale mergers as a strategy 
for  entering  foreign  banking  markets.  The  establishment  of  foreign  branches  and  subsidiaries  has 
increased steadily in the euro area. For example, the number of foreign branches of German banks in 
the  European  Union  is  now  59,  almost  double  that  of  1995.  The  average  market  share  of  foreign 
branches and subsidiaries established by banks from EU countries was 10% at the end of 2000, which 
is definitely not negligible.  
Also, the ownership structure of the banking sector is changing significantly. It is no longer true that 
only  Luxembourg's  banks  have  a  significant  proportion  of  capital  owned  by  foreigners.  In  Ireland, 
Belgium and Portugal, and in the Nordic countries, the percentage of banks' capital in foreign hands 
ranges from around 40% to some 20%. France, Italy, Spain and Austria also show ratios of between 
15%  and  10%.  For  many  large  European  banks,  the  holdings  of  stakes  in  other  large  players  is 
sometimes associated with joint ventures in specific business lines or geographic areas – for example, 
in accession countries. 
Looking at the strategies of individual banks, some banks have already developed strong multi-country 
operations in the retail field. For instance, two major banking groups have retail activities in more than 
five EU countries. In any case, if the integration of the retail markets proceeds, more such operations 
could  be  expected  to  emerge.  Integration  could  also  be  advanced  via  electronic  banking,  or  cross-
border lending, both of which are still relatively limited. In fact, e-banking could represent a forceful 
boost  to  integration,  since  it  could  allow  customers  to  access  banking  services  offered  by  banks  in 
other countries, or it could be a powerful way to enter a new market without the need to establish a 
costly branch network. 
Responses by European authorities 
As  noted,  banks  with  international  operations  have  to  develop  local  products,  also  to  comply  with 
different  legal  systems,  which  implies  significant  costs.  Important  steps  are  being  taken  by  EU 
authorities to overcome the obstacles of segmentation. However, legal aspects are only one element 
hindering  the  integration  of  the  retail  markets,  since  proximity  to  the  customer  is  still  an  important 
factor. Even though it is likely that the retail markets will maintain local features at least for some time 
to come, any unnecessary burden on the cross-border expansion of activities should be lifted to the 
maximum extent possible. 
At  the  regulatory  level,  the  European  Commission  is  generally  striving  to  finalise  the  Single  Market 
programme  via  the  so-called  Financial  Services  Action  Plan.  The  higher  cost  of  cross-border  retail 
payments, as compared with domestic ones, has been a very topical issue, and it has been taken as a 
sign of a lack of integration. In July 2001, the European Commission proposed a draft Regulation to 
close the gap between domestic and cross-border payments. In the draft now being examined by the 
Council and the Parliament, banks would be obliged to equalise prices for cross-border and domestic 
payments. The ECB has stated that the Eurosystem shares the general objective of the Regulation. 
However, the Eurosystem has expressed reservations about the chosen method, because it gives too 
little time to the banking industry to adjust in a rational way. In this context, I find the recent initiative of 
the  European  Banking  Federation  for  a  self-imposed  calendar  for  reducing  the  level  of  such  fees 
extremely promising.  
4 
 BIS Review 91/2001
 Steps  are  also  being  taken  in  the  field  of  consumer  protection  legislation.  The  aim  of  the  recently 
launched  revision  of  the  Consumer  Credit  Directive  is  to  promote  transparency  and  to  ensure  that 
cross-border credit can flow in harmonised conditions for both consumers and lenders. Also, a report 
on the regulation of e-commerce in financial services has just been launched by the Commission. It 
draws  attention  to  the  problems  that  arise  from  the  interplay  between  different  legal  systems  and 
makes proposals to overcome them.  
At the supervisory level, the Economic and Financial Committee has stressed the need to work on the 
convergence  of  diverging  national  supervisory  practices.  The  main  motivation  is  to  enhance  the 
efficiency  of  the  national  supervisory  authorities  involved  in  monitoring  cross-border  financial 
institutions  and  thereby  to  improve  financial  stability.  This  is  also  linked  to  the  new  framework  for 
capital  adequacy  rules  being  developed  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  that  will 
significantly  increase  the  scope  for  supervisory  discretion,  leaving  broad  room  for  diverging 
implementation  across  Member  States.  Thus,  demand  for  supervisory  convergence  is  going  to 
increase. To the extent that this is accomplished, the costs of banks with multi-country operations will 
also become lower. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I should like to stress that when talking about the requirements of the euro area banking 
system, we are not concerned with ordinary co-operation across Member States, as is necessary on 
account of the internationalisation of financial firms' activities. We talk about a single banking sector. 
This means that only substantially reinforced co-operation, combined with convergence in supervisory 
policies and practices, can deliver the conditions for a continued integration of banking activities. This 
will mitigate the potential risks to financial stability that stem from the new channels of contagion and 
will, in turn, benefit euro area economic activity. 
BIS Review 91/2001 
 5
