M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Risk management - Challenge for the Thai financial
institutions and regulator
Opening remark by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Market
Risk  Management  Techniques 
in  Bangkok,
12 October 2001.
the  BIS  Capital  Regime  Seminar,  held 
for 
 Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to personally extend a warm welcome and to express our deep appreciation to all of our
distinguished  speakers  and  panelists  who  have  agreed  to  come  to  Bangkok  at  this  difficult  time.  I
would also like to thank our co-host, the World Bank, in the efforts and interest which they have shown
to  make  this  important  seminar  possible.  It  is  also  important  to  convey  my  appreciation  to  the
members of the financial industry for your interest and enthusiastic participation in this seminar.
As  we  all  know,  the  New  Accord  Proposal  is  scheduled  to  be  finalized  early  next  year,  with  its
implementation  scheduled  for  2005.  Countries  that  have  not  yet  implemented  the  consolidated
supervision will have until 2008 to comply with the New Accord. Thailand is in this second category
since we have yet to be empowered by law to carry out consolidated supervision. The new Banking
Act with such a provision is expected to take effect next year.
Even  with  such  a  relatively  long  grace  period  toward  compliance,  Thai  financial  institutions  have
already taken the first step of the journey toward that direction. We have recently conducted a survey
of the financial institutions to check their readiness to conform to the credit risk guidelines under the
New Accord. I have been reported that many plan to be ready for the standardized approach, while
others  are  working  towards  the  IRB  approach,  this  is  a  welcome  news.  More  importantly,  financial
institutions have all started the effort to strengthen risk management in their respective institutions with
some notable progress so far, and we look forward to more progress to come.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend all of you for such efforts. After all, the BIS capital
requirement  only  serves  as  a  cushion  of  losses  or  failure  of  an  institution  whereas  it  is  the  risk
management that reduces the chance of failure. The significant progress you have made in the area of
risk management deserves our full support and commendation, particularly so as this is a very difficult
time for the financial industries.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Coming back to the issue of preparation for the New Accord, one can see that significant challenges
remain ahead. I will now turn to these challenges.
First, the technical and infrastructure aspects. It is important to build up a deep understanding of the
technicality  of  approaches  and  methodology  underlying  the  New  Accord.  Moreover,  it  is  critical  to
achieve in-depth knowledge of risk management and the impact of such developments on business
model  of  the  financial  institution.  Therefore  the  task  ahead  is  very  challenging,  far  beyond  just
acquiring software that would crank out numbers.
On the infrastructure aspect, data is a critical issue. The data that could be collected at this time would
be biased since the economic conditions are not normal. Nevertheless, we still need to start building
up  the  database.  In  many  countries,  such  a  challenge  is  tackled  with  the  cooperation  between  the
financial institutions and the regulators. For example, in a number of countries, developed countries in
fact,  regulators  plays  crucial  coordination  role  in  supporting  the  built-up  of  the  database  system,  in
educating and knowledge transfer. The Bank of Thailand will be more than happy to play this role.
Turning now to the second major challenge for the financial institutions, the intensified domestic and
foreign competition brought about by liberalization, globalization and technology.
Banks  also  experience  competition  from  non-bank  financial  institutions,  with  the  traditional  financial
firms and their business line becoming blurred by conventional wisdom. We also see such strategy as
M&A  across  similar  financial  firms,  or  between  financial  firms  and  non-financial  firms  such  as  IT
BIS Review 87/2001
1
providers.  In  the  meantime,  outsourcing  and  franchising  of  technology,  most  notably  through  the
venders for risk management software or solution have also exploded as a phenomenon.
While the picture is still evolving so fast and future landscape hard to forecast, financial institutions find
themselves stepping more and more into a less familiar territory, and tremendous efforts must be put
in to survive the intense competition and dynamism. At the same time, attention must be diverted to
deal with preparation for the New Accord.
The third major challenge is that financial institutions need to further strengthen their financial standing
in the recovery path after the crisis. Preparing for the New Accord means cost impact from building
capacity in terms of people, know-how, IT, data, and business model re-engineering. Therefore, strong
leadership is crucial to propel the financial  institution through  the short-term difficulties,  while at the
same  time  steering  the  institution  with  long-term  vision  and  strategy  to  ensure  that  the  financial
institution survives the challenge and complies with international best practices.
As for the regulators, our task at the Bank of Thailand is no less challenging. In addition to the need to
build  up  our  own  in-depth  understanding  and  capacity  to  implement  the  New  Accord,  we  are  also
responsible for mapping out the strategy for its adoption in such a way that the financial sector will be
capable  of  serving  efficiently  and  effectively  both  the  modern  and  traditional  sectors  of  the  real
economy. In a dual economy such as Thailand, having the right financial sector structure for financial
institutions to serve the basic function of resource allocation and risk management is a very complex
issue due to the various market imperfections where market mechanism fails - particularly when one is
dealing with financing smaller clients, and clients in the less developed segments of the country.
In the past such issues were swept onto the domain of specialized financial institutions, but today the
financial innovation and sheer creativity have made it possible for private sector solution. Commercial
banks  around  the  world  have  begun  to  find  the  technology  to  tackle  such  challenges  profitably.
However,  there  must  be  rewards  to  financial  innovation  and  risk  management  capability  that
encourage financial institutions to address these segments of the markets profitably since a financial
undertaking  which  looses  money  over  time  is  not  sustainable.  The  adoption  of  the  New  Accord,
therefore, must ensure that the financial need of the dual economy is served.
Secondly, while the Bank of Thailand can help foster the infrastructure for risk management, we must
avoid  the  problem  of  taking  away  the  incentive  for,  and  accountability  of,  the  private  institutions  to
manage  their  own  internal  database  that  could  be  used  for  their  own  models  in  the  long  run  or  to
manage their own risks. If a regulator oversteps the bound, there may be risk of moral hazard. Much
difficulty will go into walking the thin line in overseeing safety of a system and to avoid "approving" the
risk model or risk management system. I hope that this seminar will shed light on the experience in
other countries.
These challenges are complex and difficult in nature, but we must tackle them successfully to ensure
that the Thai financial institutions are strong members of the global financial community.
The market risk seminar today is a strong indication of this intention to meet the challenges. Back in
1996, the Bank of Thailand had already embarked on the study and preparation for the adoption of the
'96 Accord on Market Risk. However, the implementation had to be postponed with the onset of the
crisis. The seminar today represents an effort to catch up with the international standards. With the
implementation of the '96 Accord on Market Risk, we would be one step closer to being able to adopt
the New Accord in the future.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to take this opportunity to share with you the Bank of Thailand's stance on how we would
like to see the industry go forward.
It is our intention to actively promote the development of the strong competency and practice for risk
management within the Thai financial institutions. However, we will not expect nor require the financial
institutions  to  develop  risk  management  systems  that  are  more  complex  and  inappropriate  for  their
respective  needs.  At  the  same  time,  the  turbulence  ahead  cannot  be  underestimated.  The  Thai
financial system and the real economy should be prepared to face increasing risks, and we have a
duty to prevent the history of 1997 from repeating itself.
Since capacity building for risk management is a long-term process, therefore I must insist that the
Thai financial industry step up its already tremendous effort even more, today and in the future.
2
BIS Review 87/2001
Our goal is to adopt the '96 Accord on Market Risk. Timing of its implementation has to be appropriate,
however I would look to implementing risk assessment process in 2002, and to require capital charge
by a later date, tentatively 2003. Given the major challenge ahead, I feel we are very fortunate to have
with us today some of the world's leading experts on these issues. Experts are abound in this room,
and I hope you foster good network and contact with all these world class players, some are on the
podium, and some are sitting among the audience.
Ladies and gentlemen,
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  declare  the  opening  of  the  "  Seminar  on  Market  Risk  Management
Techniques for the BIS Capital Regime" and I wish you every success in your endeavor to meet these
challenges.
Thank you.
BIS Review 87/2001
3
