 Jaime Caruana: Asset price bubbles - implications for monetary, regulatory 
and international policies 
Speech  by  Mr  Jaime  Caruana,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Chicago, Chicago, 24 April 2002. 
 One of the central topics of debate among economists has traditionally been the reasons for economic 
cycles, the factors that may amplify or smooth them, whether the authorities should aim to iron them 
out and, if so, how this can be done. More recently, the role of the financial sector in the dynamics of 
economic cycles has emerged as a key question in this debate. 
I would like to focus today on some problems posed to regulators and policy-makers by asset price 
bubbles and the credit cycle, and to share with you some thoughts on a regulatory device we have 
recently  introduced  in  Spain  to  deal  with  some  of  these  problems:  the  so-called  forward-looking 
provisioning, also referred to as the dynamic or statistical provision. 
The pro-cyclical behaviour of the banking sector, which is now generally accepted in the literature, is 
receiving increasing attention by academics, policymakers and market participants. There is a growing 
feeling that the financial sector contributes to the swings in real activity and may even intensify and 
accelerate them. Feedback effects between credit growth  and rises in asset  prices are increasingly 
evident, although not yet well understood. Transmission channels from the financial sector to the real 
sector are becoming more and more flexible, rapid and complex. This is particularly clear for industrial 
countries, whose financial markets are more sophisticated, but it is also affecting emerging markets, 
as a logical consequence of their rapid integration into global financial markets. 
I will focus on these issues in the first part of my speech, in particular on whether the recent behaviour 
of financial markets is exacerbating the volatility and cyclicality of the real economy. Insofar as this is 
the case, the next question we regulators should ask ourselves is whether this might be a result of the 
increasing  weight  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  economy  or  spontaneous  financial  market 
developments, such as new risk management techniques by market participants and/or a by-product 
of prudential regulations which might unintendedly amplify financial cycles. 
This debate has gained momentum recently in the context of the discussions for a new Basel Capital 
Accord. One of the issues identified in the discussions was precisely to what extent there are factors in 
the old or new regulations favouring excessive pro-cyclicality. But we should not overemphasise this 
point. It is true that a certain degree of cyclicality in risk management techniques and regulations is not 
only  unavoidable  but  also  sensible.  We  regulators  ask  banks  to  be  more  risk-sensitive  and 
risk-sensitive usually means pro-cyclical behaviour. 
The second part of my address will deal with the forward-looking provisioning system recently adopted 
in  Spain.  The  merit  of  this  regulation  is  that  it  introduces  incentives  for  better  risk  management  by 
banks, while at the same time attenuating the cyclicality of the financial sector and, thereby, swings in 
the real economy. 
In  my  concluding  remarks  I  will  try  to  summarise  the  main  lessons  we  have  learned  in  discussing, 
designing and implementing the new system, with an emphasis on the broader economic view rather 
than  on the purely supervisory  one. Let me bring forward my main conclusion: there are regulatory 
mechanisms, like dynamic provisioning, that provide  incentives for sound risk management and are 
anti-cyclical by nature and can therefore moderate cyclical swings. 
 Recent experience in a number of countries shows that credit expansion and asset price increases 
- and bubbles - are mutually reinforcing processes (see Graph 1). Asset prices may start to rise in 
an economy because new investment opportunities appear or simply because of overly lax financial 
conditions.  When  asset  prices  rise  so  does  the  value  of  collateral,  which  makes  financing  easier, 
increasing the demand for assets. That in turn pushes asset prices upward. In the downturn, as the 
value of collateral drops, financing possibilities decline, as does thus credit growth, a process often 
reinforced by financial institutions pursuing much more cautious credit policies as they are incurring 
losses or making smaller profits in this phase of the cycle. Tighter credit policies reinforce recessionary 
forces and provoke additional reductions in asset prices. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 1
  This sequence affects different categories of assets (commercial property, residential property, equity), 
whose  impact  on  the  real  economy  and  transmission  channels  differ.  Commercial  property  seems 
particularly linked to the business cycle, while residential property has a larger impact on consumption. 
Equity  prices  are  intertwined  with  business  profits  and  investment  but  are  also  related  to  spending 
through wealth effects, depending on the role equity plays in the determination of financial wealth. 
This interaction between credit cycles and asset price bubbles poses a number of challenges for the 
authorities and regulators, both in the monetary policy and financial stability domains. In the upswing, 
inflationary  pressures  related  to  excessive  credit  growth  are  compounded  by  financial  imbalances 
resulting from unwarranted optimism on the part of corporations and households and excessive risk-
taking on the  part of financial institutions. In the downturn, recessionary and deflationary forces are 
aggravated by credit contraction as a result of excessive risk aversion by lenders. 
The possible explanatory factors of this potential amplification of the cycle in the financial sector 
are many-faceted  and  complex.  First,  heightened  competition  in  the  banking  sector  and  in  financial 
markets  leads  in  an  upturn  to  riskier  strategies  that  are  only  corrected  when  the  rise  in  bad  debts 
becomes  evident  in  the  downturn.  Second,  there  seems  to  be  a  tendency  for  economic  agents  to 
overreact  to  changes  in  their  environment,  leading  to  over-optimism  in  times  of  plenty  and 
over-pessimism  in  bad  times.  Third,  herding  usually  reinforces  existing  trends  and  causes 
overshooting.  Fourth,  the  use  of  common  assessment  and  risk  management  tools  by  market 
participants, and finally an excessive and shortsighted focus on “shareholder value” may also amplify 
swings.  Prudential  regulations  may  also  occasionally  have  proven  conducive  to  an  excessive 
emphasis on the short term when assessing risks. 
What  can  the  authorities  do  to  counter  these  tendencies?  Debate  among  academics, 
policymakers and market participants has been intense in recent years, and is far from settled. This is 
an area particularly open to discussion, where new ideas and new evidence are forthcoming. Indeed, 
the way monetary stability and financial stability interact with each other seems a particularly complex 
topic, and the impact of specific measures on both fields is uncertain. 
As far as monetary policy is concerned, the debate on whether it should react to asset prices has 
been one of the most interesting of recent years. Insofar as asset prices contain useful information that 
helps  predict  future  price  -and  output-  developments,  they  should  clearly  be  included  in  the  set  of 
indicators the central bank uses for decision-making. This is not, however, as easy as it may sound. 
First,  because  empirical  evidence  on  the  usefulness  of  asset  prices  in  predicting  future  price  and 
output  developments  is  not  conclusive.  And  second,  because  the  integration  of  asset  prices  in 
macroeconomic models poses a series of practical difficulties. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2002
 Going one step further, a related question is whether monetary policy should react directly to asset 
prices, over and above the impact of the latter on inflationary prospects. The argument would be that 
deflating  an  asset  price  bubble  at  an  early  stage  contributes  “per  se”  to  long-term  financial  and 
monetary  stability.  Against  this  view,  I  tend  to  share  the  position  of  those  arguing  that  asset  price 
bubbles  are  very  difficult  to  identify  in  practice  and,  even  assuming  that  they  were  correctly 
recognised,  there  is  a  lot  of  uncertainty  as  to  how  asset  markets  would  react  to  policy  changes. 
Furthermore, this strategy may prove difficult to communicate to the public. 
As concerns financial policy, the regulators’ task of ensuring the long-term soundness of the financial 
system entails creating the right incentives for market participants not reacting in excess in a given 
cyclical position and avoiding excessive misalignments. To this end it is essential, first, to encourage 
better knowledge of the risks assumed, a long-term orientation to analyses and, consequently, more 
prudent  management  within  financial  institutions.  Second,  a  greater  heterogeneity  among  financial 
market players to avoid mimetic behaviour seems desirable, although this is something the markets 
would normally develop by themselves. Third, greater transparency and disclosure by the authorities 
and  private  institutions  would  help  market  participants  to  focus  on  fundamentals.  Fourth,  a  better 
understanding and evaluation of liquidity patterns in financial markets is called for, on the part of both 
market participants and supervisors. Finally, the regulatory authorities should obviously not introduce 
rules promoting short-term strategies. 
  
Let me focus now on the relationship between bank credit, loan losses and provisions for loan 
losses. There is ample international evidence on the cyclical pattern of credit, which is very strongly 
correlated to GDP growth, as shown in Graph 2 for the case of Spain (with an elasticity higher than 
one, meaning that when real product grows, credit tends to grow more, and when real product falls, 
credit likewise tends to fall even more). Demand and supply effects are difficult to disentangle in credit 
cyclical dynamics. On the one hand, more economic activity tends to cause more credit demand. At 
the same time, credit rationing tends to diminish when the economy is booming and tightens when the 
economy  is  in  recession.  Both  demand  and  supply  seem  to  account  therefore  for  credit  cyclical 
swings. 
Competition is a key factor in explaining credit supply  dynamics. Strong competitive  pressures may 
exacerbate  the  trend  towards  looser  credit  conditions  in  the  upturn,  because  the  fight  for  a  market 
share coincides with the observation of low non-performing loans, leading towards an over-optimistic 
perception of low risk. 
The probability of losses exists from the moment the loan is granted, but it will only become apparent 
ex-post, with the emergence of default problems. Most credit risk mistakes are actually made during 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 3
 the expansionary phase, when optimism is prevailing, although only in the downturn will they become 
evident. 
Empirical estimates show that there is a strong correlation between credit growth and bad loans, with 
an average lag of around three years (see upper part of Graph 3). This means that a credit expansion 
process  is  likely  to  lead  to  some  credit  quality  problems  in  roughly  that  time  horizon.  The  average 
duration of the economic cycle (from boom to bust) is similar. This implies that if banks only look at 
contemporary bad loans to determine their credit risk policies, they will restrain credit and increase risk 
premia in the  downturn. The higher cost of funding for bank-dependent borrowers will feed back to 
activity, reinforcing recessionary forces. 
 
I turn now to provisions. In Spain, until year 2000, loan loss provisions were strongly pro-cyclical (as 
in many other countries), because they were largely linked to the volume of contemporaneous problem 
assets.  This  static  provisions  are  backward-looking,  they  are  based  on  past  events.  Only  are 
accounted for loan by loan when borrowers fail to repay or in some cases when the situation of the 
borrower deteriorates significantly. 
As  a  consequence,  the  ratio  of  provisions  to  total  loans  fell  therefore  during  periods  of  economic 
growth and tended to rise considerably during downturns (see lower part of Graph 3). As a result of 
this, the latent risk of loan portfolios was not properly recognised in the profit and loss account under 
the old system. In periods of economic expansion the fall in doubtful loans went hand in hand with the 
decrease in provisions, which in turn allowed bank managers to improve bottom-line profits. 
However, one can argue that there is something wrong in the level of profits shown if the latent credit 
risk in the loan portfolio is not properly taken into account. Intrinsically every loan has an expected (or 
potential)  loss  that  should  be  recognised  as  a  cost  by  means  of  an  early  provision.  Otherwise,  the 
picture  of  the  true  profitability  and  solvency  of  the  bank  over  time  could  be  distorted.  More 
dangerously, the overvaluation of profits might lead to an increase in dividends that could undermine 
the  solvency  of  the  bank.  Therefore,  the  acknowledgement  of  latent  losses  is  a  prudent  valuation 
principle (similar to the mathematical reserves set aside by insurance companies) that contributes to 
correcting  the  cyclical  bias  that  currently  exists  in  the  profit  and  loss  account.  The  management  of 
credit risk in the banking sector has perhaps something to learn from insurance practices. 
Theoretical  papers  on  bank  credit  risk  management  also  go  in  the  same  direction,  stressing  the 
importance of proper pricing (i.e. the interest rate charged should cover expected losses as well as the 
cost of holding capital for unexpected losses). Estimating expected losses when the bank assesses 
the borrower is the first step for sound risk management. 
Proper risk management is obviously a primary task of bank managers and shareholders. But we, as 
bank supervisors, should evaluate the effectiveness of a bank’s policies and practices for assessment 
of  loan  quality  and  provisioning  practices.  The  ability  of  a  bank’s  loan  review  system  to  identify, 
classify,  monitor  and  address  loans  with  credit  quality  problems  in  a  timely  manner  should  be 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2002
 assessed by the supervisor on a regular basis as part of its risk-based approach. A misclassification of 
assets (and the corresponding under-provisioning) is always present in banks heading for profitability 
and solvency difficulties. 
Sound credit risk management practices at the banks’ level, including acknowledgement of expected 
losses  in  due  time,  collide  to  a  certain  extent  with  the  current  accounting  framework.  The  problem 
stems  from  the  fact  that  this  framework  does  not  support  the  notion  of  provisions  on  the  basis  of 
expected  losses,  with  the  result  that  the  recognition  of  losses  is  frequently  delayed.  Some  of  the 
answers  given  by  accounting-rules  setters  to  this  problem  (i.e.  full  fair  value  accounting)  may  have 
other important drawbacks. I will touch upon this later. 
Let me briefly summarise the content of our dynamic provision. In December 1999, the Bank of 
Spain introduced a new solvency provision, the so-called statistical or dynamic provision, focusing on 
the statistical risk embedded in the unimpaired portfolio. It started to apply in July 2000. 
The  main  idea  behind  this  provision  is  to  try  to  capture,  together  with  the  other  provisions  of  the 
Spanish  system,  expected  losses.  From  the  very  moment  that  a  loan  is  granted,  and  before  any 
impairment on this specific loan appears, there is a positive default probability (no matter how low it 
might be) following a statistical distribution  with an expected  loss. The expected loss is known  in  a 
statistical sense but not yet identified in a specific loan operation or borrower. As the risk appears at 
the  beginning  of  the  operation,  so  does  the  statistical  provision  requirement.  With  this  system, 
provisions  run  in  parallel  to  revenues  and  are  therefore  distributed  through  the  cycle  allowing  for  a 
better mapping between income and costs in the profit and loss account. 
The statistical provision that we have established works in practice as an addition to the “old” existing 
provisions:  when  “old”  provisions  are  well  below  expected  losses,  the  “new”  dynamic  provision  is 
added.  In  good  years  the  net  “specific”  provisions  are  very  low  (or  even  negative,  if  there  are 
substantial recoveries), so the new provision accumulates. But in bad years the “specific” provisions 
increase sharply, eventually exceeding the gross burden of the statistical provision. The net result is 
that  with  this  system  provisions  are  distributed  over  the  cycle,  providing  a  better  recognition  of 
expected losses. 
More  specifically,  the  amount  of  the  statistical  provision  is  the  difference  between  the  measure  of 
latent  risk  (i.e.  expected  losses)  and  the  specific  provision  (that  covering  impaired  assets).  In  good 
times the specific provision is low and the statistical provision is positive. However, in a slowdown, as 
the  impaired  assets  rise,  the  specific  provision  requirements  increase  and  the  statistical  provision 
becomes negative. This means that the statistical fund (accumulated in previous years) starts being 
used, its proceeds (the difference between the latent risk and the specific provision) being credited to 
the profit and loss account. Therefore, thanks to the mechanism of the statistical provision, the burden 
of  credit  risk  on  the  profits  of  banking  institutions  is  better  spread  over  the  cycle  and  more  in 
accordance with the evolution of expected losses. 
The  new  scheme  offers  banks  two  options.  First,  to  use  their  own  internal  measurements  of  the 
statistical credit risk and second, to use a standard  method. The Bank of Spain expects that in the 
future an increasing number of institutions will be able to show robust computations, in the framework 
of  an  integrated  credit  risk  management  system.  However,  probably  in  the  next  year  or  two,  most 
banks will use the standard method. 
In the standard system the supervisor sets the parameters. The portfolio is distributed in six blocks, 
according to the relative riskiness of the different assets, or off-balance sheet items with credit risk. A 
vector of coefficients (ranging from 0 to 1.5%) is applied to the exposures contained in the six blocks. 
The resulting figure is the estimated expected loss for the bank portfolio. 
The computation produces an aggregate annual gross burden (i.e. the expected loss) that, in relative 
terms, should equal the average annual net insolvency burden borne by the Spanish banking system 
in the last fourteen years. This time span covers more than a full economic cycle. 
You might note that the internal approach to calculate the expected losses or the latent risk squares 
perfectly with Basel II developments. 
The new provision has started with a vector of coefficients that will result in a burden lower than this 
average.  This  takes  account  of  the  improvements  in  risk  management  since  the  last  cyclical  peak 
(93/94),  and  facilitates  acceptability  of  the  scheme  among  institutions.  Probably  the  scheme  will  be 
adjusted in the coming years, on the basis of the experience gained with its application. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 5
 A limit of three times the annual gross burden has been put on the accumulated statistical provision, to 
avoid  an  unnecessary  or  excessive  accumulation  of  funds  in  the  event  of  a  prolonged  cyclical 
bonanza. 
At present, the impairment of assets and other credit risk is at an historical low in Spain; and it will 
remain so in the foreseeable future, due to good economic conditions. The new provision should thus 
accumulate a significant amount of funds, with a reasonable, acceptable impact on the bottom line of 
the profit and loss account. Those funds should allow extra solvency losses to be covered when the 
tide turns. 
Technically, the new provision is considered a value adjustment. In the published accounts it will be 
deducted from the book value of the credit items that produce it. It is not considered a reserve to be 
integrated  in  the  regulatory  own  funds.  The  annual  accounts  shall  report  the  various  solvency 
provisions (or value adjustments), and their method of computation. 
The statistical provision is not a tax-deductible expense although banks can use an asset account of 
anticipated taxes (i.e. the  impact on the profit and loss is neutral  but still  negative in  terms of cash 
flows). 
Finally,  given  the  considerable  internationalisation  of  our  banking  system  in  recent  years,  it  is 
important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  statistical  provision  is  required  on  an  individual  level  of  all  the 
members of a consolidated banking group. It is not possible to counter a positive statistical provision 
requirement in one bank with a negative one in another bank of the same group. This individual bank 
approach reinforces the statistical provision requirement and squares well with the fact that expected 
losses arise at an individual bank portfolio level. 
By now, you are probably wondering about the real impact of the statistical provision in the Spanish 
banking  system.  As  far  as  the  profit  and  loss  account  is  concerned,  the  statistical  provision  for 
depository institutions represents around 12% of 2001 total operating margin. At the end of 2000 the 
statistical fund reached 15% of its maximum amount (remember there is a cap of three times the latent 
risk) and at the end of 2001 it stands at 27%. At current rates, the statistical fund will reach its peak at 
the end of 2004. 
As far as the cyclical behaviour of banks, it is too soon to say, but we tend to think that the anti-cyclical 
nature of the statistical provision is influencing bank behaviour. 
I must confess that gaining acceptance among banking institutions for our new provisioning scheme 
was not easy. Banks were reluctant to see their bottom line profits indented, arguing that the Spanish 
provisioning  system  was  already  demanding  (tight  asset  classification  rules  plus  on-site  monitoring 
and  enforcement  by  Bank  of  Spain  inspectors,  not  to  mention  high  solvency  ratios  by  international 
standards). 
Apart from banks’ initial, and understandable, criticism, some other voices have been raised, although 
not  very  loudly,  against  dynamic  provisioning.  Some  of  them  can  be  readily  refuted.  Others  merit 
careful discussion because the alternatives they propose may affect financial stability. 
The most obvious criticism is that a system of dynamic provisioning smoothes bank profits. It is true 
that the statistical provision tends to smooth profits over the course of the cycle. But it is no less true 
that the current ex post provisioning system (i.e. setting aside a specific provision when the impaired 
asset  appears)  artificially  increases  the  volatility  of  banks’  profits.  And  what  is  more  important,  this 
increased volatility in the latter case has less to do with economic fundamentals (I. e. expected losses) 
than  with  accounting  rules.  If  expected  losses  appear  from  the  beginning  of  the  operation,  banks 
should start to provision them at the very outset. This means an increase in provisions and a decline in 
bank profits during expansionary periods, just when credit risk expands the most. When the downturn 
arrived and expected losses turn into real losses, the impact of provisions on profits would be lower 
since a significant amount of the expected loss had been previously acknowledged. 
To  the  extent  that  the  extra  volatility  of  bank  profits  is  the  result  of  an  insufficient  recognition  of 
expected losses, dynamic provisioning only restores part of the distortion created. 
From a prudential point of view, it is clear that dynamic provisioning limits dangerous capital erosions 
in  times  of  plenty,  requiring  banks  to  provision  expected  losses  and  avoid  paying  out  dividends 
(remember  the  insurance  case).  Some  observers  mention  that  there  is  no  need  for  ex  ante 
provisioning  since  future  margin  income  is  enough  to  cover  expected  losses.  For  supervisors, 
however, to rely on future margin income might be an overly adventurous stance. 
6 
 BIS Review 35/2002
 Let me expand more on this. First of all, experience has painfully shown us that the pricing of a loan is 
not always properly adjusted to the risk involved in the operation (even taking into account fees and 
future  customer  relationships).  I  have  already  talked  about  strong  competition  for  market  share  or 
over-optimism. Secondly,  even if the risk is properly priced, the proceeds from a high margin could 
have  been  paid  out  to  shareholders  by  the  time  the  impairment  appears.  Moreover,  dynamic 
provisioning  allows  for  a  timely  recognition  of  both  the  income  and  costs  stemming from  bank  loan 
portfolios. 
An alternative to the current accounting framework is being promoted at some international fora. I am 
talking about full fair value accounting (FFVA), I would like underline the word “full”. It is quite clear to 
me  that  FFVA  has,  for  the  time  being,  insurmountable  drawbacks  for  commercial  banks  both  of 
theoretical and practical nature. I would place a big question mark over FFVA feasibility. 
Dynamic  provisioning  is  a  reasonable  approach  to  the  fair  value  of  a  loan  without  the  numerous 
drawbacks  of  FFVA.  The  statistical  provision  does  not  increase  volatility  of  profits  and  facilitates 
prudent risk management. 
To conclude, let me emphasise that this provisioning regulation in Spain was introduced for prudential 
reasons.  It  has  three  main  advantages:  First,  it  provides  banks  with  incentives  for  better  risk 
management  (i.e.  risk  appraisal,  pricing,  internal  models,  etc.).  Second,  it  reconciles  good  risk 
management  with  sound  and  prudent  accounting  practices.  And  finally,  it  is  anti-cyclical  in  nature 
(therefore  mitigating  the  tendency  to  reinforce  cycles).  Overall,  these  three  advantages  can  be 
summarised as one: they reinforce the soundness of each single banking institution and of the whole 
system. 
My  answer  to  the  first  question  posed  at  the  beginning  of  this  speech  is  that,  although  risk 
management  techniques  may  induce  risk-sensitive  behaviour,  and  risk-sensitive  usually  means 
pro-cyclical, that is not necessarily the case when some good regulatory practices, such as dynamic 
provisioning, are adopted, contributing to taming economic and financial cycles. 
Let me finish by adding a word of caution. Regulatory devices per se do not suffice to attain a safe and 
sound banking system. A proper risk management culture deeply ingrained in banks’ practices is also 
a  necessary  condition  to  reach  that  goal.  Consequently,  banks  and  regulators  should  work  hand  in 
hand to improve financial stability. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 7
