 Jarle Bergo: Monetary policy and the outlook for the Norwegian economy 
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank, at the Capital markets seminar, hosted 
by Terra-Gruppen AS, Gardermoen, 31 January 2002. 
The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments  presented  at  the  press  conference  following  the  monetary  policy 
meeting of Norges Bank’s Executive Board on 23 January 2002. 
 On  29  March  2001,  the  Stoltenberg  Government  issued  new  guidelines  for  monetary  policy  and 
presented guidelines for fiscal policy. The guidelines for fiscal policy imply that the central government 
budget deficit shall be equivalent over time to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum 
Fund. The changes in the guidelines for economic policy received broad support in the Storting. The 
budget for 2002 adhered to these guidelines. 
Monetary  policy  is  to  be  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  inflation  target  was  set  at 
2½ per  cent.  In  general,  direct  effects  on  consumer  prices  resulting  from  changes  in  interest  rates, 
taxes, excise duties and extraordinary temporary disturbances shall not be taken into account. 
Low and stable inflation is the best contribution monetary policy can make to growth and prosperity. In 
the  long  term,  monetary  policy  has  little  effect  on  employment  and  output.  Inflation  is  a  monetary 
phenomenon.  In  the  last  hundred  years,  we  have  had  three  extended  periods  of  inflation  -  during 
World  War  I,  during  World  War  II  and  after  the  oil  price  shocks  in  the  1970s  and  1980s,  which 
triggered  wage-price  spirals.  None  of  these  periods  will  be  remembered  as  being  particularly 
successful economically. 
Historically, economic growth has been strong in periods of relatively low inflation and weak in periods 
of especially high inflation. Inflation poisons the economy. 
The interest rate affects inflation through a number of channels. An increase in the interest rate will 
normally  contribute  to  reducing  inflation  by  curbing  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  by 
strengthening  the  krone  exchange  rate  against  other  currencies.  An  interest  rate  reduction  has  the 
opposite effect. The strength of these effects will depend on the situation prevailing at the time of the 
interest rate change and how the change is perceived. The effects may also vary over time. Monetary 
policy affects the economy with a lag. Analyses carried out by Norges Bank indicate that a substantial 
share of the effects on inflation occurs within two years. Two years is thus a reasonable time horizon 
for achieving the inflation target of 2½ per cent. If evidence suggests that inflation will be higher than 
2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation 
will be lower than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be reduced. 
Inflation in Norway is determined by both domestic and international inflationary impulses. Domestic 
inflationary impulses are influenced by the state of the Norwegian economy. International inflationary 
impulses are generated via prices for imported consumer and intermediate goods. These inflationary 
impulses will be influenced by developments in international commodity and consumer prices and by 
the exchange rate. 
The  inflation  target  provides  the  framework  for  monetary  policy.  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board 
makes  decisions  about  changes  in  the  interest  rate.  The  members  of  the  Executive  Board  are 
collectively responsible for the Bank’s decisions.  
The  Executive  Board  meets  every  three  weeks.  At  every  second  meeting,  the  Executive  Board 
discusses monetary policy in depth. Decisions regarding changes in the interest rate will normally be 
made at these monetary policy meetings. Three times a year, Norges Bank prepares inflation reports 
in which it presents its projections for inflation and economic developments in the years ahead. The 
Executive  Board  discusses  the  economic  outlook  at  a  separate  meeting  three  weeks  before  the 
Inflation  Report  is  presented.  On  the  basis  of  preliminary  projections  for  the  report,  the  Executive 
Board  assesses  the  outlook  for  inflation  two  years  ahead  and  the  uncertainty  surrounding  these 
projections.  The  following  day,  the  Executive  Board  summarises  its  discussions  and  assesses  the 
consequences for monetary policy for the next four months. This assessment constitutes an important 
internal reference when the Executive Board later makes a decision regarding the interest rate. It will 
also provide the basis for our external communication through speeches and the media.  
BIS Review 8/2002 
 1
 The risk of a deep recession in the world economy appears to have diminished. There is still, however, 
considerable uncertainty surrounding both the timing and the strength of the recovery.  
Last year industrial output declined markedly in all major regions of the world economy. In the US it 
appears that the decline may be coming to a halt. Developments in Japan are still highly uncertain. In 
the US, confidence indicators have recently shown some signs of improvement. The decline recorded 
following the terrorist acttacks on 11 September last year has been partly reversed. Nor does it appear 
that households in the euro area have become more pessimistic in the last few months. However, the 
indicators suggest that they still consider the economic situation to be fairly negative.  
Various  institutions’  growth  forecasts  for  2002  were  lowered  substantially  through  2001.  Due  to 
sluggish  economic  developments,  many  central  banks  reduced  their  key  rates  last  year,  in  some 
cases quite appreciably. With the exception of Japan, no significant further downward adjustments of 
growth forecasts have been made in the last few months. 
Norges Bank expects international consumer price inflation to be low both this year and in 2003. This 
will contribute to a low, and in some cases negative, rise in prices for imported consumer goods. 
During  the  autumn  of  2001,  we  saw  signs  that  the  international  turnaround  was  also  being  felt  in 
Norway. Some export industries, travel and tourism were most vulnerable. The oil price fell sharply. 
Since last autumn the oil price has hovered around USD 18-20 per barrel. The price of oil futures has 
remained stable  at around USD  20  per barrel. This level  will still provide solid  profitability for many 
investment projects in the petroleum sector and continued large surpluses on the current account and 
in government finances. 
The krone exchange rate, measured against our most important trading partners, has appreciated by 
about 7 per cent since the spring of 2000. However, the krone exchange rate is about 2.5 per cent 
weaker than in 1990 and at the same level as in the mid-1990s.  
Traditional merchandise exports remained high in the first half of 2001 but exhibited a weaker trend in 
the  second  half  of  the  year.  Foreign  trade  figures  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  2001  indicate  that  the 
decline in export volumes may have come to a halt, although export prices are still falling. 
Consumption indicators suggest strong growth in private consumption. 
Credit growth has slowed somewhat due to reduced borrowing by enterprises. Household borrowing, 
on the other hand, has increased further. Developments in debt may also influence financial stability. 
Although  borrowing  by  enterprises  appears  to  be  declining,  their  debt  burden  remains  high.  This 
reduces enterprises’ ability to cope with downturns. The household debt burden is increasing, but the 
level is low. These developments are due in particular to the housing market, with high turnover and 
high price rises. Experience shows that private sector debt tends to increase at a particularly fast pace 
during upturns. Higher asset prices may be a driving force. As a result of keen competition for loan 
customers, excessive optimism and problems in distinguishing between sound and unsound projects, 
risk may be underestimated during upturns. 
The  labour  market  has  few  available  resources.  Registered  unemployment  has  remained  steady  at 
about  2½  per  cent  since  the  beginning  of  1998.  Long-term  unemployment  is  low,  and  spells  of 
unemployment are generally brief. Unemployment has edged up in the last few months, primarily in 
Eastern Norway, while employment growth has been limited. In the aftermath of the terrorist attack on 
11 September last year, the aviation and travel industries reported job cuts. Cutbacks have also been 
announced in the process industry.  
The guidelines for fiscal policy will stimulate activity because petroleum revenues will now be phased 
into the economy. According to the Government’s estimate, the guidelines imply an average increase 
in the use of petroleum revenues in the central government budget of about 0.4 per cent of mainland 
GDP each year from 2002 to 2010. The government budget that was approved for 2002 implies that 
the use of petroleum revenues will increase by 0.6 per cent of mainland GDP from 2001 to 2002. 
The  guidelines  for  fiscal  policy  imply  a  substantial  stimulus  each  year.  The  expansionary  impetus 
varies  considerably,  and  is  greatest  in  the  first  few  years.  However,  an  unpredictable  and  more 
expansionary  fiscal  policy  than  that  implied  by  the  guidelines  would  have  resulted  in  greater 
uncertainty.  The  guidelines  provide  a  stable  framework  that  contributes  to  reducing  some  of  the 
uncertainty. 
Over time, the size of the internationally exposed sector will be affected by the portion of petroleum 
revenues that is absorbed by the Norwegian economy but will be unaffected by monetary policy. Any 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2002
 appreciation of the krone may, nevertheless, affect the speed at which changes occur in the business 
sector. To maintain a balance in the Norwegian economy, the phasing in of petroleum revenues must 
be countered by a monetary policy stance that is tighter than it would otherwise have been. This may 
be accomplished through a higher interest rate, an appreciation of the krone, or both.  
On  balance,  we  expect  moderate  growth  in  the  mainland  economy  in  the  next  two  years.  The 
projections  for  GDP  growth  that  were  presented  in  the  October  2001  Inflation  Report  were 
approximately on a par with the growth potential of the economy. Household consumption and public 
spending  are  the  main  forces  underpinning  growth.  Fixed  investment  and  exports  are  restraining 
growth.  Brisk  growth  in  consumption  is  resulting  in  high  demand  for  labour  in  public  and  private 
services. Low international growth and lower petroleum investment are curbing employment growth. A 
tight labour market is generating continued high growth in labour costs. 
An expansionary fiscal policy, growth in private consumption and a continued high rise in labour costs 
contribute to a high rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services. At the same time, we 
expect a  temporary decline in prices for imported consumer goods. This reflects lower  international 
commodity  and  producer  prices,  a  slower  increase  in  global  consumer  prices  and  a  stronger  krone 
exchange  rate.  As  these  effects  wane,  and  if  global  economic  growth  picks  up  in  line  with 
expectations, import price inflation may reach a more normal level. 
If  growth  in  the  global  economy  picks  up  again  as  we  have  assumed,  we  expect  consumer  price 
inflation to be about 2½ per cent in two years. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation may be somewhat 
lower due to the downturn abroad and the decline in prices for imported goods. 
Norges Bank presented its most recent Inflation Report in October 2001. In the light of international 
developments, and other factors, we considered the probability that inflation two years ahead would 
be lower than 2½ per cent to be greater than the probability that it would be higher. This was the basis 
for Norges Bank’s decision to reduce its key rate by 0.5 percentage point to 6.5 per cent in December. 
Norges  Bank’s  assessment  of  the  outlook for  inflation  remained  unchanged  following  the  Executive 
Board’s monetary policy meeting on 23 January this year. 
  BIS Review 8/2002 
 3
     4 
 BIS Review 8/2002
     BIS Review 8/2002 
 5
  6 
    BIS Review 8/2002
     BIS Review 8/2002 
 7
     8 
 BIS Review 8/2002
     BIS Review 8/2002 
 9
     10 
 BIS Review 8/2002
     BIS Review 8/2002 
 11
  12 
 BIS Review 8/2002
