 Willem F Duisenberg: A new future for Europe - welcoming the euro banknotes 
and coins 
Keynote address by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at an awards 
ceremony and press conference held on the eve of the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins, 
Frankfurt, 31 December 2001. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen, children 
Welcome to the final countdown to the euro banknotes and coins. 
Of course, New Year's Eve is traditionally a time to take stock, to look back and to look forward. This 
year, however, we are very much looking forward - in more than one sense - to the introduction of the 
euro banknotes and coins. Over 300 million Europeans will be using them every day from now on, so 
our countdown is leading towards a new era for Europe. 
That is why I am particularly pleased to have with us today young people from all twelve nations of the 
euro  area  -  Austria  Belgium,  Finland,  France,  Germany,  Greece,  Ireland,  Italy,  Luxembourg,  the 
Netherlands, Portugal and Spain. They, in a very real sense, represent the future of Europe itself. 
And that is also why I wish to extend a special welcome to the winners of our “Be a Euro SuperStar” 
competition and their families. All of us here congratulate you. 
By entering the competition you showed an enthusiasm to learn more about the new money. You set 
us an example because you took the initiative to familiarise yourself with our new money. You were 
chosen  from  among  the  more  than  300,000  young  people  who  learned  about  the  seven  new  euro 
banknotes and eight new euro coins in order to participate in the competition. We congratulate them 
and their teachers as well. 
A single currency is a dream which Europeans have had for decades. But why did Europeans have 
that  dream?  And  why  did  Europe  pursue  that  dream  when  no  one  had  ever  attempted  before  to 
replace a dozen currencies simultaneously with a single currency? Perhaps I can best explain that to 
you if I begin by revealing something which you may have trouble believing. 
It is this: I, too, was once a child.  
And the Europe into which I was born was a very different place from the Europe of today. It was part 
of a world suffering from a terrible economic depression. It was a continent whose nations were about 
to learn the terrible lessons of war for a second time in less than half a century. Out of the folly  of 
dictatorship and the errors of protectionism was born a new determination among Europeans to work 
with, instead of against, each other, and to respect each other’s differences and to learn from them. 
In the 20th century, Europe’s nations learned that they could only secure their rightful place in a world 
made  smaller  by  telecommunications  and  modern  transport  by  working  together  and  by  developing 
their economies in a spirit of co-operation. 
So the concept of a European community leading to a single currency goes back quite a way. But, as 
you know, the euro is also a very young currency - much younger than you, the Euro SuperStars, are. 
The euro was launched three years ago. And, in fact, even though you have been paying for things in 
your  national  currencies,  all  market  transactions  have  actually  been  calculated  in  euro  for  the  past 
three years. 
While I pay tribute to the skills you young people demonstrated to learn about the euro and earn the 
right to be here today, I must say that the three-year old euro is quite a precocious child. In those three 
years, the euro has clearly demonstrated it can achieve its main objectives. These include ensuring 
price stability, enhancing market transparency across national borders, and facilitating commerce both 
inside and outside Europe. 
You might even say that it is already achieving what its design symbolises. You know that one side of 
the banknotes depicts the windows of a society open to the world. And the other side of the banknotes 
shows the bridges of a community of people working together with their neighbours, both inside and 
outside Europe. 
BIS Review 1/2002 
 1
 At midnight tonight, we, the 300 million people of the euro area, will all cross a symbolic bridge - like 
those shown on the euro banknotes - and move towards greater openness and co-operation between 
our 12 nations. By using the euro banknotes and coins, we will give a clear signal of the confidence 
and hope we have in tomorrow’s Europe. 
You also have learned about the coins, where one side symbolises the different histories and cultures 
that contribute so much to our strengths. Indeed, because we share the euro with our neighbours in 
Europe, our money will be a true catalyst for integration, and is helping to build a community enriched 
by  our  diversity  of  cultures  and  strengthened  by  our  common  values  of  democracy  and  individual 
opportunity. 
I  firmly  believe  that,  because  of  what  the  euro  has  shown  it  can  achieve,  and  also  because  of  the 
shared values it symbolises, Europe is stronger than it would ever have been without the dream of the 
euro coming true. 
The introduction of euro banknotes and coins is, of course, an unprecedented operation in terms of 
scope and complexity. We, that is,  the entire  Eurosystem, comprising the  ECB and the 12 national 
central banks of the euro area, have worked hard to pave the way for a smooth transition. I am very 
confident  about  it;  everything  has  been  going  according  to  plan,  thanks  to  the  preparation  and 
commitment of the hundreds of thousands of people directly involved in the changeover. The banking 
sector,  public  authorities  and  enterprises,  in  particular  retailers  and  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises,  have  made  tremendous  efforts  to  ensure  that  the  changeover  goes  as  smoothly  as 
possible. Of course, some problems are bound to occur here and there. It could not be otherwise in 
such a vast undertaking. But I am convinced that they will be limited in scale and that we will tackle 
them. 
You may also be asking yourselves if, in the first months of 2002, millions of people will be able to 
cope with completely new banknotes and coins. The answer is  yes. Since we all have to cross the 
same  bridge  together,  the  ECB  and  the  12  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  and  all  the  key 
players in the euro changeover will do everything to ensure that the new money is readily accepted 
and understood. 
Why  is  the  answer  yes?  Because  of  the  communication  efforts  undertaken  by  the  ECB  and  the 
12 national central banks of the euro area in the form of the Euro 2002 Information Campaign as well 
as other campaigns, national and Europe-wide, public and private. Together, these campaigns have 
helped to build up confidence in the new money, and will continue to do so in the months ahead. It’s 
true: people will need to adjust to the new money, however, I am certain that they will soon get used to 
it.  
And we are particularly proud of our 3,000 partner organisations in both the public and private sector 
who  have  multiplied  the  impact  of  our  messages  by  making  extensive  and  creative  use  of  our 
materials in their training and education efforts. We also are pleased with the response to the Euro 
2002  Information  Campaign  and  its  many  communications  tools.  They  include  the  print  and  TV 
adverts, our euro information website, the public information leaflet that has been produced for 200 
million  households,  the  cash-handler  training  material,  the  national  euro  conferences,  and  the 
information kits given to the media in the countdown to the euro this year. We will continue to monitor 
the changeover and will provide you with regular press releases in January. 
While I am on the subject of the media, let me just say a personal word to reporters and editors who 
have covered the euro story. I think that you have done a remarkable job of making people realise that 
they need to learn and to prepare.  
On this very special day for Europe and our new money, I want to conclude with a tribute to others 
who have made this moment possible. It is a tribute to Europe’s leaders over the past decades.  
They are true leaders because they had the foresight to take bold actions that would make Europe a 
place  where  people,  ideas,  and  commerce  would  intermingle.  They  had  the  vision  to  see  that  a 
common currency  would  be an essential  part  of that, and  would represent a formidable  leap  in  the 
European integration process. We are marking, and making, that leap today.  
And  now,  I  would  like  to  present  one  other  “reward”  to  the  young  people  with  us  today. When  you 
entered  our  Euro  SuperStar  competition,  you  had  a  glimpse  of  a  future  world  -  or  at  least,  a  very 
creative idea of one. We thought that you winners deserved to see more of that future. So, I am happy 
to invite you to watch as that world comes alive today, with tomorrow’s currency. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2002
