 Yutaka Yamaguchi: Systemic risk 
Speech  by  Mr  Yutaka  Yamaguchi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  Chairman  of  the 
Committee on the Global Financial System, at the Third Joint Central Bank Research Conference on 
Risk Measurement and Systemic Risk held in Basel, Switzerland, 7 March 2002. 
 Introduction: A brief history of the Systemic Risk Conference 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to join you at the third conference on “Risk Measurement and Systemic Risk”. This 
theme has gained increasing importance since the first conference in 1995. The keen attention paid to 
it  by  the  international  community  is  evident  in  the  fact  that  a  number  of  international  fora  now 
endeavour to spot  potential financial vulnerabilities  which might lead to systemic crisis in the global 
market. Actually, the term “systemic risk” makes me a bit uneasy as it unfortunately has too realistic a 
connotation in my own country. I am looking forward to taking home new insights on this subject, and, 
as  Chair  of  the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  co-hosting  this  conference,  I  would  be 
happy if you could do the same. 
The  aim  of  this  series  of  conferences  is  to  enhance  our  understanding  of  the  mechanism  through 
which a systemic shock is generated and transmitted. Meanwhile, during the six years since the first 
conference, we have witnessed significant changes in the world of finance. As a result, the focus of 
the conferences has changed over the years. If I may generalise at the risk of oversimplification, the 
centre  stage  of  the  first  conference  in  1995  was  occupied  by  VaR  methodology,  which  was  then 
gaining  acceptance  at  leading  financial 
institutions.  Reporters  explored  how  risk  could  be 
quantitatively measured and what would be the real-life meaning of such measures. Well, in real life, 
crisis erupted in Asia  in 1997 triggered  by  events that  were  largely beyond the bounds of standard 
VaR methodology. Naturally, discussions at the second conference in 1998 were much influenced by 
the  Asian  crisis. We  began  to  realise  that  market  microstructure  theory  could  shed  light  on  market 
dynamics in times of stress. Our third conference today carries this theme further, with many papers 
paying attention to what creates stress and how stress is contagious. 
Triangular view of systemic risk 
This  brief  history  of  our  conference  series  suggests  that  with  the  structural  changes  in  financial 
markets, systemic risk has revealed a few faces in actual crisis and therefore the nexus between them 
has  to  be  more  deeply  explored.  Conventional  thinking  or  the  narrowest  coverage  inextricably  tied 
systemic risk to banks. Systemic disturbances that originate in a bank spill over to the banking system, 
which  in  turn  adversely  affects the real  economy. Obviously, this bank-centred  risk propagation still 
holds; in fact, much of the existing safety net is aimed at preventing a chain reaction within the banking 
system. However, it has now become evident that financial markets play a significant role as channels 
propagating the disturbances involving the banking system as well as the real economy.  
The importance of the market and its dynamics is underscored by our recent experiences in Japan, 
the Asian region, Russia and the LTCM case. The novelty of the Russian and the LTCM crises lies in 
the fact that the largest capital market in the world “seized up” without entailing any banking crisis. It 
was  often  the  case  that  the  sudden  deterioration  in  asset  prices  brought  about  turbulence  in  the 
financial system. To illustrate, the successive failures of major Japanese financial institutions in 1997 
and  1998  were  not  directly  triggered  by  a  major  default.  Instead,  their  undoing  was  a  rapid  loss  of 
confidence in the market. Typically, as the soundness of a bank was questioned in the market, prices 
of  its  stocks  and  credit  ratings  started  to  fall.  The  bank  would  then  begin  to  experience  funding 
difficulties, as its access to markets became problematic. In such a situation, the troubled bank had to 
resort to fire sales of assets, which in turn damaged its balance sheet and drove its stocks down even 
further.  In  this  self-fulfilling  spiral,  several  banks  went  out  of  business.  At  the  same  time,  the 
deterioration  in  asset  prices  led  to  further  difficulties  in  channelling  funds  to  the  corporate  sector,  a 
familiar credit crunch process. 
A credit crunch is usually attributed to the dysfunction of the banking system – a correct observation of 
one aspect of such a phenomenon. A deeper look suggests that the process is more complex. We 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 1
 have witnessed that the borrowers blame the banks for tightening credit standards, while the lenders 
complain of the lack of credit demand. No doubt, an important feedback mechanism also runs from the 
real  economy  to  the  financial  system  via  corporate  balance  sheets,  asset  prices,  banks’  capital 
position, among others. 
I am not attempting to draw definitive lessons from a specific episode of past crisis, let alone from the 
unsolved  problems  of  the  Japanese  economy.  However,  the  experiences  of  the  last  several  years 
show that disturbances are multifaceted. Systemic problems develop as market risk, liquidity risk and 
credit risk factors interact  with  each  other  in  a complex manner. This means that any  evaluation  of 
systemic risk based on one isolated factor could only provide a fragmentary view. What is called for is 
the  “triangular  view  of  systemic  risk”  –  comprehensive  analysis  covering  the  interrelations  or  nexus 
between the banking system, financial markets and the real  economy. It is against this background 
that I think we need to devote at least as much attention to market microstructure as to sophisticated 
analyses  of  “fat  tails”  in  loss  distribution.  A  focus  on  market  microstructure  could  shed  light  on  the 
relations  between  various  risk  factors.  Particularly  important  is  to  investigate  how  individual  market 
participants  under  different  budget  and  information  constraints  would  behave  rationally  in  stressful 
events, and how such behaviour would affect the formation of asset prices. 
Strategic interactions 
Recent episodes of financial crises seem to defy explanation on the basis of conventional economic 
theory,  which  regards  macroeconomic  phenomena  as  a  mere  aggregate  of  independent  decision-
making  by  economic  agents.  As  a  reflection  of  such  limitations  of  conventional  theory,  there  is  a 
growing  body  of  work  attempting  to  interpret  financial  crises  from  the  viewpoint  of  “strategic 
interactions” among market participants. I would like to devote a few minutes to outlining why.  
Strategic interaction can be defined as a  process in  which  each market participant explores his/her 
optimal strategy by conjecturing the response of other participants. Some of the papers presented at 
this conference follow this path. Herding behaviour is one example. As you know, a large number of 
small investors tend to follow a small number of large investors. Once stressful events happen, such 
behaviour is likely to lead to one-sided market sentiment, which accelerates and propagates the stress 
within  and  across  the  markets.  From  the  viewpoint  of  policymakers,  herding  behaviour  as  a 
phenomenon is hard to tackle. If we understand such a phenomenon as a consequence of strategic 
interactions among market participants, however, we might find a key to reducing the risk of triggering 
herding behaviour. 
According to my reading of this line of research, the outbreak of systemic disturbances would heavily 
depend on how many market participants, when faced with systemic threats, expect disturbances to 
actually occur. In other words, a crisis is not necessarily an accident, but a consequence of market 
participants’  expectations.  Their  expectations  are  formed  from  conjectural  views  of  other  market 
participants’ responses to such threats. The magnitude of any crisis and the extent of contagion would 
critically  depend  on  the  feedback  from  market  participants  reacting  collectively  to  systemic  threats. 
Feedbacks could also accelerate any crisis. These explanations seem to offer a useful perspective on 
the mechanism of systemic disturbances and appropriate policy responses thereto. 
The strategic interaction framework seems to offer us a roadmap for developing more stress-resistant 
markets. A possible approach would be to enhance the visibility of future stress. Let us suppose that 
there is a scenario consisting of a series of events leading to stress. If market participants have the 
view that such a scenario could result in a serious impact on a market in the future, they might take 
necessary actions to avoid losses which would materialise under the scenario. As market participants 
take necessary actions gradually and individually, the actual impact of events as they happen would 
be softened and stress would not materialise. In other words, a stress scenario would not remain a 
stress scenario once it is publicly recognised as such. In fact, we observe such episodes in financial 
markets. For example, proposed changes to accounting rules sometimes raise concerns initially, but 
only  rarely  would  they  result  in  severe  impacts  when  they  are  implemented.  Based  on  these 
experiences, I should say that an approach enhancing the visibility of stress appears more appealing. 
“Macro  stress-census”,  an  experiment  conducted  by  the  CGFS,  might  be  one  of  the  options  for 
developing  commonly  recognised  stress  scenarios  among  market  participants  and  central  banks, 
although not a panacea. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2002
 Challenges to central banks 
Before  concluding  my  remarks,  let  me  outline  the  challenges  facing  central  banks  with  regard  to 
systemic risk. In the six years since the first Systemic Risk Conference, we have learned considerably 
from  our  involvement  in  real-life  crises  and  through  intellectual  interchanges  at  this  conference  and 
other  venues.  At  the  same  time,  one  answer  leads  to  new  questions  and  there  remain  many 
unanswered  questions.  The  same  can  be  said  for  policy  responses  by  central  banks  in  times  of 
financial crisis. 
In relation to policy responses to systemic risk, we have generally recognised the importance of both 
pre-emptive actions, ie actions aimed at preventing systemic problems, and after-the-fact measures to 
contain an unfolding crisis. In this regard, I see a greater rationale than ever for views that stress the 
importance  of  preventive  measures.  This  is  because  globalisation  of  financial  markets  and 
consolidation of financial institutions have considerably raised the possible costs of dealing with actual 
systemic disturbances. To this end, the strengthening of market discipline as well as supervision would 
be essential, and the international community has made serious joint efforts. 
However, even the best of preventive measures may not be always successful in completely removing 
sources of systemic crises in an environment where financial intermediation keeps evolving at a speed 
beyond our wildest imagination. If there is the slightest chance of severe financial disturbances, the 
central  bank must  not  lower  its  guard.  In  envisaging  crisis management,  the  changing  environment 
could compel us to rethink established doctrines. 
For example, there is no doubt about stressing that we need to minimise moral hazard. Nevertheless, 
in the event that a systemic crisis is actually unfolding, we must not overlook the fact that there is an 
inherent,  conflicting  aspect  in  crisis  management.  In  a  sense,  crisis  management  artificially  creates 
moral  hazard  in  order  to  avoid  catastrophic  consequences.  In  real-life  policy  responses,  authorities 
inevitably  face  a  trade-off  between  prevention  of  systemic  crisis  and  minimisation  of  moral  hazard. 
Another example concerns the traditional lender of last resort functions of the central bank. According 
to traditional thinking, this is aimed only at banks. But the contemporary reality, as I noted earlier, is 
that systemic problems could originate in financial markets and such markets are populated not only 
by banks but also by a large number of non-bank financial institutions and conglomerates. This may 
argue in favour of the view that the traditional principle should be augmented. A related issue is the 
conditions under which central banks would take certain policy actions, such as invoking their lender of 
the  last  resort  functions.  Traditionally,  “constructive  ambiguity”  was  regarded  as  the  golden  rule  in 
such cases, but the Bank of Japan distanced itself from this in dealing with the crisis in the late 1990s, 
with  a  view  to  precluding  speculations  and  enhancing  policy  transparency  and  accountability.  The 
issue  of  the  practical  significance  of  “constructive  ambiguity”  must  be  explored  vigorously  without 
leaving any ambiguity. 
Conclusions 
Today,  I  have  offered  my  views  on  systemic  risk,  which  might  have  raised  more  questions  than 
answers for central banks. In concluding my remarks, I would like to stress that central banks must 
continue to pursue these issues to discharge their responsibilities. The responsibilities arise from the 
following facts. First, central banks are unique economic agents having relations with each corner of 
the  systemic  risk  triangle  –  the  banking  system,  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy.  Second, 
central banks are expected to confront almost every systemic crisis as entities that can readily provide 
liquidity. Fortunately, central banks have made progress in gaining insights through extensive research 
on market dynamics. Nevertheless, central banks must not be satisfied with what they have achieved 
so far. In order to answer the remaining questions, and refine views on established concepts, we are 
looking forward to continuously interacting with market participants, who have first-hand knowledge of 
the markets, and members of academia, who have been laying the groundwork. In this regard, I hope 
this  series  of  conferences  will  remain  a  valuable  venue  that  continues  to  inspire  the  central  bank 
community. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 3
