 David Dodge: Update on economic and monetary developments in Canada 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, before the Standing Senate 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 30 April 2002. 
 When Malcolm and I appeared before you at the end of last November, a heavy cloud of uncertainty 
hung over the outlook for the world economy and for Canada. Much of that uncertainty stemmed from 
the September terrorist acts in the United States, which came at a time when the global economy had 
slowed more than expected.  
To  counter  that  uncertainty  and  bolster  consumer  and  business  confidence,  the  Bank  of  Canada 
moved  aggressively  to  provide  monetary  stimulus.  Between  last  September  and  January  2002,  we 
lowered  interest  rates  by  200  basis  points,  bringing  the  total  reduction  since  January  2001  to 
375 basis points.  
As it turned out, consumer confidence was not as badly shaken in the aftermath of those tragic events 
as had been widely feared. Indeed, confidence bounced back as perceived geopolitical and economic 
uncertainties  diminished.  The  world  economy  has  begun  to  strengthen.  Here  in  Canada,  a  robust 
recovery appears to be underway. Growth in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of 2002 
was appreciably stronger than expected, so that the level of economic activity is now higher than we 
thought it would be six months ago. This momentum is reflected in the extraordinary number of new 
jobs created since the beginning of 2002. In terms of the two scenarios we had painted last November, 
clearly, we are into the more optimistic one, in which a recovery in consumer confidence leads to an 
early resumption of economic growth.  
What do we see now as we look ahead?  
The Bank projects that, in the first half of 2002, the Canadian economy will grow by between 3 1/2 and 
4 1/2 per cent, at annual rates. And we expect that it will continue to expand in the second half of the 
year  and  in  2003  at  a  rate  somewhat  above  that  of  its  production  capacity  (or  potential),  which  we 
estimate to be around 3 per cent a year.  
You may recall, Senators, that at our last visit I spoke about the concept of potential output. We set 
monetary policy so as to keep inflation low and stable, thus contributing to sustaining economic growth 
at its full potential.  
Six months ago, we assumed that our economy would be growing at a pace well below the rate of 
capacity growth in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year. We thought that the 
gap  between  the  actual  level  of  economic  activity  and  the  level  of  potential  would  be  widening 
throughout this period. Instead, growth has turned out to be much stronger than expected. This means 
that our economy is operating at a much higher level than we thought. So the output gap is smaller 
than we had predicted and is currently narrowing. Indeed, we expect that it will close in the second half 
of 2003.  
The output path that we are now projecting is consistent with core CPI inflation being at 2 per cent by 
about the end of next year. Total CPI inflation will probably continue to fluctuate in coming months as 
oil and natural gas prices move around. But, like core inflation, we expect it to be at the 2 per cent 
target midpoint by about the end of 2003.  
Although we no longer face the same degree of uncertainty as we did last fall, there are still important 
risks and uncertainties in the outlook—some of which are working on the upside and others on the 
downside.  
Given  the  amount  of  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  in  the  economy,  output  growth  could  be  even 
stronger  than  projected.  But  it  is  also  possible  that  some  of  the  recent  strength  in  spending  on 
consumer durables was borrowed from the future, so that the growth of household expenditures will be 
weaker than expected. At the same time, there is still considerable uncertainty about the timing and 
strength  of  the  pickup  in  business  investment  in  North  America,  mainly  because  of  the  continued 
weakness in profits. Moreover, recent tensions in the Middle East could have implications for crude oil 
prices and the global economy.  
BIS Review 29/2002 
 1
 While we face many of the same risks as the United States, there are a couple of differences in our 
situations that are worth noting. First, as we pointed out in the Monetary Policy Report, we expect that 
in Canada final demand will make up a larger share of the growth in the first quarter, while inventory 
rebuilding will constitute a smaller share than in the United States.  
Second,  while  weaker-than-expected  confidence  among  large  businesses  remains  a  risk  for  both 
countries,  the  sectors  that  face  the  biggest  challenges,  such  as  computer  equipment  and 
telecommunications, make up a larger share of the U.S. economy than of the Canadian economy.  
So what do recent economic developments in Canada mean from a policy perspective?  
As I mentioned, our economy is now operating at a significantly higher level than we had expected. So 
the amount of spare capacity is smaller, and is expected to be absorbed sooner, than we assumed 
last  November.  In  these  circumstances,  our  job  will  be  to  gauge  the  strength  of  the  economy  as  it 
approaches its capacity to produce and reduce the amount of monetary stimulus in place in a timely 
and  measured  manner. We  want  to  ensure  that  inflation  stays  close  to  the  target  so  that,  over  the 
medium term, our economy can continue to grow at full capacity.  
What do we mean by "timely and measured"?  
"Timely" relates to the fact that there is always a lag between our policy actions and their effect on the 
economy. We must be timely and forward-looking because our actions take a year to 18 months to 
have their full effect on output, and 18 months to 2 years to have their full effect on inflation.  
"Measured" relates to the judgments that we will make as we approach full capacity. If the economic 
data going forward tell us that we are taking up excess capacity more quickly than expected, we would 
have to reduce monetary stimulus more quickly. But if the data suggest that the return to full capacity 
is going more slowly than we thought, we would then need to move more slowly.  
Allow me to close by using the familiar car analogy. Over the past year we put our foot on the gas to 
help us get up the hill of economic difficulties. The prudent thing now, as we return to more normal 
driving conditions, is to ease off on the gas—ease off, not slam on the brakes—to make sure that we 
continue our journey along the highway at a safe cruising speed.  
It is in line with this that we moved, on 16 April, to raise the target for the overnight interest rate by 
25 basis points.  
2 
 
BIS Review 29/2001
