David Dodge: The interaction between monetary and fiscal policies 
The Donald Gow lecture by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the School of Policy 
Studies, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, 26 April 2002. Footnotes and references have been 
omitted; please see the Bank of Canada(cid:146)s website for these. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  give  the  Gow  Lecture  for  2002.  Donald  Gow  had  a  great  interest  in 
public administration and in budgetary reform in the federal government. He was one in a long line of 
Queen’s professors who have focused on various budgetary matters at the federal level.  
The  late  Doug  Purvis  was  another.  In  1998,  when  I  was  asked  to  give  the  Doug  Purvis  Memorial 
Lecture, I chose to talk about my "Reflections on the Role of Fiscal Policy." In that lecture, I discussed 
the past practice of fiscal policy in Canada and drew from that experience some lessons that might 
guide its future practice. In that context, I touched briefly on the interaction between fiscal policy and 
monetary policy.  
Today, after some experience on the monetary side of the fence, I would like to reflect more fully on 
this  important  interaction.  In  doing  so,  I  will  be  restricting  myself  to  the  macroeconomic  aspects  of 
fiscal  policy.  Thus,  I  will  be  dealing  with  deficits  and  debts(cid:151)both  in  terms  of fiscal  planning  and  in 
terms  of  the  responses  of  fiscal  policy  to  economic  surprises.  These  are  the  key  aspects  of  fiscal 
policy in terms of its interaction with monetary policy.  
To begin, I find it helpful to look back to May 1970 when Canada returned to a floating exchange rate. 
At  that  time,  there  was  no  formal  anchor  for  monetary  policy  and  therefore  no  anchor  for  nominal 
economic variables. Nor had much thought been given to a medium- to long-run goal for fiscal policy. 
Both policies had a rather short-run focus, and economic fine-tuning was still in its heyday.  
Unfortunately, the early 1970s soon brought a number of surprises that were damaging to an economy 
with  no  policy  anchors(cid:151)world  energy  prices  skyrocketed,  the  underlying  trend  rate  of  productivity 
growth  slowed,  and  revisions  to  the  employment  insurance  system  increased  the  longer-run 
equilibrium unemployment rate in the economy. By 1975, inflation had climbed above 10 per cent, and 
the general government budget had moved into a deficit of 3.5 per cent of GDP.  
In response to this rise in inflation, two policies were put in place. The Bank of Canada adopted targets 
for the growth of the narrow monetary aggregate M1, and the federal government established an Anti-
Inflation Program in the autumn of 1975, which was in force until 1978. Although the controls aspect of 
this program was aimed at facilitating the transition to lower inflation, the fiscal and monetary policies 
under the macroeconomic aspect of this program were insufficiently restrictive to achieve permanently 
lower inflation.  
Overall, through 1982, M1 monetary targeting was not as effective in bringing down inflation as had 
been anticipated. The links between money growth and inflation over a policy-relevant horizon were 
not  as  tight  as  had  been  expected.  The  high  interest  rate  elasticity  of  money  demand  meant  that 
interest  rates  did  not  have  to  be  raised  by  much  to  slow  down  money  growth.  And,  at  times,  this 
problem was compounded by unexpected downward shifts in the desire to hold M1 balances. Thus, 
although the targets for the monetary aggregate were achieved, spending and inflation did not decline 
as much as had been hoped.  
In the 1970s, fiscal policy was concentrating on cushioning shocks in a discretionary manner and on 
expanding the amount of public goods and services. There was little realization that it was going off 
track when examined from a medium- to long-term perspective. This was partly because real interest 
rates were very low (and, indeed, often negative) throughout the decade. This situation could not last 
forever, and it did not. Once real interest rates returned to higher levels and the economy continued to 
experience lower trend growth rates, the vicious circle of debt dynamics set in.  
Overall,  one  can  view  the  period  since  1970  as  one  in  which  the  authorities  struggled  to  establish 
appropriate medium-term anchors for both monetary and fiscal policies. During this time, they learned 
about the appropriate interaction between those two policies in the context of economic stabilization 
and growth under a flexible exchange rate regime.  
BIS Review 28/2002 
  
1
In the rest of this lecture, I will deal with four interrelated topics: the appropriate goals for fiscal and 
monetary policy, building policy credibility, the appropriate stabilization role for the two policies, and 
policy co-operation. I will conclude with some thoughts about the future.  
The appropriate goals and focus for monetary and fiscal policies  
I will start with the topic of the appropriate goals for monetary and fiscal policies.  
In the 1970s, it was not only Canada, but most industrialized countries, that went off track in terms of 
their  economic performance and budgetary  outcomes. The global economic surprises that occurred 
during the course of the decade were partly to blame. But, more fundamentally, the problem was that 
central banks and governments had not yet established an appropriate macroeconomic framework for 
dealing  with  such  surprises. This  framework  would  have  to  operate  in  a  world  of floating  exchange 
rates with high capital mobility and a high degree of substitutability between assets denominated in 
domestic  currency  and  assets  denominated  in  foreign  currencies.  Although  Canada  had  been  on  a 
flexible exchange rate regime for most of the 1950s and into the early 1960s, it had operated on a 
fixed-rate regime from 1962 to 1970. Most other industrialized countries did not float their currencies 
until 1973 or later. And, although Canadian capital markets had historically been closely linked with 
those in the United States, the same could not be said for most other countries.  
Much  of  the  academic  literature  around  1970  was  focused  on  short-run  stabilization,  short-run 
changes  in  policy  instruments,  and  static  analysis.  Not  much  attention  was  paid  to  changes  in  the 
stocks of assets and liabilities, which influence economic behaviour in the medium to longer run. Even 
though  the  large  econometric  models  that  were  being  constructed  at  that  time  did  have  dynamic 
behaviour  and  some  limited  role  for  asset  accumulation,  they  were  not  typically  used  to  look  at 
alternative policy rules or regimes. Apart from the literature linked to the monetary aggregates, little 
had  been  written  that  dealt  with  a  coherent  medium-term  policy.  And  there  was  also  little  or  no 
concentration  on  the  long-run  effects  of  fiscal  policy.  Given  all  this,  it  was  not  surprising  that  we 
struggled to come to grips with our problems here in Canada.  
Short-run static analysis  
There  was  still  an  active  debate  in  the  early  1970s  as  to  whether  there  was  a  long-run  trade-off 
between inflation and unemployment. Those who believed that there was, were more willing to engage 
in a high level of fine-tuning the real economy. Models were used to mimic fine-tuning exercises, with 
interest  rates  or  fiscal  policy  levers  changed  to  get  back  quickly  to  desired  output  levels.  Empirical 
models of the Canadian economy under flexible exchange rates were hampered by the fact that the 
experience was all from the 1950s(cid:151)a time when the economic structure was much different from that 
of the 1970s and the exchange rate did not fluctuate very much. Not surprisingly, it proved difficult to 
develop an equation that explained exchange rate movements very well.  
Fortunately,  there  were  some  extremely  powerful  theoretical  models  of  the  short-run  effects  of 
monetary and fiscal policy, developed in the early 1960s by Robert Mundell and Marcus Fleming. The 
sharpest  prediction  of  the  early  models  occurred  under  the  assumption  of  perfect  substitutability 
between  domestic  and  foreign  assets  and  a  fixed  domestic  price  level.  In  a  flexible  exchange  rate 
regime, only monetary policy (and not fiscal policy) would affect the level of output ("internal balance"). 
Expansionary fiscal policy would, however, lead to a sizable deterioration of the current account of the 
balance  of  payments.  Conversely,  in  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  only  fiscal  policy  (and  not 
monetary  policy)  would affect the level  of output,  while monetary  policy  would  affect the balance of 
payments through its implications for changes in official reserves.  
Mundell had used quite restrictive  assumptions regarding prices and expectations of exchange rate 
changes  and  inflation  in  his  simple  models.  It  is  important  to  note,  however,  that  relaxing  these 
assumptions,  while  maintaining  a  hypothesis  of  perfect  asset  substitutability,  still  leads  to  the 
conclusion that monetary policy has no effect on output under a credible fixed exchange rate regime 
(because  it  must  be  used  to  defend  the  fixed  rate  and  therefore  is  endogenously  determined). 
Moreover, with perfect asset substitutability, monetary policy has a more powerful effect on output(cid:151)
and fiscal policy has a less powerful effect on output(cid:151)under a flexible exchange rate regime than a 
fixed exchange rate regime. This comes about because the domestic effects of monetary policy are 
augmented  by  its  impact  on  the  exchange  rate,  whereas  the  domestic  effects  of  fiscal  policy  are 
reduced by exchange rate movements.  
2 
  
BIS Review 28/2001
Even though Mundell’s models dated from the early 1960s, it is not clear that policy-makers had taken 
their implications into account for the change in exchange rate regime when Canada floated in 1970.  
Medium-run analysis  
Central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  had  long  favoured  a  goal  of  price  stability.  And  the 
Economic Council of Canada, founded in the mid-1960s, favoured "reasonable price stability" as one 
of its preferred policy objectives (but it did believe in "inflation-unemployment trade-off zones"). But by 
1970,  the  only  anchors  for  obtaining  price  stability  or  good  inflation  performance  that  were  given 
prominence in the literature were monetary aggregates. The 1960s and 1970s saw a battle between 
the  "monetarists,"  who  favoured  low  and  stable  growth  of  a  monetary  aggregate,  and  the 
"Keynesians,"  who  believed  in  fine-tuning  and  (in  some  cases)  considered  monetary  policy  to  be 
ineffective.  
On the fiscal policy side, there was little analysis of medium- to long-run effects. In large part, this was 
because  the  federal  debt-to-GDP  ratio  had  been  on  a  long  downward  trend  since  the  end  of  the 
Second World War  to  1974.  It  was  only  after  this  ratio  had  increased  for  a  number  of  years  that  it 
became obvious that there was a problem with sustainability.  
As the Canadian economy moved into the 1980s, taking with it a legacy of problems from the 1970s, 
attention turned more and more to the importance of policies that would be sustainable over the long 
run, as well as to what policies should be expected to accomplish over the medium to long run under a 
floating exchange rate regime.  
Evolution of thought about monetary policy in the 1980s and early 1990s  
In  1982,  and  just  before  the  Bank  dropped  its  M1  target,  Governor  Gerald  Bouey  gave  the  Per 
Jacobsson  Lecture.  In  that  lecture,  he  discussed  the  "search  for  a  better  analytic  framework  within 
which monetary policy choices are made." Importantly, he noted that the Bank had found itself "taking 
a  view  of  policy  that  is  more  forward-looking  than  one  based  solely  on  monetary  targets  on  the 
grounds that it is wise to respond immediately to any potentially inflationary shocks rather than to wait 
until such shocks are reflected in higher inflation and higher money growth." In the 1982(cid:150)86 period, 
the Bank looked for a target(cid:151)monetary aggregate or other measure(cid:151)that would provide  
   a  nominal  anchor  as  a  medium-term  guide  to  policy  (that  is,  a  target  that  would  prevent 
cumulative policy error)  
a place to stand that would be used to communicate policy to the public, and  
an anchor that could potentially affect the formation of inflation expectations.  
Research  failed  to  turn  up  a  monetary  aggregate  that  could  fulfill  these  conditions.  But  to  aid 
policy-making,  Bank staff set out a  desired path for inflation that  would  lead to price stability  in the 
context of internal economic projections.  
In 1988, in his Hanson Lecture, Governor John Crow laid out the case for price stability as the best 
way that monetary policy could contribute to raising living standards. He also made it clear that, in his 
view, 4 per cent inflation was not price stability.  
It  is  important  to  review  the  case  for  low  and  stable  inflation  that  the  Bank  has  been  making  since 
1988.  The  first  key  element  in  this  case  is  that  there  is  no  long-run  trade-off between  inflation  and 
output(cid:151)a  belief  fully  borne  out  by  events.  Moreover,  low  and  stable  inflation  would  be  expected  to 
actually increase output or economic welfare by  
    reducing uncertainty about the future (and thus aiding planning and investment)  
reducing the costs of having to cope with inflation  
increasing equity and fairness  
leading to a more stable economy  
The  government  was  also  sensitive  to  the  problems  caused  by  volatile  inflation  and  by  inflation 
expectations that were not solidly anchored. Thus, by late 1990, there was a growing shared desire to 
have an explicit target that would provide a better anchor for inflation expectations.  
BIS Review 28/2002 
  
3
The  fact  that  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  can  potentially  be  frustrated  by  inappropriate  fiscal 
policy(cid:151)a  theme  to  which  I  will  return  later(cid:151)is  one  of  the  reasons  that  it  is  essential  for  both  the 
government and the central bank to sign on to an agreement.  
In fact, an agreement was reached on specific inflation-reduction targets and was announced in a joint 
press release at the time of the February 1991 budget. You may recall that a series of targets was 
announced in that agreement, aimed at bringing the 12-month CPI inflation rate down to 2 per cent 
(plus  or  minus  1  per  cent)  by  December  1995.  The  target  has  subsequently  been  extended  three 
times, retaining the 2 per cent target midpoint.  
For  ten  years  now,  inflation  has  been  low  and  stable,  and  households  and  businesses  have 
increasingly come to believe in its predictability. The increased transparency of the Bank’s conduct of 
policy and its enhanced communications strategy have played key roles in this success.  
An understanding of the appropriate medium- to long-run goals for monetary policy, both conceptually 
and quantitatively, was thus solidly in place in the early 1990s. Moreover, the quantitative targets were 
achieved in short order. It took longer, however, for medium- to long-run goals to be established and 
achieved on the fiscal side.  
The evolution of thought about fiscal policy in the 1980s and early 1990s  
While central bankers and monetary theorists had always kept at least one eye on price stability or low 
inflation, the fiscal authorities in industrialized countries had typically not had to deal with rising debt-
to-GDP ratios during peacetime. Therefore, it took a while before there was any recognition that there 
was a longer-run problem on the fiscal side. The recognition lag was exacerbated by an unexpected 
decline in the trend rate of productivity growth, now dated at around 1973, and a rise in the actual real 
interest rate to some longer-run equilibrium that occurred sometime in the early 1980s.  
In my Purvis Lecture, I noted that in the 1971(cid:150)83 period, "Expansionary fiscal policy was used . . . as a 
substitute for appropriate structural policies." This was particularly true with regard to the response to 
the two oil-price shocks. Thus, the contribution that fiscal policy could make to savings and longer-run 
growth was largely neglected in discussions during that period.  
During the 1983(cid:150)85 period, academic economists began to discuss the sustainability of public deficits 
and the appropriate role for fiscal policy. (Queen’s professors Neil Bruce and Doug Purvis were key 
contributors to this discussion.)  
The sustainability problem really comes down to two things. First, the stock of government debt cannot 
grow faster than the economy indefinitely. Eventually, fiscal policy must be adjusted. Second, because 
of this, when the rate of interest on government debt exceeds the growth of the economy, a rise in the 
government deficit relative to the size of the economy today means that there must be a rise in tax 
rates or a cut in the ratio of government program expenditures to GDP sometime in the future. That is, 
there are important transfers among generations.  
Economists were also becoming more convinced that deficits and debts have significant real effects 
on the economy. These effects occur because, in practice, changes in private sector savings do not 
fully offset changes in government saving. That is, reduced government saving leads to some decline 
in overall national saving.  
In a small open economy such as Canada’s, when the international substitutability of assets is very 
high,  the  most  important  effect  of  changes  in  government  debt  will  be  on  foreign  indebtedness.  It 
works this way. A decrease in the deficit lowers domestic expenditures relative to domestic production 
and  thus  increases  the  current  account  balance.  There  is  a  corresponding  decrease  in  net  capital 
inflows and thus in foreign indebtedness. The decline in foreign indebtedness will lower the interest 
and dividend payments flowing abroad and thus raise domestic net income relative to gross domestic 
product.  
To the extent that domestic interest rates decline when the domestic government debt-to-GDP ratio 
falls, a decrease in government debt will tend to increase business investment and the capital stock. 
This is the second major effect of a decline in deficits and debts on the Canadian economy.  
Combining these two major effects, one can say that the appropriate longer-term goal for fiscal policy 
should be increased savings, investment, and output through an appropriately low debt-to-GDP ratio.  
A decline in the debt-to-GDP ratio can have additional favourable effects. First, to the extent that a 
lower debt-service burden leads to lower taxes, rather than higher expenditures, it leads to a reduction 
4 
  
BIS Review 28/2001
in the usual distortionary effects of taxes. Second, to the extent that it reduces the effect of a given 
change in interest rates on the government’s balance, it makes fiscal planning much easier. Third, in 
situations  of  very  high  (and  perhaps  rising)  debt-to-GDP  ratios,  markets  may  build  a  premium  into 
interest rates to cover the perceived probability that debt will be monetized. Lower debt ratios reverse 
this  effect.  Finally,  when  the  economy  weakens,  governments  facing  high  debt  ratios  may  feel  that 
they have to override the automatic stabilizers to avoid making a bad situation even worse(cid:151)as often 
had to be done in the 1990s. This effect will tend to disappear at lower debt ratios. I will come back to 
the last two points later in this lecture.  
In the mid-1980s, the Canadian federal government developed a plan to gradually deal with the rising 
debt-to-GDP ratio. But little progress was made, and thus more significant measures had to be taken 
in 1993 and 1994. It was not until the budget of February 1995, however, that the cumulative effects of 
all the measures taken were perceived to have put fiscal policy back on a sustainable track.  
Since that budget, the debt-to-GDP ratio at the federal level has fallen from 70 per cent to 50 per cent, 
and the provinces have, by and large, also put their fiscal houses in order. Largely as a result of these 
fiscal moves, the ratio of Canada’s international indebtedness to GDP has been halved from 40 per 
cent to around 20 per cent.  
Differentials in nominal long-term bond rates between Canada and the United States have come down 
from over 2 per cent in 1990 to between 1/4 and 1/2 per cent over the past year. Canadian long-term 
interest  rates  in  real  terms  have  also  declined.  With  lower  government  financing  needs,  Canadian 
corporations  could  more  easily  issue  debt  in  Canada.  All  these  changes  have  favoured  increased 
business  fixed  investment  in  Canada,  which  rose  from  10.3  per  cent  of  GDP  in  1992(cid:150)95  to 
12.4 per cent of GDP in 1996(cid:150)2001.  
As for future objectives, it is plain that the federal government and many provinces clearly intend to 
pursue  further  significant  declines  in  their  debt-to-GDP  ratios  over  the  medium  term.  The  federal 
government, for example, has a framework of targets and contingency reserves in each annual budget 
that reduces to low levels the probability of running a deficit. The usual nominal growth in the economy 
will thus reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio. While the objective in the fiscal area may not be as specific as 
in the monetary area, it is the most definitive and operational medium- to long-term objective that there 
has been for Canadian fiscal policy in recent memory.  
What medium- to long-term objectives accomplish  
Whether one is thinking about monetary policy or fiscal policy, there are two important results when 
medium- to long-term objectives are established and achieved. First, a sustainable situation is created 
over  time.  Policy  instruments  are  forced  to  adjust  to  surprises(cid:151)particularly  permanent  surprises(cid:151)
because  there  is  a  longer-run  anchor.  Second,  in  choosing  long-term  objectives,  appropriate 
consideration  is  given  to  the  type  of  policy  framework  that  will  raise  our  living  standards  over  the 
longer run. The longer-run outcome should  be more than the result of a series of ad  hoc short-run 
decisions aimed at economic fine-tuning.  
As  a  by-product,  the  economy  gets  the  appropriate  "assignment"  of  policies:  long-run  "internal 
balance"(cid:151)that  is,  low  and  stable  inflation(cid:151)is  assigned  to  monetary  policy  and  long-run  "external 
balance"(cid:151)wealth  accumulation  coming,  at  least  partly,  from  an  increase  in  net  foreign  assets(cid:151)is 
assigned to fiscal policy. This should be taken as only a rough parallel to Mundell’s results for short-
run policy under flexible exchange rates with perfect international asset substitutability. It misses the 
richness  of  the  dynamic  process  through  which  both  the  capital  stock  and  the  stock  of  net  foreign 
assets can be affected, as discussed earlier.  
The credibility of monetary and fiscal policies  
I would now like to turn to the credibility of monetary and fiscal policies.  
After  establishing  appropriate  medium-  to  long-term objectives  for monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  it  is 
important  to  achieve  them.  This  is  not  only  because  in  a  democratic  system  it  is  important  to  be 
accountable, but also because there are gains to be reaped from having credible policies.  
The short- to medium-run credibility of monetary policy was established quite quickly, as inflation fell to 
2 per cent in early 1992, more than three years before the inflation-reduction target itself was slated to 
be 2 per cent. By early 1993, the inflation expectations of private sector forecasters and businesses for 
BIS Review 28/2002 
  
5
short-run horizons had fallen in line with the midpoint of the target range. It took a while for these same 
inflation expectations at a 6- to 10-year horizon to fall to 2 per cent. This occurred by about early 1996. 
And at a 30-year horizon, as measured by the spread between the yields on conventional and Real 
Return bonds, expectations remained above 3 per cent until late 1996, before falling quite sharply to 
around 2 per cent by late 1997 and staying there.  
The  significant  deviation  of  long-term  expectations  from  the  target  was  partly  a  result  of  concerns 
about pressures that could arise because of a fiscal situation that was still not perceived to be fully in 
control. That is, financial markets were concerned with "fiscal dominance" over monetary policy in that 
period.  
There  are  a  couple  of  strands  in  the  theoretical  literature  on  the  interaction  between  fiscal  and 
monetary policy, which essentially assert that fiscal policy will eventually dominate in determining long-
run  monetary  policy.  Both  these  strands,  however,  require  that  the  fiscal  authorities  will  either 
eventually require the monetary authorities to monetize the debt or convince the financial markets that, 
ultimately,  the  fiscal  authority  will  have  the  upper  hand.  These  appear  to  be  extreme  assumptions 
because  they  depend  on  the  view  that  fiscal  authorities  are  unconcerned  with  any  inflationary 
consequence  of  their  actions  and  ignore  the  many  legal  and  institutional  separations  that  exist 
between fiscal and monetary authorities. Nonetheless, market concerns about the potential for fiscal 
dominance  can  potentially  have  significant  effects  in  financial  markets,  particularly  on  longer-term 
bond rates. These concerns were definitely at play in Canadian financial markets in the early and mid-
1990s.  
As I noted earlier, it was only in February 1995 that the Government of Canada was perceived to have 
established an objective for fiscal policy that was specific enough to provide a basis for achieving a 
reduction  in deficits to  zero and setting  the  economy on a path that  would reduce the debt-to-GDP 
ratio. This objective was regarded as a foundation on which to build credibility for fiscal policy.  
As  in  the  case  of  monetary  policy,  credibility  did  not  come  immediately.  It  had  to  be  earned. 
Considerable credibility was gained, however, over the 2- to 2 1/2-year period after the 1995 budget. 
The  deficit-reduction  milestones  were  more  than  achieved  and  successive  budgets  reinforced  the 
intention to stay the course.  
It is important to note the supporting role that the credibility of monetary policy played in this process. 
In part, because the short- to medium-run credibility of monetary policy was high, short- to medium-
term interest rates on government debt had fallen significantly. Even long-term rates were much lower 
than in the early 1990s. These lower interest rates reduced the real cost of the existing government 
debt as it was rolled over.  
Thus,  there  was  an  interaction  between  the  credibility  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  The  joint 
credibility  of the two policies led  to  lower rates on  long-term bonds as risk premiums related  to the 
debt-to-GDP ratio and to inflation uncertainty fell. The spreads between Canadian and U.S. long-term 
bond rates even became negative for most of the period from mid-1997 to late 2000.  
Canada’s  experience  in  the  1990s  thus  strongly  suggests  that  there  are  important  spillovers  in 
credibility  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  Moreover,  it  is  easier  for  everyone(cid:151)policy-makers 
and the private sector alike(cid:151)when the frameworks for both monetary and fiscal policy are clear and 
understandable.  
In  discussing  the  establishment  of  credibility,  I  have  so  far  put  the  emphasis  on  achieving  the 
established objectives. This is certainly the most important factor. But communication has also played 
a  key  role(cid:151)communication  about  the  quantitative  objectives  and  about  the  framework  of  the 
mechanisms that enable us to attain those objectives. Communication has been equally important for 
both monetary policy and fiscal policy.  
Policy credibility has led to important gains for the Canadian economy.  
The  joint  credibility  of  the  two  policies  has  lowered  long-term  interest  rates  in  real  terms, favouring 
business investment and, therefore, economic growth.  
The credibility of monetary policy has apparently led to a change in the nature of the inflation process 
itself. In the short run, inflation does not seem to respond as strongly to measures of excess demand 
and  supply.  As  well,  because  inflation  expectations  have  been  well  anchored  near  the  2  per  cent 
target  midpoint,  the  labour  market  today  operates  much  more  efficiently  than  it  did  during  the 
high-inflation years. Union contracts have lengthened considerably and wages are rarely indexed to 
the cost of living. Moreover, there are no immediate reactions of wages to big changes in oil prices. 
6 
  
BIS Review 28/2001
Thus, relative wages are better anchored and tend to better reflect demand and supply conditions in 
particular markets. I regard all this as an extraordinarily important contribution, since I spent two years 
with  the  Anti-Inflation  Board  struggling  to  settle  down  a  labour  market  that  had  become  terribly 
distorted  by  high  inflation  in  the  early  1970s.  Overall,  credibility  has  stabilized  the  inflation  process 
and,  therefore,  inflation  itself.  Moreover,  effective  monetary  policy  seems  to  have  reduced  the 
variability in the real economy as well.  
The credibility of fiscal policy has enhanced investment planning by the business sector since it has 
drastically  reduced  the  risk  of  future  increases  in  taxes  stemming  from  a  need  to  deal  with  fiscal 
problems.  
Thus,  credibility  has  led  to  a  more  stable  Canadian  economy  and  one  that  is  better  positioned  for 
future economic growth.  
Stabilization policy  
There is a connection between credibility and my next topic(cid:151)stabilization policy. The achievement of 
policy  credibility  has  meant  that  the  automatic  stabilizers  in  the  economy(cid:151)those  features  of  macro 
policy that tend to stabilize output(cid:151)can be allowed to work fully.  
When  the  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  are  attempting  to  establish  credibility,  there  is  a  natural 
inclination(cid:151)and sometimes a necessity(cid:151)to err on the side of overachieving the targets. This means 
that explicit actions may have to be taken to prevent the automatic stabilizers from working, as was the 
case with fiscal policy in the 1990s. Moreover, the lack of a credible fiscal policy was one of the factors 
that seemed to hinder the Bank’s ability to achieve the monetary conditions that it desired at certain 
points in the early- to mid-1990s. Thus, the stabilizing properties of monetary policy were not able to 
fully work at that time. Now that the credibility of both policies is very high, both the federal government 
and the Bank can allow the automatic stabilizers to do their job.  
Monetary policy and stabilization  
In the case of monetary policy, interest rates actually have to be changed to get the stabilizing result. 
Nonetheless, although judgments are made based on the special factors at play and the balance of 
inflation  risks  going  forward,  the  changes  in  rates  can  be  considered  as  more  or  less  automatic  in 
response  to  surprises  in  demand.  Our  2  per  cent  inflation  target  limits  our  discretion.  Changes  in 
interest rates independent of those in the United States are made possible by our flexible exchange 
rate regime.  
Let me explain how monetary policy focused on an inflation target plays a stabilizing role when there 
are demand surprises. Suppose that the economy is operating at its production potential, and inflation 
is at the 2 per cent target midpoint. A downward shift in demand(cid:151)coming from, say, a tightening in 
fiscal policy(cid:151)would create excess supply in the economy, putting downward pressure on inflation. To 
bring inflation back to 2 per cent over an 18- to 24-month horizon, the Bank of Canada would lower its 
target for the overnight interest rate. This action, through  its effect on market interest rates and the 
exchange  rate,  would  increase  the  level  of  output  in  the  economy  towards  its  production  potential. 
Inflation  would  therefore  return  to  target  shortly  after  the  excess  supply  disappeared  from  the 
economy. Because the inflation-targeting framework operates symmetrically, the same process would 
occur in reverse in response to an upward shift in demand.  
Supply shocks(cid:151)which take the form of higher (or lower) inflation than expected for a given level of 
demand(cid:151)are  always  more  difficult  for  policy-makers  to  deal  with  than  demand  surprises. 
Nevertheless,  the  Bank’s  framework  for  inflation-targeting  allows  temporary  supply  shocks  to  be 
largely ignored, so long as they do not feed into inflation expectations. The credibility that has been 
established means that they no longer do so. Consider price surprises coming from the most volatile 
components of the consumer price index(cid:151)components such as fruit and vegetables or oil and gas. As 
our operating guide, we use a measure of core inflation that excludes such components. This gives us, 
and  economic  observers,  some  confidence  that  we  are  looking  at  the  underlying  trend  of  inflation. 
Thus, our interest rate response to price shocks that are perceived to be temporary can be minimal. 
As a result, there will be little effect on output. In other words, monetary policy does not turn temporary 
supply shocks into something that is destabilizing for aggregate output.  
BIS Review 28/2002 
  
7
Fiscal policy and automatic stabilization  
On  the  fiscal  side,  the  automatic  stabilizers  are  tax  revenues  and  employment  insurance  payouts. 
When the economy weakens, tax revenues tend to fall, and employment insurance payouts tend to 
increase. This buffers the effect on personal disposable income of the decline in output and therefore 
tends to reduce the amplitude of the output shock. If households based their spending decisions on 
their expected permanent level of income, as opposed to current income, there would be little role for 
the automatic stabilizers. But the evidence shows that many households, particularly those with lower 
incomes, cannot borrow freely against future income and therefore are often significantly constrained 
by  their  current  level  of  disposable  income.  Thus,  automatic  stabilizers  on  the  fiscal  side  play  a 
significant role.  
Some have argued that a significant rise in the propensity to import, which can act as an automatic 
stabilizer in the economy, has perhaps decreased the importance of the automatic fiscal stabilizers. 
While this is true at the aggregate level, its effect has not been uniform across shocks affecting various 
final  expenditure  categories.  The  greatest  increases  in  the  propensity  to  import  have  come  on  the 
export  side,  because  of  the  growing  importance  of  two-way  trade.  Components  of  domestic 
expenditure such as housing investment, non-residential construction, and consumption of services, 
however, still have very low marginal propensities to import.  
Comparing and contrasting the automatic fiscal and monetary stabilizers  
Some of the automatic fiscal stabilizers work almost immediately(cid:151)for example, the personal income 
tax  deducted  by  the  employer.  Others,  such  as  employment  insurance  payments  and  social 
assistance payments, work with a fairly short lag. These types of fiscal stabilizers are very effective in 
dampening an output cycle. But they do not come close to fully offsetting the change in output. Other 
elements of the automatic fiscal stabilizers do not take hold until income tax is settled in the spring of 
each year.  
The lags in the effects of monetary policy mean that there is no contemporaneous dampening effect 
on  output.  While  changes  in  monetary  policy  can  have  some  impact  in  the  very  short  run,  the  full 
impact on output is not normally felt for 12 to 18 months. It is largely because of these lags that the 
Bank aims to bring inflation back on target over an 18- to 24-month horizon.  
As I noted earlier, the automatic fiscal stabilizers at the federal level will no longer have to be offset. 
What difference does that make for monetary policy? The most important factor is that fiscal policy will 
be more symmetric and predictable.  
Discretionary stabilization policy  
While  the  automatic  stabilization  provided  by  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  is  very  desirable,  the 
question remains whether there is a role for something further(cid:151)a role for a discretionary stabilization 
policy.  
In the case of monetary policy, the nature of our response is the more or less automatic one described 
earlier.  As  I  said  earlier,  judgment  is  key  to  the  process.  That  is  particularly  true  at  times  of  great 
uncertainty, as existed last autumn. But our clear inflation target means that, in principle, our discretion 
is limited relative to that of fiscal policy.  
The arguments for and against discretionary fiscal policy as an important element in macroeconomic 
stabilization in an open economy tend to revolve primarily around lags, and around the effectiveness 
of short-run fiscal policy relative to monetary policy.  
If the timing was close to perfect, fiscal policy measures that lasted for two or three quarters could, in 
principle, and under ideal  circumstances, shorten the time to move output  back to its desired  level. 
Thus, in principle, discretionary fiscal policy is an important tool. But, as a practitioner, I can tell you 
that the great problem here is that temporary measures are both difficult to start quickly when the need 
arises and extraordinarily difficult to stop once the need is past.  
Thus, as a practical matter, not a philosophical one, there are some severe limitations to the use of 
discretionary fiscal policy as a stabilizer.  
8 
  
BIS Review 28/2001
Policy co-operation  
Now let me turn to policy co-operation and coordination.  
I want to start by emphasizing that the inflation targets are joint targets. They are not just the Bank’s 
targets(cid:151)they are the targets of the Government of Canada as well.  
Put  another  way,  "coordination"  came  through  the  joint  agreement  on  inflation  targets.  With  clear 
agreement on the medium-term policy objectives and an understanding of the policy framework, there 
is no need for coordination on the setting of interest rates or fiscal policy instruments.  
The  economic  literature  on  policy  coordination  tends  to  be  about  situations  where  the  fiscal  and 
monetary  authorities  have  one  or  more  of  the  following:  very  different  views  of  economic  welfare, 
inconsistent policy objectives, policy that is totally discretionary, or a tendency to get involved in game-
like behaviour with one another. None of these applies in Canada.  
Given the policy framework, when the government changes fiscal policy, it needs to think of how these 
changes  will  affect inflation and, consequently,  interest rates.  Similarly, the  Bank needs to consider 
how  changes  in  fiscal  policy  will  affect  demand  and  inflation,  and  thus  its  setting  of  interest  rates. 
Therefore, it is to the mutual benefit of both  parties  to co-operate in the sharing of information and 
analysis as they set their policies.  
For  example,  it  is  important  for  the  Bank  to  recognize  that  government  policies  can  affect  the 
production potential of the economy through their effect on sustainable labour utilization rates and the 
level of productivity. The Bank needs to consider this information when making its policy decisions.  
Co-operation between the Bank and the federal Department of Finance occurs on a number of levels. I 
have  frequent  discussions  with  the  Minister  and  Deputy  Minister.  My  colleagues  on  the  Governing 
Council  stay  in  touch  with  the  associate  and  assistant  deputy  ministers  who  are  their  counterparts. 
And there are meetings at the staff level to share, for example, information from economic forecasts, 
surveys, and contacts with various groups and organizations. One of the key reasons for our regular 
discussions is so that each institution understands the details of the framework within which the other 
organization is pursuing its objectives and how this framework applies to current economic surprises.  
With our inflation-targeting regime, provincial fiscal authorities(cid:151)especially those in large provinces(cid:151)
also know that the Bank will react to the effect that their policies could have on the course of future 
inflation. At the same time, we at the Bank are obligated to keep the provincial authorities informed of 
our views on future inflation.  
Some of you may be surprised that I have not said anything about the appropriate mix of monetary 
and fiscal policies when talking about coordination and co-operation. As you might remember, policy 
mix was a hot topic in Canada in the late 1980s. That was before we had explicit frameworks for our 
monetary and fiscal policies. With these frameworks in place, the whole issue of policy mix becomes 
moot.  In  particular,  interest  rates  are  not  adjusted  to  deal  with  problems  of  deficits  and  debts,  and 
taxes and fiscal spending are not adjusted primarily to achieve an inflation objective.  
This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  there  are  no  implications  for financial  and  policy  variables  as  a 
prolonged fiscal tightening puts the economy on a course for a new longer-run equilibrium with a lower 
debt-to-GDP ratio. All else being equal, the fiscal tightening will initially lead to lower real interest rates 
and a temporary real depreciation of the Canadian dollar, so that interest-rate-sensitive components of 
GDP  and  net  foreign  demand  can  make  up  for  the  loss  in  domestic  demand  stemming  from  the 
tightening.  But  as  Canadian  net  foreign  assets  rise,  the  wealth  effect  on  consumption  will  become 
large enough to support demand and to allow the Canadian dollar to rise to a permanently higher real 
value than prior to the change in fiscal policy.  
Related  to  what  I  have  said  about  the  need  for  co-operation  rather  than  coordination  of  policy 
variables  domestically,  I  would  argue  that,  if  each  major  industrial  country  had  clear  medium-term 
objectives  for  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  along  with  transparent  frameworks  for  achieving  those 
objectives,  there  would  be  no  need  or  desire  to  have  any  strong  form  of  international  coordination. 
Again, it would be co-operation in terms of information-sharing that would be important.  
Overall, I believe that the clear longer-term objectives and frameworks of monetary and fiscal policies 
have created an environment  where co-operation  in  the form of sharing information and analysis  is 
most effective.  
BIS Review 28/2002 
  
9
Concluding thoughts  
Just over 25 years ago, in the absence of appropriate anchors, Canadian monetary and fiscal policies 
both  went badly off course. It then took 15 to 20  years to establish the appropriate focus for those 
policies and to bring them back on course.  
Now  there  are  clear  monetary  and  fiscal  objectives  and  clear  accountability  for  meeting  those 
objectives.  
The  transparent  framework  that  has  been  established  will  be  extremely  helpful  in  meeting  the 
challenges that the future is sure to bring. Two of these challenges are already apparent(cid:151)a possible 
increase in the trend rate of productivity growth and a slowdown in population growth combined with 
an aging population. Both these factors create uncertainty about the growth and level of production 
potential of our economy.  
Fortunately, this broad type of uncertainty is not new, either for the Bank of Canada or for the fiscal 
authorities. The medium-term frameworks that have been set up for monetary and fiscal policies mean 
that the required adjustments in the economy will take place against a relatively stable background. 
That  is  to  say,  the  Bank  will  react  so  that  inflation  does  not  stray  too  far  from  2  per  cent,  and  the 
government will react so that the debt-to-GDP ratio remains on a downward trend.  
We have come a long way in the past 25 years in understanding the relationship between monetary 
and fiscal policies and  what those policies can best accomplish. As  we  go forward, this will help to 
underpin strong economic growth and a more stable Canadian economy.  
10 
  
BIS Review 28/2001
