 M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Outlook for 2002 and the road ahead 
Speech  by  Mr  M  R  Pridiyathorn  Devakula,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  to  the  Foreign  Banks 
Association, Bangkok, 6 March 2002.  
 Mr Weerasinghe, distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me begin by thanking the Foreign Banks Association for hosting this enjoyable event and for inviting 
me to speak. I am honored to be here and would like to extend once again my congratulations to Mr. 
Weerasinghe  on  his  presidency  of  the  FBA.  The  formal  meeting  we  had  in  late  January  offered  an 
opportunity for me to exchange many useful views and ideas with you. I consider that fruitful and I also 
appreciate the opportunity given to me this evening. I hope my talk tonight will enhance communication 
and our mutual understanding even further.  
I wish to use my time tonight to share with you our view on the current state of the Thai economy as well 
as what we see now as the outlook for 2002. It is my intention to discuss with you our assessment of the 
nature of the incipient recovery process that is now taking place, and to identify the risks and challenges 
we may face in the near future.  
Ladies and gentlemen, permit me to go straight to the crux of the matter. 
We enter the year 2002 with more confidence. The Thai economy had most assuredly bottomed out last 
year. The latest released January economic figures point to more strength in the fourth quarter of 2001 
than we had anticipated, given the event on September 11.  
And, with the current more supportive fiscal and monetary policy stance as well as the expectation of a 
rebound in the US, the overall environment this year is more conducive to growth than last year. From 
this  vantage  point,  we  are  of  the  view  that  the  economy  could  grow  by  2-3  per  cent  this  year  while 
inflationary  pressure  would  be  virtually  absent.  A  continuing  expansion  in  domestic  demand  and  a 
rebound  in  exports  in  the  latter  half  of  the  year  would  be  the  key  drivers  of  this  year’s  growth.  The 
outlook  for  inflation  remains  tame,  with  core  inflation  expected  to  hover  around  1-1.5  per  cent,  well 
within the target corridor of 0-3.5 per cent.  
Last  year,  notwithstanding  the  slowdown  in  the  global  markets,  the  Thai  economy  exhibited  a  noted 
degree  of  resiliency. While  the  world  economy  was  in  a  slump,  Thailand’s  exports  did  not  fall  to  the 
extent observed in many countries in the region. And, even as export fell by about 7 per cent, output 
growth remained positive in every quarter. In terms of macroeconomic stability, we saw an improvement 
both on the domestic and external fronts. In fact, Thailand external position strengthened significantly 
over 2001. The current account registered a large surplus and external debt continued to fall sharply in 
2001. Our reserve position remains strong.  
I am convinced that a flexible mix between monetary and fiscal policies, plus the diversified structure of 
production  and  exports,  did  allow  the  economy  to  avoid  contraction  and  build  on  greater  external 
stability. With the improved environment for growth that I have just noted, I am more comfortable today 
than last year to talk about an economic recovery. My optimism, however, remains guarded. Because 
on this road to recovery, there are still many risks. Such risks, if not managed well, could undermine the 
sustainability of the recovery process. 
Let me first talk about the macroeconomy and our view for 2002. Then I will describe the challenges 
ahead as well as our thoughts on how to manage them. 
First, the economic recovery.  
What do the recent economic numbers tell us? 
In January, the economy showed signs of continued expansion despite the sluggish global conditions, 
thanks  largely  to  the  momentum  in  domestic  demand.  A  number  of  indicators  suggested  that  the 
economic conditions had improved somewhat from the recent months. For instance, 
– 
Consumption  and  investment  continued  to  improve  in  January.  In  particular,  the  Private 
Investment  Index  (PII)  continued  to  increase.  A  significant  expansion  was  seen  in 
construction, following the spur in housing demand and construction activities. 
BIS Review 16/2002 
 1
   It looks like this good news on the domestic demand front warrants a significant increase in 
the January Business Sentiment Index (BSI) and the index looking 3 months ahead.  
Export  quantities  continued  to  improve  with  the  year-on-year  growth  rate  in  a  high  positive. 
This  represents  both  the  pick-up  in  our  trading  partners'  purchasing  power  and  our  staying 
ability to compete.  
Another factor that continued to firm up the recovery process came from the fiscal front.  
– 
During  the  first  four  months  of  fiscal  year  2002,  the  budget  disbursement  rate  accelerated 
compared to same period last year. This front-loaded fiscal stance will surely contribute to a 
sooner recovery. I must note here, however, that the jury is still out on what these early signs 
may  portend.  I  believe  the  impassioned  judgment  on  the  speed  of  the  recovery  must  await 
more data.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  rather  unfortunate  that  while  economists  are  busy  debating  whether  these  early  signs  point  to  a 
tangible  recovery,  the  recent  strong  boom  in  the  stock  market  seemed  to  have  overwhelmed  that 
debate.  
On this point, let me say that we need to distinguish between the recent asset price performance and 
the economic fundamentals. 
It is true that the performance of the listed SET firms has improved. The improvement was led in part by 
better-than-expected profitability of listed companies. Corporate profits in general were also on the rise 
in 2001, compared to 2000. With this improvement, we are now more able to segregate the winners - 
that is, the strong performers -- from those lagging behind. This presents a stark contrast to the previous 
pictures  in  which  almost  all  sectors  were  judged  to  have  performed  poorly.  Another  factor  that 
contributed to the strong performance in the stock market is that the Thai market had a relatively low 
P/E ratio compared to other markets, regional and extra-regional, and the positive price correction might 
have been at large.  
But,  whether  the  inflows  that  have  been  driving  the  market  up  will  stay  for  long  will  depend  on  the 
underlying fundamentals.This is to say that in order to attract long-term investors that they need, Thai 
companies  must  persevere  with  business  restructuring  and  continue  to  reform  their  operations.  But 
more  importantly  at  the  macro  level,  the  economic  recovery  process  must  continue  firmly,  and  be 
supported by the right policy mix and by further progress on the unfinished reforms. 
I would like to turn your attention now to what we see as the risks in the process of recovery.  
The  speed  and  robustness  of  the  recovery  will  depend  in  large  part  on  the  turnaround  of  the  global 
economy. On this front, the Bank of Thailand remains cautious in our optimism. 
Our guarded optimism is based on two reasons. First, the US economy, which absorbs roughly 20 per 
cent of our exports, is likely to rebound later in the year while Japan, where 15 per cent of our exports 
go, seems more likely to remain in the mire for the rest of the year. Therefore, the global economy as a 
whole may not be expanding much.  
Second, a US recovery, particularly if led  by  electronics, may  not  benefit Thailand  as much as it  will 
benefit  other  regional  economies.  This  is  owing  to  the  diversified  nature  of  Thailand's  exports.  For 
example, electronics count for only 26 per cent of our total exports while they count for 36 and 60 per 
cent of Taiwan's and Singapore's exports, respectively. Furthermore, the US takes in more than 40 per 
cent of Taiwan's electronics exports. So, a US rebound would likely benefit them more than us. 
Therefore, while we are hopeful that the US economic trend is more upbeat, we harbor a healthy dose 
of reservation insofar as the immediate gains brought on by the US recovery are concerned. 
Another risk to growth is in the effectiveness of policy stimulus to meet the growth challenge. 
In  the  past  few  years,  various  fiscal  stimulus  packages  have  been  the  principal  motor  driving  the 
economy.  Later  this  year,  however,  the  necessary  consolidation  will  take  place  to  ensure  fiscal 
sustainability, and sound economic management will demand a right mix of policies. Having achieved 
external  stability  and  price  stability,  there  is  room  for  monetary  policy  to  be  more  accommodative  to 
growth. 
On this point, I wish to emphasize that even though our focus today is on economic recovery, the Bank 
of Thailand's monetary policy objective remains that of maintaining price stability.  
2 
 BIS Review 16/2002
 It is my belief that an important pre-condition for growth on a sustained basis is a stable macroeconomic 
environment.  However,  I  doubt  that  macroeconomic  policy  alone  will  be  sufficient  for  long-term 
economic growth. We, therefore, need to look beyond macroeconomic policy.  
To meet the growth challenge, Thailand needs a steady and sincere effort at the micro-level to put our 
economy back on a more robust growth path. The reforms must aim for good corporate governance, 
faster debt restructuring, and the efficient and effective banking sector.  
Without  these  actions,  the  potency  of  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  will  be  limited,  and  whatever 
gains in output we make will be ephemeral.  
The bottom line, Ladies and Gentlemen, is that Thailand will stand ready to reap the full advantage of 
an  upcoming  global  recovery  only  if  the  real  sector  becomes  competitive  and  the  financial  sector 
functions smoothly.  
The Bank of Thailand can contribute to the growth process by conducting a responsible monetary policy 
to ensure price stability, and by prodding the economy along the path of institutional reforms that have 
been  initiated.  With  a  sound  policy  framework  and  institutional  reforms  in  place,  a  more  efficient 
economic  structure  will  have  been  built  and  the  entrepreneurial  energy  of  the  private  sector  can  be 
unleashed to ensure greater economic well being.  
This  brings  me  to  the  last  point  I  wish  to  make  tonight,  that  is  the  need  to  speed  up  the  structural 
reforms.  
I am convinced that the necessary transition toward more robust and durable growth lies in breaking out 
of  the  current  constraints  imposed  on  the  economy  post-1997,  the  most  pressing  of  which  is  the 
debt-overhang problem. To go forward we first need to unshackle ourselves. The crawling pace of debt 
resolution is tying down the economy. If we could not resolve the debt problem in a timely manner and 
adopt new work practices, it will be next to impossible to compete successfully in the world market.  
The Bank of Thailand and the Government are alert to this challenge. And the Government has already 
initiated the process of overhaul.  
One  notable  attempt  at  debt  restructuring  is  the  establishment  of  the  Thai  Asset  Management 
Corporation (TAMC). The entity was set up to reduce distressed assets in the banking system through 
centralization of NPLs' management. This should allow banks to resume their normal function and new 
lending. New lending is needed to provide the working capital to support corporate restructuring as well 
as  business  expansion.  This  way,  our  energy  will  be  channeled  toward  more  productive  enterprises. 
And,  with  the  authority  to  liquidate  and  rehabilitate  businesses  through  swift  legal  procedures,  the 
TAMC is unique in its unprecedented power. 
Next, given that a substantial share of distressed assets remains outside the purview of the TAMC, I 
see the need to expedite the process of corporate debt restructuring which requires a speedy passage 
of  the  reformed  bankruptcy  law.  This  action  will  be  testimony  to  the  sincere  effort  that  we  in  the 
authorities can make for the benefit of our future generations. 
Insofar  as  the  banking  sector  is  concerned,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  regards  better  enforcement  of  the 
banking and financial institution regulations as a priority.  
This  is  an  area  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand  takes  leadership  role  to  strengthen  the  soundness  and 
efficiency of the financial institutions. Our leadership  must lead to an outcome which makes practical 
sense, measures up to international best practices, and must be market-oriented. 
On  this  front,  we  have  been  actively  involved  in  the  consultation  process  for  the  New  Basel  Capital 
Accord, which will provide a more comprehensive and sensitive approach to addressing risks through 
the use of minimum capital requirements, supervisory reviews and market discipline.  
The second agenda of the banking sector reform is enhancing our risk management capacity. Toward 
this end, our Supervision Group has moved from regulation and transaction-testing toward risk-based 
supervision. 
We realize that good rules alone do not automatically translate into honorable practices. Therefore, we 
consider an upright supervisory role as a sine qua non to ensure honest banking practices.  
The new supervisory practices can be considered a milestone in this area. Our aim is to nudge Thai 
banks to change their business practices. Currently, they are working harder than ever to satisfy some 
of the new rules, notably those that link risk-based classification of debts to provisioning for loan losses. 
BIS Review 16/2002 
 3
 We  are  in  effect  encouraging  banks  to  eschew  the  old  norm  of  collateral  lending  and  adopt  new 
practices of examining cash-flow projections and other indicators. This reform was implemented hand in 
hand with the corporate sector reform under the purview of the SEC. This practice will only lead to a 
more efficient allocation of financial resources. Under the new rules and our strict supervisory practices, 
we are optimistic that the banking system will play a more meaningful role in the economy in the near 
future. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Much has transpired since 1997. Our economy has been under intense pressure to perform, and I am 
confident enough to say that we are in a better position today to manage future challenges. Although, 
the  outlook for  2002  is  brighter  than  that  of  last  year,  we  do  remain  somewhat  cautious.  The  reform 
process must continue so that the global pick-up does not pass us by and that our economy can secure 
the potential gains imbedded in our talented entrepreneurs and workforce.  
It has been an honor and thank you for your attention tonight.  
4 
 BIS Review 16/2002
