 Nout Wellink: Monetary unions in Europe and the US - just how different are 
they? 
Speech  by  Mr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, at the Institut International d’Etudes Bancaires, Amsterdam, 17 May 2002. 
 Introduction 
First of all, thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. Now that we have a monetary union, 
there has been discussion about the role of national central banks in the euro area, including some 
questions  about  their  ongoing  relevance.  Clearly  you  regard  us  as  relevant  or  you  would  not  have 
invited  me  to  speak!  It  will  come  as  no  surprise  that  I  also  think  that  national  central  banks  are 
relevant, and will continue to be so. Today I would like to briefly compare monetary policy in the euro 
area  and  in  the  US.  Of  course  there  are  differences  between  the  two  areas,  but  there  are  also 
important similarities. This comparison can help us understand the reasons behind our differences and 
may provide some useful insights into the institutional implications for euro area monetary policy in the 
future. I will structure my remarks around three themes: the policy goals of the two monetary unions, 
their organisation, and the monetary policy decision-making process in each system. 
Goals and philosophy  
Let  me  begin  by  comparing  the  goals  or  mandates  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the  Federal  Reserve 
System. Here in Europe the primary focus of monetary policy is to maintain price stability. In contrast, 
the Fed has multiple objectives for monetary policy. Their goals are to achieve maximum employment, 
stable  prices  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.  An  important  explanation  for  our  different 
mandates can be found by looking at our economic histories. 
In Europe, monetary union is the most recent step in an ongoing process of political and economic 
integration. The hyperinflation experienced in the first half of last century in some European countries, 
in particular in Germany, has played an important role in ensuring that European monetary policy is 
focussed on price stability. 
Our  experiences  in  Europe  contrast  with  those  in  the  US.  A  key  US  event  that  commentators 
frequently refer to is the Great Depression. Monetary policy is often blamed for adding to the severity 
of the Great Depression in the US. I think that is a reason why employment and interest rate objectives 
remain  in  the  Fed’s  mandate,  and  why  policy  makers  there  react  so  quickly  to  signs  of  slowing 
economic growth. Under normal circumstances, policy makers on both sides of the Atlantic are likely 
to take similar decisions. However, around the time that the economic cycle is changing and growth is 
slowing  rapidly,  you  might  see  different  decisions  being  taken  in  Frankfurt  and  in  Washington  - 
reflecting our different mandates. 
In addition to the influence of history, the Eurosystem’s mandate reflects academic insights from the 
last 20 years or so. This research tends to support the view that monetary policy should only focus on 
price stability. Other central banks around the world that have reviewed their mandates in recent years 
have tended to move towards having price stability as their sole objective. Similar proposals have also 
been made regarding the Fed. If the Fed’s mandate were to change in the future, I expect it to also be 
in the direction of a more explicit focus on price stability. 
Organisation of the two monetary unions 
A second area in which our different histories have played a role is in the way in which the Eurosystem 
and Fed are organised. While the Fed  was created ‘from scratch’ by the Federal  government for a 
single country, the Eurosystem was established when twelve sovereign states voluntarily gave up their 
monetary autonomy. This is reflected in the fact that the Eurosystem is some ways more decentralised 
than the Fed. Greater decentralisation is consistent with the EU-wide principle of subsidiarity, under 
which  decisions  are  taken  at  the  country  or  regional  level  where  possible.  This  greater  degree  of 
decentralisation is apparent in areas such as monetary policy decision-making and operation, banking 
supervision and statistics. However, the Fed can also be considered decentralised in other areas. In 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 1
 fact, when  you exclude staff working on  tasks unrelated  to the monetary union, both systems have 
roughly  the  same  number  of  employees.  Clearly,  this  does  not  tell  us  much  about  the  potential  for 
efficiency gains, except that it is around the same in both systems. 
The European monetary union is made up of sovereign countries. That means that it is not politically 
or publicly acceptable to carry out all central banking tasks at the ECB. Our preference for subsidiarity 
also  implies that there are limits to potential efficiency  gains  within the system. The pace of further 
centralisation  is linked to the speed of further political integration  in  Europe.  As long  as there  is no 
federal  European  state,  I  expect  that  providing  an  independent  view  on  national  and  euro  area 
economic developments, within the context of area wide monetary policy,  will  be a key  task for the 
Dutch central bank. Tasks related to financial stability and banking supervision will also remain part of 
our core business. 
In order to carry out these tasks effectively, we have to remain closely connected to the formation of 
monetary policy. We also have an important role in explaining policy decisions to our citizens. Given 
the language, cultural and historical differences between countries, we should not underestimate the 
importance  or  difficulty  of  this  task  and  the  role  of  national  central  banks  in  carrying  it  out.  These 
factors help explain the inclusion of national central bank governors in the ECB Governing Council, 
which brings me to my third theme. 
Decision-making in the two monetary unions  
The  final  area  of  comparison  between  the  Fed  and  the  Eurosystem  I  want  to  make  concerns  the 
process of monetary policy decision making. Both areas include representation from regions as well as 
from the centre. But, it is clear that in this area the US also has a more centralised system than the 
euro  area.  Washington-based  board  members  form  a  majority  on  the  committee  that  makes  US 
monetary policy decisions. In contrast, the ECB Executive Board members form a minority in the ECB 
Governing Council. 
In  both  monetary  unions,  all  decision  makers,  whether  regional  or  not,  are  expected  to  make  their 
decisions  on  the  basis  of  prospects  for  the  whole  monetary  union.  This  area  wide  approach  is 
strengthened in Europe by ensuring that Council members are prohibited from taking instructions in 
their decision making. At the same time, national or European bodies are not allowed to put pressure 
on Council members. These provisions reinforce the fact that we are in the ECB Council on a personal 
basis, and not to represent national or other interests. 
In a few years, the size of the euro area will probably increase significantly. As you will all be aware, 
European  history  also  lies  behind  our  desire  for  enlargement.  Most  accession  countries  have 
announced that they want to join the euro area shortly after entry into the EU. Whether they should 
join the euro area so quickly is a point we could debate another day. Regardless of our views on that 
issue, the fact remains that we have to be prepared for a substantial enlargement of the Eurosystem in 
the  next  five  to  ten  years.  Consistent  with  the  provisions  in  the  Nice  Treaty,  the  ECB  Council  is 
preparing its proposals on changes to voting procedures to accommodate enlargement. 
The reason for considering a change is to guard against the perception that our decision making could 
become inefficient, and that it could potentially  be  dominated  by  governors from small countries.  In 
making changes, we must find a solution that retains the supranational character of decision making 
and does not renationalise monetary policy. This implies that the governors of all the national central 
banks  should  continue  to  be  treated  equally.  At  the  same  time,  the  Council  must  represent  the 
Eurosystem as a whole, and be seen to do so - implying that it must not become too centralised. A 
solution that meets these criteria could involve some form of rotating membership for the governors of 
the national central banks, so as to limit the number of voting governors. This could be a variation on 
the  Fed  system,  albeit  more  decentralised.  There,  all  of  the  regional  presidents  participate  in  the 
discussions,  but not all of them have a  vote  at  any  point  in time. Finding a solution that meets the 
criteria I have set out is especially important, given that changes here could set a precedent for other 
areas of supranational European co-operation 
Concluding remarks 
Let me briefly conclude. In my view, differences in mandates between the Fed and the Eurosystem are 
important in understanding our respective decisions, and this is often forgotten. In addition, comparing 
the two systems sheds some light on where each institution may head in the future. Regarding our 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2002
 mandates, it seems to me that any changes in this  area are likely to  be in the direction of the Fed 
moving closer to where we and other central banks are, rather than the reverse. For organisation and 
decision making, the future is more difficult to predict. Any changes here need to take account of the 
political  realities  of  monetary  union  between  sovereign  countries.  Euro  area  monetary  policy  is 
supranational, so decision making has to be based on the euro area as a whole, and not individual 
countries. At the same time, the euro area consists of independent countries. That implies that there is 
a limit to how far the Eurosystem can centralise in advance of any political union. This reality has to be 
clearly reflected in our decision-making body. 
I wish you success with the rest of your conference and an enjoyable stay here in Amsterdam. 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 3
