 Otmar Issing: Monetary policy in a changing economic environment 
Speech by Professor Otmar Issing,1 Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Symposium “Rethinking Stabilisation Policy”, Jackson Hole, 30 August 2002. 
 I intend to focus my remarks on the challenges facing monetary policy in a rapidly changing world. I 
shall  start  by  examining  the  nature  of  economic  change  confronting  monetary  policy  in  its  daily 
execution.  In  the  absence  of  an  unambiguous  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  and  of  a  clear 
strategy to sustain it, the ongoing task of identifying the latest economic shocks may easily  distract 
the  central  bank  from  the  need  to  maintain  a  firm  sense  of  direction  in  the  longer  run.  Next,  I  will 
advance  an  interpretation  of  why  the  transition  to  European  monetary  union  –  involving,  by  all 
standards,  a  state  of  acute  uncertainty  –  could  be  accomplished  in  the  smooth  manner  in  which  it 
proceeded. In this context, I will highlight the role of two complementary policy perspectives. These 
two principles of good policy are conducive to flexible and timely responses to unfolding events and, at 
the  same  time,  insure  policy  against  myopia  and  short-termism  and  keep  it  solidly  anchored  to  its 
medium-term objective.  
Cyclical and structural change 
Economic change – and the uncertainty which it brings about – has three dimensions. At the ground 
level,  we  have  cyclical,  that  is  transitory  and/or  non-structural,  economic  shocks  coming  along 
continuously.  The  theory  of  economic  policy  normally  assumes  that  such  shocks  are  ‘additive’  in 
nature,  in  that  they  do  not  pose  a  controllability  problem  for  policy.  Nevertheless,  they  have  to  be 
properly  identified  in  real  time.  Econometric  theory  has  spent  decades  devising  sophisticated 
identifying restrictions to isolate different types of shocks from the tangle that appears in the data. The 
purpose  of  these  exercises  is  to  trace  the  propagation  profile  of  exogenous  impulses  through  the 
economic system. But nothing close to a consensus view has emerged. In fact, inference is often non-
robust across various identification schemes.2  
As  a  consequence,  central  bankers  are  given  little  guidance  as  to  the  nature  of  the  stochastic 
disturbances which drive the business cycle on average. Of course, model-selection itself is at stake 
here, as competing modelling paradigms can only be put to a test – and discriminated – by matching 
their quantitative implications with the dynamic shock responses that one sees in the data. If the latter 
can only be generated on the basis of controversial identification restrictions, the empirical benchmark 
becomes  elusive.  For  all  these  reasons,  central  bankers  must  exercise  judgement  when  they 
encounter  perturbations,  and  they  cannot  rely  on  any  single  approach  to  reasoning  through  the 
implications of such shocks.  
At a  higher  level, and  a lower frequency,  we  have  structural change. This induces parameter – i.e. 
multiplicative  –  uncertainty,  as  innovations  tend  not  only  to  persist,  but  become  embedded  in  the 
coefficients through which key variables respond to exogenous forces. Monetary policy-makers, again, 
find themselves at a crossroads. For one thing, it is extremely difficult for them to decompose in real 
time what is due to structural change and what stems from normal cyclical sources of fluctuation, as 
these events tend to come together. But, more fundamentally, central bankers perceive the uncertainty 
surrounding  structural  variation  as  of  a  higher  order  of  magnitude  –  and  of  a  different  nature  – 
compared  to  the  way  parametric  risk  is  treated  in  much  of  the  literature.  I  believe  this  type  of  our 
measure of uncertainty is closer, in this case, to a Knightian concept wherein probability distributions 
for model coefficients cannot be articulated. 
A  further  source  of  uncertainty,  of  a  strategic  sort,  stems  from  the  endogenous  –  at  times 
unpredictable – process whereby agents form their expectations. This process has a strategic, game-
I would like to thank Massimo Rostagno for his valuable contribution. 
                                                      
1  
2   Various  alternative  methods  to  identify  monetary  policy  shocks  generally  produce  comparable  qualitative  results,  in  the 
sense that inference is reasonably robust across a large subset of identification schemes. However, this does not appear to 
be the case for exercises aimed at identifying shocks to technology. Furthermore, there is some disagreement as to the 
extent to which different shocks have been responsible for output variation in the past.  
BIS Review 48/2002 
 1
 theoretic flavour as the central bank and  its  way to respond to the events is  very much part  of the 
picture, and in some way it is driving the formation of views about the future.   
Incidentally, the  identification of the  disturbances stemming from cyclical, structural or  expectational 
disturbances is further complicated by the ex-post statistical revisions which may at times overturn the 
empirical  platform  on  which  central  bankers  have  to  make  their  decisions  in  real  time.  And  it  is 
superfluous  to  remind  this  audience  of  the  paramount  measurement  problems  that  cloud  state 
variables  such  as  the  output  gap,  the  NAIRU,  the  steady-state  real  interest  rate  which  are  of  key 
importance in mainstream macroeconomic discussions.  
Institutional change  
Complexity  reaches  its  climax  in  the  presence  of  large-scale  institutional  change,  however.  This 
source of change is sufficiently rare in history to escape econometric testing, and sufficiently severe to 
impart a profound discontinuity in the data-generating process. Times of institutional change are times 
in  which  the  signal  extraction  problem  for  central  banks  is  most  acute.  Structural  change  may  be 
associated with a widely dispersed range of expectations. These, in turn, may behave erratically and 
fail to co-ordinate on a focal point.  
The  ECB  has  some  examples  to  tell  in  this  regard.  When  the  European  Central  Bank  started 
conducting policy in 1999, area-wide back data were only scantly available, many statistical indicators 
were still under construction. More importantly, the presumption was that the creation of the euro area 
would itself imply a major regime shift. Therefore, the statistical patterns emerging from past data – if 
and when made available by aggregation of national figures – might not be informative of the structure 
of the new economic entity, or might even be misleading. Under such circumstances, it could not be 
taken  for  granted  that  private  agents  could  immediately  form  expectations  consistent  with  the  new 
regime, and thus instability in behaviour could not be ruled out.  In some sense, we were studying the 
evolution of a moving object, which was changing for the very reason that it was being observed, as in 
the famous Heisenberg paradox. Real time misperception, false inference, Knightian uncertainty, all 
the usual professional hazards of central banking, plus something else seemed to be compounded – 
let’s be conservative – by a factor of three.  
Indeed, the ECB did preside over a monumental transition. The money market, for one, underwent a 
historical  transformation  on  the  eve  of  the  launch  of  the  euro  in  January  1999.  Eleven  national 
markets,  so  diverse  in  terms  of  participants,  operating  conventions,  settlement  structures,  credit 
facilities, had to merge into a unified trading area almost overnight. New payments systems for large-
value 
traditionally  protected  by  currency 
fragmentation and national regulations were opened up to arbitrage and straight competition.  
Yet, the transition was smooth and the abrupt switch in structural relations, which many observers had 
seen in the offing, did not materialise after all. Markets immediately recognised the new rules of the 
game.  They  adjusted  swiftly  to  the  new  monetary  policy  environment.  Since  1999,  overnight  rates 
have limited their fluctuations on the dates of monetary policy announcements to less than five basis 
points on average, a sign that policy was reasonably predictable.3 The 10-year break even inflation 
rate  obtained  from  French  index-linked  bonds  –  a  crude  measure  of  inflation  expectations  –  has 
consistently signalled the degree of credibility of the ECB’s monetary policy to maintain inflation in line 
with its announced definition of price stability. This indicates that markets have perceived our pattern 
of response to the events as transparent and consistent over time.  
All this has to be measured against the magnitude of the disturbances which intervened in the course 
of the first three and a half years of our existence. Since 1999 the euro area has weathered a number 
of major economic or financial turbulence world-wide preserving a degree of monetary and economic 
stability that would have hardly been conceivable before the advent of Monetary Union. The euro area 
has  gone  through  a  sequence  of  energy  price  shocks  with  only  limited  and  short-lived  impact  on 
inflation expectations. And a long trend of foreign exchange depreciation – recently reversed – as well 
as a marked correction in stock prices since early 2000 have done little to shake the confidence in the 
euro as a solid store of value.  
implemented.  Capital  markets 
transactions  were 
                                                      
3   See V. Gaspar et al (2001), ‘The ECB Monetary Policy Strategy and the Money Market, European Central Bank Working 
Paper No. 47, July; and P. Hartmann et al (2001), The Microstructure of the Euro Money Market, European Central Bank 
Working Paper No. 80, October.  
2 
 BIS Review 48/2002
 Anchoring expectations in a changing environment 
How  was  all  this  possible?  How  could  uncertainty  of  the  highest  degree  fail  to  leave  a  mark  in  the 
records? In my view the ECB’s success in anchoring expectations right from the start has not fallen 
from the sky nor has it been entirely “inherited” from the past. Instead, I would argue, our success can 
be attributed in good measure to the ECB’s monetary policy strategy and the more general principles 
which underlie our policy making. Not least, it has been a reflection of our philosophy that markets are 
powerful, sometimes overwhelmingly so, but nevertheless in need to be guided by a central bank, not 
meddled with.  
First, the way we committed ourselves to the overriding mandate to be the guardians of price stability 
in the euro area – which we received from an international Treaty – anchored expectations in a time of 
accelerated change. The ECB’s announcement of a quantitative definition of price stability – which is 
symmetric in the sense that it is incompatible with inflation as well as with deflation – was immediately 
acknowledged by our counterparts. It is important to add that price stability according to our definition 
is  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium-term.  The  medium-term  orientation  of  our  monetary  policy 
strategy and our aversion to fine-tuning of short-term developments in prices and real variables has 
helped  to  provide  a  firm  compass  while  the  economy  was  sailing  through  the  uncharted  turbulent 
waters of 1999 and subsequent years. It deflected the risk that, amidst exceptional uncertainties, the 
central  bank  may  itself  become  an  additional  source  of  noise.  Ultimately,  it  provided  a  degree  of 
leverage over expectations on the eve of the transition to the new currency that could pin them down 
solidly  to  the  intended  objectives  of  policy.4  The  mandate  and  the  independence  that  it  ensures 
endowed the new institution with a stock of credibility that facilitated its operations and its interactions 
with the markets from the first day of monetary union.  
Secondly, our strategy has helped to sort through a wealth of conflicting statistics and has provided a 
reliable  roadmap  and  a  sense  of  direction.5  We  have  built  into  our  strategy  two  complementary 
perspectives over the workings of the economy, one in which money and credit are attributed a key 
role in the formation of prices. And one in which real variables receive pre-eminent attention as the 
determinants  of  price  pressures  in  the  short  term,  and  where  monetary  factors  are  treated  only 
implicitly. Under what we call the first pillar, we thoroughly monitor monetary and credit indicators on 
the  basis  of  those  analytical  frameworks  which  can  sensibly  incorporate  developments  in  money. 
Under this pillar, we announce a reference value for M3 growth which, if realised on average over the 
medium term, should in normal circumstances indicate that policy is consistent with the achievement 
of  price  stability.  I  shall  return  to  this  principle  shortly,  as  it  will  constitute  the  focal  point  of  my 
remaining observations. Under the second pillar we review a broad set of non-monetary indicators and 
assess their implications for price setting over a short to medium-term horizon.  
These  two  mutually-reinforcing  perspectives  provide  robust  indications  for  a  policy  aimed  at  price 
stability, which survive the cross-checking of competing models and the rise-and-fall cycles of fashions 
in economic thinking.  
Keeping a firm sense of direction  
But  how  can  a  monetary  policy  framework  induce  prompt  action  in  the  face  of  ever  changing 
circumstances, and at the same time maintain a firm sense of direction? Here there is clearly potential 
for  destabilising  mechanisms  setting  in.  Constantly  bombarded  by  economic  news,  a  central  bank 
risks becoming hypnotised by the latest indicator, by the markets’ likely reaction to the latest indicator, 
by  the  markets’  anticipation  of  the  central  bank’s  response  to  the  latest  indicator,  and  so  on  into 
infinity. This mechanism can lead monetary policy gradually astray from its foremost role of providing a 
firm medium-term anchor for the economy.  
                                                      
4   On the connection between a central bank’s predominant focus on price stability, its aversion on real fine-tuning and its 
credibility assets, see V. Gaspar and F. Smets (2002), ‘Monetary Policy, Price Stability and Output Gap Stabilisation,’ Paper 
presented at the Conference ‘Government and the Economy: The Pros and Cons of Counter-Cyclical Macro Policy’ (New 
York, 11 July).  
5   For  a  more  precise  description  of  the  ECB  monetary  policy  strategy,  see  ECB  (1999),  ‘The  Stability-Oriented  Monetary 
Policy Strategy of the Eurosystem,’ Monthly Bulletin, January; ECB (2000), ‘The Two Pillars of the ECB’s Monetary Policy 
Strategy,’  Monthly  Bulletin,  November;  and  O.  Issing  et  al  (2001),  ‘Monetary  Policy  in  the  Euro  Area,’  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
BIS Review 48/2002 
 3
 So,  at  the  risk  of  oversimplifying,  let  me  now  turn  to  consider  two  general  principles  of  prudent 
monetary governance which may help central banks to reconcile the need for prompt action and a firm 
medium-term orientation.  
First, a central bank always needs to tailor action upon the origin, the magnitude and the nature of the 
shocks which hit the economy from time to time. As I tried to argue above, this is a highly demanding 
exercise, because shocks do not come about with labels: they have to be identified first, in real time. 
But there are no shortcuts or excuses: no simple rules linking policy to one or two privileged indicators 
can  substitute  for  an  accurate  examination  of  shocks  and  a  careful  analysis  of  their  potential  for 
transmission into prices over a sufficiently extended span of time ahead. A corollary to this principle is 
that the horizon for policy action cannot be set in advance, as I shall argue more extensively below. 
Second, a central bank can benefit from keeping  an  eye fixed on the single  long-term compatibility 
condition  that  monetary  economics  has  to  offer  to  practitioners,  free  of  model-specificities  and 
restrictive assumptions. Namely, that over a sufficiently extended period of time money should grow at 
a  rate  which  is  consistent  with  trend  growth  in  real  output  and  the  central  bank’s  definition  of  price 
stability. In more general terms, this principle embodies the ancient wisdom of the quantity theoretic 
law that it is the growth of money that ultimately anchors the development of prices. 
Each  one  of  these  two  principles  –  if  taken  individually  –  entails  some  guidance  for  the  monetary 
policy-maker, which, however, is partial. A monetary policy strategy – such as the one adopted by the 
ECB – can be seen to provide a robust framework for monetary policy decision-making, which heeds 
these two general principles in a way in which they reinforce and complement each other. 
The lesson suggested by the first principle is that disturbances have to be evaluated, as they come 
about,  according  to  their  potential  for  propagation,  for  infecting  expectations,  for  degenerating  into 
price spirals. And preventive action should not be delayed, as it becomes clear that shocks – whatever 
their origin – may take hold in the economy and evolve into inflationary or deflationary pressures over 
the medium term. The time dimension of these possible developments varies with the type of shock, 
the initial macroeconomic conditions, the prevailing financial sentiment, the international environment 
and  many  other  variables.  Therefore,  the  horizon  for  monetary  policy  cannot  be  set  in  advance. 
Sometimes it pays to look far ahead, beyond the average lag of monetary transmission. Sometimes, 
the economy can be expected to return to price stability within a much shorter horizon. In all events, a 
central bank has to ensure that expectations be quickly reverting to its declared objective of policy.   
The policy recommendation implicit in the second principle is simple: do not ignore the information that 
monetary developments contain for medium-term price developments even if the relationship between 
money and prices may not come through strongly at shorter horizons. This principle also provides an 
antidote against the pitfalls of exceedingly forward-looking rules.6 Looking into the future with a vigilant 
eye, as the first principle suggests, is a fundamental element of good policy. But, by constantly looking 
ahead, one should not lose sight of the intended trajectory of policy and the need to act consistently 
over  time.  One  should  always  be  constantly  aware  of  possible,  inadvertent  slippages  from  the 
intended  long-term  direction.  In  the  end,  monetary  policy  needs  to  ensure  a  path  of  money  supply 
which is consistent with maintaining price stability over the medium term. Trends in money velocity can 
be  incorporated  in  such  a  longer-term  benchmark,  to  account  for  the  evolving  structure  of  the 
monetary  exchange.  But,  in  the  end,  there  can  be  no  sustained  inflation  without  systematic 
accommodation in monetary aggregates.  
The key point that I want to bring out here is that neither of these two principles can stand alone. Both 
are  in  need  for  mutual  cross-checking.  The  first  principle  suggests  that  the  central  bank  move  its 
interest rate policy instrument in reaction to the disturbances that are considered to have implications 
for price stability in the medium term. But these actions – taken at successive points in time – may not 
prove to be consistent over time and could thus, cumulatively, result in systematic divergence from the 
desired objective. Thus, the course of policy followed in the attempt to counter perturbations via shock-
specific responses needs to be ascertained against the straight line provided by the quantity theoretic 
reference of the second principle. If that line turns out to have been departed from for an extended 
period of time, then policy, sooner or later, has to be brought back onto the right course.  
                                                      
6  A discussion of the problem of excessive forward-lookingness in monetary policy is provided in M. Woodford (2000), ‘Pitfalls 
of Forward-looking Monetary Policy,’ American Economic Review, vol. 90(2), 100-104.. 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2002
 Incidentally,  it  is  worth  noting  that  historical  episodes  of  asset  price  ‘bubbles’  have  tended  to  be 
accompanied  by  strong  and  persistent  deviations  from  that  reference  line.  Thus,  a  monetary  policy 
strategy  that  monitors  closely  monetary  developments  and  measures  them  against  a  medium  term 
reference growth rate may – as an important side effect – also contribute to limiting the emergence of 
unsustainable developments in asset valuations. Asset prices, by themselves, are not a suitable goal 
for  monetary  policy.  In  the  long  run  the  relative  price  of  assets  is  mainly  driven  by  underlying  real 
factors – e.g. technological developments and preferences – which cannot be controlled by monetary 
policy. But monetary aggregates and credit developments in situations of financial instability can signal 
to  what  extent  consumption,  investment,  labour  and  price  setting  decisions  are  been  affected  by 
conditions of financial disorder, excessive euphoria or disillusion.       
Conversely, the second principle too, if followed in isolation, is subject to potential difficulties. As first 
pointed  out  by  William  Poole  more  than  thirty  years  ago,  there  are  many  short-term  shocks  to  the 
amount of money demanded for each unit of nominal income, which monetary authorities would do 
better  ignoring  and  accommodating.  These  unexplained  innovations  may  be  simply  related  to 
seasonal noise in the money creation system, or transitory forces driving around transactions habits. 
They  may  reflect  reversible  movements  in  the  preference  for  liquidity,  in-  or  out-flows  of  foreign 
exchange transiting through checkable accounts, or else. In the case of Europe, it cannot be ruled out 
that  the  process  of  financial  integration  may  have  affected  the  income  velocity  of  monetary 
aggregates.  In  these  circumstances,  having  to  hit  a  constant  rate-of-growth  target  for,  say,  base 
money on a near-term horizon would result in ample fluctuations in short-term interest rates. And this 
instability would likely be transmitted to prices and output causing unnecessary fluctuations in these 
variables.  In  this  context,  the  first  principle  of  good  policy,  prescribing  a  careful  filtering  of 
disturbances,  provides  important  safeguards  against  such  policy-induced  instabilities.  In  fact,  it 
underlies the ECB’s decision to adopt a reference value for monetary growth, which is not a monetary 
target.  And  it  also  supports  the  need  to  look  at  monetary  developments  from  a  medium-term 
perspective.  Nevertheless,  as  long  as money  demand  relationships  are  reasonably  stable  –  as  has 
been  the  case  in  Europe  in  contrast  to  the  US  –  information  from  monetary  developments  should 
provide robust indications of medium-term price pressures. 
Paraphrasing an expression of Paul Samuelson, we were given two eyes: one to watch money and 
credit aggregates and one to watch everything else. Ultimately, these two policy perspectives are to be 
combined in a single strategy which subsumes them both in a unified – albeit complex – and robust 
framework for action. This strategy lends policy-makers an accurate perspective over the economy to 
respond expeditiously to the events, and at the same time insures them against systematic slippage. 
Concluding remarks 
I shall conclude with a number of observations which have been recurrent in my remarks above.  
First: there is no simple escape for a central bank from a serious analysis of economic change, which 
comes in the form of shocks and noise. These changes are often opaque and present themselves in 
disguise, but they may contain information which cannot be discarded on a priori grounds. There is no 
escape to a serious analysis of economic perturbations. Certainly, following deceptively simple policy 
rules of one sort or another is no viable cure to complexity. 
Second: the change in money demand is one of the most difficult to decipher. Looking ahead, these 
shocks may even augment in number and magnitude – as has been the case in the US and elsewhere 
in  the  past  –  which  would  make  filtering  and  reading  the  signals  coming  from  money  a  difficult 
undertaking. But the central bank should not deny itself the opportunity to take advantage of all the 
information  that  they  carry  with  themselves.  The  conviction  that  money  matters  and  contains 
invaluable information for policy is shared across central bankers wedded to different monetary policy 
strategies.7  
Third:  while  looking  into  conjunctural  signals,  a  central  bank  should  never  fall  prey  to  myopia  and 
short-termism. Monetary theory has provided a compass for measuring how the course of policy has 
deviated in the past and will likely deviate in future from the straight line consistent with price stability 
                                                      
7   See for example M. King (2002), ‘No Money, No Inflation – The Role of Money in the Economy,’ Bank of England Quarterly 
Bulletin, Summer;  and  L.  Meyer  (2001),  ‘Does  money  matter?’  Homer Jones  Memorial  Lecture  (St.  Louis,  28  March),  in 
Bank of International Settlement Review No. 25 (30 March).   
BIS Review 48/2002 
 5
 and  a  sustainable  growth  path.  This  quantity  theoretic  reference  should  be  consulted  regularly  and 
taken seriously. Monetary policy cannot react mechanistically to monetary variables, and the weights 
that a central bank attaches in its considerations to the various headline measures of money supply 
are state-dependent: they cannot be set in advance. Thus, there may be extended periods of time in 
which  observers  do  not  detect  reactions  to  monetary  indicators.  In  our  strategy,  for  example,  the 
weights are conditional on the analysis of monetary shocks, which is conducted under the first pillar. 
This analysis is aimed at purging the developments in monetary aggregates of the noise with which 
they are usually observed. This analysis yields more reliable measures which can be used for policy 
orientation.  
But if deviations in these measures of money from the long-run trajectory consistent with price stability 
are ample and persistent, a central bank should intervene, if the anchoring properties of money are to 
be reinstated and made operative.  
6 
 BIS Review 48/2002
