 Kristina Persson: The Riksbank, growth and inflation 
Speech  by  Ms  Kristina  Persson,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Företagarnas 
Riksorganisation, Trosa, 28 February 2002. 
 Firstly,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here.  It  is  important  to  meet  with 
representatives of industry and be able to talk about the role of the Riksbank and its significance for 
growth.  
The role of the Riksbank 
The  objective  for monetary  policy  is  clearly  stated  in  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  -  to  maintain  price 
stability. The Riksbank has further defined this in its inflation target, i.e. that CPI inflation shall amount 
to 2 per cent, with a tolerated deviation interval of plus/minus one percentage point. This means that 
when we are determining the direction for monetary policy, we must take into account changes in a 
number of areas that affect price trends directly or indirectly. I intend to comment on one of these in 
particular, namely the potential growth of the Swedish economy in a long-term perspective. 
The Sveriges Riksbank Act also establishes that the Riksbank shall be independent, this means that 
we six members of the Executive Board, who make decisions regarding the instrumental rate, may not 
request  or  receive  instructions  from  the  government  or  parliament.  The  idea  is  that  we  are  thereby 
always free to safeguard the value of money and are not tempted, for instance, to contribute to an 
increase in growth and employment through lower interest rates during an election year. 
At the beginning of the new monetary policy regime, when the fixed exchange rate was abandoned in 
1992,  there  was  a  certain  amount  of  criticism  of  the  inflation  target;  many  people  feared  that  the 
unconditional  attachment  to  an  inflation  norm  would  have  a  negative  effect  on  growth  and 
employment. A monetary policy aimed at price stability could lead to a prolonged period of low growth 
and, in extreme cases, to declining production. 
It may appear as though this objective forced the Riksbank to give a lower priority to the development 
of the real economy, i.e. production and employment. We have only one objective for monetary policy, 
unlike, for instance, the US central bank that also has the task of taking into consideration the effects 
of  interest  rate  decisions  on  growth  and  employment.  However,  in  actual  fact,  the  difference  is 
probably not so great - indirectly the assessments of the future path of the real economy also play an 
important role in our decisions. Moreover, we also have the task "without neglecting the price stability 
objective, of supporting the objectives for general economic policy with the aim of attaining sustainable 
growth and a high level of employment." This is expressed in the proposal for the Sveriges Riksbank 
Act from 1999. 
However, even more importantly, there is no opposition between good growth and price stability, quite 
the reverse. If we look at developments during the 1990s, growth since 1992 has shown an average 
rate of 3 per cent a year, despite the fact that inflation was under the target level for several years. At 
the  same  time,  unemployment  has fallen  from  9  per  cent  to  approximately  4  per  cent.  This  can  be 
compared with the 1970s and 1980s, when inflation was at around 8 per cent and growth an average 
of 2 per cent. 
Price stability and the importance of achieving it are also well established among the general public in 
Sweden.  This  is  important,  as  understanding  and  acceptance  of  monetary  policy  is  important  for 
inflation  expectations  and  thereby  for  behaviour  on  the  labour  and  goods  markets.  It  is  you  - 
particularly those of you with your own businesses - who set the prices and who must be able to trust 
that it will turn out as we say; that inflation will not rise above or fall below the target of 2 per cent for a 
longer period. This is also the reason why we members of the Executive Board often travel around 
holding speeches. Communication with the Swedish public and the operators on the various markets 
is important for monetary policy. 
As monetary policy operates impact with a certain time lag, the instrumental rate is adjusted so that 
the total assessment of future inflation, taking into account the risk scenarios, 1 to 2 years ahead is in 
line  with  the  target.  Interest  rate  decisions  are  based  on  forecasts  of  future  prices.  There  will  be 
deviations from these forecasts, even if they are well founded, partly because the economy is hit by 
BIS Review 14/2002 
 1
 unforeseen shocks from time to time. If fruit-growers' crops are attacked by insects, the price of apples 
will rise, if the dams are not filled with water, electricity prices may rise, and if cows in Europe suffer 
various diseases, the price of meat and certain other foodstuffs rises. If the Riksbank tried to make 
corrections  for  this  type  of  temporary  price  disturbance,  it  would  probably  lead  to  large  swings  in 
monetary policy and unnecessary fluctuations in demand. 
It would therefore be wrong to give the impression that inflation will always lie at 2 per cent. On the 
other hand, it is important that the Riksbank constantly adapts the instrumental rate to ensure that the 
inflation forecast 1-2 years ahead is in line with the inflation target. This means that households and 
firms can rely on temporary deviations above or below this level being just temporary. 
One factor that could seriously undermine the credibility of the inflation target is if a higher rate of price 
increase led to large-scale demands for wage compensation. If wages and prices begin to chase one 
another upwards, as happened in the 1980s, everyone will lose out in the end. 
The importance of monetary policy for growth and vice versa 
The importance of monetary policy for growth is primarily connected to the need for stability in trade 
and industry and the labour market. When you businessmen and women have to make a decision on 
investment, you can now usually avoid having to worry that sudden fluctuations in the inflation rate will 
overturn  your  calculations.  In  most  cases,  temporary,  minor  deviations  from  the  target  should  not 
change the final results of the calculations. The stability in planning that this creates should lead to 
more and better quality investments, which in turn should stimulate growth. 
This  is  reflected,  for  instance,  in  the  fact  that  total  factor  productivity  in  the  Swedish  economy 
increased  strongly  once  macroeconomic  stability  was  established  in  the  1990s.  Other  countries 
around  the  world  have  had  the  same  experience.  Macroeconomic  stability  promotes  growth  and 
productivity. 
What may be given less attention in the public debate is the importance of growth for our capacity to 
meet  the  inflation  target  -  despite  the  fact  that  this  really  is  a  key  issue.  It  is  the  demand  in  the 
economy  in  relation  to  production  capacity  that  is  the  decisive  factor  as  to  whether  inflationary 
bottlenecks arise or not. Or, if we instead under-utilise production potential and therefore need to try to 
increase capacity utilisation. What determines whether there is a risk of overheating is the Swedish 
economy's capacity utilisation in relation to its potential. 
I believe that one can say there is a type of inbuilt speed limit for the economy. It is difficult, as a rule, 
to know  where this goes; moreover it changes over  time. External events, the  dynamics in industry 
and in particular economic policy can change the potential growth rate of the economy. In other words, 
it is possible to both raise and lower the speed limit, depending on what is happening in the economy. 
However,  at  a  given  point  in  time  there  is  a  limit  that  cannot  be  exceeded  or  gone  below  without 
damaging consequences. If growth exceeds the limit for a longer period, overheating and inflationary 
pressure will arise. If growth is too low, the opposite will apply, resulting in higher unemployment and 
poorer welfare than necessary. 
Let us compare the Swedish economy with driving a car. The Riksbank's job is made easier if the car 
and the road allow some speed, without accidents occurring. The work done in other political areas to 
promote growth in trade and industry is therefore very important in enabling the Riksbank to maintain a 
low interest rate. The Riksbank cannot affect potential growth; our role is to create good conditions for 
other  private  and  public  operators.  It  is  their  work  on  structural  reforms,  better  infrastructure, 
education,  research,  entrepreneurship,  innovations,  etc.  that  improves  the  economy's  long-term 
capacity to create growth and thereby welfare in the long term. 
The decisive factor for monetary policy is the speed limit over a longer period of time. If we have low 
capacity utilisation from the start, we can temporarily have higher growth, i.e. accelerate until we have 
achieved the economy's cruising speed. One complication is the lack of clear signs stating the speed 
limit - in other words; there is always uncertainty over where the capacity ceiling lies - or how high the 
Swedish economy's potential growth rate is. At the Riksbank we have previously estimated this to be 
approximately 2-2.5 per cent. Today, when we conclude that the inflation tendencies in the Swedish 
economy  appear  to  have  been  higher  than  we  had  previously  realised,  one  of  the  possible 
explanations  is  that  we  may  have  over-estimated  the  Swedish  economy's  production  capacity.  The 
Inflation Report to be published in March, which will form the basis for our decision on the interest rate 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2002
 at  our  next  monetary  policy  meeting,  will  provide  an  overall  assessment  of  resource  utilisation  and 
inflation. 
Economic progress in the 1990s 
In  the  seam  between  the  1980s  and  1990s,  we  had  a  clear  overheating  of  the  Swedish  economy, 
despite the fact that growth had been a modest 2 per cent a year during the 1980s. Over the past five 
years, the economy has grown by 3 per cent a year without the corresponding worries. Something has 
evidently changed for the better. 
My opinion is that the reason is positive changes particularly in four areas important for growth: the 
macroeconomy, increased competition, trade and developments in technology. I shall briefly discuss 
these and then, in conclusion, say a few words about the challenges I see for the Swedish economy at 
present. 
Economic policy has changed in different stages during the 1990s. Monetary policy has been aimed at 
maintaining  price  stability,  which  has  given  us  lower  interest  rates  and  an  increased  stability  and 
predictability, which is beneficial for the willingness to invest. Fiscal policy has also contributed through 
a  consolidation  of  central  government  finances  and  the  new  budget  system,  which  also  gives  us 
increased predictability. 
Sweden's membership of the EU's common market and deregulation also mean that several markets 
that  were  previously  monopolies  and  screened  off  from  competition,  have  now  been  opened  up  to 
competition.  These  include  financial  services,  transport,  telecommunications  and  energy.  The 
pressure on companies to use their resources efficiently has thereby increased. 
The stiffer competitive pressure is both a result of increased internationalisation and of deregulation of 
various  sub-sectors.  The  new  competition  act  introduced  in  1993  should  also  have  contributed. 
However, despite the fact that it is several years since the new competition legislation was introduced, 
the development towards increased competition appears to be moving very slowly. One indication of 
this  is  that  price  levels  in  Sweden  are  higher  than  in  many  other  countries,  without  this  being 
completely explained by differences in VAT and wage levels. This applies, for instance, to foodstuffs 
and  to  the  construction  materials  sector,  areas  characterised  by  a  high  company  concentration, 
significant entry barriers for new companies and weak competition from imports. Some of the limitation 
in  import  competition  is  due  to  norms,  standards  and  regulations  that  are  specific  to  Sweden.  The 
Swedish  market  is  too  small  for  companies  from  other  countries  to  find  it  profitable  to  manufacture 
products especially for us. 
There may therefore be reason to consider how competition legislation may have greater  effects in 
practice. Increased competition benefits the economy in two ways: by initially contributing indirectly to 
lower inflation and by stimulating efficiency and new ways of thinking. 
I believe that one of the problems with the competition legislation may be that the incentives to follow 
the law are too weak. It is always individuals (company managers, owners) who prepare and make 
decisions  on  limiting  competition  against  the  provisions  of  the  law,  but  there  is  little  personal 
responsibility  in  the  current  legislation.  Merely  sentencing  the  companies  to  fines  risks  creating  a 
situation where it is ultimately the consumers that have to pay a second time; first the cartels' higher 
prices and then the cost of the cartels' fines. In the USA, it is the responsible decision-makers that are 
penalised when breaches of the law come to light. 
The  Swedish  Competition  Authority  expresses  the  opinion  in  its  response  to  the  report  by  the 
committee  on  combating  cartels  (SOU  2001:74)  that  the  possibility  of  personal  penal  responsibility 
should be considered in Sweden. It makes comparisons with other economic crimes that lead to prison 
sentences. 
Increased mobility for ideas, goods, services, work and capital during the 1990s, partly through our 
membership  of  the  EU,  has  probably  also  had  a  positive  effect  on  growth.  Internationalisation  and 
increased  competition  are  particularly  valuable  for  growth  in  a  small  country  like  Sweden,  as  they 
involve  resources  that  would  otherwise  be  used  inefficiently  instead  being  moved  towards  more 
efficient use in other sectors or companies. 
Some  years  ago,  there  was  a  widespread  hope  in  Sweden  and  in  other  countries  that  the  "new 
economy"  following  the  breakthrough  of  information  technology  would  lead  to  a  sustainable  higher 
growth rate. It is possible that this still remains, in the USA there are calculations indicating that growth 
BIS Review 14/2002 
 3
 has been one percentage  point higher because of IT than it  would otherwise have  been during the 
1990s.1 The setbacks experienced by telecommunications and IT recently should probably be seen 
mainly as an unavoidable sobering process for a sector that was too heavily inflated by expectations. 
The fact that the bubble burst does not change the situation that IT developments have in many ways 
lastingly  changed  the  conditions  for  growth,  particularly  through  more  efficient  flows  of  information, 
decentralised production in networks, etc. 
In  Sweden  we  have  seen  how  total  factor  productivity,  the  part  of  productivity  considered  to  reflect 
progress in technology and organisation, has risen more strongly than before, and much more strongly 
than in many other countries, during the 1990s. The high productivity figures in Sweden were partly 
connected to the rise in the telecommunications products industry, but a rise in total factor productivity 
has  also  been  seen  in  other  parts  of  Swedish  trade  and  industry,  mainly  in  the  engineering  and 
pharmaceuticals industries. 
Despite the fact that the importance of IT is now being played down, the extensive use of computers, 
networks and the Internet in Sweden will make a positive contribution to productivity. Efficiency gains 
should  arise,  for  instance,  when  tax  authorities,  social  insurance  systems,  municipal  services,  etc. 
move over to Internet-based self-service. The connection between IT use and internationalisation of 
trade  and  industry  appears  particularly  strong,  with  increasingly  advanced  networks  of  specialised 
sub-contractors. It appears that the countries which had good productivity growth during 1995-2000, 
such  as  the  USA,  Finland,  Australia  and  Sweden,  all  had  trade  and  industry  that  opened  up  to 
international exchange more quickly than other OECD countries, parallel with an increase in IT use. 
Challenges 
The question is whether these improved conditions are enough to provide Sweden with stable, good 
growth over the next five to ten years. Can we trust that the problems of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s 
are definitely over? Or are there other institutional or structural changes which the economy need to 
undergo?  Some  of  the  growth  during  the  1990s  was  probably  a  temporary  effect  of  the  economy 
making a recovery after having been so hard pressed at the beginning of the 1990s. This effect should 
have faded now, and it is therefore up to the labour force, technology and renewal to do the job of 
raising potential growth in the long term. 
There are two main methods of increasing growth: firstly, that more people work or more people work 
more, secondly that productivity is improved. When, for instance, new technology or new organisations 
are introduced, production can be rationalised and productivity increases. If the content of production 
changes through a renewal in the direction of products and services that demand a higher value on 
the global market, the value of production rises. When this occurs without a corresponding increase in 
the number of hours worked, it leads to higher productivity. 
During the 1970s and 1980s and a little way into the 1990s, Sweden lost considerable ground in terms 
of  real  growth  compared  with  other  countries  in  the  OECD  region.  According  to  an  SNS  paper 
produced  last  year,  if  Sweden  had  a  growth  rate  of  one  whole  percentage  point  over  the  average 
among the richest countries, it would take 17 years for us to regain our place among the ten richest 
countries in the world.2 
If growth is going to increase through more people working, part of the large percentage of the adult 
population  that  is  absent  from  working  life  for  various  reasons  would  have  to  work.  Today 
approximately 800,000 full-time workers disappear from working life as a result of ill health3. At the end 
of 2001, it was estimated that the number of persons who had been on sick leave for longer than one 
year amounted to 120,000, which is almost three times the figure for 1997. The number of those on 
sick leave shorter than one year is also continuing to rise.4 The problems are accentuated by the fact 
                                                      
1   According to Stephen Oliner and Daniel Sichel at the Federal Reserve in Washington, the productivity trend has increased 
by one percentage point during the second half of the 1990s. Half of this increase is a result of investments in IT. 
 
2  Economics council report 2001: kluster.se. Sweden in the new geographical economy 2001. 
3 
800  000  full-time  posts  is  calculated  on  approximately  400 000  early  retirements  plus  total  sick  leave,  including  the 
qualification days and absence during the sick-pay period which when translated becomes approximately 400 000 full-time 
posts (Source: SOU 2002:5, An action plan for increased ill-health at work.) 
4  Source: SOU 2002:5, An action plan for increased ill health at work. 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2002
 that  the  pensioner  support  ratio,  which  expresses  the  number  of  professionally  active  in  relation  to 
those retired due to ill-health or old age, is moving up from 2.1 in 2000 to 1.4 in 2030, according to 
Statistics Sweden's population forecasts.5  
This  means  that  if  potential  growth  is  to  be  sustained  through  more  people  working,  more  need  to 
participate in working life in the higher age groups. Another method of raising potential growth would 
be  to  invest  so  heavily  that  the  productivity  of  the  labour  force  increased  sufficiently  to  allow  one 
worker to support one pensioner in the future. 
Capacity for renewal 
To  summarise,  much  has  changed  recently  in  the  Swedish  economy.  The  external  framework  is 
currently  characterised  by  a  substantial  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy  stability,  which  facilitates 
planning  and  decision-making  for  both  households  and  companies.  These  fundamental  conditions, 
together  with  a  marked  increase  in  openness  to  the  world  around  us,  give  reason  to  believe  in  a 
continued favourable development in productivity. 
At the same time, one should remember that many markets in Sweden still show clear signs of poor 
competition. This involves considerable costs. I believe that the Swedish economy has considerable 
unutilised potential for stronger development if we concentrate on this, i.e. how we shall increase the 
"speed limit" in the economy. 
It is not enough to have good macroeconomic conditions; a policy for growth is concerned more with 
microeconomics than macroeconomics. It is a question of creating good incentives for individuals and 
people to behave in a rational social manner in their roles as economic agents. What is profitable and 
attractive behaviour for the individual should also be profitable for the whole. 
This takes me into the field of politics, which is not part of the Riksbank's responsibilities. However, 
this is a field where I have been very involved in my previous career roles. I would therefore like to 
very briefly round off by saying something about what I personally believe could increase the long-term 
growth potential in Sweden. 
I believe that the stimulance for increased growth capacity in the Swedish economy can be found in 
three  main  arease,  which  concern,  firstly,  efforts  to  promote  entrepreneurship,  i.e.  more  people 
choosing to start up companies and companies growing. The entrepreneurs' share of the work force in 
Sweden is low. Compared with other OECD countries, Sweden was ranked no. 19 in 2000.6 
Secondly,  we  should  invest    more  in  knowledge  and  education,  at  all  levels  and  for  everyone. 
Research  belongs  here  too,  as  does  the  link  between  research  and  new  products  -  innovations. 
Education promotes both economic growth and individual welfare. 
The third area can be called the renewal of working life. A good, rich society must make use of the 
productive force that all people have. To make this possible probably requires new thinking in many 
areas. 
So, how about access to capital, this is surely decisive for growth? Certainly, but capital seeks to go 
where  it  will  obtain  the  best  return.  Attractiveness,  an  ability  to  attract  and  retain  investments,  is 
created  by  entrepreneurs,  research  &  development  and  competence.  In  an  increasingly  globalised 
market, regions and places compete with one another for investments. The most important factor in 
attracting investments is tied to people's capacity. The key to growth is human capacity and will. 
This  reasoning  can  be  applied  to  small  places  such  as  Trosa  municipality,  but  also  to  regions  and 
countries such as Europe or Sweden. The EU competes with the USA; recently the USA has often 
been  superior  with  regard  to  productivity,  growth  and  inflow  of  capital.  An  important  question  for 
Europe  is  whether  the  common  market,  single  currency  and  co-operation  can  achieve  the  same 
degree  of  dynamism  as  in  the  USA.  And  how  to  pursue  a  European  welfare  policy  without  losing 
competitiveness.  Excessively  deep  social  chasms,  extensive  crime  and  social  maladjustment  could 
become an internal threat to growth. 
                                                      
5  Source: The National Social Insurance Board analyses 2002:3 "Older people's exit from the labour force - now and in the 
future." 
6  OECD, DSTI/IND(2002)11: "Benchmarking: Fostering firm creation and entrepreneurship". 
BIS Review 14/2002 
 5
 Even with good microeconomic conditions and a well-tended macropolicy, we will not be able to avoid 
fluctuations in economic activity; this is  built  into the way the economy functions. However,  we can 
subdue  the  fluctuations  through  stability  and  predictability  and  above  all,  we  can  have  a  different 
development in welfare than we have had since the 1970s. 
Thank you for listening! 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2002
