 Willem Duisenberg: China and the euro area in a global perspective 
Address by Dr Willem F. Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the symposium of 
the People’s Bank of China, Beijing, 25 February 2002. 
 Governor Dai, ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  China  and  I  feel  especially  honoured  to  be  invited  to  deliver  a 
speech at the People’s Bank. First, I would like to wish you all a very prosperous new year, under the 
sign of the horse. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Governor Dai and his staff, among 
other  things,  for  their  hospitality  and  for  having  prepared  such  an  excellent  programme  for  our 
delegation.  
Ever since China opened up to the outside world in 1978, it has been a major trading nation thanks to 
social and economic reforms. The process has turned China into a major economy and strengthened it 
as a political power. In 2000, the size of the Chinese economy, measured in terms of GDP, passed the 
USD 1 trillion mark, and is now ranked fifth behind the United States, the euro area, Japan and the 
United  Kingdom. To  accompany  China’s  growing  economic  and  financial  weight  in  the  international 
community, the EU is committed to further developing a comprehensive partnership with this country. 
The  ECB  is  playing  its  part  through  co-operation  in  both  international  and  bilateral  meetings.  For 
example,  we  meet  regularly  with  other  central  banks  in  the  context  of  the  IMF,  G20  and  BIS  to 
exchange  views  on  global  economic  and  financial  issues.  In  fact,  I  have  already  met  Governor  Dai 
once this year (actually, last week) in Hong Kong, at a BIS Special Governors’ meeting. Europe and 
Asia also co-operate closely through the ASEM (Asia-Europe meeting) process, launched in Bangkok 
in 1996. This has now developed into a broad forum for in-depth consultations between European and 
Asian partners and has prompted a range of co-operation initiatives. For example, in April this year the 
ECB  will  be  organising  a  seminar  on  “Regional  economic, financial  and  monetary  co-operation:  the 
European and Asian experiences”. Of course, I would also like to recall that the EU has long been in 
favour of China joining the World Trade Organisation, as it now has done, for which I should like to 
congratulate you. 
On a bilateral basis, four summit meetings between the EU and Chinese leaders have been held since 
1998. Leaders exchanged views on EU-China relations as well as international and regional issues of 
common interest, and agreed at the fourth summit in 2001 that the EU and China should continue their 
efforts to promote stability, peace and development in the world. Meanwhile, 2001 also witnessed a 
strengthening in the relations between the ECB and China. Following the visit of the PBC delegation 
headed by Governor Dai to the ECB in June, we agreed to establish a regular dialogue between the 
two central banks so as to enhance our co-operation on issues of common interest. Towards the end 
of  the  year,  our  Vice-President,  Mr.  Noyer,  was  invited  twice  by  the  Delegation  of  the  European 
Commission in China (once to Beijing in November and once to Shanghai in December) to speak on 
the subject of the euro cash changeover. On those occasions, Mr. Noyer outlined the importance of 
the process for the whole world, and reviewed relevant issues for countries outside the euro area.  
Today, I would like to dwell on the same topic – the euro. Let me begin by giving you an update of the 
euro cash changeover. I will then talk about the recent global economic developments and their impact 
on the euro area, before turning to the international role of the euro.  
Euro cash changeover 
Let me first turn to the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. While the euro was introduced as 
a new currency on 1 January 1999, the euro banknotes and coins were only issued and became legal 
tender  in  the  countries  participating  in  the  euro  area  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  With  the  cash 
changeover, the process of introducing a single European currency is completed. Paying with a single 
currency in daily transactions throughout the euro area can be regarded as an achievement of historic 
proportions and as a major step towards greater European integration.  
Now, three days before the remaining national currency denominations will cease to be legal tender, I 
can  say  that  the  operation  has  progressed  very  smoothly  and  successfully,  even  beyond  our 
expectations.  
BIS Review 13/2002 
 1
 The  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  has  been  a  complex  and  ambitious  undertaking.  In 
addition  to  understanding  and  collaboration  on  the  part  of  the  public,  it  required  organisational, 
logistical and technical efforts on the part of those sectors directly involved in the use of banknotes 
and coins. 
By the end of 2001, more than 6.4 billion euro banknotes worth some EUR 133 billion and amounting 
in  volume  to  around  80%  of  the  euro  banknotes  now  in  circulation  had  been  frontloaded  (i.e.  pre-
delivered) to banks. With regard to the euro coins, more than 37.5 billion coins or 90% of the coins 
now  in  circulation  with  a  total  value  of  around  EUR 12.4  billion  had  been  frontloaded.  Broadly 
speaking, sub-frontloading – the pre-delivery by banks to retailers and other professional target groups 
– represented an overall amount of 10 to 20% of the frontloaded amount.  
Given that, in terms of transactions, around 70% of banknotes are put into circulation via automated 
teller  machines  (ATMs),  the  quick  adaptation  of  these  machines  was  one  of  the  key  factors  for  a 
smooth changeover. In total, more than 200,000 ATMs either on site in bank branches or off site, for 
example in shopping centres, had to be converted. This was achieved within less than one week. As a 
result, on average, 75% of all cash transactions were already effected in euro after only one week. On 
the whole, the euro banknotes and coins were introduced considerably faster than originally foreseen, 
not least because of the favourable attitude of and quick acceptance by European citizens. 
I should like to mention that the changeover has also been smooth outside the euro area. The euro 
banknotes  were  received  positively  in  third  countries.  Information  to  the  public  has  been  generally 
adequate and euro banknotes were readily available in banks and exchange offices, in most cases. 
With regard to the frontloading of central banks outside the euro area, I should mention that 26 central 
banks, mainly in central and eastern Europe, the Mediterranean area and in Africa, requested to be 
frontloaded with euro cash. The total value of the euro banknotes provided to these central banks and 
to wholesale banks outside the euro area amounted to some EUR 4 billion. 
Overall, the Eurosystem is proud of and grateful to all actors’ contributions to this historic process. The 
enthusiasm of the European citizens to get hold of euro cash can be seen as a clear vote for a united 
Europe.  
Recent global economic developments 
Let  me  briefly  review  the  current  international  environment.  I  feel  quite  some  relief  that  the  world 
economy has proved relatively resilient to the shock of the terrorist attacks in September of last year. 
The events of 11 September and their aftermath undoubtedly increased uncertainty, and for some time 
contributed substantially to the already ongoing deterioration in confidence in most countries.  
However, there are now more and more signs that the global economic downturn may have come to 
an end around the end of 2001. At the current juncture, a mild recovery is generally expected to start 
in the course of 2002 and to accelerate in 2003. The risks previously envisaged in connection with the 
11 September events appear to have largely evaporated. Nevertheless, the level of uncertainty on the 
precise timing and strength of the recovery remains high. While I am reasonably optimistic about the 
sustainability  of  the  recovery  that,  we  expect,  will  start  this  year,  I  am  also  aware  of  the  remaining 
downside risks.  
These  risks  relate,  for  instance,  to  the  imbalances  that  have  built  up  during  the  past  episode  of 
exceptionally strong growth in the world economy and have only been partially corrected. Examples of 
these  imbalances  are  protracted  current  account  deficits,  household  and  corporate  indebtedness, 
overinvestment  in  certain  industries,  and  fragility  in  the  financial  sectors  of  some  countries.  In  that 
context,  an  important  issue  is  the  extent  to  which  trade  will  finally  pick  up  from  the  historical  lows 
witnessed in the second half of 2001, and how beneficial the international transmission mechanism will 
be in transforming the current limited signs of recovery into a virtuous circle for world growth. Needless 
to say that protectionism and, more generally, obstacles to further international trade integration would 
be counterproductive also in this respect. In this context, I think we all agree that China’s entry into the 
WTO has been a significant step towards further progress in world trade development.  
Economic outlook for the euro area 
Let me now turn to the economic outlook for the euro area. Overall, 2001 was a rather disappointing 
year with regard to macroeconomic performance: growth in activity was below potential and consumer 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2002
 price inflation was above the 2% limit set by the ECB for price increases over the medium term. This 
disappointing  performance  was  the  result  of  an  unfortunate  combination  of  adverse  supply  and 
demand shocks, originating to a large extent from developments in the external environment. These 
included the sharp increase in oil prices in 2000 and early 2001, the slowdown in the US economy and 
the terrorist attacks in the  United  States. Taken together, these adverse shocks led to a  protracted 
weakening  in  demand  –  from  both  the  external  and  the  domestic  side  –  and  to  considerable 
uncertainty with regard to the outlook for growth.  
Looking ahead, we expect that the negative impact on growth and inflation from these adverse factors 
will diminish and that this will pave the way for a more satisfactory macroeconomic performance this 
year and next. Most recently, projections have shown that real GDP growth in 2002 as a whole should 
be somewhat lower than in 2001, but this would be consistent with a recovery in growth in the course 
of this year. At the end of the year, economic growth should reach a level close to potential growth. 
For the time being, however, the strength and the precise timing of this recovery remain uncertain.  
A  number  of  positive  factors  can  be  identified  that  should  support  the  upturn  in  growth  in  the  euro 
area. First, as regards the domestic side of the euro area economy, an important reason for expecting 
a  recovery  is  that  there  are  no  fundamental  imbalances  that  would  require  an  enduring  correction 
process.  Second,  as  regards  the  external  environment,  there  are  some  encouraging  signs  of  a 
stabilisation in the outlook for growth at the global level, related mainly to positive news from the US 
economy.  Other  indications  of  an  improvement  in  economic  activity  are  that,  owing  to  the  ECB’s 
stability-oriented  monetary  policy,  financing  conditions  are  now  very  favourable.  Moreover,  the 
declines in consumer price inflation observed in the second half of 2001 and expected over the course 
of 2002 will support higher growth in real disposable income, which, in turn, should underpin growth in 
domestic demand. 
We continue to expect no  medium-term upward pressures on  inflation.  At  the same time, however, 
annual  inflation  rates  in  the  euro  area  will  be  somewhat  erratic  at  the  beginning  of  this  year. 
Preliminary HICP data for January 2002 saw an increase in inflation, which was due to a large extent 
to exceptional and short-lived factors. I should like to emphasise that, notwithstanding many anecdotal 
reports of price changes associated with the introduction of euro notes and coins, there is currently 
little  evidence  of  any  significant  effect  on  the  aggregate  inflation  figures.  Barring  unforeseen 
developments, the Governing Council expects that annual HICP inflation should fall safely below 2% 
during this year and remain at levels consistent with price stability thereafter.  
International role of the euro 
Last but not least, I should like to address the use of the euro outside the euro area. The introduction 
of the euro has contributed to the emergence of a new economic player, the euro area. The euro area 
includes 12 countries and  over 300 million people. It is also the largest trading partner in the  world 
economy, accounting for 19% of world exports. 
Let me explain how the European Economic and Monetary Union has modified global finance. I would 
like first to comment on the building-up of a new integrated financial market within the euro area, and 
then turn to some evidence on the role of the euro outside the euro area. I will finally explain why the 
two aspects (the domestic and the international role of the euro) are intertwined.  
The euro and European financial markets 
The creation of the single currency is one step in the integration process in Europe, which started with 
the  establishment  of  the  European  Economic  Community  in  the  1950s.  The  integration  among  the 
Member States gained further momentum with the completion of the single European market in 1992. 
By  the  time  the  European  Central  Bank  was  created  in  1998,  capital  movements  in  the  EU  were 
already completely liberalised, and commercial banks have been allowed to operate within the entire 
European  Union  since  1996.  However,  exchange  rate  fluctuations  among  the  currencies  of  EU 
countries  –  although  not  close  to  the  size  of  the  wide  swings  in  the  early  1990s  –  still  implied,  if 
unhedged,  currency  risks  for  any  EU-wide  allocation  of  investment  portfolios.  Moreover,  financial 
investors  had  to  face  very  diverse  levels  of  monetary  stability  and  fiscal  soundness  across  EU 
countries. 
The success of the nominal convergence process – which preceded the start of Monetary Union – and 
the  governments’  commitment  to  honour  the  fiscal  regulations  associated  with  the  monetary 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 3
 integration  itself,  reduced  risks  of  EU-wide  investments  even  before  the  creation  of  the  ECB.  The 
irrevocable pegging of exchange rates and the effective start of Monetary Union on 1 January 1999 
created  an  unprecedentedly  large single financial area in  Europe. Today,  we  have a single interest 
rate  prevailing  in  the  short-term  financial  markets  and  only  minor  spreads  between  long-term  bond 
yields  among  the  12  euro  area  Member  States.  Since  1999  we  have  observed  a  surge  in  the 
dimension  of  our  domestic  financial  markets:  euro-denominated  securities  issued  by  euro  area 
residents (other than shares) have increased by 20% to around EUR 7 trillion. New market segments 
– for instance, corporate and municipal bonds – have recorded strong growth. We have observed a 
market-driven integration process, through which stock exchanges have been linked to each other, by 
creating single trading platforms, and the settlement system infrastructure has been streamlined with 
the creation of cross-border hubs. Every day, the wholesale payment system for the euro (TARGET) 
processes  around  200,000  large-value  payments  among  credit  institutions,  20%  of  which  relate  to 
cross-border transactions. The latter amounts to an increase of cross-border activities by more than 
15% in the last two years. 
The euro outside the euro area 
The  significant  size  of  domestic  markets  for  euro-denominated  assets  has  increasingly  attracted 
financial  operators  outside  the  euro  area.  In  particular,  the  euro  has  been  used  by  international 
borrowers as a currency to secure funding. Let me give you two examples.  
Since the launch of the euro, around one-quarter of international money market instruments issued by 
residents outside the euro area were denominated in euro. This is mainly due to the investors’ interest 
in the higher liquidity brought about by the creation of the integrated money market. Before the launch 
of the single currency, only 8% of all international money market instruments issued by non-euro area 
residents were denominated in the legacy currencies. 
Likewise, around 30% of international bonds and notes issued by residents outside the euro area are 
currently denominated in euro, as opposed to less than 20% in euro legacy currencies prior to 1999. 
Also in this case, market expectations of growing liquidity have probably been the key driving force 
behind the upward trend. 
Let me add that, outside the euro area, the euro is not only used by private agents but also by the 
official  sector.  In  particular,  more  than  50  countries  currently  maintain  an  exchange  rate  regime 
involving an external anchor in which the euro plays a role.  
As a reserve currency, the euro accounts for 13% of official reserves and, admittedly, plays currently a 
smaller  role  than  the  US  dollar,  whose  share  amounts  to  66%.  The  ECB  itself,  by  holding  a  large 
amount  of  US  dollar  foreign  reserves,  contributes  to  the  prevailing  role  of  the  US  currency  as  an 
official reserve currency. The current share of the euro in international reserves is comparable with the 
share  reached  by  the  euro  legacy  currencies  prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  implying  that,  in 
aggregate terms, there had been no reallocation of official reserves out of the US dollar.  
The link between domestic and international factors 
Let  me  now  elaborate  briefly  on  the  interaction  between  domestic  and  international  factors  as  a 
determinant of the international use of the euro. Without doubt, when deciding on the use of the euro 
or another currency as a means of transaction, international markets also assess economic policies 
carried out in the various economic areas. In this vein, the commitment of the ECB to price stability – 
which  is  defined  as  an  inflation  rate  below  2%  over  a  medium-term  horizon  –  should  underpin 
international investors’ confidence that the purchasing power of their euro-denominated assets will be 
maintained over time. Indeed, a currency can only reach international status if internal price stability is 
ensured over the long run.  
International investors also consider the size and liquidity of domestic financial markets as crucial. In 
this regard, efforts currently undertaken to further promote integration of financial markets (with more 
than 40 measures to be adopted by EU institutions) are likely to further attract international financial 
operators. Larger and more liquid financial markets imply lower transaction costs, and make it more 
efficient for foreign agents to trade euro-denominated financial instruments, as well as to resort to the 
euro in the foreign exchange market.  
4 
 BIS Review 13/2002
 It is not the task of the ECB to try to influence directly the international investors’ decisions regarding 
the  currency  in  which  they  want  to  invest,  borrow  or  lend.  The  international  role  of  the  euro  will 
ultimately depend upon the market’s judgement. However, this neutral stance of the ECB should not 
be misinterpreted, as the increasing use of the euro is an issue of policy relevance to the ECB, and 
requires continuous monitoring.  
To sum up, the creation of the euro facilitates the deepening of the financial integration inside Europe. 
Moreover, the single currency has already had consequences outside the euro area, as the euro has 
rapidly become the second most used currency in the world. 
Conclusions 
To conclude my speech, I will pre-empt the Q and A session by first telling you “What will happen after 
February?” From 1 March 2002, not only will the euro be the sole legal tender in the euro area, but it 
will also become one of the main channels that should facilitate the future co-operation between the 
ECB and the PBC. While China will manage to sustain strong growth and to open further its internal 
market as part of the WTO membership process, we expect the trade and financial ties between China 
and the EU to grow even stronger. I attach great importance to the relations between the ECB and the 
PBC, and I am very confident that such relations will flourish over time. “Xie Xie”  
BIS Review 13/2002 
 5
