Urban Bäckström: Sweden’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Urban  Bäckström,  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Skanes  Provinsbank, 
Helsingborg, 7 March 2002. 
 First  a  word  of  thanks  for  the  invitation  to  Helsingborg  to  discuss  matters  to  do  with  the  Swedish 
economy and the Riksbank’s monetary policy. For me it is particularly interesting to come here since I 
lived and worked for some years in Helsingborg in the 1980s. 
As the published minutes show, at the Riksbank’s latest monetary policy meeting on 7 February the 
Executive  Board  concluded  that  some  shift  has  occurred  in  the  risk  spectrum  and  there  is  now  an 
overall tendency towards an upside risk for inflation one to two years ahead. The Board also made the 
overall  assessment  that  the  time  for  an  interest  rate  increase  is  probably  not  far  off  if  economic 
statistics continue to confirm an upturn and if inflation remains high. 
In what I have to say here today I shall be starting from this appraisal, which I will place in its context 
and then to some extent try to look ahead. 
Inflation prospects determine the repo rate 
When the Riksbank sets the repo rate, the focal point is an analysis of future inflation in Sweden. This 
analysis  is  based  in  turn  on  three  factors  in  particular:  total  resource  utilisation,  the  path  of  the 
exchange rate and people’s inflation expectations. 
Inflationary  pressure  normally  varies  with  the  demand  situation  and  with  changes  in  resource 
utilisation.  The  stronger  the  upswing  in  relation  to  potential  output,  the  greater  will  be  the  risk  of  a 
faster increase in prices and wages and vice versa. That is why those of us who work in central banks 
around the world talk so frequently about the cyclical picture even though our target variable is actually 
inflation. 
The future value of the krona plays a part in our assessment of inflation. Exchange rate movements 
affect inflation directly in that they show up in the price of imported goods and services; they also have 
indirect  effects  through  aggregate  demand.  Changes  in  the  value  of  the  krona  relative  to  other 
currencies  of  importance  for  foreign  trade  have  consequences  for  the  competitiveness  of  Swedish 
goods and services. 
Turning finally to inflation expectations among households and firms, there is the effect on the actual 
formation  of  prices  and  wages  and  thereby  on  inflation.  Altered  expectations  are  liable  to  influence 
price formation if the Riksbank does not act through monetary policy. 
There  are,  however,  other  price  impulses  that  the  Riksbank  also  has  to  handle.  Examples  are  last 
winter’s shortage of snow that restricted the supply of hydroelectric power, cattle diseases that pushed 
up  the  price  of  meat,  and  the  unusually  cold  weather  in  Europe  that  raised  the  price  of  fruit  and 
vegetables. Price shocks of this type can occasion large shifts in the general price level at the same 
time as their impact on inflation is probably only transient. Suppose such a price shock occurs in a 
particular month; it will then leave its mark on the annual inflation rate in the coming year and then 
drop out of the statistics. As we normally count on a time lag of more than a year before monetary 
policy has its full effect on inflation, countering such temporary price impulses is both difficult and not 
particularly meaningful. Monetary policy accordingly focuses instead on the forecast of inflation one to 
two years ahead. 
Occasional shifts in the price level can, however, affect inflation prospects more permanently if they 
alter  the  general  perception  of  inflation’s  path  in  the  longer  run.  To  put  it  briefly,  if  temporarily  high 
inflation  induces  a  general  belief  that  inflation  will  also  be  high  in  the  years  ahead,  then  monetary 
policy must intervene. Even if the economic situation as such does not give grounds for worrying about 
inflation, in such a case resolute action may be called for so that the higher inflation does not become 
entrenched via inflation expectations. This is quite simply because, in terms of decreased output and 
employment, preventing inflation expectations from rising is less costly than pushing them down once 
they have become established at too high a level. 
BIS Review 15/2002 
 1
These, then, are the types of assessment from which we, as members of the Riksbank’s Executive 
Board, form a picture of the prospects for inflation. We look at them from various angles, consider the 
risks and opportunities. Four times a year the Riksbank presents a more comprehensive account; at 
present we are working on this year’s first Inflation Report. Let me remind you that for those who are 
interested, these reports are easily downloaded from our website: www.riksbank.se. Perhaps I should 
add that in addition to the text, the site provides the equally relevant statistics behind the charts. 
Two routes for a central bank 
Any  central  bank  with  an  explicit  target  is  faced  with  a  choice  that  in  its  most  extreme  form  looks 
something  like  this:  either  aim  to  keep  inflation  continuously  on  target  or  admit  that  there  will  be 
deviations that may last for quite some time. 
If inflation is to be kept close to the target all the time, there will be a constant need for sizeable repo 
rate  adjustments,  with  the  attendant  marked  fluctuations  in  market  interest  rates,  output  and 
employment. If temporary deviations from the central bank’s target are tolerated, on the other hand, 
monetary policy can be implemented more smoothly. A gradual adjustment of output and employment 
ultimately brings inflation back into line with the target. 
Both  these  routes  have  their  drawbacks.  Negative  effects  on  employment  and  output  from  major 
changes in the repo rate are liable to erode public confidence in the central bank and the monetary 
policy regime. At the same time, undue acceptance of large deviations from the inflation target may 
weaken  the  target’s  credibility  and  lead  both  to  rising  inflation  expectations  and  to  high  costs  for 
ultimately bringing inflation back on target. 
As a result, central banks tend to prefer a monetary policy strategy that lies somewhere between these 
two extremes, avoiding excessively large interest rate adjustments but not hesitating to adjust when 
this is called for. The Riksbank normally formulates monetary policy with a view to inflation one to two 
years ahead. This unfortunately means that the repo rate has to be set with the aid of forecasts and 
forecasts can err. Moreover, there is always the possibility of price shocks that are a-cyclical but still 
affect  the  rate  of  inflation.  A  forward-looking  policy  has  the  advantage,  however,  of  permitting  an 
implementation  that  is  smoother  yet  firm.  The  Riksbank  reacts  to  the  inflation  forecasts  in  a 
determined  manner  but  as  the  forecasts  include  an  assessment  of  the  extent  to  which  inflationary 
impulses are transient, over-reactions are avoided. 
The supply shocks I referred to earlier as having occurred during the past year are examples of price 
fluctuations that, with the monetary policy strategy the Riksbank has chosen, can occasion deviations 
from the inflation target. This is not the first time inflation has been affected by occasional factors. In 
the late 1990s, for example, successive deregulations of electricity and telecom markets resulted in 
deviations from the target, the difference being that at that time the gap was on the downside. What 
has happened now is the opposite. With our monetary policy strategy, this is a natural case of striking 
a reasonable balance between maintaining the fixed value of money and avoiding excessively large 
fluctuations in economic activity. It cannot be stressed too strongly that although the Riksbank’s sights 
are consistently on the target, inflation will always tend to hover around the bull’s-eye. Looking back, 
however, it will be seen that ever since the target was instituted, inflation has on average been very 
close to it. The intention is that this will continue to be the case in the future. 
More and more signs of a recovery 
So it is not the transitory price shocks that give the greatest cause for concern. Things are worse if we 
cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  part  of  an  increase  in  inflation  stems from  strong  activity  earlier. 
Such effects usually show up after some time and tend to persist. During a strong upward phase, firms 
can begin to pass through rising business costs to consumers in the form of higher prices. Perhaps it 
is precisely this we have seen recently, at least to some extent. Support for such a conclusion may lie 
in that fact that, according to the latest statistics, the average wage level in Sweden is rising somewhat 
faster than is compatible with a 2 per cent inflation target. This may indicate that resource utilisation is 
in some sense more strained than we counted on earlier. 
If  economic  activity  in  Sweden  were  to  rise  only  moderately,  leading  in  time  to  a  weakening  of 
inflationary pressure, the risk of inflation would diminish. But if activity were rather to show signs of 
freshening,  there  is  a  risk  of  the  existing  high  inflation  continuing  and  being  incorporated  in  our 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2002
perceptions  of  inflation  in  the  longer  run,  with  possible  effects  on,  for  example,  future  wage 
negotiations. That of course must not happen. 
A scrutiny of the current cyclical picture reveals a growing number of signs that activity abroad, above 
all in the United States, is on the way to improving. This is something that also affects conditions for 
the  Swedish  economy.  A  majority  of  leading  indicators  point  in  that  direction.  Although  the  upward 
phase  does  contain  risks  to  which  I  shall  be  returning,  there  is  still  a  good  deal  of  evidence  that  a 
recovery in the rest of the world as well as in Sweden may be on the way to materialising later this 
year. 
A factor that often contributes to a cyclical swing is movements in stocks. When stocks are plentiful 
and sales are falling, firms often cut back production so that this falls more than demand. In this way, 
stock adjustments initially accentuate the cyclical downturn. When the reduction of stocks ultimately 
comes  to  an  end,  firms  may  step  up  production  again  even  though  demand  has  not  yet  started  to 
recover. This drives a cyclical upturn and perhaps it is just such a positive effect that may be on the 
way. There are signs of this in the United States in particular but also in Sweden. 
A continued recovery requires that this is accompanied by a broad and sustained increase in demand; 
otherwise the upswing is liable to be relatively brief. In this respect there may still be some uncertainty, 
mainly perhaps as regards the American economy. 
The economic imbalances in the United States are still large and stock-market values are high, both 
historically and in relation to the current cyclical phase. However, high productivity compared with the 
rest  of  the  world  may  make  these  problems  less  troublesome.  Household  saving  has  admittedly 
become  somewhat  higher  relative  to  disposable  income  since  the  end  of  last  year  but  the  level 
remains  very  low  compared  with  earlier  years.  Unemployment  continues  to  rise.  Against  this 
background there are grounds for expecting that growth in the coming years will not be as high as in 
the late 1990s. But as overall economic policy is expansionary, there should be a successive recovery 
during the second half-year, though of course there are both upside and downside risks. 
Turning  now  to  Europe,  there  do  not  seem  to  be  any  clear  signs  of  a  strong  recovery.  Leading 
indicators  admittedly  point  to  a  more  positive  business  mood  but  the  prospects  for  Germany  –  the 
largest economy in the euro area – are still uncertain and unemployment is rising from a high initial 
level. The euro area has not accumulated imbalances such as those in the United States and this may 
help to maintain a recovery once it has begun. 
In Sweden,  economic policy has charged the economy  with a good  deal  of stimuli that can  help to 
generate a broader increase in demand now that the stocks cycle is beginning to have a favourable 
effect and the prospects for the international economy are brightening. As a result of lower taxes and 
increased  transfers,  for  example,  most  things  suggest  that  household  purchasing  power  is  rising 
comparatively strongly this year. Seen over a complete economic cycle, the Riksbank’s instrumental 
rate is comparatively low. Considering the rate of inflation and the signs that activity is picking up, the 
real repo rate (the repo rate less the rate of inflation) can be said to be low. Then there is the weak 
exchange  rate,  which  has  subdued  effects  of  the  international  slowdown  and  is  now  helping  to 
stimulate the export-oriented sector. All this amounts to not inconsiderable stimuli to general demand 
in the Swedish economy, stimuli that look like materialising successively. 
How heavily should we tread on the accelerator? 
If inflation, even disregarding the temporary effects, is above the target initially, activity is entering an 
upward phase and economic policy’s impact on the economy is expansionary, then monetary policy 
ought  to  contribute  to  a  somewhat  lighter  foot  on  the  accelerator.  But  if  most  of  the  unduly  high 
inflation stems from transient increases in the price level and if an economic upturn is not yet assured, 
it may then indeed be advisable to somewhat defer an upward adjustment of the instrumental rate. 
It is likely to be around these and other aspects that our deliberations at the Riksbank will circle when 
the Executive Board finally adjusts the coming Inflation Report and next discusses monetary policy on 
18 March. That is still almost a fortnight ahead and some more statistics are due to be published. In 
the  meantime,  the  six  of  us  on  the  Board  will  have  to  form  our  opinions  step  by  step  and  decide 
whether there is to be some increase in the repo rate already in March or whether it is possible to go 
on waiting. Personally I share the concern about inflation prospects that a number of my colleagues 
have expressed in speeches recently. 
BIS Review 15/2002 
 3
