 Alan Greenspan: The state of the U.S. economy 
Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate, Washington, 24 January 2002.  
 Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, in just a few  weeks, the Federal Reserve Board  will 
submit its semiannual report on monetary policy to the Congress. That report, and my accompanying 
testimony, will give our detailed assessment of the outlook for the U.S. economy and the implications 
of that outlook for monetary policy. This morning, I would like to offer some general comments about 
the state of the economy before turning to the federal budget. I want to emphasize that I speak for 
myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve.  
It  is  clear  that  the  U.S.  economy  went  through  a  significant  cyclical  adjustment  in  2001  that  was 
exacerbated  by  the  effects  of  the  terrorist  attacks  on  September  11.  That  adjustment  was 
characterized  by  sharp  reductions  in  business  investment  and  pronounced  liquidations  in  business 
inventories  and  was  compounded  by  the  simultaneous  economic  difficulties  of  some  of  our  major 
trading partners. But there have been signs recently that some of the forces that have been restraining 
the economy over the past year are starting to diminish and that activity is beginning to firm.  
One key consideration in that assessment is the behaviour of inventories. Stocks in many industries 
have been drawn down to levels at which firms will soon need to taper off their rate of liquidation, if 
they have  not already  done so.  Any slowing in the rate  of inventory  liquidation  will induce a rise  in 
industrial production if demand for those products is stable or is falling only moderately. That rise in 
production  will,  other  things  being  equal,  increase  household  income  and  spending.  The  runoff  of 
inventories, even apart from the large reduction in motor vehicle stocks, remained sizable in the fourth 
quarter. Hence, with production running well below sales, the potential positive effect on income and 
spending of the inevitable cessation of inventory liquidation could be significant.  
But that impetus to activity will be short-lived unless sustained growth of final demand kicks in before 
the positive effects of the swing from inventory liquidation to accumulation dissipate. Most recoveries 
in the post-World War II period received a boost from a rebound in demand for consumer durables and 
housing  from  recession-depressed  levels  in  addition  to  some  abatement  of  the  liquidation  of 
inventories.  Through  most  of  last  year's  slowdown,  in  contrast  to  the  usual  pattern,  the  household 
sector was a major stabilizing force. As a consequence, although household spending should continue 
to trend up, the potential for significant acceleration in activity in this sector is more limited.  
In  fact,  there  are  a  number  of  pluses  and  minuses  in  the  outlook  for  household  spending.  Low 
mortgage interest rates and favorable weather have provided considerable support to homebuilding in 
recent months. Moreover, attractive mortgage rates have bolstered both the sales of existing homes 
and  the  realized  capital  gains  that  those  sales  engender.  They  have  also  spurred  refinancing  of 
existing homes and the associated liquification of increases in house values. These gains have been 
important  to  the  ongoing  extraction  of  home  equity  for  consumption  and  home  modernization.  The 
pace of such extractions likely dropped in response to the decline in refinancing activity that followed 
the backup in mortgage rates that began in early November. But mortgage rates remain at low levels 
and should continue to provide support to activity in this sector.  
Consumer  spending  received  a  considerable  lift  from  the  sales  of  new  motor  vehicles,  which  were 
remarkably strong in October and November owing to major financing incentives. Sales have receded 
some as incentives were scaled back, but they have remained surprisingly resilient. Other consumer 
spending appears to have advanced at a moderate pace in recent months.  
The substantial declines in the prices of natural gas, fuel oil, and gasoline have clearly provided some 
support  to  real  disposable  income  and  spending.  To  have  a  more  persistent  effect  on  the  ongoing 
growth of total personal consumption expenditures, energy prices would need to continue declining. 
Futures prices do not suggest that such a decline is in the immediate offing, but the forecast record of 
these markets is less than sterling.  
Although the quantitative magnitude and the precise timing of the wealth effect remain uncertain, the 
steep  decline  in  stock  prices  since  March  2000  has,  no  doubt,  curbed  the  growth  of  household 
spending. Although stock prices recently have retraced a portion of their earlier losses, the restraining 
effects  from  the  net  decline  in  equity  values  presumably  have  not,  as  yet,  fully  played  out.  Future 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 1
 wealth effects will depend importantly on whether corporate earnings improve to the extent currently 
embedded in share prices.  
Perhaps most central to the outlook for consumer spending will be developments in the labor market. 
The  pace  of  layoffs  quickened  last  fall,  especially  after  September  11,  and  the  unemployment  rate 
rose  sharply.  Over  the  past  month  or  so,  however,  initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  have 
decreased markedly, on balance, suggesting some abatement in the rate of job loss.  
Although this development would be welcome, the unemployment rate may continue to rise for a time, 
and job losses could put something of a damper on consumer spending. However, the extent of such 
restraint will depend on how much of any rise in unemployment is the result of weakened demand and 
how much reflects strengthened productivity. In the  latter case, average real  incomes could rise,  at 
least partially offsetting losses of purchasing power that stem from diminished levels of employment. 
Indeed, fragmentary data suggest that productivity has held up quite well of late.  
The dynamics of inventory investment and the balance of factors influencing consumer demand will 
have important consequences for the economic outlook in coming months. But the broad contours of 
the present cycle have been, and will continue to be, driven by the evolution of corporate profits and 
capital investment.  
The  retrenchment  in  capital  spending  over  the  past  year  was  central  to  the  sharp  slowing  we 
experienced in overall activity. The steep rise in high-tech spending that occurred in the early post-
Y2K  months  was  clearly  not  sustainable.  The  demand  for  many  of  the  newer  technologies  was 
growing  rapidly,  but  capacity  was  expanding  even  faster,  exerting  severe  pressure  on  prices  and 
profits. New orders for equipment and software hesitated in the middle of 2000 and then fell sharply as 
firms re-evaluated their capital investment programs. Uncertainty about economic prospects boosted 
risk  premiums  significantly,  and  this  rise,  in  turn,  propelled  required,  or  hurdle,  rates  of  return  to 
markedly  elevated  levels.  In  most  cases,  businesses  required  that  new  investments  pay  off  much 
more  rapidly  than  they  had  previously.  For  much  of  last  year,  the  resulting  decline  in  investment 
outlays was fierce and unrelenting. Although the weakness was most pronounced in the technology 
area, the reductions in capital outlays were broad-based.  
These cutbacks in capital spending interacted with, and were reinforced by, falling profits and equity 
prices. Indeed, a striking feature of the current cyclical episode relative to many earlier ones has been 
the virtual absence of pricing power across much of American business, as increasing globalization 
and deregulation have enhanced competition. In this low-inflation environment, firms have perceived 
very  little  ability  to  pass  cost  increases  on  to  customers.  Growth  in  hourly  labor  compensation  has 
slowed  in  response  to  deteriorating  economic  conditions,  but  even  those  smaller  increases  have 
continued to outstrip gains in output per hour for the corporate sector on a consolidated basis. The 
result has been that profit margins are still under pressure.  
Business managers, with little opportunity to raise prices, have moved aggressively to stabilize cash 
flows by trimming workforces. These efforts have limited the rise in unit costs, attenuated the pressure 
on  profit  margins,  and  ultimately  helped  to  preserve  the  vast  majority  of  private-sector  jobs.  To  the 
extent  that  businesses  are  successful  in  stabilizing  and  eventually  boosting  profits  and  cash  flow, 
capital spending should begin to recover more noticeably.  
Such  success  would  likely  be  accompanied  by  a  decline  in  elevated  risk  premiums  back  to  more 
normal levels and, with real rates of return on high-tech equipment still attractive, should provide an 
additional spur to new investment. When capital spending fully recovers, its growth is likely to be less 
frenetic  than  that  which  characterized  1999  and  early  2000--a  period  during  which  outlays  were 
boosted by the dislocations of Y2K and the extraordinarily low cost of capital faced by many firms.  
Still,  the  evidence  strongly  suggests  that  new  technologies  will  present  ample  opportunities  to  earn 
enhanced  rates  of  return.  Indeed,  reports  from  businesses  around  the  country  suggest  that  the 
exploitation of available  networking and other information  technologies  was only partially completed 
when the cyclical retrenchment of the past year began. Many business managers are still of the view, 
according to a recent survey of purchasing managers, that less than half of currently available new, 
and presumably profitable, supply chain technologies have been put into use.  
If  the  recent more-favorable  economic  developments  continue  and  gather  momentum,  uncertainties 
will diminish, risk premiums will fall, and the pace of capital investment embodying these technologies 
will  increase.  As  we  have  witnessed  so  clearly  in  recent  years,  the  resulting  enhanced  growth  of 
productivity will lift our standard of living.  
2 
 BIS Review 6/2002
 The economic and financial developments I have described, of course, have important implications for 
the federal budget and can help explain a significant portion of the shift in the budget situation over the 
past  year. A  year ago, the Congressional  Budget Office expected the unified surplus to continue to 
mount if no new policy actions were taken and to cumulate to $5.6 trillion for fiscal years 2002 to 2011.  
As  you  know,  if  today's  policies  remain  in  place,  CBO  is  currently  forecasting  a  cumulative  surplus 
over the same ten years that is $4 trillion below what had been anticipated in its baseline a year ago. 
CBO  calculates  that  the  now  less  favorable  economic  assumptions--especially  in  the  near  term--
contribute  nearly  $1  trillion--after  taking  account  of  the  associated  cost  of  debt  service--to  the 
downward  revision  in  its  ten-year  surplus  projections.  In  addition,  more  than  $600  billion  of  the 
downward  revision  reflects  CBO's  view  that  the  ten-year  estimates  it  made  a  year  ago  of  receipts 
relative to taxable incomes were too high; the revision was based in part on the recent disappointing 
tax collections and lowered estimates of realized capital gains in the wake of stock market declines.  
If CBO had been able to employ what has been learned about recent developments and the long-term 
outlook in the past year--that is, if it had used its current economic and technical assumptions when it 
put  together  its  budget  projections  last  January--a  still  formidable  surplus  would  have  emerged. 
Instead  of  projecting  a  $5.6  trillion  current-policy  surplus,  it  would  have  estimated  $4  trillion.1  Of 
course, legislated tax and spending actions over the past year, as estimated by CBO, have reduced 
the  ten-year  surplus  by  $2.4  trillion.  This  leaves  a  current-policy  ten-year  surplus  expectation  of 
$1.6 trillion through fiscal 2011.  
Despite  the  erosion  in  the  budget  picture  over  the  past  year,  our  underlying  fiscal  situation  today 
remains considerably stronger than that of a decade ago, when policymakers were struggling to rein in 
chronic deficits. The shift from a deficit equal to nearly 5 percent of GDP in fiscal 1992 to a surplus 
equal to 2-1/2 percent of GDP in fiscal 2000 was truly remarkable. Restraint on outlays accounted for 
about 40 percent of the fiscal reversal over this period, and revenue growth in excess of GDP growth 
accounted for about 45 percent; the associated declines in debt service accounted for the remainder. 
The fall in the non-interest outlay share of GDP largely reflected lower defense spending as the Cold 
War came  to  an  end,  but  other  spending  also  was  fairly  well  restrained.  At  least  until  the  past  few 
years,  the  statutory  caps  helped  to  hold  nondefense  discretionary  expenditures  in  check,  and  the 
pay-as-you-go rules forced careful consideration of deficit-expanding initiatives.2  
The extraordinary rise in receipts over the past decade resulted from the exceptional performance of 
the U.S. economy and the associated rise in the market value of assets, which helped lift receipts from 
17-1/2 percent of GDP in fiscal year 1992 to a postwar high of nearly 21 percent of GDP in fiscal 2000. 
The  increase  in  receipts  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  was  particularly  impressive--especially  for 
individual income taxes, which grew about 11 percent per year, on average, between 1995 and 2000. 
The surge in individual taxes was attributable in part to the strong growth in incomes from production 
and to the tendency of rising levels of income to shift a greater share of taxable income into higher tax 
brackets.  
But  individual  taxes  also  received  a  boost  from  the  enormous  rise  in  the  value  of  financial  assets 
during that period--directly through taxes on higher capital gains realizations and indirectly through the 
taxes collected from the exercise of stock options, from stock-price-related bonuses to workers in the 
financial industry, and from withdrawals from capital-gains-augmented IRAs and 401(k) plans.  
Estimates based in part on data from the Statistics of Income and other sources suggest that such 
market-related receipts accounted for only about 15 percent of total individual receipts in fiscal 1995; 
                                                      
1   That projection would have indicated a need for significant accumulation of private assets in federal government accounts 
by 2009. In the actual CBO estimates of January 2001, that date was two years earlier. In the absence of cuts in taxes or 
increases  in  outlays  that  are  programmed  and  phased  in  well  in  advance,  the  avoidance  of  sizable  private  asset 
accumulation might require taking actions that would essentially eliminate the surplus as the federal debt approached its 
irreducible minimum. As I argued a year ago, such actions could result in a fiscal policy wholly inconsistent with the state of 
the economy at that time. For reasons I discussed last January, I believe that cutting taxes is a far preferable way to reduce 
the  surplus  over  time  than  to  institute  new  expenditure  programs.  CBO's  projections  of  a  year  ago,  which  implied  a 
substantial shortfall of reducible debt as early as 2007, suggested to me some urgency in phasing down the surplus. If CBO 
had access to the economic and technical developments of all of 2001 last January, it would have projected a somewhat 
later date for that shortfall. In the event, of course, a considerable part of the current-policy surplus was used to reduce 
taxes and to increase spending so that the most recent current-policy projections of the CBO do not anticipate a need for 
significant nonfederal asset accumulation until well into the next decade. 
2   Relatively favorable demographic trends helped to restrain spending on social security and health programs; and although 
health spending rose very rapidly in the first half of the 1990s, these outlays decelerated markedly in the second half as a 
result of both legislative actions and the cost-containment efforts in the medical sector. 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 3
 but  because  they  grew  about  25  percent  per  year,  on  average,  between  1995  and  2000,  they 
accounted for more than one-third of the increase in total individual receipts over that period. Receipts 
that  are  more  directly  related  to  production  in  the  broader  economy--that  is,  those  associated  with 
wages  and  salaries,  business  and  professional  incomes,  dividends,  and  interest  income--rose 
8-1/2 percent  per  year,  on  average,  between  1995  and  2000,  one-third  the  pace  of  receipts  on 
stock-market-related taxable incomes.  
Had equity  asset values risen only  as fast as nominal GDP between 1995 and 2000--that  is, about 
6 percent per year--taxes related to stock-price levels would have been approximately $130 billion less 
in fiscal 2000, even without taking account of the reduced receipts that would have resulted from a 
presumably less buoyant economy.  
Recent developments, of course, have reversed part of this fiscal bonanza. Tax cuts, the weakening in 
economic  activity,  and  the  sharp  decline  in  stock  prices  have  reduced  individual  tax  receipts.  In 
addition,  taxes  on  capital  gains  realizations  have  become  an  increasingly  important  component  of 
corporate receipts in recent years--perhaps as much as one-fourth. Consequently, declines in stock 
prices have exerted additional downward pressure on corporate receipts, which had already taken a 
large hit from declining profit margins.  
Increased funding for defense and homeland security and the higher expenditures on unemployment 
benefits and other cyclically sensitive programs are also pressing on our current-policy fiscal balances. 
Such  calculations,  of  course,  do  not  include  the  additional  expenditures  that  doubtless  will  be 
authorized as the year progresses.  
The  current-policy  budget  outlook  prepared  by  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  for  the  coming 
decade,  though  less  favorable  than  a  year  ago,  is  still  quite  positive.  CBO  remains  reasonably 
sanguine  about  the  economy's  growth  prospects  for  the  next  ten  years,  and  this  is  reflected  in  the 
re-emergence in its current-policy projections of moderate unified budget surpluses by the middle of 
the  decade.  If  realized,  such  surpluses,  by  lowering  the  publicly  held  federal  debt  and  freeing  up 
private  saving  to  be  channeled  into  capital  investment,  would  help  us  prepare  for  the  considerable 
demographic  changes  that  we  face  over  the  longer  run.  This  will  clearly  be  no  simple  task.  As 
Dr. Crippen emphasized yesterday, the fiscal pressures that will almost surely arise after 2010 will be 
formidable.  
Achieving a satisfactory budget posture will depend on ensuring that new initiatives are consistent with 
our  longer-run  budgetary  objectives.  Indeed,  as  you  craft  a  budget  strategy  for  coming  years,  you 
might again want to consider provisions that, in some way, would limit tax and spending initiatives if 
specified targets for the budget surplus and federal debt were not satisfied.  
The significant improvement in the budget in the 1990s reflected not only decidedly positive economic 
forces but also much hard work and many difficult decisions on the part of this committee and others. 
Similar efforts will be required in the years ahead.  
4 
 BIS Review 6/2002
