 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in 
Frankfurt, 2 May 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today's meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB.  
The  Governing  Council  comprehensively  examined  monetary, 
financial  and  economic 
developments  and  also  considered  the  accumulated  changes  in  the  economic  outlook  since  its 
decision to lower the key ECB interest rates in November 2001. We concluded that the prospects for 
price stability appear to be somewhat less favourable than they were towards the end of last year. At 
the  same  time,  we  recognised  that  the  economic  outlook  remains  subject  to  uncertainties  and  that 
price developments partly reflect the influence of specific temporary factors. Accordingly, we decided 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged.  
Starting  with  the  analysis  under  the  first  pillar  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  three-month 
average  of  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3  decreased  to  7.5%  in  the  period  from  January  to  March 
2002, down from 7.8% in the period from December 2001 to February 2002. The high annual growth 
rate of M3 continues to reflect the portfolio shifts to liquid positions which occurred last autumn. In the 
meantime there has been some normalisation in the development of M3, as indicated by the slowdown 
in its short-term dynamics in early 2002. The annual rate of growth of loans to the private sector also 
continued to decline  in March. However, M3 growth  has only slowed relatively  recently  and, for the 
time being, the reversal of built-up liquidity is proceeding only slowly. 
As regards the second pillar,  our  expectations for a rebound in real GDP growth  in the  euro area 
have been confirmed by recently published forecasts of international organisations, which all paint a 
similar picture. While the recovery in 2002 is expected to initially proceed at a gradual pace, real GDP 
growth rates in the euro area should  again be in line  with potential  growth later this  year and solid 
growth  rates  should  be  attainable  by  2003.  Business  confidence  has  considerably  improved  in  the 
euro area over the past few months and the conditions for a sustained upswing in domestic demand 
continue  to  be  in  place,  including  favourable  financing  conditions.  The  more  positive  international 
environment should also help stimulate euro area exports, thereby fuelling aggregate demand in the 
euro  area.  Finally,  sound  fundamentals  and  the  absence  of  major  imbalances  support  the  positive 
outlook for the euro area economy. However, there are still a number of uncertainties surrounding the 
strength of the current upswing, such as those related to the future development of oil prices and to 
the impact of existing imbalances elsewhere on the world economy. 
Turning to price developments, trends in inflation – with annual HICP increases of 2.7% in January 
falling  to  2.2%  in  April,  according  to  Eurostat's  early  estimate  –  have  been  less  satisfactory  than 
expected a few months ago, not least as a result of higher oil prices. As stated on previous occasions, 
price  developments  in  both  2000  and  2001,  and  again  in  recent  months,  have  been  shaped  by  a 
sequence of adverse but rather specific shocks to prices. These should unwind sooner or later and, in 
principle, such shocks should not affect the medium-term outlook for price stability.  
However, it is essential that past upward tendencies in prices – even though they partly resulted from 
a  clustering  of  specific  factors  –  do  not  become  entrenched.  Recently  published  forecasts  of  price 
developments in the euro area, developments in indicators of inflation expectations and recent trends 
in wage settlements neither clearly confirm nor entirely contradict the risk of such entrenchment. At 
this juncture, it is therefore particularly important to remain vigilant with regard to the further evolution 
of the key factors determining the outlook for prices.  
On the basis of current information, it is still possible that annual HICP inflation rates will fall below 2% 
in  the  coming  months.  However,  the  outcome  is  highly  dependent  on  oil  price  developments.  The 
rather protracted upward trend in services prices is also a factor to be taken into account. For next 
year,  projections  for  price  developments  depend  largely  on  the  assumption  of  continued  wage 
moderation. The outcome of the ongoing wage negotiations in some regions of the euro area could 
become  a  matter  of  concern.  Excessive  wage  increases  could  create  additional  cost  pressure  with 
BIS Review 29/2002 
 1
 potential  consequences  not  only  for  prices  but  also  –  to  an  even  greater  extent  –  for  employment 
creation and real GDP growth.  
Regarding fiscal policies in the euro area, let me reiterate the views previously expressed. It is vital 
that those Member States that have not already done so manage the transition to budgetary positions 
in balance or in surplus so that the Stability and Growth Pact can operate smoothly and effectively in 
future. Commitments made to achieving balanced budgets by 2003-4 must therefore be honoured by 
the Member States concerned.  
The  Governing  Council  calls  upon  Member  States  to  make  faster  progress  in  implementing 
comprehensive  structural  reforms  –  in  public  expenditure  and  revenues  and  product,  labour  and 
financial markets. The forthcoming finalisation of the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines for 2002 will 
be an opportunity both to take stock of the unfinished agenda following the agreements of Lisbon and, 
more  recently,  of  Barcelona  and,  in  particular,  to  accelerate  the  implementation  of  reforms.  As  we 
have said on numerous occasions, such reforms are needed to increase the growth of real GDP and 
employment  on  a  sustainable  basis.  Past  experiences  both  inside  and  outside  the  European  Union 
indicate  that  measures  to  promote  the  efficiency  and  integration  of  markets,  the  encouragement  of 
entrepreneurship and the fostering of a knowledge-based economy are clearly working in this direction 
and are thus in the interest of all member countries.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 
BIS Review 29/2001
