 Michael Bonello: The challenge of the Euro 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Second International 
Summit organised by The Economist/Caja Madrid, Madrid, 8 July 2002. 
 It is a pleasure and an honour to be in Madrid today to participate in this discussion on challenges 
related to the adoption of the euro and to share a platform with such distinguished speakers. Since I 
have been invited to present the perspective of a small candidate country, I propose to start by briefly 
recalling some key facts about Malta and its economy. 
Malta is a micro-state, with a population of nearly 400,000 living in an area of just over 300 km2. In 
2001 nominal GDP amounted to €4 billion, or less than 0.1% of that of the euro area. This translates 
into a level of income per capita estimated at around half the European Union (EU) average. Market 
services,  including  tourism  and  finance,  account  for  nearly  two-fifths  of  GDP,  while  manufacturing 
contributes almost a quarter.  
Given its size and lack of natural resources, it is not surprising that Malta has one of the most open 
economies in the world, with imports and exports combined amounting to nearly double GDP. The EU 
is  Malta’s  main  trading  partner,  accounting  for  two-fifths  of  its  exports  and  nearly  two-thirds  of  its 
imports during 2001. It is an even more important market for the tourist industry and is a major source 
of capital inflows. 
These strong economic links are expected to deepen once Malta accedes to membership of the EU. 
Malta  was  officially  recognised  as  a  candidate  country  at  the  1999  Helsinki  summit  and  has 
consistently  met  the  Copenhagen  accession  criteria,  which  include  the  existence  of  a  functioning 
market  economy  able  to  withstand  competitive  pressures  within  the  Union.  Negotiations  began  in 
March 2000 and since then 23 chapters have been provisionally closed, including those on Economic 
and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  and  on  the  free  movement  of  capital.  Accession  is  expected  in  2004, 
subject to the outcome of a referendum to be held early next year.  
Apart from its political and social dimensions, EU membership offers Malta the opportunity to become 
fully  integrated  into  the  world’s  largest  regional  economy.  Membership  will  guarantee  unimpeded 
access to our major market and requires the implementation of internationally recognised norms and 
standards, both of which would increase Malta’s attractiveness as an investment location. Moreover, 
as  in  the  case  of  other  candidate  countries,  the  accession  process  has  spurred  market-oriented 
reforms.  As  a  result,  EU  accession  should  contribute  to  faster  economic  growth,  leading  to  an 
acceleration of the process of real convergence and to a steady improvement in living standards. 
EU  membership  also  entails  a  commitment  to  participate  in  EMU.  Before  accession,  Malta  will, 
therefore, have to adopt key elements of the acquis communautaire related to EMU. This process is 
well underway. For example, legislation currently before Parliament will explicitly make price stability 
the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy,  strengthen  the  legal  and  operational  independence  of  the 
Central Bank of Malta and formally prohibit central bank financing of public sector deficits. In practice, 
the Central Bank has been formulating monetary policy independently since 1994, using market-based 
instruments, including open market operations and reserve requirements, which are similar to the ones 
currently used by the Eurosystem. 
The adoption of the euro would be the final step in a process linking the Maltese economy and the 
euro  area.  Compared  to  the  current  regime  it  offers  a  number  of  additional  advantages,  which  are 
highlighted in the literature on optimum currency areas. Specifically, it should reduce transaction costs; 
result in lower interest rates in Malta; ease access to the growing European financial market; and lead 
to  more  transparent  pricing  of  goods  and  services.  It  should  also  act  as  a  spur  to  the  integration 
process with the EU since countries with the same currency tend to trade more with each other. 
From  an  institutional  point  of  view,  it  should  allow  Malta  to  be  represented  in  the  decision-making 
processes of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) that affect it even today. Here I would 
like to support the view put forward recently, among others by Governor Wellink of De Nederlandsche 
BIS Review 46/2002 
 1
 Bank1, about the need for adequate representation of national central bank governors in the decision-
making  bodies  of  the  ESCB.  Their  participation  confers  a  degree  of  legitimacy  on  the  decisions  of 
supra-national bodies such as the Governing Council, and can improve the quality of the policy debate 
as well as communications with the public in the various member states. 
From our perspective, the adoption of the euro should not involve any major regime shift. In fact, since 
the collapse of the Bretton Woods system three decades ago, the Maltese lira has been pegged to a 
basket of major currencies. Although the composition of the basket has been changed on a number of 
occasions, mainly in response to shifting trade patterns, the exchange rate was only devalued once, in 
the wake of the ERM crisis in the autumn of 1992. The fact that Malta has successfully maintained a 
peg for so long suggests that this is a viable exchange rate arrangement.  
The choice of a fixed exchange rate as the intermediate target of monetary policy was dictated by key 
characteristics  of  the  economy.  First,  Malta’s  size  implies  that  it  is  a  price  taker  on  international 
markets and cannot hope to influence its terms of trade through nominal exchange rate movements. In 
addition,  because  of  the  economy’s  openness,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  to  take  the 
exchange rate into account, whatever the overall policy strategy adopted. In fact, our experience after 
the 1992 devaluation showed the ineffectiveness of the exchange rate as a policy instrument, given 
the  rapid  pass-through  from  import  prices  to  the  general  price  level,  and  the  consequent  loss  of 
competitiveness in export markets. 
Second, the economy is already highly integrated with that of the EU. This is borne out by trade flows, 
as well as by a comparison of Malta’s economic structure in terms of the sectoral distribution of value 
added and employment with that of the Union. In addition, differences in productivity levels between 
Malta and the EU in the traded goods sector have been found to be small, which suggests that the 
Balassa-Samuelson  effect  is  unlikely  to  be  strong.  Moreover,  economic  integration  will  deepen  as 
barriers  to  the  movement  of  goods,  services  and  factors  of  production  are  removed  as  part  of  the 
accession process. These factors, which attest to a significant degree of real convergence, support an 
exchange rate regime based on a peg to the euro.  
Empirical evidence indeed shows that the exchange  rate peg has been a valuable nominal anchor, 
restraining price and wage increases. In fact, inflation has averaged just 2.6% in the past five years, 
indicating a considerable measure of nominal convergence with our major trading partners, and with 
the euro area in particular. By reducing the costs associated with international trade and investment, 
the peg has also contributed to Malta’s orientation as an open economy. Price stability and openness 
have been key factors contributing to the country’s economic growth record, which averaged 3.3% in 
real terms during the same period. 
Between now and the adoption of the euro, therefore, Malta intends to maintain a fixed exchange rate 
regime based on a currency basket centred on the euro. The Central Bank is aware that it will have to 
maintain the peg and manage a smooth transition to membership of the ERM and the single currency 
area in a rapidly changing economic environment. This will not be easy, but we should be able to rely 
on the well-established institutional and policy framework of the acquis and anchor our strategy to a 
clear end-point, the adoption of the euro. We, therefore, believe this to be a credible approach to euro 
area membership. 
In conducting monetary policy during this period, we recognize that international capital movements 
may present a growing challenge. For a long time, Malta’s exchange rate peg was backed by controls 
on  inward  and  outward  capital  flows  but  these  are  now  being  gradually  phased  out.  In  theory,  full 
capital  account  liberalisation  may  lead  to  large  and  volatile  capital  flows  which,  in  turn,  may  put 
pressure on the peg. In practice, econometric evidence suggests that, because of its openness, the 
Maltese  economy  has  already  been  exposed  to  significant  capital  flows.  This,  together  with  recent 
experience with a partially liberalised capital account, suggests that the impact of full liberalisation may 
turn out to be less than might have otherwise been the case. 
It is clear, nevertheless, that the Central Bank will have to  adjust short-term interest rates – its key 
policy tool – to neutralise any pressures on the exchange rate. In other words, interest rates will not be 
able to respond to domestic economic developments, but will have to move in line with those abroad. 
                                                      
1   Nout  Wellink,  ‘The  Role  of  National  Central  Banks  within  the  Europeans  System  of  Central  Banks:  The  Example  of  De 
Nederlandsche Bank’, 30th Economics Conference, Oesterreichische Nationalbank, June 13 – 14, 2002. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2002
 This  would  not,  however,  represent  much  of  a  change  because  already  today  the  Bank  has  only 
limited autonomy in the conduct of monetary policy. 
As far as the transition to the euro is concerned, therefore, the path that Malta should follow seems 
fairly straightforward, given the starting point of the existing exchange rate regime. Today, the basket 
consists  of  the  euro,  the  US  dollar  and  sterling,  with  weights  of  around  52%,  26%  and  22%, 
respectively. There is no fluctuation band. The peg is backed by official external reserves, which have 
comfortably exceeded the monetary base over the years and are equivalent to a fifth of broad money.  
The first step would be to increase the weight of the euro in the currency basket at the expense of 
either or both of the other component currencies. If the United Kingdom were to join EMU, this would 
automatically raise the proportion of the euro in the currency basket, making Maltese entry into ERM II 
that much easier. On accession, the timing for joining ERM II, as well as technical questions relating to 
the entry level and the fluctuation band will be up for discussion. 
If the Maltese lira were to join ERM II with the normal fluctuation band of ±15%, this would inject more 
flexibility  into the system. The exchange rate  would  be able to move in response to the  balance of 
payments, allowing monetary policy some latitude in reacting to domestic economic developments. In 
this framework, the real exchange rate appreciation that is a corollary of economic convergence could 
take  place  via  nominal  exchange  rate  appreciation.  However,  the  introduction  of  a  relatively  wide 
fluctuation band could lead to unprecedented exchange rate volatility. In turn, this could jeopardise the 
Bank’s price stability objective. It may, therefore, be preferable to enter ERM II without a fluctuation 
band at all.  
This exchange rate strategy of course implies that the burden of adjustment to shocks will have to be 
borne  by  the  real  economy.  In  the  first  instance  this  means  pursuing  a  prudent  fiscal  policy.  The 
current aim of fiscal policy is indeed to reduce the deficit to GDP ratio to around 2.5% by 2004, from 
5.3%  last  year  and  over  10%  in  the  late  1990s.  By  restraining  domestic  absorption,  a  tighter  fiscal 
stance  will  enhance  the  credibility  of  the  exchange  rate  peg.  Moreover,  a  smaller  borrowing 
requirement will also free up resources for the private sector and contain upward pressure on interest 
rates, thereby stimulating economic growth. Finally, bringing the budget deficit closer to balance will 
then give fiscal policy the leeway it lacks today to respond to adverse shocks or cyclical downturns.  
The response to such disturbances will also depend on the degree of flexibility in the economy as a 
whole. Unlike most accession countries, Malta has always had a functioning market economy, driven 
by private ownership of productive assets and with much of it exposed to international competition. In 
general, therefore, the private sector has already proved that it can cope with adverse shocks. In this 
regard, the flexibility of the labour market has been especially important. This flexibility must, however, 
be enhanced in order to safeguard competitiveness. 
The  EU  accession  process  itself  has  stimulated  important  structural  reforms  in  product  and  factor 
markets, ranging from the removal of barriers to trade to the liberalisation of the telecommunications 
industry. The privatisation of state-owned firms has also triggered important inflows of foreign direct 
investment,  while  the  restructuring  of  the  shipyards  –  a  key  employer  -  has  begun  to  yield  positive 
results. The pace of reform must, however, be sustained if we are to secure the productivity gains that 
would increase competitiveness in the tradable sector, buttress the exchange rate peg and bring about 
real convergence. 
Another crucial precondition for maintaining the exchange rate peg and ensuring a smooth transition 
to  the  single  currency  is  financial  sector  stability.  In  this  respect,  a  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework based on high international standards is already in place. Maltese legislation in this area in 
fact  incorporates  almost  all  the  features  of  the  corresponding  EU  directives,  and  legislative 
amendments  currently  before  Parliament  will  bring  about  almost  total  harmonisation.  Institutional 
responsibilities are divided between the Malta Financial Services Centre, which is responsible for the 
regulation  and  supervision  of  banking,  insurance  and  investment  services;  and  the  Central  Bank, 
which  is  charged  with  ensuring  the  stability  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  The  Central  Bank  is  also 
responsible for the domestic payments system, which is being upgraded in line with developments in 
the euro area. 
BIS Review 46/2002 
 3
 According  to  a  recent  background  paper  prepared  by  the  European  Central  Bank(ECB)2,  Malta 
already  has  a  domestic  financial  intermediation  mechanism  that  broadly  mirrors  the  composition  of 
different  financial  market  segments  in  the  euro  area  member  states.  While  there  has  been 
considerable growth of non-bank financial intermediaries and development in the money and capital 
markets,  the  banks  remain  the  key  financial  institutions.  Total  bank  assets  amount  to  more  than 
double GDP, whereas the ratio of domestic credit to GDP is broadly in line with the EU average. More 
importantly, the banking system is generally healthy, enjoying ample liquidity and a broad capital base, 
with  the  ratio  between  own  funds  and  risk-weighted  assets  standing  close  to  14%  in  March  of  this 
year. 
Although there are concerns about the quality of loan portfolios after a recent period of rapid credit 
expansion, the banks have reinforced their capacity to assess and contain risk. In this regard, the sale 
of one of Malta’s two large banks to a major foreign banking group in 1999 was particularly important. 
Prudential  controls  also  limit  bank  exposures  to  exchange  rate  risk,  thereby  reducing  a  source  of 
instability in the context of a pegged exchange rate regime with international capital mobility. 
In conclusion, EU accession and, in particular, the adoption of the euro would cement the strong links 
that already exist between Malta and the Union. From the Central Bank’s point of view, the prospect of 
EMU  membership  will  reinforce  the  current  commitment  to  price  stability  through  the  use  of  an 
exchange rate peg. Overall, the adoption of the euro would represent a logical step for an economy 
already closely integrated with that of the EU and influenced by the monetary policy of the ECB. We 
are,  however,  under  no  illusions:  achieving  this  goal  will  require  the  continued  pursuit  of  fiscal 
consolidation, structural reform and financial stability. But we are confident that these challenges can 
be met. 
                                                      
2  European  Central  Bank,  ‘Financial  Sector  Developments  and  Convergence  in  Accession  Countries:  An  Overview’, 
December 2001 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2002
