 David Dodge: Review of Canada’s recent economic performance and prospects 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at a luncheon at the Canadian Consul 
General's residence Chicago, Illinois, 9 May 2002.  
 Thank you for the invitation to this luncheon and for the opportunity to speak to you this afternoon. I 
want to take this time to review Canada's recent economic performance and prospects and to hear 
your views as to how you see things evolving in the U.S. economy.  
Canada's recent economic performance 
In Canada, the economic weakness that we experienced was really concentrated in the third quarter of 
last  year,  particularly  in  September.  The  terrorist  attacks  in  September  created  a  great  deal  of 
uncertainty,  and  so  the  Bank  of  Canada,  like  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve,  provided  an  extraordinary 
amount of stimulus by aggressively lowering interest rates.  
But  with  the  improvement  in  the  geopolitical  situation,  consumer  confidence  recovered  rapidly,  and 
consumers responded strongly and quickly to the monetary stimulus. Interest-sensitive sectors, such 
as housing and automobiles, showed remarkable strength. As a result, we saw annualized growth of 
2 per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year,  when  many  analysts  were  expecting  the  Canadian 
economy to continue to shrink.  
Canada's economic outlook  
In the Monetary Policy Report, which we published a couple of weeks ago, we forecast growth in the 
first half of this year of between 3 1/2 and 4 1/2 per cent at annual rates, although data released since 
then suggest that the first quarter may have been slightly stronger than we had thought. Second-half 
growth is expected to be in a range of 3 to 4 per cent.  
With growth at the end of last year and early this year being stronger than we had earlier assumed, the 
economy is operating at a higher level than anticipated. Indeed, this strength led us to sharply raise 
our forecast for average annual growth this year. In the Monetary Policy Report Update published in 
January, we pegged average annual growth for 2002 at just over 1 per cent. When we published our 
full Report in April, we raised that forecast to between 2 1/4 and 3 1/4 per cent.  
With the economy now operating at a considerably higher level, the gap between the actual level of 
economic activity and the level of potential output is smaller than we had predicted, and is currently 
narrowing. We now expect that the output gap will close in the second half of 2003.  
In  these  circumstances,  our  job  will  be  to  gauge  the  strength  of  the  economy  as  it  approaches  its 
capacity to produce and to reduce the amount of monetary stimulus in place in a timely and measured 
manner.  
What do we mean by those terms? "Timely" relates to the fact that there is always a lag between our 
policy actions and their effect on the economy. We must be timely because our actions take a year to 
18  months  to  have  their  full  effect  on  output,  and  18  months  to  2  years  to  have  their  full  effect  on 
inflation.  
"Measured" relates to the judgments that we will make as we approach full capacity. If the economic 
data going forward tell us that we are taking up excess capacity more quickly than expected, we would 
have to reduce monetary stimulus more quickly. But if the data suggest that the return to full capacity 
is going more slowly than we thought, we would then need to move more slowly.  
There are still important risks and uncertainties in the outlook. Some are working on the upside and 
others  on  the  downside.  Given  the  amount  of monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  in  the  economy,  output 
growth could be even stronger than projected. But it is also possible that some of the recent strength 
in spending  on consumer durables may  have  been  borrowed from the future,  so that the  growth of 
household expenditures may be weaker than expected. At the same time, there is still considerable 
uncertainty  about  the  timing  and  strength  of  the  pickup  in  business  investment  in  North  America, 
BIS Review 30/2002 
 1
 mainly because of the continued  weakness in profits. Moreover, recent  developments in the Middle 
East could have implications for crude oil prices and the global economy.  
The Canadian and U.S. situations  
On  16  April,  Canada  became  the  first  G-7  country  to  raise  interest  rates  following  the  most  recent 
economic  slowdown.  Central  banks  should  always  tailor  their  monetary  policies  to  their  own 
circumstances. And while Canada faces many of the same risks as the United States, there are some 
differences in our situations that are worth noting.  
Although  the  first-quarter  national  accounts  data  are  not  yet  out  in  Canada,  we  expect  that  final 
demand has made up a larger share of Canada's growth in the first quarter, while the contribution to 
growth from inventories constituted a smaller share than in the United States.  
It is always difficult to measure excess capacity with precision. However, it is clear that the Canadian 
economy is now nearer its level of potential than we expected it to be just a few months ago.  
The  key  issue  facing  both  the  U.S.  and  Canadian  economies  is  business  investment—when  it  will 
resume and how strong that pickup will be. In this context, I would certainly be very interested to hear 
your views on the situation here in the Midwest, and in the United States as a whole.  
As  I  recently  said  to  our  Parliamentary  committees,  we  see  two  or  three  key  differences  in  the 
Canadian and U.S. situations.  
First,  it  is  clear  that  there  was  a  tremendous  buildup  of  capacity  in  the  telecommunications  and 
information technology sectors in recent years, and some analysts expect that it will likely be well into 
2003 before we see any recovery in investment there. But I would note that these sectors represent a 
smaller proportion of the Canadian economy than the U.S. economy.  
The second issue we have noted is that small- and medium-sized firms tend to be more bullish about 
their  outlook  and  investment  intentions  than  large,  multinational  firms.  I'd  certainly  be  interested  in 
hearing  your  perspective  on  this.  But  again,  I'd  point  out  that  these  smaller  companies  make  up  a 
larger share of the Canadian economy than of the U.S. economy.  
The final point I made to the committees has to do with the potential impact of higher oil and natural 
gas prices on investment. While higher oil and natural gas prices stemming from developments in the 
Middle East could hurt consumers, they could lead to much greater drilling and exploration activity in 
Canada. Of course, that sector remains a significant part of our economy.  
2 
 BIS Review 30/2002
