 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in 
Frankfurt, 7 March 2002. 
 today's  meeting  we  examined 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today's meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB.  
First  of  all,  we  were  pleased  to  see  that  the  euro  cash  changeover  went  so  smoothly  –  more 
smoothly in fact than we could have hoped. The European public very quickly became familiar with the 
new banknotes and coins, as is shown by the fact that national banknotes were largely withdrawn well 
before the final deadline of their ceasing to be legal tender. The Governing Council wishes to express 
its gratitude once more to all those who helped to make the euro cash changeover such a success. 
recent  monetary,  financial  and  economic 
As  usual,  at 
developments. The Governing Council concluded that the information which had become available in 
recent weeks confirmed that the current level of key ECB interest rates remains appropriate for the 
maintenance of price stability over the medium term. Against this background, the Governing Council 
decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged.  
Starting  with  the  analysis  under  the  first  pillar  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  three-month 
average of the annual growth rates of M3 stood at 8.0% in the period from November 2001 to January 
2002, compared with 7.8% in the period from October to December 2001. The high level of the annual 
growth rates of M3 is very much related to portfolio shifts to liquid positions, most of which occurred in 
the autumn of 2001 in an economic and financial environment characterised by high uncertainty. While 
many investors still seemed to be "parking" some of their assets in M3 in early 2002, some moderation 
in the short-term dynamics of M3 could be observed around the turn of the year.  
The Governing Council continues to hold the view that the information from the first pillar thus far does 
not indicate risks to price stability, as the portfolio reallocations which drove M3 growth in 2001 should 
remain temporary. In addition, the slowdown in the rate of growth of loans to the private sector has 
been continuing over the past few months. However, we will need to analyse monetary developments 
closely in the coming months. 
As regards the second pillar, there are further signs that the trough in economic activity may have 
been reached at the end of last year. Coincident and forward-looking indicators increasingly point to 
improvements in economic conditions. A similar picture is reflected in financial market expectations, 
especially those embedded in bond yields.  
The economic fundamentals of the euro area are sound and there are no major imbalances that would 
require a  lengthy  process  of adjustment. The expectation of a recovery  in the  euro area  in  2002  is 
furthermore  supported  by  favourable  financing  conditions  and  by  real  disposable  income  benefiting 
from past and expected future declines in inflation. There is also increasing confirmation that economic 
activity  outside  the  euro  area  is  picking  up,  which  should  lead  to  a  gradual  strengthening  of  the 
external  demand  for  euro  area  products  and  services.  While  the  strength  of  the  recovery  remains 
uncertain, there are good reasons to expect a return of economic growth to levels in line with potential 
towards the end of the year. 
Turning to short-term price developments, annual consumer price inflation picked up substantially in 
January. Part of this increase was expected, as it related to base effects stemming from falling energy 
prices  in  early  2001  and  to  higher  indirect  taxes  in  some  euro  area  countries.  Furthermore,  the 
increase reflected a considerable rise in unprocessed food prices due to adverse weather conditions in 
parts of Europe. Part of the latter effect seems to have been reversed in the meantime, as preliminary 
data for February indicate. Some increases have also been observed in oil prices and in the rate of 
growth  of  services  prices  in  January.  While  there  might  have  been  an  impact  on  specific  service 
categories  in  January,  overall  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  euro  cash  changeover  has  had  a 
significant  upward  effect  on  the  average  price  level  in  the  euro  area  or  that  the  declining  trend  in 
annual inflation rates has been affected recently. 
BIS Review 15/2002 
 1
 In the coming months, the effects of past increases in energy and food prices should gradually subside 
and annual inflation rates should fall to below 2%. The recent behaviour of producer prices also points 
in  this  direction.  Beyond  that  horizon,  we  expect  little  upward  pressure  on  prices  from  aggregate 
demand and, barring unforeseen developments, inflation rates to be in line with price stability.  
However,  the  current  favourable  outlook  for  inflation  fundamentally  rests  on  the  assumption  of  a 
continuation of wage moderation. As I already noted last month, there is some cause for concern with 
regard to ongoing wage negotiations. A continuation of wage moderation in the euro area is crucial not 
only  to  foster  employment  growth  but  also  to  support  monetary  policy  in  its  task  to  maintain  price 
stability. 
With  regard  to  fiscal  policy  in  the  euro  area,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  reaffirmed 
commitments  of  the  governments  of  euro  area  countries  with  fiscal  imbalances  to  adhere  to  the 
objective  of  achieving  balanced  budgets  by  2003-2004.  The  confirmation  of  the  political  will  to 
continue along the path of fiscal consolidation is most appropriate. The Governing Council supports 
the actions taken by the European Commission in the context of the Stability and Growth Pact and the 
subsequent outcome of the ECOFIN Council meeting last month. It is now necessary to remain vigilant 
in  order  to  ensure  strict  adherence  to  the  medium-term  plans  and  rigorous  implementation  of  the 
procedures of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
In order to further improve the fundamentals of the euro area and to put the expected recovery on a 
broad  and  sustainable  basis,  euro  area  countries  must  strengthen  their  efforts  to  implement 
comprehensive structural reforms. Over the past few years progress has been made with regard to 
enhancing the flexibility of euro area product and capital markets. Euro area countries have also made 
some headway in terms of improving the way their labour markets operate. These reforms, together 
with  moderate  wage  developments,  have  contributed  to  the  strong  employment  growth  and  the 
considerable  reduction  in  unemployment  witnessed  in  many  euro  area  countries  in  the  last  cyclical 
upswing. However, it is worth noting that despite the continued high unemployment in the euro area, 
firms continue to report difficulties in terms of recruiting suitably qualified workers. This suggests that 
further improvements in the functioning of euro area labour markets and their ability to match labour 
supply and demand are needed.  Evidence gathered in a recent  Eurosystem analysis,  which  will be 
published shortly, supports this view. In this context I would also like to stress that structural reforms in 
different markets should not be seen in isolation. The more efficiently euro area product and capital 
markets  function,  the  greater  the  success  of  labour  market  reforms  will  be  in  creating  employment 
opportunities. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2002
