 Tony Latter: Why blame the peg? 
Speech  by  Mr  Tony  Latter,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  a 
luncheon of the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong, 12 March 2002. 
 Introduction 
When things aren't going too well, it's natural to look for scapegoats. In the case of the Hong Kong 
economy, the pegged exchange rate certainly gets its fair share of that treatment. What is the basis for 
complaints about the peg, and how far are they justified? 
Before examining some of the complaints, however, let us review the monetary policy background. 
Monetary policy 
It is widely accepted that the duty of monetary policy - and that embraces exchange rate policy - is to 
provide that monetary environment which is most conducive to long-term growth and prosperity of the 
economy.  This  is  seen  to  imply  a  desire  for  stable  monetary  conditions,  but  there  is  scope  for 
judgement as to how this stability should be defined. 
The majority of regimes focus on internal purchasing power and thus aim for low and stable domestic 
inflation.  Thus,  the  practice  of  inflation  targeting  has  now  become  quite  widespread  and  well 
understood. This requires an active monetary policy, necessarily impacting on domestic interest rates 
and money market liquidity; and, at least in the strictest form of targeting, it inevitably involves some 
exchange rate flexibility, even if not an entirely free float. 
A minority of regimes, of which Hong Kong is one, focus on a stable external value of the currency - in 
Hong Kong's case through the particular mechanism and discipline of the currency board. The more 
externally  oriented  an  economy  is,  the  greater  is  the  weight  which  may  need  to  be  attached  to 
exchange rate stability within the overall concept of monetary stability. 
There  are  various  pros  and  cons  of  each  approach.  Inflation  targeting  is  less  precise,  in  that  it  is 
necessarily based on forward projections, and verifiable indicators of success are only available after a 
timelag. It also requires a reasonably accurate forecasting process, which may be simpler to realise in 
a  relatively  closed  than  in  a  highly  open  economy.  Nevertheless,  experience  of  several  countries 
shows that inflation targeting is capable of delivering good results. 
An obvious advantage of a fixed-rate regime is that compliance can be monitored very  directly and 
unambiguously  in  real  time;  and,  in  the  currency  board  version,  the  regime  operates  by  automatic 
mechanisms rather than by the discretion of a central bank. It may, however, result in a less stable 
inflation  rate,  although,  assuming  that  monetary  policy  in  the  country  of  the  anchor  currency  is 
conducted responsibly, extremes of hyper-inflation or deflation will be avoided. 
Both regimes may be prone to fluctuations in interest rates in response to shocks, but with inflation 
targeting, which requires a flexible exchange rate even if managed to a degree, the central bank has a 
measure  of  discretion  in  the  magnitude  and  timing  of  its  response,  whereas,  with  a  fixed  rate, 
defensive reactions must be more immediate and may hence be potentially sharper. 
Hong Kong context 
Recent  criticisms  of  Hong  Kong's  currency  board  have  focused  mainly  on  two  aspects  -  the 
implications  for  the  competitiveness  of  Hong  Kong  vis-a-vis  other  economies  and  the  problems  of 
living with falling price levels. The remainder of this paper is directed mostly at these issues. 
Competitiveness 
Changes  in  competitiveness  are  typically  measured  by  comparing  movements  in  some  appropriate 
measure  of  costs  or  prices  at  home  and  abroad,  and  adjusting  for  shifts  in  exchange  rates.  The 
BIS Review 17/2002 
 1
 measure  of  competitiveness  thus  produced  is  commonly  referred  to  as  the  real  exchange  rate.1  A 
stronger real rate means higher relative prices and therefore implies weaker competitiveness.2 
I detect two common misconceptions about the real exchange rate. 
Influencing the real rate 
The first is the belief that the real rate is amenable to control by the central bank or government and 
that the chosen regime for the nominal exchange rate is therefore an important determinant of the real 
rate. 
Let me explain what I believe to be some flaws in this view. 
Even  if  the  central  bank  could,  through  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  or  actions  to 
influence domestic interest rates, fix the nominal exchange rate at some particular level, and even if it 
succeeded in fixing not simply the bilateral rate but the trade-weighted rate, this would only determine 
the real rate for the short term. This is because any monetary policy actions, such as exchange market 
intervention or changes in interest rates, in due course have a feedback effect on domestic inflation. 
More  specifically  for  example,  depreciation  tends  to  raise  prices.  In  a  market-based  economy  the 
central bank, if it already uses monetary policy to set the nominal exchange rate, cannot separately 
control  inflation.  Eventually  any  initial  gain  in  competitiveness  from  depreciation  is  offset  by  the 
inflationary feedback, most obviously so in highly import-dependent economies such as Hong Kong. 
Empirical studies do not reject the hypothesis that this feedback is eventually 100%, although the full 
offset may occur only after a considerable lapse of time. 
Meanwhile the real rate is also affected by movements in price levels in other economies, which lie 
beyond the home central bank's influence. 
In sum, the central bank cannot, except perhaps for the short term, dictate the real exchange rate. 
Equilibrium of the real rate 
The second misconception about the real exchange rate is that a weak rate (if it could somehow be 
arranged)  would  necessarily  be  a  good  thing,  because  of  the  benefit  which  an  improvement  in 
competitiveness, thus measured, would bring to the economy. 
History  tells  a  rather  different  story.  Successful  economies  have  typically  experienced  appreciating 
exchange rates during periods of their most rapid development; and the wealthiest economies tend to 
be those which appear to be the most expensive in terms of overall price comparisons. It is not so 
much the real exchange rate which determines prosperity, as it is the fundamental characteristics of 
the economy, such as underlying productivity, which determine the real exchange rate. An economy 
which can successfully sell high  value-added goods and services on  world markets and as a result 
enjoy at the same time relatively cheap imports is better off than one which balances its accounts by 
selling a higher quantity of cheaper output and buying a lower quantity of dearer imports. 
There  remains  a  question  of  whether  there  might  nevertheless  be  advantage  in  a  short  burst  of 
competitive advantage - as might be delivered by an engineered depreciation before the inflationary 
feedback negated the competitive gains - not just as a means of boosting the economy in the short 
term but also hopefully as a means of building a better foundation for longer-term growth. Experience 
suggests,  however,  that  this  sort  of  procedure  is  a  bit  like  a  drug  to  which  the  patient  too  readily 
becomes  addicted.  If  people  come  to  expect  continuing  doses  of  devaluation,  then  inflation  and 
inflationary  expectations  may  harden  and,  perhaps  more  significantly,  businesses  are  spared  the 
discipline of searching for greater efficiency or the  incentive to move up-market. The dosage of the 
drug may be increased as dependency rises, but eventually a fairly severe anti-dote of austerity may 
need to be administered to break the growing addiction. 
It may reasonably be argued, however, that, even if the underlying path of the real exchange rate is 
determined essentially by structural forces within the economy, monetary policy should be utilised so 
                                                      
1 
In fact it is necessary to take into account all one's trading partners and thus arrive at the real trade-weighted or "effective" 
exchange rate - the REER. For ease of exposition, however, only the term "real exchange rate" is used in this paper. 
2   The precise interpretation depends crucially on the set of prices or costs which is used in the calculation, but this aspect is 
not addressed here. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2002
 far  as  possible  to  prevent  excessive  divergences  from  trend  which  may  prove  damaging  to  the 
economy. For example, if a currency is artificially strong for a prolonged period, a particular sector of 
the  economy  may  become  so  damaged  that  it  is  incapable  of  recovering  when  the  exchange  rate 
eventually returns to equilibrium. In practice, however, it is extremely difficult to determine, at the time, 
whether a particular movement in the real rate represents a divergence from the equilibrium path or a 
fundamental  shift  in  the  path  itself.  At  various  moments  over  the  past  20-30  years  there  may  have 
been calls for a weaker HK dollar in order to preserve the local manufacturing sector. But few would 
doubt  in  retrospect  that  the  shift  away  from  manufacturing  to  a  higher  value-added  service-based 
economy has been beneficial and that it would anyway have been inevitable eventually. There would 
have been little advantage in trying to slow the process through actions of monetary or exchange rate 
policy. 
In other words, the long-term equilibrium path of the real rate is not necessarily flat. The trend path 
may, at any particular moment, be up, down or flat, while the actual rate constantly diverges from its 
equilibrium  path  because  of  random  events  such  as  unforeseen  movements  in  nominal  exchange 
rates or in cost and price levels at home or abroad, or because of the failure of market adjustment 
processes to work quickly enough. 
All of this can be quite aptly illustrated by looking at the path of the Hong Kong dollar's real rate since it 
was first pegged. The natural trend appeared to be upward, though not smoothly so, for the middle 
period of about ten years, but there is nothing here which tells us what will, or should, be the path from 
hereon. 
Against this background, monetary policy may not be expected to achieve much for competitiveness. 
But policy makers nevertheless have to choose. Should a fixed or floating rate be preferred? 
Fix or float? 
In  theory,  an  advantage  of  floating  is  that  it  may  allow  for  the  nominal  exchange  rate  to  adjust 
continuously and precisely so as to keep the real rate at equilibrium - an ideal situation if achievable. 
However, the historical experience, even of the world's major currencies - US dollar, Japanese yen or 
the currencies now merged into the euro, for example - is that a floating regime provides no assurance 
of a stable real rate. In practice, the market does not steer the rate in a continuously rational manner. 
There is also a tendency, even if the authorities are prepared to conduct some intervention, for floating 
rates  to  overshoot  occasionally,  especially  when  at  the  mercy  of  potentially  massive  international 
capital flows and herding behaviour in financial markets. Indeed, in certain circumstances floating may 
magnify rather than reduce short-run volatility in competitiveness, thereby unsettling the environment 
for making judgements about costs and prices, and hence for business planning. 
BIS Review 17/2002 
 3
 The advantage of a fixed rate is that, if credible (and I take Hong Kong's 18-year track record as a 
leading  example  of  that),  it  provides  an  unambiguous  and  highly  transparent  real-time  indicator  of 
whether monetary policy is on track or not, as well as a solid anchor for planning purposes. But, as 
with floating,  it provides no assurance of a stable real rate. And the disadvantage  is that  the  entire 
burden of relative cost-price adjustment falls on domestic costs and prices. Inflation is likely to be more 
volatile  than  under,  say,  inflation  targeting  accompanied  by  floating.  Moreover,  notably,  the  fixed 
regime may require downward flexibility of costs and prices if the nominal exchange rate becomes too 
strong for whatever reason. It is this aspect which has become the focal point of recent attention for 
Hong Kong. 
Hong Kong's flexibility 
In fact, Hong Kong exhibits very considerable flexibility of the sort required. This is not a characteristic 
shared  to  such  a  degree  by  many  other  economies.  Comparisons  have  often  been  drawn  with 
Argentina because of, until recently, its currency peg. The charts below compare various indicators for 
Hong  Kong  and  Argentina.  The  timescales  are  set  to  align  the  sudden  loss  of  competitiveness  by 
Hong  Kong  in  late  1997  because  of  the  Asian  crisis,  with  the  sudden  loss  of  competitiveness  by 
Argentina in early 1999 as a result of the Brazilian crisis and devaluation of the real. Attention is drawn 
in  particular  to  the  comparison  of  developments  over  the  subsequent  months  (to  the  right  of  the 
vertical divide). 
The first chart shows the levels of consumer prices. Hong Kong experienced much more significant 
price deflation, with the absolute price level falling almost 10% from its peak in the first two years after 
the shock, while in Argentina prices fell only 3-4%, even looking at a somewhat longer period. 
A more appropriate measure of internal costs and prices is the GDP deflator. This fell by some 10% 
for Hong Kong but was roughly static in Argentina.  
 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2002
  Largely  as  a  result  of  these  differences  in  the  response  of  internal  costs,  Hong  Kong  managed  to 
recoup all of the lost competitiveness (as measured by the real exchange rate), which had amounted 
to about  15%,  but  Argentina failed to achieve any  lasting recovery; indeed,  loss of competitiveness 
resumed, long before lost ground had been recovered.  
 In view of this evident flexibility in Hong Kong, to what extent is it therefore correct to talk of the peg 
imposing some sort of rigidity on the economy? In the strict sense of the word, there is of course some 
rigidity, because, even with speedy and flexible adjustments of domestic costs, the correction of these 
which may be needed to offset a shock to the nominal exchange rate cannot be instantaneous. But if 
this  rigidity  is  judged  against  how  other  economies  might  or  do  fare  under  fixed  rates,  Hong  Kong 
emerges  rather  favourably.  And,  when  compared  with  the  alternative  of  floating,  it  is  by  no  mean 
BIS Review 17/2002 
 5
 obvious that the peg delivers an inferior result for Hong Kong, given the possibility of volatility or over-
shooting under floating, especially for a small and highly exposed economy. 
Indeed,  although  it  is  always  difficult  to  predict  events  in  hypothetical  circumstances,  there  is  a 
concern that a more flexible regime would, rather than liberating monetary policy, actually pose more 
problems  -  especially  in  the  short  term  as  confidence  would  have  to  be  re-established  and  might 
remain  more  brittle.  This  might  involve  higher  rather  than  lower  interest  rates  because  of  a  risk 
premium, plus greater uncertainty. 
Before moving on from the subject of competitiveness, let me leave you with a couple of thoughts. If 
Hong Kong has, in some underlying sense, been suffering from severe uncompetitiveness, how does 
one explain the continuing strength of the trade and current account performance... 
 
 
…  and  the  fact  that  the  pace  of  recession  in  Hong  Kong  over  the  last  two  years  has  not  been 
significantly different from that in a number of other economies in the region?  
 
6 
 BIS Review 17/2002
 I am drawn to conclude that the criticisms of the peg on competitiveness grounds do not stand up too 
well under scrutiny. Even if the foregoing analysis and discussion does not prove unequivocally that 
fixing  is  superior  to  floating,  it  does  challenge  the  contention  that  perceived  problems  of 
competitiveness would dissipate if only we had a floating exchange rate. 
Living with deflation 
Let me turn now to the other focus of criticism of the monetary regime that I mentioned earlier, namely 
deflation. There are four main factors which have been contributing to falling prices in Hong Kong. 
First, there is the state of the global economy. A combination of recession and remarkable success in 
taming inflation in recent years have left policy makers in several countries facing the unusual situation 
of deflation. Hong Kong has not been alone, although the process has perhaps been more prolonged 
here than in many other places. 
The second factor is the process of integration of the economies of Hong Kong and southern China. 
This  is  something  which  is  generally  welcomed  in  the  broader  context,  but  it  may  put  downward 
pressure on Hong Kong prices in certain sectors. 
The third is the peg which, against the global background mentioned above, has been forcing some 
downward adjustment of our costs and prices. 
The fourth factor is peculiar to the property market, namely the excesses of the property market cycle 
which drove prices to such peaks some five years ago, from which it was almost inevitable that there 
would be some correction. 
Attitudes  to  falling  prices  are,  understandably,  ambivalent.  Other  things  being  equal,  consumers, 
especially  those  on  fixed  incomes,  generally  prefer  falling  to  rising  prices.  Even  some  people  who 
have had to suffer small cuts in pay may still be better off than previously; after all, the prices which 
they face, as measured by Hong Kong's consumer price index, are currently some 14% below their 
peak.  Meanwhile,  those  involved  in  marketing  Hong  Kong  as  a  business  location  are  eager  to 
publicise the lower costs. And prospective first-time entrants to the property market are happy. 
But for producers who see continuing declines in the likely prices at which they can sell their output, 
for wholesalers and retailers whose margins are being squeezed, for home-owners sitting on negative 
equity, or for financial institutions worried about the solvency of customers as a result of any of these 
developments, the process of deflation is not particularly welcome. 
From  the  monetary  policy  perspective,  the  prospect  of  persistent  deflation  presents  the  possible 
concern that, even with near-zero interest rates, people may prefer to sit on money balances rather 
than to spend, and that this may hinder recovery in real activity. To a certain extent the problem may 
only be illusory. Behaviour should be no different when interest rates are zero and inflation (or, strictly 
speaking, projected inflation) minus 2%, than when interest rates are 5% and inflation plus 3%; the 
real rate is the same in each case. But deflation does prevent real interest rates from going negative. It 
is a matter for debate as to how much of an impediment to recovery this limitation could be. Possibly it 
would only become significant if the expected pace of deflation was rather sharper than it has been. 
In  assessing  the  causes  and  impact  of  deflation,  and  the  possible  remedies,  it  is  appropriate  to 
distinguish  between  the  price  level  for  goods  and  services  on  the  one  hand,  and  that  for  assets  - 
whether financial or real estate - on the other. 
For goods and services, the consensus view is probably that a low, stable positive rate of inflation is 
preferable to a negative one. Nevertheless, both the economy and society may be able to cope for a 
certain period with modest deflation - in the range of, say, 0-2% pa - without too much difficulty. 
Asset prices, on the other hand, display much greater volatility, and the collapse of property prices has 
created problems for some homeowners and financial institutions, despite presenting opportunities for 
others. Plainly, stability is preferable to volatility. But the plunge in prices has much more to do with the 
earlier exuberance, plus structural influences, such as growing cross-border integration, than with the 
exchange rate. 
Although  the  current  deflation  may  undoubtedly  be  painful  to  some,  before  we  rush  to  argue  that 
deflation  could  be  avoided  if  only  we  had  a  floating  exchange  rate,  let's  pause  to  reflect  on  the 
Japanese experience. At times, Japan experienced deflation accompanied by upward pressure on the 
yen,  which  only served to  exacerbate the deflation.  It may not  be  appropriate to draw too close an 
BIS Review 17/2002 
 7
 analogy,  given the contrasting economic circumstances between the two economies, but it  is  worth 
noting  that,  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  deflation,  if  it  continues,  eventually  restores  any  lost 
competitiveness and will then bottom out (assuming no significant continuing deflation overseas). In 
other words, in the Hong Kong context the peg in effect sets upper and lower bounds to the inflation 
rate relative to the rate in the United States. 
In sum, the peg has certainly not been the only contributor to deflation, and such contribution as it has 
made,  has  probably  not  been  severe.  The  presence  of  deflation  does  not  itself  make  a  compelling 
case for altering the exchange rate regime. 
Summing up 
Back  in  1983  when  the  peg  was  installed,  I  recall  being  asked  whether  it  was  the  government's 
intention  that  the  arrangement  should  be  permanent,  or  in  what  circumstances  a  change  would  be 
contemplated. I said then simply that the peg was for the time being the most appropriate monetary 
anchor for Hong Kong. I would give very much the same answer today. 
Our peg is not a fixed rate that is supported by or dependent on discretionary intervention. It is a rule-
based currency board system which imposes a particular discipline of adjustment through interest rate 
channels  and  domestic  prices.  It  enjoys  widespread  support  from  international  observers  both  in 
official  circles  and  more  widely.  This  is  not  just  people  being  nice  to  us  and  choosing  not  to  say 
anything which might rock the boat, although there may be one or two of them. Rather it reflects an 
appreciation of the unique features of a currency board structure and the benefits which it has brought 
over 18 years, as well as an appreciation of the distinctive characteristics of the Hong Kong economy. 
The main distinctive characteristics to which I allude are the following: the flexibility in costs and prices, 
as discussed earlier; the extreme openness of the economy in terms of both trade and capital flows; 
the constitutional commitment, through the Basic Law, to support the free movement of capital and not 
to operate exchange controls; and the soundness of the banking sector. Taken together, these factors 
help explain why a peg may be feasible and sensible for Hong Kong while it might not be so for others. 
This does not mean that Hong Kong would be incapable of operating or continuing to prosper under 
an  alternative  regime.  Indeed,  we  possess  the  necessary  infrastructure  to  conduct  discretionary 
monetary policy (although that was not the case back in 1983), and I am confident that my colleagues 
would be quite capable of meeting the challenge of any new, more activist regime. However, although 
there may be moments when one thinks "If only we had a floating rate, things wouldn't be so bad right 
now", one cannot chop and change between regimes to suit short-term expedience. We acknowledge 
that no system is perfect, but I have suggested that much criticism of the peg may be exaggerated, or 
even  unfounded.  We  would  need  to  be  well  satisfied  that  an  alternative  would  be  unequivocally 
superior, before ditching something which has been the cornerstone of internal financial stability and 
external confidence for over 18 years. 
8 
 BIS Review 17/2002
