 Y V Reddy: Monetary and financial sector reforms in India: a practitioner(cid:146)s 
perspective  
Presentation by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Indian Economy 
Conference, Program on Comparative Economic Development (PCED) at Cornell University, Ithaca, 
New  York,  on  April  19-20,  2002.  Footnotes  and  references  have  been  omitted;  please  see  the 
Reserve Bank of India(cid:146)s website for these. 
 The objectives of this paper are to review the monetary and financial sector reforms in India, identify 
the emerging issues and explore the prospects for further reform. The first part is devoted to a brief 
background  on  the  need  for  reforms  taken  up  in  1991-92.  The  second  part  is  devoted  to  the 
institutional  aspects  of  the  reform.  Issues  relating  to  ownership,  competition  and  regulation  in  the 
financial sector as a whole, but primarily in the banking sector are analysed. The third part relating to 
policy framework focuses on monetary policy and credit delivery. The fiscal policy insofar as it impacts 
on the financial sector is also analysed. The fourth part focuses on managing process of reform in its 
various dimensions and perspective is that of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). The concluding part 
identifies the critical elements that would possibly determine the progress of reform.  
Need for reforms 
The  Indian  financial  system  of  the  pre-reform  period  essentially  catered  to  the  needs  of  planned 
development in a mixed-economy framework where the Government sector had a predominant role in 
economic activity. As part of planned development, the macro-economic policy in India moved from 
fiscal  neutrality  to  fiscal  activism  (Reddy  2000).  Such  activism  meant  large  developmental 
expenditures, much of it to finance long-gestation projects requiring long-term finance. The sovereign 
was  also  expected  to  raise  funds  at  fine  rates,  and  understandably  at  below  the  market  rates  for 
private sector. In order to facilitate the large borrowing requirements of the Government, interest rates 
on  Government  securities  were  artificially  pegged  at  low  levels,  which  were  unrelated  to  market 
conditions. The government securities market, as a result, lost its depth as the concessional rates of 
interest and maturity  period of securities essentially reflected the  needs of the  issuer (Government) 
rather  than  the  perception  of  the  market.  The  provision  of  fiscal  accommodation  through  ad  hoc 
treasury bills (issued on tap at 4.6 per cent) led to high levels of monetisation of fiscal deficit during the 
major part of the eighties. In order to check the monetary effects of such large-scale monetisation, the 
cash reserve ratio (CRR) was increased frequently to control liquidity. 
The  environment  in  the  financial  sector  in  these  years  was  thus  characterised  by  segmented  and 
underdeveloped  financial  markets  coupled  with  paucity  of  instruments.  The  existence  of  a  complex 
structure of interest rates arising from economic and social concerns of providing concessional credit 
to certain sectors resulted in (cid:147)cross subsidisation(cid:148) which implied that higher rates were charged from 
non-concessional borrowers. The regulation of lending rates, led to regulation of deposit rates to keep 
cost of funds to banks at reasonable levels, so that the spread between cost of funds and return on 
funds  is  maintained.  The  system  of  administered  interest  rates  was  characterised  by  detailed 
prescription on the lending and the deposit side leading to multiplicity and complexity of interest rates. 
By  the  end  of  the  eighties,  the  financial  system  was  considerably  stretched.  The  directed  and 
concessional availability of bank credit with respect to certain sectors resulted not only in distorting the 
interest rate mechanism, but also adversely affected the viability and profitability of banks. The lack of 
recognition of the importance of transparency, accountability and prudential norms in the operations of 
the banking system led also to a rising burden of non-performing assets.  
In sum, there was a de facto joint family balance sheet of Government, RBI and commercial banks, 
with  transactions  between  the  three  segments  being  governed  by  plan  priorities  rather  than  sound 
principles  of  financing  inter-institutional  transactions  (Reddy,  November  2000).  There  was  a 
widespread  feeling  that  this  joint  family  approach,  which  sought  to  enhance  efficiency  through 
co-ordinated  approach,  actually  led  to  loss  of  transparency,  of  accountability  and  of  incentive  to 
measure or seek efficiency.  
BIS Review 27/2002 
 1
 The policies pursued did have many benefits, although the issue of the higher costs incurred to realize 
the  laudable  objectives  remains.  Thus,  the  post-nationalisation  phase  witnessed  significant  branch 
expansion to mobilise savings and there was a visible increase in the flow of bank credit to important 
sectors like agriculture, small-scale industries, and exports. However, these achievements have to be 
viewed against the macro-economic imbalances as well as gross inefficiencies at the micro level in the 
financial  sector  compounded  by  non-transparent  accounting  of 
financial 
transactions.  
intra-public  sector 
Institutional aspects of reforms 
Institutions  
At  present,  the  institutional  structure  of  the  financial  system  is  characterised  by  (a)  banks,  either 
owned  by  the  Government,  RBI  or  private  sector  (domestic  or  foreign)  and  regulated  by  the  RBI; 
(b) development financial institutions and refinancing institutions, set up either by a separate statute or 
under  Companies  Act,  either  owned  by  Government,  RBI,  private  or  other  development  financial 
institutions and regulated by the RBI and (c) non-bank financial companies (NBFCs), owned privately 
and regulated by the RBI.  
Since the onset of reforms, there has been a change in the ownership pattern of banks. The legislative 
framework governing public sector banks (PSBs) was amended in 1994 to enable them to raise capital 
funds from the market by way of public issue of shares. Many public sector banks have accessed the 
markets since then to meet the increasing capital requirements, and until 2001-02, Government made 
capital  injections  out  of  the  Budget  to  public  sector  banks,  totalling  about  2  per  cent  of  GDP.  The 
Government  has  initiated  legislative  process  to  reduce  the  minimum  Government  ownership  in 
nationalized banks from 51 to 33 per cent, without altering their public sector character. The underlying 
rationale of the proposal appears to be that the salutary features of public sector banking is not lost in 
the transformation process. 
Reforms  have  altered  the  organizational  forms,  ownership  pattern  and  domain  of  operations  of 
financial institutions (FIs) on both the asset and liability fronts. Drying up of low cost funds has led to 
an intensification of the competition for resources for both banks and FIs. At the same time, with banks 
entering  the  domain  of  term  lending  and  FIs  making  a  foray  into  disbursing  short-term  loans,  the 
competition  for  supply  of  funds  has  also  increased.  Besides,  FIs  have  also  entered  into  various 
fee-based  services  like  stock-broking,  merchant  banking,  advisory  services  and  the  like.  Currently, 
while Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Ltd. (ICICI) is in the process of finalising its 
merger  with  ICICI  Bank,  Industrial  Development  Bank  of  India  (IDBI)  is  also  expected  to  be 
corporatised  soon.  At  present,  the  RBI  holds  shares  in  a  number  of  institutions.  The  further  reform 
agenda is to divest the RBI of all its ownership functions.  
In the light of legal amendments in 1997, the regulatory focus of the NBFCs was redefined, both in 
terms of thrust as well as the focus. While NBFCs accepting public deposits have been subject to the 
entire gamut of regulations, those not accepting public deposits have been sought to be regulated in a 
limited manner. In order to consolidate the law relating to the NBFCs, regulation is being framed to 
cover detailed norms with regard to entry point and the regulatory and supervisory issues.  
Competition 
Steps  have  also  been  initiated  to  infuse  competition  into  the  financial  system.  The  RBI  issued 
guidelines in 1993  is respect of establishment of new  banks in the  private sector. Likewise, foreign 
banks have been given more liberal entry. Recently, the norms for entry of new private banks were 
rationalised. Two new private sector banks have been given (cid:145)in-principle(cid:146) approval under these revised 
guidelines.  The  Union  Budget  2002-03  has  also  provided  a  fillip  to  the  foreign  banking  segment, 
permitted these banks, depending on their size, strategies and objectives, to choose to operate either 
as  branches  of  their  overseas  parent,  or,  corporatize  as  domestic  companies.  This  is  expected  to 
impart greater flexibility in  their  operations and provide them with  a level-playing field  vis-(cid:224)-vis their 
domestic counterparts. 
As  a  group,  however,  the  performance  of  PSBs  in  terms  of  profitability,  spreads,  non-performing 
assets and standard assets position seems to have been lower than that of the new private sector and 
foreign banks. There have been significant divergences in performance among the public sector banks 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2001
 (cid:150) some have performed on par with private and foreign banks, whereas the performance of others has 
been relatively unsatisfactory. Hence, although PSBs have been subject to Government intervention, 
these  do  not  appear  to  provide  a  complete  explanation  of  bank  performance.  Bank  specific  factors 
such  as  rapid  expansion,  higher  operating  costs  and  differential  industry  focus  seem  to  have  been 
important  considerations  as  well.  Public  sector  banks  operating  in  the  same  environment  with  the 
same  constraints  have  shown  varied  performance;  ultimately  this  reflects  the  performance  of 
management. 
Regulation and supervision 
A second major element of financial sector reforms in India has been  a set of prudential measures 
aimed at imparting strength to the banking system as well as ensuring safety and soundness through 
greater transparency, accountability and public credibility. 
Capital adequacy norms for banks are in line with the Basel Committee standards and from the end of 
March 2000, the prescribed ratio has been raised to 9 per cent. While the objective has been to meet 
the  international  standards,  in  certain  cases,  fine-tuning  has  occurred  keeping  in  view  the  unique 
country-specific  circumstances.  For  instance,  risk  weights  have  been  prescribed  for  investment  in 
Central Government securities on considerations of interest rate risk. Also, while there is a degree of 
gradualism, there is an intensification beyond the (cid:145)best practices(cid:146) in several instances in recent period, 
an example being exposure norms stipulated for the banking sector in respect of investment in equity. 
Investments are valued and classified into appropriate categories, as per international best practices. 
To  take  into  account  the  vagaries  of  interest  rate  risks,  a  prescription  for  meeting  a  targeted 
Investment Fluctuation Reserve out of the realised profits from sale of investments within a stipulated 
time frame has also been prescribed recently. 
The supervisory strategy  of the Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) constituted as part  of reform 
consists of a four-pronged approach, including restructuring system of inspection, setting up of off-site 
surveillance, enhancing the role of external auditors, and strengthening corporate governance, internal 
controls and audit procedures. The BFS, in effect, integrates within the Reserve Bank the supervision 
of banks, NBFCs and financial institutions.  
Prudential  regulations  have  had  a  significant  impact  on  the  banking  system  in  terms  of  ensuring 
system stability even in the face of both external and internal uncertainties, almost throughout during 
the second half of the nineties. As at end-March 2001, 95 out of 100 scheduled commercial banks had 
capital adequacy ration of 9 per cent or more. There was a distinct improvement in the profitability of 
public sector banks measured in terms of operating profits as well as in terms of net profits to total 
assets. Reflecting the efficiency of the intermediation process, there has been a decline in the spread 
between the borrowing and lending rates as reflected by the decline in the ratio of net interest income 
to total assets. The most significant improvement has been in terms of reduction in NPAs.  
Policy environment 
Changing monetary policy framework 
Since the onset of the reforms process, monetary management in terms of framework and instruments 
has undergone significant changes, reflecting broadly the transition of the economy from a regulated 
to liberalized and deregulated regime. While the twin objectives of monetary policy of maintaining price 
stability and ensuring availability of adequate credit to productive sectors of the economy to support 
growth have remained unchanged; the relative emphasis on either of these objectives has varied over 
the  year  depending  on  the  circumstances.  Reflecting  the  development  of  financial  markets  and  the 
opening  up  of  the  economy,  the  use  of  broad  money  as  an  intermediate  target  has  been 
de-emphasised, but the growth in broad money (M 3) continues to be used as an important indicator of 
monetary  policy.  The  composition  of  reserve  money  has  also  changed  with  net  foreign  exchange 
assets currently accounting for nearly one-half. A multiple indicator approach was adopted in 1998-99, 
wherein interest rates or rates of return in different markets (money, capital and government securities 
markets)  along  with  such  data  as  on  currency,  credit  extended  by  banks  and  financial  institutions, 
fiscal position, trade, capital flows, inflation rate, exchange rate, refinancing and transactions in foreign 
exchange  available  on  high  frequency  basis  were  juxtaposed  with  output  data  for  drawing  policy 
perspectives.  Such  a  shift  was  gradual  and  a  logical  outcome  of  measures  taken  over  the  reform 
period since early nineties.  
BIS Review 27/2002 
 3
 The thrust of monetary policy in recent years has been to develop an array of instruments to transmit 
liquidity  and  interest  rate  signals  in  the  short-term  in  a  more  flexible  and  bi-directional  manner.  A 
Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  (LAF)  has  been  introduced  since  June  2000  to  precisely  modulate 
short-term liquidity and signal short-term interest rates. The LAF, in essence, operates through repo 
and  reverse  repo  auctions  thereby  setting  a  corridor  for  the  short-term  interest  rate  consistent  with 
policy objectives. There is now greater reliance on indirect instruments of monetary policy. The RBI is 
able  to  modulate  the  large  market  borrowing  programme  by  combining  strategic  debt  management 
with active open market operations. Bank Rate has emerged as a reasonable signally rate while the 
LAF rate has emerged as both a tool for liquidity management and signaling of interest rates in the 
overnight market. The RBI has also been able to use open market operations effectively to manage 
the impact of capital flows in view of the stock of marketable Government securities at its disposal and 
development of financial markets brought about as part of reform.  
The responsibility of the RBI in undertaking reform in the financial markets has been driven mainly by 
the  need  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  transmission  channel  of  monetary  policy.  The 
developments  of  financial  markets  have  therefore,  encompassed  regulatory  and  legal  changes, 
building  up  of  institutional  infrastructure,  constant  fine-tuning  in  market  microstructure  and  massive 
upgradation of technological infrastructure. 
Since  the  onset  of  reforms,  a  major  focus  of  architectural  policy  efforts  has  been  on  the  principal 
components  of  the  organised  financial  market  spectrum:  the  money  market,  which  is  central  to 
monetary policy, the credit market, which is essential for flow of resources to the productive sectors of 
the economy, the capital market, or the market for long- term capital funds, the Government securities 
market which is significant from the point of view of developing a risk- free credible yield curve and the 
foreign exchange market, which is integral to external sector management. Along with the steps taken 
to  improve  the  functioning  of  these  markets,  there  has  been  a  concomitant  strengthening  of  the 
regulatory framework. 
The medium-term objective at present is to make the call and term money market purely inter-bank 
market for banks, while non-bank participants, who are not subject to reserve requirements, can have 
free access to other money market instruments and operate through repos in a variety of instruments. 
The Clearing Corporation of India Ltd is expected to facilitate the development of a repo market in a 
risk free environment for settlement. A phased programme for moving out of the call money market 
has already been announced and the final phase-out will coincide with the implementation of the Real 
Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system. Further reform is being contemplated in terms of reduction of 
CRR to the statutory minimum of 3 per cent, removal of established lines of refinance, limits on call 
money borrowing lending and borrowing by banks and PDs and a move over to a full-fledged LAF.  
With  the  switchover  to  borrowings  by  Government  at  market  related  interest  rates  through  auction 
system in 1992, and more recently, abolition of system of automatic monetisation, it was possible to 
progress  towards  greater  market  orientation  in  Government  securities.  Further  reforms  in  the 
Government  Securities  market  have  resulted  in  the  rationalization  of  T-Bills  market,  increase  in 
instruments and participants, elongated the maturity profile, created greater fungibility in the secondary 
market,  instituted  a  system  of  delivery  versus  payment,  strengthened  the  institutional  framework 
through Primary Dealers and more recently Clearing Corporation, and enhanced the transparency in 
market operations. Clarity in the regulatory framework has also been established with the amendment 
to the Securities Contracts Regulation Act. A Negotiated Dealing System for trading in Government 
Securities  is  in  operation.  Further  developments  in  the  Government  Securities  market  hinges  on 
legislative changes consistent with modern technology and market practices; introduction of a RTGS 
system, 
for  Government  securities  and 
standardisation  of  practices  with  regard  to  manner  of  quotes,  conclusion  of  deals  and  code  of  best 
practices for repo transactions.  
The movement to a market-based exchange rate regime took place in 1993. Reforms in the foreign 
exchange  market  have  focused  on  market  development  with  prudential  safeguards  without 
destabilizing  the  market.  Thus,  authorized  dealers  have  been  given  the  freedom  to  initiate  trading 
position in the overseas markets; borrow or invest funds in the overseas markets (up to 15 per cent of 
tier  I  capital,  unless  otherwise  approved);  determine  the  interest  rates  (subject  to  a  ceiling)  and 
maturity period of Foreign Currency Non-Resident (FCNR) deposits (not exceeding three years); and 
use  derivative  products  for  asset-liability  management.  These  activities  are  subject  to  net  overnight 
position limit and gap limits, to be fixed by them. Other measures such as permitting forward cover for 
some  participants,  and  the  development  of  the  rupee-forex  swap  markets  also  have  provided 
additional  instruments  to  hedge  risks  and  help  reduce  exchange  rate  volatility.  Alongside  the 
the  payments  and  settlement  systems 
integrating 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2001
 introduction  of  new  instruments  (cross-currency  options,  interest  rates  and  currency  swaps, 
caps/collars  and  forward  rate  agreements),  efforts  were  made  to  develop  the  forward  market  and 
ensure orderly conditions. Foreign institutional investors were allowed entry into forward markets and 
exporters  have  been  permitted  to  retain  a  progressively  increasing  proportion  of  their  earnings  in 
foreign  currency  accounts.  The  RBI  conducts  purchase  and  sale  operations  in  the  forex  market  to 
even out excess volatility. 
In  respect  of  the  financial  markets,  linkage  between  the  money,  Government  Securities  and  forex 
markets  has  been  established  and  is  growing.  The  price  discovery  in  the  primary  market  is  more 
credible than before and secondary markets have acquired greater depth and liquidity. The number of 
instruments and participants in the markets has increased in all markets, the most impressive being 
the Government Securities market. The institutional and technological infrastructures that have been 
created  by  the  RBI  to  enable  transparency  in  operations  and  secured  settlement  systems.  The 
presence of foreign institutional investors has strengthened the integration between the domestic and 
international capital markets.  
Credit delivery  
The  reforms  have  accorded  greater  flexibility  to  banks  to  determine  both  the  volume  and  terms  of 
lending.  The  RBI  has  moved  away  from  microregulation  of  credit  to  macro  management.  External 
constraints to the banking system in terms of the statutory premptions have been lowered. All this has 
meant greater lendable resources at the disposal of banks. The movement towards competitive and 
deregulated  interest  rate  regime  on  the  lending  side  has  been  completed  with  linking  of  all  lending 
rates to PLR of the concerned bank and the PLR itself has been transformed into a benchmark rate. 
As a result of reforms, borrowers are able to the get credit at lower interest rates. The lending rate 
between 1991-92 and 2001-02 has declined from about 19.0 per cent to current levels of 10.5-11.0 
per  cent.  The  actual  lending  rates  for  top  rated  borrowers  could  even  be  lower  since  banks  are 
permitted  to  lend  at  below  Prime  Lending  Rate  (PLR).  Further,  since  banks  invest  in  Commercial 
Paper (CP), which is more directly related to money market rates, many top rated borrowers are able 
to tap bank funds at rates below the prime lending rates. These developments have been possible to 
banks because the overall flexibility now available in the interest rate structure has enabled them to 
reduce their deposit rates and still improve their spreads. 
In terms of priority sector credit also, the element of subsidisation has been removed although some 
sort  of  directed  lending  to  Agriculture,  Small  Scale  Industry  (SSI)  and  export  sector  have  been 
retained. The definition of priority sector has been gradually increased to help banks make loans on 
commercially viable terms. However, the actual experience has been that the credit pick up is not up 
to  the  mark  and  has  been  generally  less  than  projected  by  the  RBI  in  its  monetary  policies,  in  a 
number of years. Also, while in general the rates of interest have come down, they are available more 
to highly rated borrowers than to the small and medium enterprises. There is considerable concern 
about the inadequate flow of resources to rural areas, and in particular agriculture, while interest rates 
have not been reduced to the extent they were, for the corporate sector. 
Fiscal policy and financial sector 
There are several channels that link the fiscal and financial sectors and in the Indian context four of 
them  appear  significant.  These  relate  to  (a)  governments(cid:146)  borrowing  programme;  (b)  guarantees 
extended by governments; (c) mechanisms such as (cid:145)direct debits(cid:146); and (d) governments(cid:146) investments 
in financial sector. 
The market borrowing programme of the central government continued to be relatively large, both in 
gross and net terms. Since a large part of the borrowing programme has to be completed in the first 
half  of  the  fiscal  year,  in  view  of  seasonality  for  demand  for  credit  on  private  account,  the  monthly 
average borrowing by centre is around three quarters of a percent of GDP in recent years. Further, 
there  has  been  an  upward  revision  in  the  borrowing  programme  of  central  government  during  the 
course of every year, usually, around three quarters of a percent of GDP. It has been possible for RBI 
as  debt  manager  to  complete  the  borrowing  programme  while  pursuing  its  interest  rate  objectives 
without  jeopardizing  external  balance,  by  recourse  to  several  initiatives  in  terms  of  institution, 
instruments,  incentives  and  tactics.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  been  able  for  RBI  to  reduce  statutory 
preemptions in regard to banks to the prescribed minimum of 25% of their net liabilities. The banking 
system, in which PSBs account for about three quarters of activity, holds majority of the outstanding 
BIS Review 27/2002 
 5
 stock of government securities, and currently their holdings in excess of statutory prescriptions are far 
in excess of the annual borrowing programme of the Central and State Governments. In any case, a 
large part of outstanding government securities are held by Government owned financial institutions, 
especially in banking and insurance sectors. RBI has so far been able to successfully reconcile the 
interests of Government as its debt manager and of banks as regulator and supervisor. In this regard, 
recognizing the importance of containing interest rate risks and widening the participant profile, RBI 
has prescribed an Investment Fluctuation Reserve for banks and is pursuing retailing of government 
securities.  While  technological,  institutional  and  procedural  bottlenecks  for  retailing  are  being 
overcome  by  RBI,  some  of  the  constraints  such  as  tax  treatment  and  relatively  high  administered 
interest rates do persist. 
The  conduct  of  borrowing  programme  of  State  Governments  is,  however,  posing  several  problems. 
While  the  market  borrowing  programme  of  states  in  aggregate  is  well  below  a  quarter  of  centre(cid:146)s 
market  borrowings,  in  a  liberalized  environment,  banks  cannot  be  compelled  to  subscribe  to  the 
programme. It was necessary to provide investors a premium for states(cid:146) paper over the centre(cid:146)s paper 
of a comparable maturity. Of late, the premium is widening and differing as between states, while in 
the case of some states, there have been some difficulties in ensuring subscriptions. In recent years, 
the increases in states(cid:146) borrowing programme over the budgeted amounts have been large with the 
attendant problems of garnering subscriptions. It has, however, been possible for RBI to conduct the 
programme  without  serious  disruption  in  the  markets,  since  some  states  have  also  begun  to  take 
initiatives to improve their fiscal profile and discharge their liabilities, especially to banks, in a timely 
fashion. It is necessary to recognise that size of government borrowings is only one element in public 
debt management, since there are other liabilities also, especially ballooning of pension liabilities.  
In this regard, extra budgetary transactions are also emerging, which impinge on the balance sheets of 
banks  and  other  financial  institutions  which  take  an  exposure  on  them.  For  example,  (cid:147)oil  bonds(cid:148)  to 
settle government(cid:146)s dues to public sector oil companies and (cid:147)power bonds(cid:148) to settle dues from State 
Electricity Boards to national level power utilities fall in this category. Banks exposure to food credit, 
which is in the nature of funding of buffer stock operations is also relatively large at over 2.0% of GDP. 
RBI  had  been  advocating  that  a  law  be  passed  imposing  a  ceiling  on  government  borrowings  as 
enabled by the Constitution, but more recently, a Bill is under contemplation for fiscal responsibility at 
the centre and several states.  
Financial intermediaries, especially banks, take exposures with a great degree of comfort when there 
is a sovereign guarantee.  Such guarantees are  often formally extended and notified as such to  the 
legislative  bodies  and  financial  markets.  RBI  has  encouraged  governments  to  pass  a  legislation 
prescribing a ceiling on such guarantees and also charge a fee without exception to ensure credibility 
to guarantees and comfort to subscribers. Several State Governments have passed such legislations, 
though some are less stringent than others. In view of the magnitudes of such guarantees by many 
States, banks have been advised to exercise due diligence in subscribing to them. Apart from explicit 
guarantees, recourse is occasionally made by governments to letters of comfort which have a similar 
effect, and RBI has been dissuading such relatively non-transparent practices. 
There  are,  in  addition,  what  may  be  termed  as  (cid:147)implicit-guarantees(cid:148)  which  have  maximum  linkage 
between fiscal and financial sectors.  A  predominant  point of financial  intermediation through banks, 
mutual  funds,  and  insurance,  in  spite  of  significant  reform  is  undertaken  by  publicly  owned  or 
government  backed 
to  repose  confidence  with  a 
corresponding implicit direct obligation on the part of government to protect the interests of depositors 
or investors. Such a reasonable expectation is not only justified on the considerations of reputational 
risk and the concept of (cid:147)holding out(cid:146) or backing, but also by the obligations discharged in the past by 
the Government of India, in several cases; some of them at the instance of regulator concerned.  
In some cases, banks and financial institutions seek and obtain instructions for direct debit of dues to 
them from government accounts to ensure the timely recovery of dues to them and thus bring about 
comfort  through  credit  enhancement.  Since  large  scale  recourse  to  such  mechanisms,  especially 
when  State  Governments  are  under  fiscal  strain  has  the  potential  of  eroding  both  the  integrity  of 
budget  process  and  the  de  facto  comfort  to  financial  intermediaries,  RBI  has  been  vigorously 
advocating avoidance of recourse to such direct debit mechanisms.  
The governments have, in its asset portfolio, equity holding and some debts of financial intermediaries 
that they own, and financial returns on these do impact the fiscal situation. More important, whenever 
pockets  of  vulnerability  arise  in  financial  sector,  the  headroom  available  in  the  fiscal  situation  to 
institutions.  Hence,  public 
financial 
tend 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2001
 provide  succour  to  financial  entities  needs  to  be  assessed.  Fortunately,  on  present  reckoning,  the 
magnitudes of the few pockets of vulnerability appear to be manageable without undue fiscal strain. 
In assessing fiscal financial linkage, the scope for money financing of budgets vis-(cid:224)-vis bond financing 
also needs to be considered. Since there are elements of open capital account, the maneuverability 
for RBI in the short-term to monetize government(cid:146)s deficit is severely circumscribed by the direction 
and  magnitudes  of  such  flows.  Keeping  these  considerations  in  view,  RBI  and  Government  have 
agreed upon freedom to RBI to determine the extent of monetization of government budget consistent 
with macro-economic stability. 
Managing the process of reform 
Financial sector reform and changes in law 
Any reform has both public and private dimensions, and ideally all participants should recognize the 
emerging  new  realities,  assess  costs  and  benefits  and  make  attempts  to  cope.  Reform  outcomes 
should thus, be related not only to public action but also several other factors. In public action itself, 
there can be legal, policy and procedural aspects including subordinate legislations and institutional 
changes.  There  are  possibilities  of  significant  policy  and  procedural  changes  within  a  given  legal 
framework and these need to be explored since changes in law are often difficult to get through in any 
democratic process.  
RBI has been articulating the need for appropriate changes in Law, assisting the Government in the 
process and has also been brining about changes in the financial sector without necessarily waiting for 
changes in law. Thus, several legislative measures affecting ownership of banks, IDBI, debt recovery, 
regulation of non banking financial companies, foreign exchange transactions and money market have 
been  completed.  Those  on  the  anvil  include  measures  relating  to  fiscal  and  budget  management, 
public  debt,  deposit  insurance,  securitization  and  foreclosure,  and  prevention  of  money  laundering. 
The agenda for further legal reform, as identified by several Advisory Groups relate to RBI, Banking 
Regulations,  Companies,  Chartered  Accountant,  Income-tax,  Bankruptcy,  Negotiable  Instruments, 
Contracts, Unit Trust of India, etc.  
The  legislative  process  is  complex  in  a  democratic  set  up  and  it  will  be  inadvisable  to  rush  into 
legislation  through  a  (cid:147)big  bang(cid:148)  approach.  Furthermore,  many  elements  of  economic  reform  and 
underlying legislative framework need to be harmonized. At the same time, it may not be necessary to 
wait for legislative framework to change to bring about some of the reforms or initiate processes to 
demonstrate usefulness of reform-orientation. In fact, there are several examples of managing reform 
within  constraints  of  law  which  need  to  be  recalled.  For  example,  there  are  some  enabling  but  not 
mandated provisions which may or may not be used. Thus, RBI had shed its direct developmental role 
in  the  sense  of  money  financing,  by  ceasing  to  operate  on  relevant  provision  and  by  and  large, 
confining  money  creation  for  Government  of  India  only.  Supplemental  agreement  to  terminate 
automatic monetization (WMA) of government(cid:146)s deficit has been used, by way of a signed agreement 
between RBI and Government of India, though a legislative compulsion in still under consideration as 
part of Fiscal Responsibility and Management Bill.  
In several cases, contracts with stipulated conditions have been framed in the absence of specific law 
governing  such  transactions.  Examples  relate  to  regulation  of  Clearing  Houses;  operating  current 
payment systems and functioning of electronic trading even before instructions under I.T. Act came 
into force. Similarly, it has been possible to invoke prudential regulations over RBI regulated financial 
institutions  to  effectuate  best  practices  in  financial  markets,  though  the  legal  compulsion  as  a 
regulation  on  all  market  participants  may  not  be  possible;  the  example  of  successes  achieved  are 
dematerialisation of Commercial Paper and Demateralisation of Debt instruments, brought about in the 
requirements  on  Banks  and  financial  institutions.  There  could  also  be  use  of  incentives  to  conform 
though legal or formal regulation may be difficult. Examples relate to valuation and accounting norms 
being  performed  by  a  self  regulatory  organization  and  adopted  by  banks  and  proposals  relating  to 
information sharing with Credit Information Bureau pending legislative initiatives. A deliberate decision 
may  be  taken  not  to  use  regulatory  powers,  thus  enabling  development  of  markets.  For  example, 
current  account  convertibility  in  external  sector  was  implemented  even  before  a  new  law  was 
introduced by recourse to large scale relaxations. Similarly, Credit Guarantee was virtually given up 
though a new law is yet to be enacted giving up the credit-guarantee function of Deposit Insurance 
Guarantee Corporation. In all these cases, however, a positive approach to law to enable reform was 
BIS Review 27/2002 
 7
 possible because of clarity about what was to be done and finding of legal ways of doing even if it 
were second best.  
Managing uncertainties during reform 
Reforms in the financial sector had to be implemented keeping in view not only the desirable directions 
and appropriate measures carefully sequenced, but also the emerging uncertainties, both in domestic 
and global arena. By all accounts, India has managed the uncertainties reasonably well. Recognizing 
that such uncertainties have a tendency to impact the exchange rate, it is instructive to briefly review 
the processes of management and drawn some tentative lessons. The Gulf crisis, which triggered the 
reform  process  was  managed  without  any  reschedulement  of  any  contractual  obligation,  but  with  a 
recourse  to  stabilization  measures  and  initiation  of  structural  reforms.  The  current  account 
convertibility in 1994 led to liberalization of gold imports and large capital inflows up to 1996. In 1997, 
the  timely  efforts  to  depreciate  the  currency  warded  off  a  possible  crisis  due  to  persistence  of  a 
relatively over valued rupee in the forex markets. This also enabled the implementation of a package 
of monetary and other prompt actions in resisting contagion effects of Asian crisis in late 1997 and 
early 1998. The imposition of sanctions by U.S. government and others consequent upon nuclear tests 
required replacement of normal debt flows with a type of extra ordinary financing. 
There was also an occasion, as in May-August 2000 where inexplicable changes in expectations put 
pressure on the currency warranting yet another package to counter the market sentiment. In contrast 
the events of September 11, 2001 needed measures to reassure the markets with timely liquidity and 
stability in monetary measures. The reasonable success in managing these uncertainties while adding 
to forex reserves with marginal addition to total external debt but maintaining both reasonable overall 
macro-economic stability and pace of reform in financial sector has some tentative lessons to offer.  
First,  stable  and  appropriate  policies  governing  overall  management  of  the  external  sector  are 
important. As part of the reform process, a policy framework was developed to gradually liberalise the 
external sector, move towards total convertibility on current account, encourage non debt credit inflows 
while containing all external debt especially short term debt in capital account and make the exchange 
rate  largely  market  determined.  The  policy  reform  in  the  external  sector,  accompanied  by  other 
changes  was  guided  by  the  Report  of  High  Level  Committee  on  Balance  of  Payments,  April  1993 
(Chairman Dr.C.Rangarajan).  
Second, the impression that a closed economy is less vulnerable to crisis is not borne out by facts. 
India was a closed economy on the eve of the Gulf Crisis but the impact was severe. Though it is now 
a relatively more open economy, it could without serious disruptions withstand several uncertainties. 
Third, as evident from experience, if the fundamentals are weak, the economy is more vulnerable in 
the face of uncertainties.  
Fourth,  in  all  instances  of  serious  uncertainties,  the  existence  and  manifestation  of  harmonious 
relations between the Government and the central bank become critical and appropriate coordination 
is  extremely  useful.  Fifth,  while  it  is  difficult  to  anticipate  or  assess  the  uncertainties,  there  may  be 
advantages in taking the risk of early action than late action. Sixth, while in a rapidly changing world of 
uncertainties,  commitment  to  ideology  can  prove  to  be  a  drag  on  policy,  especially  in  emerging 
countries,  which  are  attempting  structural  transformation,  it  has  been  demonstrated  by  events  the 
world over as well as by the Indian experience, that when the going is good, government is perceived 
to be a problem but when the going gets tough, effective public policy may be the only solution. As 
such, the state has a pivotal role in stabilizing the economy when there is a spell of stormy weather. 
Seventh,  there  may  be  need  for  several  short-term  actions  to  meet  challenges  but  this  should  not 
distort the medium term vision to proceed with economic reform to improve standards of living. In other 
words, it is necessary for the policy makers to be conscious and more importantly, essential for the 
policy maker to convince market participants that some measures to meet the crisis are short term, 
while  some  others  may  get  embedded  into  the  public  policy  in  the  medium-term.  Related  to  this 
approach and to reinforce this, there is advantage in designing measures that are easily reversible, 
preferably  with  an  explicit  indication  that  the  measures  are  reversible  even  as  they  are  being 
announced, though a specific time frame may not be prescribed. 
Eighth,  as  regards  the  techniques  and  instruments  of  managing  uncertainties,  they  have  to  evolve 
keeping  in  view  the  reform  process  itself,  especially  developments  in  financial  markets,  monetary 
policy, the nature, composition and evolution of market participants and above all public opinion.  
8 
 BIS Review 27/2001
 Ninth,  it  is  necessary  to  have  an  appropriate  mix  of  surprise  elements  and  anticipated  elements  in 
policy actions for meeting any uncertainties. As an example, when the markets are in need of comfort 
or  assurances,  when  the  convergence  in  the  objectives  of  policy  makers  and  the  markets  are 
matched, and such convergence  is observable in regard to instruments, there is merit in taking the 
market  into  confidence  and  proceeding  accordingly.  Where  there  is  a  perception  that  the  market 
expectations and their possible actions in the direction are not considered to be desirable by the policy 
makers,  it  is  always  advantageous  to  bring  an  element  of  surprise  preferably  with  firmness  and 
credibility so that all possible anticipatory actions as well as resistances are avoided. There may be 
occasions when the wavelengths of markets or segments thereof and policy maker differ significantly 
and in such circumstances, the conduct of policy would presumably be more complex and difficult.  
Finally,  the  issue  of  transparency  is  extremely  important.  There  are  many  occasions  where 
transparency  is  desirable  but  there  are  also  occasions  where  instant  transparency  is  not  entirely 
essential  and  could  even  be  counter-productive.  An  acceptable  approach  seem  to  be  one  that 
practices  transparency  as  a  rule  but  the  timing  of  transparency  could  vary  depending  on  the 
circumstances.  
the  RBI  have  enhanced 
RBI and Government 
During the early 1960s, Governor Iengar identified four areas of potential conflict between the Bank 
and  the  central  government.  These  were  interest  rate  policy,  deficit  financing,  cooperative  credit 
policies and management of sub-standard banks. It may be of interest to note that these four areas 
are still some of RBI(cid:146)s concerns. 
During the post-reform period, the relationship between the central bank and the Government took a 
new turn through a welcome development in the supplemental agreement between the Government 
and the RBI in September 1994 on the abolition of the ad hoc treasury bills to be made effective from 
April 1997. The measure eliminated the automatic monetisation of Government deficits and resulted in 
considerable moderation of the monetised deficit in the latter half of the Nineties.  
At  the  same  time,  with  gradual  opening  up  of  the  economy  and  development  of  domestic  financial 
markets, the operational framework of the RBI also changed considerably with clearer articulation of 
policy goals and more and more public dissemination of vast amount of data relating to its operations.  
In fact, during the recent period, the RBI enjoys considerable instrument independence for attaining 
monetary policy objectives. Significant achievements in financial reforms including strengthening of the 
banking  supervision  capabilities  of 
instrument 
independence. It has been pointed out by some experts that the RBI, though not formally independent, 
has enjoyed a high degree of operational autonomy during the post-reform period.  
In terms of redefining the functions of the RBI, enabling a movement towards meaningful autonomy, 
Governor  Jalan(cid:146)s  statement  on  Monetary  and  Credit  Policy  on  April  19,  2001  is  a  landmark  event. 
First, it was decided to divest RBI of all the ownership functions in commercial banking, development 
finance and securities trading entities. Secondly, a beginning was made in recommending divestiture 
of RBI(cid:146)s supervisory functions in regard to cooperative banks, which would presumably be extended to 
non-banking financial companies and later to all commercial banks. Thirdly, the RBI signalled initiation 
of  steps  for  separation  of  Government  debt  management  function  from  monetary  policy.  These 
measures would enable the RBI to primarily focus on its role as monetary authority and enhance the 
possibility of a move towards greater autonomy.  
The emerging issues relating to autonomy of RBI can be addressed at  different levels. First, at the 
level of legislative framework, several suggestions have been made to ensure appropriate autonomy 
and many of them are under consideration. In particular, proposed Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management Bill and other amendments to Reserve Bank of India Act would cover significant ground. 
Several other suggestions relating to legal framework, as recommended by the Advisory Groups are 
yet to be taken up.  
Second, at the policy level, there are three important constraints on the operational autonomy even 
within  the existing legal framework. One, the continued fiscal  dominance, including large temporary 
mismatches between receipts and expenditures of Government warranting large involuntary financing 
of  credit  needs  of  Government  by  the  RBI.  Two,  the  predominance  of  publicly  owned  financial 
intermediaries and non-financial public enterprises, which has created a blurring of the demarcation 
between  funding  of  and  by  Government  vis-(cid:224)-vis  public  sector  as  a  whole.  Three,  the  relatively 
underdeveloped state of financial markets partly due to legal and institutional constraints, which blunts 
its  credibility  and 
BIS Review 27/2002 
 9
 the  effectiveness  of  instruments  of  monetary  policy.  These  issues  need  to  be  resolved  to  enhance 
genuine autonomy.  
Third,  at  the  operational  and  procedural  level,  there  is  a  problem  of  (cid:147)old  habits  die  hard(cid:148).  In  a 
deregulated  environment,  there  is  considerable  scope  to  reduce  micro-management  issues  in  the 
relations  between  the  Government  and  the  RBI.  At  the  level  of  degree  of  transparency,  there  is  a 
temptation  to  continue,  what  has  been  termed  as  the  (cid:147)joint-family  approach(cid:148);  which  ignores  basic 
tenets of accounting principles in regard to transactions between RBI and Government.  
Some critical elements for progress in reform 
In spite of difficulties in prioritizing the elements relevant for reform, an attempt is made to mention 
some elements which present themselves as critical in the light of experience gained so far. First, as 
elaborated in Governor Jalan(cid:146)s recent statements on Monetary and Credit Policy, several legislative 
measures are needed to enable further progress. These relate in particular, to ownership, regulatory 
focus,  development  of  financial  markets,  and  bankruptcy  procedures.  Some  of  the  serious 
shortcomings in the anticipated benefits of reform such as in credit delivery do need changes in legal 
and  incentive  systems.  In  particular,  there  is  need  to  focus  on  reduction  of  transaction  costs  in 
economic  activity,  and  enhancing  economic  incentives.  Severe  penalties  in  law,  including  criminal 
proceedings,  may  not  be  substitutes  for  increasing  enforceability  (i.e.,  probability  of  being  caught, 
prosecuted, and punished adequately and in a timely fashion). In regard to institutions, there is need 
to clearly differentiate functions of owner, regulator, financial intermediary and market participant, to 
replace the joint-family approach that is a legacy of the pre-reform framework. 
Second, fiscal empowerment appears to be essential for obvious reasons. While the existing level of 
fiscal  deficit  may  be  manageable,  the  headroom  available  for  meeting  unforeseen  circumstances 
appears rather  limited. The problem is somewhat acute  in regard  to finances of states, which have 
serious  structural  problems  and  their  resolution  is  possible  only  through  accelerated  fiscal  support 
from Central Government consistent with the fiscal soundness of Central Government. Some of the 
legal reforms may also be necessary for this purpose and the link for further progress in the financial 
sector  is  obvious.  In  particular,  the  nature  of  fiscal  dominance  does  constrain  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy  to  meet  unforeseen  contingencies  as  well  as  maintain  price  stability  and  contain 
inflationary expectations. 
Third, the reforms in the real sector are needed to bring about structural changes in the economy. The 
liberalization of financial sector and of external sector can provide impetus for further growth and in 
turn  help  more  rapid  progress  only  when  accompanied  by  reforms  in  the  real  sector,  particularly  in 
domestic trade. 
Fourth, there are what may  be termed as (cid:145)overhang(cid:146) problems in the financial sector, such as non-
performing  assets  of  banks  and  financial  institutions.  There  are  similar  overhang  problems  in  other 
areas as well, and it is necessary to make a distinction between what may be termed as flow issues 
and  overhang  issues.  There  is  merit  in  insulating  the  overhang  problem  from  flow  issues  and 
demonstrably solve the flow problem upfront. For example, in regard to food stocks there is addition to 
buffer stocks virtually on a continuous basis and a policy needs to be evolved to tackle this flow. Any 
attempt to sort out the overhang accumulated excess stocks on an ad hoc basis would obviously have 
limited success. Any solution to the overhang problem of large magnitude is bound to be operational 
over the medium-term and may involve admission of the magnitude of possible losses to be incurred. 
Yet  another  example  relates  to  the  power  sector,  where  addition  to  capacities  to  generate  without 
ensuring cost recovery adds to the problem of accumulated losses. Prima facie, the major areas with 
considerable overhang problems apart from the financial sector are  public enterprises, pension  and 
provident  fund  liabilities  and  the  cooperative  sector.  The  criticality  of  the  issue  is  in  terms  of  their 
cumulative impact on financial sector as a whole. 
Fifth,  it  will  be  useful  to  distinguish  between  what  a  financial  sector  can  contribute  and  what  fiscal 
action can contribute to matters relating to poverty alleviation. In the interest of efficiency and stability 
of financial sector, intermediation may have to be progressively multi institutional rather than  wholly 
bank-centred.  Social  obligations  may  have  to  be  distributed  equitably  among  banks  and  other 
intermediaries  but  that  would  be  difficult  to  achieve  in  the  context  of  emerging  capital  markets  and 
relatively  open  economy.  In  such  a  situation,  banks  which  are  special  and  backbone  of  payment 
systems, may face problems if they are subject to disproportionate burdens. Hence, mechanisms have 
to be found to reconcile these dilemmas. 
10 
 BIS Review 27/2001
 Furthermore, monetary policy is increasingly focused on efficient discharge of its objective including 
price stability, and this no doubt would help poverty alleviation, albeit indirectly, while the more direct 
attack on poverty alleviation would rightfully be the preserve of fiscal policy. Monetary and financial 
sector policies in India should perhaps be focusing increasingly on what Dreze and Sen call (cid:147)growth 
mediated  security(cid:148)  while  (cid:147)support-led  security(cid:148),  mainly  consisting  of  direct  anti-poverty  interventions 
are addressed mainly by fiscal and other governmental activities.  
BIS Review 27/2002 
 11
