 Willem F Duisenberg: The path towards a single currency 
Reply  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the  occasion  of 
receiving  the  Grand  Cross  1st  class  of  the  Order  of  Merit  of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany, 
Frankfurt am Main, 24 July 2002 
 First, I should like to sincerely thank the President of the Federal Republic of Germany, represented 
here  today  by  the  Finance  Minister,  Mr.  Eichel,  for  awarding  me  the  Grand  Cross  1st  class  of  the 
Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany. I feel deeply honoured. I would also like to thank 
the Finance Minister for his kind words. And I am grateful to all of you here for sharing this special 
moment with me. 
To be mentioned in the same distinguished company as Karl Otto Pöhl, Helmut Schlesinger and Hans 
Tietmeyer is a great honour for a former President of the Dutch central bank. In the early 1970s, De 
Nederlandsche  Bank  and,  in  particular,  my  predecessor  there,  Jelle  Zijlstra,  realised  that  the 
Netherlands, as a relatively small and open economy, had no other option than to orient its monetary 
policy towards its main trading partner and neighbour, Germany. Moreover, by doing so, we thought 
we  could  ‘import’  the  credibility  of  German  monetary  policy  and  transfer  the  internal  stability  of  the 
Deutsche Mark to the Dutch guilder. This policy was contentious and De Nederlandsche Bank rather 
cautiously adopted an exchange rate target policy. Indeed, in my early years as President of the Dutch 
central bank, I was confronted - in 1983 - with the decision of the Dutch government not to revalue the 
Dutch  guilder  in  the  European  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  to  the  same  extent  as  the  German 
currency; a decision taken against the explicit advice of the Dutch central bank. This decision resulted 
in a divergence between Dutch and German interest rates, which, unfortunately, came to haunt the 
Netherlands for almost eight years. The most important lesson of this event - for me and also for the 
government - was that to gain credibility in financial markets was very difficult, but to lose credibility 
was very easy. 
After  1983,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  guilder  was more  or  less  pegged  to  the  exchange  rate  of  the 
Deutsche Mark. And as was expected in the 1970s, price developments in the Netherlands very much 
mirrored those in Germany. The success of Dutch monetary policy became very obvious during the 
upheaval in the European Monetary System in July 1993, when it was decided to widen the fluctuation 
bands  of  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism.  Only  the  tight  link  between  the  Dutch  guilder  and  the 
Deutsche  Mark,  sealed  with  an  exchange  of  letters  between  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  De 
Nederlandsche  Bank,  survived  this  storm.  Apparently,  the  credibility  of  Dutch  monetary  policy  was 
restored again. 
In parallel to these developments, a vision even more daring than the close link between the Dutch 
and German currencies was gaining the attention and support of European leaders: the introduction of 
a  single  currency  in  Europe.  One  of  its  fathers,  the  former  Prime  Minister  of  Luxembourg  Pierre 
Werner, only very recently passed away. It is unfortunate that his proposal to achieve monetary union 
by  the  end  of  the  1970s  did  not  succeed,  and  I  take  this  opportunity  to  pay  him  the  tribute  he 
deserves. But this failure probably did not harm Europe, because at the time the single market was far 
from completion. Indeed, the political aspirations behind a single currency in Europe were running too 
far  ahead  of  the  economic  realities.  By  contrast,  failing  to  introduce  a  single  currency  following  the 
Maastricht Treaty would have been considerably more damaging. 
The  path  towards  a  single  currency  was  a  tortuous  one.  The  whole  plan,  laid  down  in  the Werner 
Report,  was  put  aside  amid  the  global  currency  turmoil  in  the  early  1970s  and  the  subsequent 
economic recession. But the vision of establishing a single currency in Europe gained new momentum 
after the ratification of the Single European Act in 1987, which laid the foundations for the European 
Single Market. The idea, rightly so in my view, was that it would not be possible to reap all the benefits 
from  an  internal  market  if  it  were  still  subject  to  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  Moreover,  the  free 
movement of capital, fixed exchange rates and sovereign national monetary policies were generally 
regarded as mutually incompatible. (A view first expressed by my colleague on the Executive Board of 
the  ECB,  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa).  The  initiatives  taken  at  that  time,  however,  would  not  have 
been possible without the political will and courage to create a single currency in Europe. Indeed, this 
process, which eventually led to the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins on 1 January of this 
year, required considerable resolve on the part of the German government. 
BIS Review 45/2002 
 1
 In the run-up to the introduction of the euro, Germany proved to be a staunch supporter of a single 
currency enshrined in a stability-oriented culture. The internal value of the single currency would have 
to be at least as stable as that of the Deutsche Mark. If there were any country in Europe that had full 
understanding  of  Germany’s  concerns  at  that  time,  it  was  perhaps  my  own  country,  and  not  only 
because the Netherlands had benefited enormously from the stability-oriented monetary policy of the 
Deutsche Bundesbank. The Netherlands had also learnt the merits of having a stable currency and 
low  inflation.  Hence,  in  the  process  leading  to  monetary  union  in  Europe,  Germany  was  strongly 
supported by the Dutch government and, in particular, by the Dutch central bank. Indeed, I would say 
that the Netherlands has frequently been an even more ardent defender of the currency stability faith 
than Germany.  As a small country,  and  one known for its directness and candour, the  Netherlands 
could often adopt positions and policies that Germany, as a big player in Europe, could not, or only in 
a nuanced way. 
In this context, I should like to thank the German government for the trust it has placed in me as the 
“guardian” of the new currency, to the extent that any one person can perform that task. I also wish to 
pay  tribute  to  the  German  government  for  having  the  courage  to  “sacrifice”  the  Deutsche  Mark,  a 
symbol of German identity, and to give its support to the euro, an unknown quantity at that time, in the 
interests  of  peace  and  prosperity  in  Europe.  I  am  of  course  also  very  grateful  for  the  kind  words 
expressed by Mr. Eichel as regards my role in the euro cash changeover. However, it should not be 
forgotten  that  the  success  of  the  euro  so  far  -  in  particular  the  success  of  the  cash  changeover  - 
should,  at  least  in  my  view,  be  attributed  first  and  foremost  to  the  people  of  Europe.  Without  their 
support, the undertaking would have failed. And without their support for a stability-oriented monetary 
policy, it would not have been and will not be possible to safeguard the value of the currency. 
In your speech, Mr Eichel, you echoed the words in the citation for the Order of Merit, namely that the 
European Central Bank has done well in ensuring price stability in the early years of monetary union, 
reflected  in  an  annual  average  inflation  rate  of  2%  over  this  period.  Economic  actors  share  the 
German  government’s  view  in  this  respect,  as  is  evidenced  by  various  indicators  of  inflationary 
expectations. However, there is no reason to be complacent. In 2000 inflation in the euro area was 
2.3%; in 2001 it was 2.5%. For this year, we expect the average inflation rate to be just above 2%. The 
ECB should and will remain vigilant in order to maintain its credibility and to retain the support of the 
citizens of Europe. I have already alluded to my own experience in this respect as President of the 
Dutch central bank: credibility is much easier to lose than to gain. 
In this context, I should like to emphasise that the ECB alone cannot ensure a stable macroeconomic 
environment,  or  only  at  rather  high  cost.  The  success  of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  also 
depends on wage moderation, which is the responsibility of social partners, and a sound fiscal policy, 
which is the mandate entrusted to European governments, as laid down in the Stability and Growth 
Pact. I am pleased to hear today, Mr. Eichel, that the German government continues to commit itself to 
achieving  the  objectives  of  the  Pact.  In  your  speech,  you  praise  my  achievements  as  Minister  of 
Finance  of  the  Netherlands.  I must  admit  that  the  policy  which  I  pursued  in  the  early  1970s,  which 
entailed an increase in the tax and social security burden of no more than 1 percentage point of the 
national income per  year and  which should be seen against the macroeconomic background of the 
early 1970s, would definitely not be in line with current thinking about fiscal policy. 
It is not surprising that the stability-oriented culture and the framework which should ensure macro-
economic stability is being tested, in particular at the current stage of the business cycle. However, I 
believe that the macroeconomic policy framework, in particular the Stability and Growth Pact, provides 
enough flexibility for fiscal policy-makers, contrary to what some critics argue, as long as governments 
adhere to the rules of the Pact. This is also clearly shown by the fiscal policy of some Member States. 
Moreover,  I  think  that  it  would  be  a  big  mistake,  and  detrimental  to  the  stability-oriented  culture,  to 
change  the  macroeconomic  policy  framework  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  be  it  fiscal  or 
monetary policy. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, dear Mr. Eichel, the recognition I have received today is 
greatly appreciated. Although the ECB is an independent institution, as are its decision-makers, the 
government of the largest country of the European Union evidently believes that I have done my job 
as  I  am  supposed  to  do.  This  expression  of  confidence  makes  the  responsibility  I  am  bearing  as 
President of the ECB indeed feel somewhat lighter. 
Again, I thank you very much for this decoration. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2002
