 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Global economic recovery - where to from 
here? 
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England,  at the  Lord  Mayor’s 
Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, Mansion House, 26 June 2002. 
 My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, my Lords, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
On this great annual occasion last year I spoke about the problems that confronted us in keeping the 
UK economy on course in the face of the cold winds blowing from abroad. I drew attention to the risk 
that  in  seeking  to  avoid  being  sucked  down  into  the  Charybdis  of  adverse  external  influences,  by 
lowering  interest  rates  in  this  country,  we  could  find  ourselves  thrown  onto  the  Scylla  of  excessive 
domestic exuberance. 
In  the  event,  the  cruel  terrorist  attacks  on  New  York  and  Washington  on  September  11th  -  had  a 
damaging short term impact on economic conditions everywhere. We were drawn irresistibly towards 
Charybdis  despite  the  resilience  of  domestic  consumer  demand,  which  we  sought  to  sustain  by 
steering  towards  Scylla,  with  further  reductions  in  interest  rates.  The  economy  as  a  whole  became 
becalmed over the winter. 
That  of  course,  was  disappointing  after  37  successive  quarters  of  relatively  steady  growth.  But  the 
economy as a whole still managed to grow in the year to the first quarter - by 1% on the present data - 
which was somewhat faster than in a number of other G7 countries. The labour market held up well, 
with the number of people in employment (on the LFS measure) rising by 184,000 in the year to April, 
to an all-time high; and while the number of unemployed people on the same measure rose somewhat 
over  the  year,  it  fell  on  the  claimant  count  basis,  to  945,000  in  May,  a  26  year  low.  And  inflation, 
though rather more volatile from month to month, averaged 2.2% over the past year very close to our 
2½% target, although it fell to 1.8% in May. For only the third time in the past nine years the rate of 
growth in the year to the first quarter fell below the rate of inflation. 
So we have much to be thankful for, despite the hostile external environment we have had to contend 
with. We can also be grateful that the difficult international environment has not seriously undermined 
the stability of the global financial system - though that’s another story. 
The key question now is where are we going from here. 
Well, the relatively good news is that the external economic storms seem to be beginning to abate. 
The US in particular, which experienced negative growth in the middle of last year, saw a surprisingly 
strong recovery on the back of a reversal of falling stocks, over the winter; and while this may not have 
continued  on  the  same  scale  through  the  spring,  consumer  spending  has  remained  encouragingly 
resilient. The uncertainty looking forward relates primarily to the prospects for a recovery of investment 
spending as we move into the second half of the year. Most economic analysts - including ourselves in 
the Bank - are reasonably optimistic, pointing in particular to the continuing underlying strength of US 
productivity growth despite the economic slowdown and evidence that demand for computer hardware 
has  picked  up.  The  consensus  economic  forecast  is  for  overall  growth  in  the  US  -  perhaps  after 
something  of  a  lull  in  the  second  quarter  -  to  pick  up  steadily  to  around  trend  -  to  3%  or  perhaps 
somewhat more - through the second half of the year into next. But it has to be said that many US 
businesses themselves seem less convinced about future earnings prospects; and financial markets, 
too,  remain  uncertain,  notably  about  equity  valuations  -  partly  as  a  result  of  the  recent  spate  of 
corporate governance and accounting failures. 
The outcome in the US, of course, is fundamentally important to the prospects elsewhere. But on the 
reasonably optimistic consensus view for the US, the outlook is for recovery to around trend growth in 
the  eurozone  and  for  modest  positive  growth  even  in  Japan.  And  there  are  encouraging  signs  of 
stronger growth elsewhere in Asia - though parts of South America have problems of their own. 
If global economic recovery seems likely to provide  a more hospitable international environment for 
our own economy, so, too, do recent developments in foreign exchange markets. Last year I pointed 
out that sterling’s exchange rate was at a 15 year low against the dollar, but close to its peak against 
the euro. In overall terms sterling’s effective Exchange Rate Index against currencies generally had 
been relatively stable - at around 105 plus or minus 5% - for most of the past 2-3 years. That pattern of 
BIS Review 40/2002 
 1
 exchange rates made life particularly difficult for the euro-exposed sectors or our economy, and, given 
that the eurozone represents over 50% of our external trade, contributed significantly to the imbalance 
within our economy. 
Happily, from our point of view, and indeed in the context of the global external imbalance, we have 
recently seen a significant strengthening of the euro against the dollar, and to a lesser extent against 
sterling,  which  will  help  to  ease  some  of  the  earlier  tensions.  Sterling’s  exchange  rate  has  recently 
moved to two year high against the dollar and nearly a three year low against the euro. Sterling has 
consequently also weakened in overall, effective, terms, from some 107 some months ago to currently 
around 103 - which is still within the earlier range. 
It is frankly anyone’s guess whether the recent pattern of exchange rate movements will be extended, 
but what has happened so far, taken together with the improved prospect for global demand, suggests 
that the adverse external factors weighing down the UK economy over the past two years or so should 
now diminish. That offers the prospect of both stronger and more balanced demand and overall output 
growth. Indeed we are already seeing - in surveys but also now in actual data for the past month or so 
-  increasing  signs  of  a  recovery  in  overall  output  growth,  including  a  recovery  in  the  manufacturing 
sector which was the most hard hit by the global environment last year. 
But  our  policy  dilemma  has  not  simply  gone  away.  In  fact  trying  to  weigh  up  the  prospects  for  the 
various different components of demand in order to decide what we need to do with interest rates to 
keep overall, aggregate, demand growing broadly in line with the underlying, supply-side, capacity of 
the economy to meet that demand, is a perpetual dilemma. 
In the present context what that means is that, in order to accommodate the expected improvement in 
external  demand,  we  are  likely  to  need  a  moderation  in  the  recent  strength  of  domestic  demand 
growth - particularly the consumer spending growth which has sustained the overall economy through 
the period of global weakness - if we are to avoid a build-up of inflationary pressure further ahead. 
The necessary moderation of consumer demand growth could come about of its own accord, if, for 
example, consumers become more reluctant to  take on additional debt. It  is perhaps  not surprising 
that as they have become more acclimatised to a low inflation/low nominal interest rate environment, 
households have been prepared to incur more debt relative to incomes, and the debt to income ratio 
has indeed risen to an all-time high over recent years. But that adjustment cannot go on indefinitely 
and will at some point come to an end. 
In the meantime many commentators have recently focussed on accelerating house price inflation - 
which is closely related to the build-up of debt - as worrying evidence of a bubble that will eventually 
burst.  And  we,  on  the  MPC,  agree  that  the  current  rate  of  house  price  increases  is  unsustainable, 
although  it  is  less  obvious  that  that  necessarily  applies  also  to  the  present  level  of  house  prices, 
though of course it may. In any event, while, of course, we pay close attention to what is happening to 
house prices, as we do to other asset prices, our principal concern, in this part of the equation, is with 
consumer  demand  as  a  whole  -  and  that  depends  on  a  range  of  other  factors,  not  just  on  house 
prices. 
What is clear is that if external demand does improve as we expect, and if consumer demand growth 
does not moderate to accommodate it, then we will need at some point to raise interest rates to bring 
that  moderation  about.  It  is  important  that  both  borrowers  and  lenders  should  understand  and  take 
account of that possibility in their decision-making. But you will note the qualifications. It is not a threat 
- if anything it is a promise. It’s what our mandate from the Chancellor requires us to do for the very 
good  reason  that  low,  stable,  inflation  is  both  a  necessary  condition  for  and  a  reflection  of  overall 
macro-economic stability over the medium and longer term, which is clearly what we all want to see. 
Given the qualifications, it is not a promise on which we will necessarily deliver immediately. We start 
from a position in which inflation is somewhat below our symmetrical target, and there is little evidence 
at this point of significant inflationary pressure; wage pressures, in particular, remain relatively benign - 
despite the robust labour market - and it is crucial that that should continue. That gives us a certain 
amount of time to assess the unfolding evidence on the evolution of both the external situation and the 
strength of overall domestic demand, though one can legitimately debate just how much risk we can 
afford to take by waiting. But if and when we do decide to act, you should see that as a sign of the 
strength  of  the  economy  rather  than  as  evidence  of  weakness.  Indeed  my  message  to  you  this 
evening  is  that,  after  a  difficult  passage  over  the  past  twelve  months,  we  can  reasonably  now  look 
forward to more favourable offshore winds in the period ahead, opening the way to somewhat stronger 
and better balanced overall output growth, but with inflation remaining close to target. Few things are 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2002
 certain in life - the distance between Scylla and Charybdis has not widened, but it is a more comforting 
prospect than I was able to offer you last year. 
My Lord Mayor, I’m not sure how much comfort that message will bring to the Merchants and Bankers 
of  the  City  of  London  here  this  evening.  But  they  will  certainly  have  enjoyed,  as  I  have,  your  very 
generous hospitality, which has been in the very best tradition of the occasion. And on behalf of all 
your guests I thank you - and the Lady Mayoress - for that. I thank you, too, for your sterling efforts - 
throughout your mayoralty - in support of the City, in its civic affairs, in its business activity, and in its 
increasing engagement with our neighbouring communities. And I thank you not least for the role that 
you have played - on behalf of all of us - in helping to celebrate so splendidly Her Majesty’s Golden 
Jubilee. 
I invite all your guests, now, to rise and join me in a toast to your good health. 
My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen, the Toast is: 
“The Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress - Michael and Sally Oliver” 
BIS Review 40/2002 
 3
