 Eva Srejber: Experiences from the cash changeover in the euro area 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  meeting  of  the 
Swedish Federation of Trade, Stockholm, 9 April 2002. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to come to the Swedish Federation of Trade's meeting 
to  speak  about  the  cash  changeover  that  has  taken place  in  the  twelve  countries  now  participating 
fully in the third stage of EMU. 
The changeover from national banknotes and coins to euro has gone much more quickly and been 
more  problem-free  than  expected  and  now  the  euro  is  an  established  currency  in  the  countries 
concerned. The cash changeover was a major challenge for these countries, as the volumes were so 
extensive  and  the  time  period  for  the  changeover  was  relatively  short.  Almost  15  billion  euro 
banknotes and 50 billion euro coins were to be distributed, and at the same time all of the national 
banknotes  and  coins  were  to  be  withdrawn  to  the  central  banks.  The  logistics  and  security  for  the 
changeover  therefore  had  to  be  specially  designed  and  extra  capacity  was  required.  However,  the 
most important factor in making the changeover a success was the enthusiasm of the general public 
and the naturalness demonstrated by banks, the retail trade and other institutions handling cash when 
carrying out their work. 
Since the end of February the national currencies are no longer legal tender, the major exertion by 
society is over and life is beginning to return to normal in the euro countries. For Sweden, however, a 
changeover of banknotes and coins still lies ahead, if we were to say  "yes" in  a referendum on full 
membership of the monetary union. It is therefore important that all of us in various sectors of society 
take a look at how the changeover has worked in the different countries and learn from this. Today I 
intend to begin by discussing what experiences Sweden could learn from the cash changeover. After 
that, I shall say a few words about the timetable for a potential Swedish full participation in the third 
stage of EMU. 
The cash changeover in the EMU countries 
The  overall  picture  painted  by  the  ECB,  the  European  Commission,  embassies,  central  banks  and 
media with regard to the euro introduction is that it has gone smoothly, and above all quickly. Only a 
few days into 2002 the euro was being used in most cash transactions and only a few of the problems 
that  had  been  feared  actually  arose.  On  the  other  hand,  other,  rather  more  unexpected  problems 
arose in the aftermath of the cash changeover, because of the rapid pace at which it occurred. I shall 
mention  some  factors  here,  both  positive  and  negative,  which  have  affected  the  outcome  of  the 
introduction of the euro. 
The distribution of euro banknotes and coins had been well prepared in all countries of the euro area 
well before 1 January 2002. Euro banknotes – particularly the smaller denominations – had to a large 
extent been distributed in advance to banks and retail traders, beginning in September 2001, and the 
coins were distributed mainly to retailers and the general public in December. Without this preliminary 
work, the logistics of the transition would have been much more complicated, so frontloading can be 
considered a decisive factor in the successful outcome. The countries chose slightly different methods 
the frontloading of coins; e.g. in the Netherlands a major investment was made in providing a free set 
of coins to every citizen over the age of six years, while other countries sold sets of varying sizes at 
their face value. In this way, the euro coins soon became familiar to the general public and created an 
interest in the new currency. In Finland the central bank exchanged "company packages" equivalent to 
FIM 2,000 and containing both banknotes and coins, with the aim of preparing small companies for the 
transition.  Common  to  all  of  the  countries  involved  was  that  they  supplied  the  retailers  with  large 
amounts of coins so there would be no shortage of change during the transition. 
Another important factor in the cash changeover was the ATMs, as a large part of the euro banknotes 
was distributed via these. Many banks were closed on 1 January and an enthusiastic general public 
wanted to get hold of the new cash as quickly as possible, preferably on New Year's Eve. This meant 
that there was tremendous pressure on converting the ATMs to euro as quickly as possible at the end 
of the year, which the banks succeeded in achieving. On 2 January, 91 per cent of the ATMs in the 
euro area had been converted to euro, and it took only a couple more days until they all worked with 
BIS Review 23/2002 
 1
 euro banknotes. Many countries also distributed lower denomination banknotes (five and ten euro) via 
the ATMs to facilitate change for retailers. Despite this, and despite the advance distribution of coins, 
there  arose  a  shortage  of  coins  and  of  five-euro  banknotes  in  a  few  places,  although  the  system 
worked  well  on  the  whole.  With  regard  to  other  types  of  machines,  it  has  been  reported  that,  for 
instance petrol machines could not accept euro banknotes at first. However, this is being overcome. 
The  changeover  to  the  euro  was  done  in  different  ways  in  different  countries.  Naturally,  help  was 
required from all those  who handle cash,  and  despite this there  were  long queues in many  places. 
However, the customers seem to have accepted this with relative equanimity, perhaps because it was 
a  holiday  period  and  many  had  vacation  at  that  point  in  time. The  situation  improved  rapidly  in  the 
retail trade, but it took a little longer in the banks. The banks in a number of countries stayed open 
longer than usual to deal with the extra business, which was received positively. However, there have 
been  reports  that  some  banks  did  not  wish  to  implement  pure  exchanges,  but  forced  customers  to 
deposit  national  currency  in  an  account,  only  then  putting  the  equivalent  amount  in  euro  at  their 
disposal. This created some dissatisfaction that could have been avoided by giving customers more 
information in advance. In many countries the banks carried the heaviest burden, while in Finland, a 
country whose use of cash is similar to Sweden's, the retail trade had to shoulder a large part of the 
changeover,  as  the  banks  deal  with  cash  to  a  relatively  small  extent.  This  example  shows  the 
importance of co-operation between the central bank, the banks, the post office, the retailers and other 
companies handling cash in order for a cash changeover of this scope to function. 
One important lesson is that the retail trade would play a major role in the introduction of the euro, 
particularly  if Swedish banks further reduce their cash management. The studies  we  have made of 
other countries' changeovers show that the retailers have chosen different approaches, as I am sure 
you already know. In some countries they have had, for instance, special exchange desks to avoid 
handling double currencies in the normal cash desks, something that has had varying results. On the 
whole,  the  turnover  in  the  retail  trade  appears  to  have  increased  prior  to  the  changeover,  which  is 
connected with an increased use of cash during the same period. Many consumers have quite simply 
chosen to consume extra during the late autumn of 2001 to use up their national banknotes and coins. 
The rapidity of the changeover appears to have simplified it for the retailers, as the period of using two 
different currencies was relatively short. In Sweden, the retail trade is already represented in the SIFS 
group (Consultation and Information with the Financial Sector), which is led by the Riksbank and as 
the preparations for a cash changeover proceed, we will certainly have reason for closer contact. 
The rapid changeover to the euro has had the result that the need for transportation and storage of 
both euro and national currencies has increased and become more concentrated than estimated. It is 
above all the national currencies that have created storage problems for the retailers and banks, as 
return transport of these has had to wait until sufficient amounts of euro have been distributed in the 
market. Despite this type of problem, the speed with which the euro was introduced has meant that 
there  have  been  calls  in  many  countries  to  shorten  the  cash  changeover  period,  which  has  lasted 
between one and two months. For instance, in Austria and Spain some shops have refused to accept 
schillings  and  pesetas,  despite  the  fact  that  these  were  still  legal  tender,  as  it  was  considered 
unnecessary to have two parallel cash desks when the changeover was more or less complete. This is 
a question that must be considered carefully with regard to Sweden. I know that the retail trade would 
like  to  see  the  shortest  possible  cash  changeover  period  and  experiences  from  the  current  EMU 
members  indicate  that  two  months  may  be  on  the  long  side.  However,  there  is  a  risk  that  an 
introduction of the euro might not occur as rapidly in Sweden at a later date, as the currency would no 
longer be exciting news and the general public would already have access to the banknotes and coins 
from other countries. Of course, it is also possible that the Swedish people, as soon as the exchange 
rate is irrevocably fixed, will begin exchanging krona for euro and there will be unofficial use of euros. 
In this case, the changeover could be implemented in a very short space of time. It would also mean 
that the foreign exchange offices would play an important role in the cash changeover in Sweden. This 
question is one to which the Riksbank will return within the co-operation with the SIFS group. 
One subject that often arose in the debate prior to the cash changeover was that surreptitious price 
rises  could  be  made  in  the  translation  from  national  currencies  to  the  euro,  which  would  create 
inflationary pressure. This has been the focus of considerable discussion, particularly in Finland, as 
there they have chosen to continue their practice of rounding-off and to round off cash payments to 
the  nearest  five  cents,  something  we  would  probably  also  do  in  Sweden  if  we  adopt  the  euro. 
Eurostat's euro indicator for January 2002 shows that the price level in the euro countries rose by 0.5 
per cent between December 2001 and January 2002. However, this is not considered to be caused 
primarily by the cash changeover - the effect of this is estimated to be somewhere in the interval of 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2002
 0.0-0.16 per cent. The Bank of Finland has not yet made a complete analysis of how large an effect 
the cash changeover has had on prices, but the figures for the month of January give no indication of 
inflationary  pressure  from  the  price  rounding-off.  However,  there  have  been  reports  from  the 
Netherlands  of  some  effects  on  inflation.  In  a  number  of  other  countries  (e.g.  Greece,  France  and 
Ireland) the authorities have been keeping a very close watch on price increases and are working to 
counteract them. 
Naturally, there are a large number of other experiences from the introduction of the euro that could be 
mentioned in this context, and the Riksbank is working on a compilation of the information we have 
received  from  other  central  banks  in  the  euro  area.  This  compilation  will  be  presented  in  the  next 
progress report from the SIFS group (no. 8), which will be published in May. 
Discussion of the timetable for a potential Swedish EMU membership 
The  timetable  for  a  potential  full  Swedish  membership  of  EMU  will  be  determined  by  the  political 
process. The Government Bill "Sweden and the Economic and Monetary Union" from 1997 states that 
if the government later finds that Sweden should participate in the monetary union, the matter should 
be put before the Swedish people. Pronouncements by, for instance, Prime Minister Göran Persson 
indicate  that  a  referendum  will  be  held  next  year.  Other  political  leaders  have  expressed  similar 
opinions.  If  the  result  is  a  "yes",  then  Sweden  would  put  forward  an  application  to  the  European 
Commission and the ECB for an examination of whether we fulfil the legal and economic convergence 
criteria. The economic criteria assessed are the inflation rate, long-term interest rates, exchange rate 
stability  and  the  public  sector's  budget  and  central  government  debt.  Following  this  scrutiny,  the 
European Parliament and the European Council shall present their views on the reports made by the 
Commission  and  the  ECB  and  after  this  the  ECOFIN  Council  will  decide  on  the  Commission's 
proposal to allow Sweden to participate in the union. 
If Sweden is accepted, there will be negotiations on when entry will occur and at what exchange rate 
the krona will be fixed against the euro, which is decided by the ECOFIN Council. After this a national 
changeover plan will need to be drawn up. There are a large number of legal acts from the EU and the 
ECB that regulate how the introduction of the euro should be implemented. Although the legal acts 
currently  only  apply  to  the  countries  that  have  already  adopted  the  euro  as  legal  tender,  the 
corresponding regulations will probably also be applied to future applicant countries. To keep the door 
open for a rapid future membership, the Riksdag (the Swedish parliament) decided back in 1997 that 
Sweden  should  maintain  the  highest  possible  state  of  readiness  by  continuing  the  technical  and 
practical  preparations  for  membership.  The  Riksbank  has  therefore  been  working  on  internal  EMU 
preparations for almost five years now, as well as preparations together with the financial sector. This 
work is conducted within the SIFS group, whose seventh progress report was presented in the autumn 
and is available to read on our website. 
The most recent progress report describes two possible transition scenarios, a gradual scenario and 
what is referred to as "Big Bang". A gradual transition would mean that the exchange rate would be 
irrevocably  fixed  on  membership  of  EMU  and  the  euro  would  become  Sweden's  currency,  while 
banknotes and coins in krona would continue to be legal tender during a transition period. This means 
that if someone wants to pay with banknotes and coins in krona, they must be accepted as payment. 
During this period there is no compulsion to use the euro and no prohibition either. It would be fine to 
pay  with euro if both parties are in  agreement on this. The disadvantage  of a gradual transition for 
Sweden is that, as euro banknotes and coins already exist in the euro area, it may seem strange to 
the general public that they cannot count on being able to use them completely in all transactions in 
Sweden right from the start. The advantages of a gradual transition are that the major technical and 
practical  adaptations  to  the  euro  can  be  made  gradually,  while  Sweden  can  participate  fully  in  all 
forums  for  co-operation  and  decision-making  within  the  monetary  union  as  soon  as  Sweden  joins, 
without having to wait until the practical work is complete. 
With  a  gradual  transition  process,  the  financial  and  central  government  sector  would  require  1-1.5 
years to prepare from the time that it is clear that Sweden will apply for membership until the krona 
exchange  rate  is  irrevocably  fixed  on  membership.  After  this,  the  financial  sector  requires  a  further 
year  and  the  public  sector  requires  approximately  two  years  before  euro  banknotes  and  coins  can 
replace  krona  banknotes  and  coins.  This  would  in  total  involve  a  period  of  between  two  and  three 
years  from  a  referendum until  the  introduction  of  the  euro  is  complete.  However,  I  believe  that  this 
period can be shortened somewhat, assuming that the political process openly and clearly chooses a 
transition process and establishes a timetable for the different stages. It is worth remembering, in this 
BIS Review 23/2002 
 3
 context, that there is no reason why a cash changeover should have to be made at the start of a year, 
for practical reasons it would be better implemented in March or October. 
Another alternative described in the report is known as "Big Bang", i.e. to begin a cash changeover at 
the same time as the krona exchange rate is fixed and full membership of the monetary union occurs. 
This scenario requires a preparation period of 2-2.5 years. This makes the demand that the euro can 
be handled in all transactions in Sweden, both physical and electronic, and by everyone in Sweden, 
from the corner tobacconist to the National Swedish Social Insurance Board and the major banks from 
the  first  day  of  membership.  As  this  alternative  involves  a  simultaneous  changeover  in  IT  systems, 
other practicalities such as accounting and payment of taxes, as well as a physical cash changeover, it 
makes  high  demands  on  co-ordination  and  information.  Taking  into  account  the  longer  preparation 
period  prior  to  the  actual  EMU  membership  required  in  this  alternative,  it  would  take  longer  until 
Sweden could fully participate in all forums for co-operation and decision-making within the monetary 
union than would be the case with a gradual transition process. The advantage of this scenario is that 
it would avoid uncertainty  arising among the general public over the position of the euro during the 
transition period in that the euro could be used everywhere immediately. 
It has not yet been established what kind of transition scenario we would have in Sweden. Nor is it yet 
clear  how  much  time  would  be  required,  partly  because  the  political  process  has  not  yet  chosen  a 
transition  scenario  and  partly  because  changes  are  constantly  being  made  in  operations  and  IT 
systems that affect the time required for a potential transition. Examples of measures that reduce the 
time  required  for  a  potential  membership  are  that  IT  systems  that  are  being  modernised  for  other 
reasons  are  designed  to  also  process  euros.  Within  the  Riksbank  we  are  working  on  reducing  the 
length  of  time  calculated  as  necessary  for  the  production  of  Swedish  euro  coins.  The  result  of  our 
preparations and those of the financial sector are reported, as I mentioned earlier, in regular progress 
reports. Number 8 will be published in May. 
Conclusion 
In the event of a "yes" in a Swedish referendum on full participation in the third stage of the EMU, the 
whole of society needs to prepare for a cash changeover, and many decisions need to be taken as to 
how we shall proceed. In this situation Sweden would be under slightly different conditions than the 
current  euro  countries,  as  euro  banknotes  and  coins  already  exist  in  the  market.  This  is  a 
circumstance  that  we  must  take  into  account  in  our  planning,  but  despite  this  we  will  have 
considerable assistance from the fact that twelve countries have already implemented an introduction 
of the euro. We all have a lot to learn from studying their methods. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2002
