 Y V Reddy: Indian Banking - Paradigm Shift in Public Policy 
Valedictory  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Twenty-Third  Bank  Economists’  Conference  organised  by  Indian  Banks’  Association  and  hosted  by 
Allahabad Bank at Kolkata. 
 Chairman, distinguished participants and friends, 
I am thankful to the organisers for inviting me to deliver this address. It is good to see that the focus on 
paradigm shift did not extend to shifting the  traditional speaker at the Valedictory  Address. Today’s 
address  will  be  divided  into  five  sections.  The  first  section  would  capture  the  paradigm  shift  in  the 
environment in the Indian banking as presented in the Conference and the deliberations as captured 
by  the  Rapporteurs’  presentations.  In  the  second  section,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  general 
achievements of public policy in the financial sector and in particular the banking sector during the last 
ten  years,  so  that  we  recognise  our  strengths.  The  third  section  would  be  in  the  nature  of  critical 
introspection of public policy. It is meant to share some dilemmas and issues that might not have been 
highlighted so far or some aspects of policy that could have been misconstrued. The fourth section 
attempts  a  bold  technical  vision,  unconstrained  by  the  existing  policy  framework  and  the  possible 
political  economy  implications.  The  purpose  of  the  bold  technical  vision  is  to  provoke  a  debate  for 
substantial paradigm shift in public policy in banking. The final section presents select actions under 
contemplation in the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) which would enhance the scope for a paradigm shift 
in public policy. 
Paradigm Shift in the Indian Banking Environment 
I am glad to note from the summary of the inaugural section that there is  a formal recognition of the 
closeness between Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) and BECON and also that a holistic approach to 
industry  is  being  considered  as  part  of  such  closeness.  In  particular,  Governor  Jalan’s  suggestion 
about setting up a group of 4-5 middle level officers is extremely relevant for operationalising not only 
capital adequacy requirement, but to do further work on coping with the inevitable paradigm shift on 
the structural aspects.  
The  most  important  point  made  in  the  first  session  is  that  mergers  and  acquisitions  in  the  banking 
sector must be market-led rather than prompted by Government or regulator, except perhaps where 
there  is  a  systemic  crisis.  At  the  same  time,  there  must  be  close  monitoring  and  supervision  of 
merging  institutions  to  preclude  threats  to  systemic  stability.  Second,  advanced  risk  management 
systems, sophisticated information technology infrastructure, human expertise and a comprehensive 
database are pre-requisites for Indian banks to adopt the New Basel Capital Accord.  Indian banks 
must  also  improve  their  internal  audit,  loan  review  and  internal  rating  systems.  Third,  capital 
requirements  must  be  supplemented  by  adequate  provisioning  for  non-performing  assets.  While 
capital  adequacy  constitutes  an  important  part  of  supervision,  unless  overall  economic  reforms  are 
pushed forward, problems of the real sector would spill into the banking sector as well. Fourth, human 
resource management has assumed ever-greater importance, particularly in the post-VRS scenario. 
The  measures  should  include  retraining  of  staff,  performance  linked  compensation  packages, 
transparent promotion and transfer policies, etc. Fifth, regulatory issues relating to conversion of banks 
and  Development  Financial  Institutions  into  universal  banks  should  include  enforcing  corporate 
governance,  transparency,  consolidation  of  accounts,  risk  management  and  firewalls  to  prevent 
conflicts of interest relating to the operational aspects.  
In the second session, there is a broad consensus on several issues relating to operational aspects.  
First,  factors  like  market  positioning,  cost  of  intermediation  and  service  delivery  will  determine  the 
efficiency of banks with respect to their competitiveness. Indian banks need to reorient their business 
strategies to meet the challenges of a ‘buyer’s market’ and in this regard, public sector banks have 
certain core strengths which they can utilise to make the best of new opportunities. Second, given their 
size and customer base, the opportunities for PSBs in retail banking and micro-credit are immense. 
However, a systematic and calculated approach is a pre-requisite for success in the long run. Third, in 
respect of risk management, areas yet uncharted by Indian banks include dynamic estimation of cash 
flow  profile  and  risk  profiles,  adoption  of  risk-adjusted  return  on  capital  framework  of  pricing,  etc. 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 1
 Fourth, in respect of directed credit, there is a consensus on using the conduit of self-help groups for 
credit delivery and the adoption of a participatory approach to development. 
Somewhat surprising was the enthusiasm on the part of some papers for infrastructure financing at a 
time when many issues relating to regulatory reform and full cost recovery are still to be resolved and 
also  at  a  time  when  even  a  specialised  institution  for  the  purpose  like  Infrastructure  Development 
Finance Company (IDFC) finds it difficult to achieve its disbursement intentions. However, I am glad to 
notice some caution from the Rapporteurs report and it clearly shows that when securitisation, takeout 
financing, sound debt markets dominated by public issues are in place, banks could proceed with such 
financing,  especially  at  the  shorter  end.  It  is  very  satisfying  to  see  some  serious  effort  to  improve 
financing of priority sector - a less fashionable, but more legitimate area for banks.  
Governance  aspects  covered  in  the  third  section  are  somewhat  tricky  to  be  handled  for  several 
reasons, but some of the distinguished speakers seem to have made telling points such as the need 
for  arms-length  to  be  maintained  by  owners  with  the  Board,  and  the  fact  that  best  corporate 
governance exists when ownership is widely distributed. I wonder Government is treated as a single 
owner for this purpose !. There appears to be some broad consensus on reform in this area.  First, 
effective  corporate  governance  arises  out  of  responsible  and  vigilant  simultaneous  actions  by  the 
managers,  the  board  of  directors  and  the  shareholders  of  a  company.  Second,  the  essence  of 
corporate governance relates to a system in which the interests of the whole gamut of stakeholders of 
an organisation are recognised and conflicts among them are sought to be reconciled. Third, Indian 
banks will have to enhance the transparency of their operations and make greater disclosures to the 
public  to  attain  international  standards  of  corporate  governance.  Fourth,  one  may  expect  to  see 
governance rating of institutions along the lines of credit rating. 
Some issues relating to cooperative banks, especially urban cooperative banks have been discussed, 
particularly on regulatory matters relating to access to capital funds from the capital market, lending 
rate stipulations, evolution of a credit rating system, giving a level-playing field with commercial banks, 
etc.  A  significant  point  raised  though  perhaps  not  debated  extensively  relates  to  the  conflicts  of 
interests  among  various  stake  holders.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that  a  paradigm  shift  in  banking 
recognises the need for resolving the complexities of cooperative banks, especially urban cooperative 
banks,  regional  rural  banks  and  perhaps  local  area  banks.  Critical  to  appreciating  these  issues  is 
perhaps  the  appropriate  framework  of  corporate  governance  for  institutions,  which  are  under  the 
cooperative fold at their current stage of legal and regulatory framework.  
It  is  also  interesting  to  note  that  public  sector  banks  have  made  legitimate  points  about  the 
level-playing field and the need to consider public sector banks fully owned by the government and 
others  where  there  is  shareholding  by  public.  The  external  constraints  imposed  on  them,  the 
restrictions  on  internal  consolidation  due  to  work  practices  need  to  be  addressed  in  any  debate  on 
paradigm  shift,  while  the  distinction  between  fully-owned  and  others  is  critical  to  issues  relating  to 
corporate governance. The broader issue of the case for or against privatization should recognize the 
new insights provided by one of the papers – a paper backed by significant data.  
Governor  Jalan’s  poser  in  the  latest  annual  meeting  of  the  National  Institute  of  Bank  Management 
(NIBM) is a relevant starting point to discuss paradigm shift: “The crucial issue that the country has to 
debate  is  whether  Corporate  Governance  is  compatible  with  public  ownership,  which  makes  the 
system accountable to political institutions and not to the economic institutions or even regulators. This 
is a big and fundamental issue which our country has to debate and decide. Is a ‘via media’ possible? 
Could we have public ownership without Government or political control or do we need to change to a 
corporate structure?” 
While this is one type of challenge, Governor Jalan makes a telling point when referring to non-public 
sector banks in the banking system (i.e. co-operative and private). “One thing which is common to all 
is  that  Corporate  Governance  is  highly  centralized  with  very  little  real  check  on  the  CEO,  who  is 
generally  also  closely  linked  to  the  largest  owner  groups.  Boards  or  auditing  systems  are  not  very 
effective”.  
In  brief,  my  view  is  that  the  paradigm  shift  in  banking  sector  has  to  be  seen  in  terms  of  two 
dimensions:  one  relates  to  operational  aspects  especially  risk-management  system.  There  is  some 
sensitization on these issues when the participants discussed technology, customer-centric approach, 
motivation  of  workforce,  performance  incentives,  outsourcing,  off  balance-sheet  items,  etc.  Many  of 
these have overlap with regulatory regime which has also displayed significant progress. The second 
dimension  relates  to  structural  and  external  environment  or  exogenous  aspects,  and  these  can  be 
tackled  only  with  a  paradigm  shift  in  public  policy  addressed  to  ownership,  form  of  organization, 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 regulation and competition. My address would, therefore, concentrate on the second dimension and 
select aspects of public policy. 
Achievements of Public Policy in Financial Sector  
It is necessary to recall our achievements in the filed of public policy. 
First, public policy has ensured the development of multi-institutional structure in the financial system. 
The Asian crisis demonstrated the risks of a single institution dominated system and underscored the 
importance of a well-diversified financial system in maintaining systemic stability. The diversification of 
ownership of public sector banks is a welcome form of diversification. 
Second, public policy has changed the system’s flexibility to manage credit. Progressive reduction in 
the pre-emptions has accorded greater flexibility to banks to lend based on genuine credit decisions. 
By  deregulating  interest  rates  both  on  the  deposits  (barring  saving  deposit)  and  lending  side,  the 
banking system has also been accorded the flexibility to price their loans as needed, keeping in view 
the cost of funds and the appropriate credit and term premia. 
Third, it is absolutely essential to ensure adequate credit flows to meet emerging needs. Thus, even 
as banks have greater flexibility to lend and price their loans, RBI has urged that credit to sectors such 
as  agriculture  and  small  and  medium  industries  are  critical  for  the  overall  development  of  the 
economy. Policies over the years have attempted to ensure adequate flow of credit to these sectors, 
but based on commercial terms and in a non-micro regulated manner. 
Fourth,  public  policy  has  infused  greater  competition  in  the  banking  system  by  permitting  entry  of 
private  sector  banks.  This  has  given  a  wider  choice  to  customers  (both  lenders  and  borrowers)  to 
approach their bank of choice. At the same time, it has created an incentive mechanism for banks to 
enhance their efficiency. 
Fifth, at the same time, public policy has, by and large, preserved the branch network of the banking 
system to ensure that banking services continue to reach the remote corners of the country. 
Sixth, prudential standards are being imposed on banks to bring them on par with international best 
standards. Thus, while banks have greater freedom to take credit decisions, capital adequacy norms, 
exposure norms, income recognition rules, asset liability management systems in banks not only help 
to identify risks but also contain risks thereby contributing to financial stability. 
Seventh, the system is more transparent now than before both in terms of disclosure of accounts by 
banks  and  data/  information  disseminated  by  the  central  bank.  Looking  at  the  data  on  the  banking 
system,  there  is  a  contention  that  the  banking  system  is  more  vulnerable  now  than  before.  My 
response has been that it is not so. There is a degree of transparency that ensures awareness and 
corrective  action  today.  The  Indian  banking  system  is  not  unstable  or  vulnerable,  but  there  are 
problems of efficiency. 
Eighth,  in  most  areas,  be  it  deposits  or  credit  or  investment  or  risk management,  public  policy  has 
moved away from micro-regulation to macro-management. While RBI issues general guidelines, it is 
now more often left to individual Boards of banks to implement these measures and set internal rules 
and guidelines. 
Ninth, initiatives have also been taken to develop financial markets in a gradual manner and integrate 
them cautiously. By developing the money market, it is ensured that the signals of the central bank are 
transmitted  to  the  system  without  friction.  For  pricing  of  loans  to  be  market-based,  development  of 
Government securities market is crucial since all the rates in the rest of the markets are priced off the 
zero-risk yield curve, i.e. Government Securities. Impressive progress has bee made in Government 
securities market. 
Tenth, on macro-policy side, RBI has ensured stability in interest rates, exchange rates and reined in 
inflationary  expectations  to  a  reasonable  level  and  contained  the  threats  of  external  contagion  and 
domestic uncertainties, thus making it easier for the banking system to cope up with competition in a 
deregulated environment.  To quote from Dr. Jalan’s inaugural address: “… despite  a turbulent  year 
and many challenges we have made progress towards this goal” and by goal he means the vision of a 
sound and well-functioning banking system.  
Thus, public policy has contributed to an efficient transitional path of the banking system to move from 
a regulated focus on predetermined objectives to a more and more liberalised regime. Public policy is 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 3
 ensuring  non-disruptive  gradual  changes  with  intensely  participative  approach  providing  some 
flexibility in the pace but not the direction of overall objectives. Governor Jalan said in the inaugural 
address  to  this  Conference:  “There  is  greater  awareness  now  of  the  need  to  prepare  the  banking 
system  for  the  technical  and  capital  requirements  of  the  emerging  prudential  regime  and  a  greater 
focus on core strengths and niche strategies.” 
Introspection  
Introspection  is  seldom  structured  and  not  really  conclusive.  Perhaps  introspection  revolves  around 
the questioning of assumptions or values rather than the logic. In many cases, it may be looking at 
facts which one failed to notice before. Briefly stated, there will be an element of randomness in the 
focus of such introspection. 
First and foremost relates to the foundation of reform viz., promoting efficiency through competition, 
which  involves  some  objective  criteria  in  assessing  performance.  RBI’s  annual  statutory  report  on 
banking  attempts  to  do  it  by  categorising  the  banks  into  public  sector,  private  sector,  etc.  How 
appropriate is that?  
(a) 
Given  the  size  and  variety  of  public  sector  banks  and  in  particular  the  varied  ownership 
pattern, aggregating their performance as a category can be questioned. After all, a category 
accounting for over 70 per cent of all activity may  not be clubbed together and  compared 
with  two  other  small  segments.  Sub-dividing  them  into,  say,  those  closer  to  private  sector 
banks’ in terms of performance, like Corporation Bank, or very weak banks could have been 
attempted. Are there insights on why some public sector banks are able to cope up better 
than  others?  Are  there  no  lessons  for  the  owner  who  owns  several  units  that  perform 
differently?  
Are facts of market segmentation on both demand and supply recognized while comparing 
prices and spread between the categories of banks? There is a relationship between interest 
spreads and market segments, e.g.,  with regard to food credit, the interest charged  is the 
average of participating banks’ PLR. Similarly, government business, pension business etc. 
are with PSBs. Is it possible that the real competition among the three different categories is 
only on a small part of the balance sheet? 
Time dimension is also critical in any analysis on net interest income. In other words, legacy 
problems can distort the current picture. Further developments in financial markets over the 
last few years are unique.  For example, in a rising interest rate scenario, it is possible that 
public sector banks might have done better. When interest rates are falling, it does have an 
adverse  impact  on  the  net  interest  margins  of  public  sector  banks.  Should  that  also  be 
reckoned?  
To  what  extent  do  macro-factors  have  an  impact  on  the  net  interest  margins  of  different 
categories is perhaps an area requiring closer attention. In the last three to four years, there 
has  been  some  decelerating  of  growth,  especially  in  traditional  brick  and  mortar  type 
manufacturing  sector  where  public  sector  banks  are  heavily  exposed.  They  have  been 
opened to international competition and are subject to domestic restructuring. These affect 
the portfolio of older banks which are mostly PSBs, disproportionately.  
As regards staff costs, new private sector banks have enormous flexibility of entry and exit. 
The  public  sector  banks  simply  do  not  have  the  freedom.  If  such  a  freedom,  genuine 
freedom is given to public sector banks, would the benefits be more or less, to all concerned, 
i.e, owner and work force? 
Public sector banks have an element of public sector accountability and institutional factors 
operate differently for different banks. For instance, public sector banks have a large number 
of branches in backward areas and hence it may not be feasible in a socio-economic sense 
to permit closure or sale of these branches. If 20 per cent of branches of public sector banks 
account for 80 per cent of business and if the only objective is profitability, could they close 
the 80 per cent? 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
Second, on Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARC) as a solution to current problems facing public 
sector banks several issues arise: 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Normally ARCs are conceived when there is a collapse of financial systems and may not be 
treated as a substitute for poor credit-recovery processes. There is an existing mechanism 
through Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) which provides for expeditious recovery of dues by 
banks  and  financial  institutions.  The  question  is  whether  the  proposed  framework  should 
give more power for recovery than the DRT mechanism. If it gives more powers and if it is to 
be  a  private  or  semi-private  company  is  it  justifiable?    If  such  enhancement  of  powers  is 
possible, then why not enhance the powers of the banks themselves?  
If there is no Government guarantee, the ARC will have to have better ways of collecting the 
dues  than  banks.  If  there  is  an  assumption  that  in  view  of  its  professional  expertise,  the 
proposed ARC will be superior to the bank in this respect, it is an assumption at this stage. 
Hence any decision to transfer the distressed assets of a bank to the proposed ARC may 
have to be left to each bank in respect of each asset; either to transfer or not. 
Government is only one of the owners in regard to many public sector banks and hence the 
issue of transfer of an asset from the books of a bank to a proposed ARC would presumably 
be the decision of the Board and the Management and not that of the owner or one of the 
owners. 
Is it possible to have several ARCs on an ongoing basis to create an enabling competitive 
environment  for  recovery  of  dues  in  respect  of  their  assets  so  that  the  banks  will  have 
options from time to time to choose among ARCs and decide on individual assets? 
Third,  there  is  a  view  that  priority  sector  lending  generally  generates  higher  non-performing  assets 
than non-priority sector lending. Is that a fair comparison? When food credit, which is a large part of 
non-priority  sector  and  credit  to  public  enterprises  are  netted  to  arrive  at  non-performing  assets  for 
private sector in non-priority sector and a comparison made, would that difference get reduced? Would 
that  get  further  reduced  if  subsidised  lending  under  government-sponsored  programmes  is  also 
netted? 
Fourth, there is a demand for disclosure of defaulters. What purpose has disclosure of suit-filed cases 
served?  Similarly,  there  is  a  demand  for  punishing  ‘wilful  defaulters’  but  has  severe  punishment 
prescribed in law served a purpose if there is a perception that the probability of being caught is less, 
being  punished  is  remote  and  being  severely  punished  promptly  even  more  remote?  Have 
centrally-directed one-time settlements and somewhat unclear basis of dispensations of BIFR helped 
in improving credit-recovery process?  
Fifth, because of unwillingness to change structural rigidities, distortions in governance structures may 
be  possible.  For  example,  the  organization  of  IDFC  as  a  private  company  while  the  financial 
participation by Government and RBI is relatively large, represents a compromise to enable flexibility 
in  view  of  rigidities  of  majority  public  sector  ownership.  Is  it  better  to  have  in-built  flexibility  in  the 
structures? 
Finally, and this indeed is a troubling thought. In a regime where the governance structures are yet to 
be fully strengthened and contract-enforcement through legal means difficult as well as delayed, the 
preference for dominant private-ownership should be accompanied by intensive efforts to strengthen 
efficiency and autonomy of public ownership. In other words, should privatisation be a credible threat 
to ensure reform of public sector and movement between the public and private be a more dynamic 
process than unidirectional or rigid ? In other words, are the choices only in terms of centrally decided 
nationalisation or privatisation? Is it possible for each bank to evolve into different ownership patterns 
to meet the challenges of paradigm shift ? 
Technical Vision 
A technical vision is, and for that matter any vision is generally clear in terms of broad contours and 
certainly  vague  in  respect  of  detail.  A  vision  is  not  necessarily  feasible  but  hopefully  possible.  A 
technical vision is, above all, one that transcends existing policy framework and is exploratory. Having 
identified the crux of the paradigm shift as one relating to structural aspects, a brief outline of such a 
technical  vision  is  presented  below  in  respect  of  each  segment  of  banking,  mainly  to  provoke  a 
discussion and definitely, it is not RBI view, but a technical vision. 
(a) 
All public sector banks could be converted into companies, to accord flexibility for changes in 
ownership, mergers, acquisitions, sound corporate governance and motivation for workforce 
to compete effectively.  
BIS Review 3/2002 
 5
 (b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
To  professionalise  the  ownership  functions  and  ensure  that  portfolio  is  shuttled  around  to 
optimise public interest, a holding company of public sector banks can be formed to which all 
shares held by Government and RBI are transferred. The mandate for holding company can 
be three-fold, viz., fiscal neutrality, protecting the interests of those banks that are serving 
special  public  purpose  by  infusing  resources  and  enhancing  bank-wise,  genuine  board 
management  and  worker  motivation  to  cope  with  paradigm  shifts  occurring  in  banking 
industry.  The  critical  element  for  success  here  is  manning  of  holding  company,  but 
Government  will  be  able  to  devote  significant  attention  to  a  focussed  task  compared  to 
several tasks of many institutions.  
To  ensure  genuine  corporate  governance  and  protect  a  private  shareholder,  even  if  the 
Government owns a majority, a Government company  should be one  where 100 per cent 
ownership vests with Government directly and not 51 per cent or above. 
The provisions of central vigilance, CBI, etc., would be applicable to a public servant, but not 
to any person employed in an organization that is substantially competing with private sector 
organizations, procedures similar to private sector should apply. 
Cooperatives as a genuine peoples movement should be differentiated from a cooperative 
as a mere form of organization.  Cooperatives should also be distinguished between those 
who accept public deposits and those  who  do  business with  only members in a restricted 
area.  In  other  words,  a  distinction  should  be  made  between  a  bank  and  a  credit  union.  A 
bank  should  be  covered  under  the  Banking  Regulation  Act,  irrespective  of  whether  it  is 
registered under Companies Act or Cooperatives Act. The rest will have to be credit unions 
of some form or the other.   
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) should be revamped so that ownership of Centre and State is 
also  made  optional.  They  could  be  brought  under  Companies  Act  and  flexible  ownership 
promoted through National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). RRBs 
have the unique capabilities to enhance credit delivery in rural areas if the overhang problem 
is sorted out. 
The  Development  Financial  Institutions  (DFIs)  should  be  similarly  corporatised  where  they 
are not and they should formally be brought under the regulatory framework of NBFCs as a 
distinct category.  
Above  all,  a  national  consensus must  be  attempted  among  all  the  stakeholders  to  seek a 
banking system that is flexible, dynamic, fair and truly national - where the owners, workers, 
depositors, borrowers and  regulators commit themselves to a real  paradigm shift in public 
policy. It is pragmatism and not ideological extremes that has made India strong in external 
sector and perhaps a similar approach will work in financial sector also. 
Select Actions under Contemplation with RBI 
In this concluding section, I will mention a few actions under contemplation in RBI that would enable 
paradigm shift in banking.  
With  respect  to  ownership  of  the  RBI  in  banks  and  other  refinancing  institutions,  the  Monetary  and 
Credit Policy of April 2001 had expressed the RBI’s intentions to divest its holdings in State Bank of 
India, NABARD and National Housing Bank through transfer to Government. The RBI has also sent 
proposals to the Government to transfer its loan portfolio in respect of IDBI, IDFC, etc. 
I understand that you have had lively discussions on International Standards and Codes. As you are 
aware, a Standing Committee on International Standards and Codes was set up to benchmark Indian 
practices against international standards. The Standing Committee had set up ten advisory Groups in 
key areas of the financial sector. The Groups have completed their Reports, which are available on the 
RBI  website.  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  two  reports  which  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the 
banking system – Advisory Group on Banking Supervision (Chairman: Shri. M.S.Verma) and Advisory 
Group  on  Corporate  Governance  (Chairman:  Dr.R.H.Patil).  The  Group  on  Corporate  Governance 
emphasized  the  strengthening  the  rights  of  shareholders  in  banks  and  financial  institutions, 
appointment of risk management committees, withdrawal of special status of Government directors, 
withdrawal  of  RBI  Directors  and  improvement  in  regard  to  disclosure  of  information.  The  Group  on 
Banking Supervision recommended on issues such as independence of supervisor, capital adequacy, 
management of credit risk, connected lending, functioning of Board of Directors etc. 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 Currently, the Standing Committee is in the process of consolidating the reports of the ten Advisory 
Groups  and  identifying  the  legal,  procedural  and  policy  changes  required  in  implementing  the 
recommendations. A number of recommendations would need amendments to the Banking Regulation 
Act, Companies Act, RBI Act, etc. Following the Finance Minister’s Budget speech last year, the RBI 
had  already  indicated  a  number  of  legal  changes  that  would  be  required  to  give  more  flexibility  to 
monetary  policy.  In  the  financial  markets,  the  Government  Securities  Bill  is  at  the  final  stages  of 
consideration.    A  Working  Group  in  the  RBI  has  already  proposed  a  draft  bill  on  securitisation,  to 
Government. 
An  important  issue  in  regard  to  banks’  operational  area  relates  to  the  sharing  of  credit  information. 
Currently, banks are sharing information on an informal basis. However, the RBI has been collecting 
and disseminating information on the list of suit filed defaulters, including wilful defaulters. Formalising 
the system of sharing information would require amendment to secrecy laws. In order to overcome this 
aspect in the short run, pending legislative amendment, the RBI has constituted a Working Group to 
operationalise the process of collection and dissemination of data on credit information by the Credit 
Information Bureau. The Group is also considering the suggestion given by bankers that information 
regarding the defaults of State Governments be collected and widely circulated and published. 
Yet another area critical for financial stability relates to several international initiatives were undertaken 
over  the  last  couple  of  years  with  the  goal  of  maintaining  financial  stability  by  strengthening  the 
financial  infrastructure.  The  RBI  and  SEBI  were  members  of  one  such  Task  Force  on  Securities 
Settlement  Systems  constituted  by  Bank  for  International  Settlements.  The  report  has  since  been 
finalised and released by BIS. An Expert Group is being set up by the RBI to examine the adherence 
to the recommendations in regard to Government securities market in important areas such as legal 
risk, pre-settlement risk and settlement risk. 
Efficient payment system is also very critical to meet the new challenges. The RBI has been engaged 
in the design and development of the payment system in India as part of the financial sector reforms. 
The  broad  objective  of  this  process  is  to  ensure  the  setting  up  of  a  robust,  efficient,  secure  and 
integrated  payment  and  settlement  system  for  the  country.  The  ultimate  aim  to  be  achieved  in  this 
regard is to ensure quick settlement of financial transactions, especially in an electronic environment 
based  on  a  sound  legal  foundation.  The  RBI  is  addressing  the  task  of  drafting  the  Indian  payment 
system  legislation  considering  among  others  issues,  finality  of  payment/settlement  in  an  electronic 
environment, issues of failure from bankruptcy and the formulation of the framework for the Payment 
System  Act,  the  Netting  Act  and  other  related  issues.  To  bestow  focused  attention,  a  Payments 
Systems Department is being contemplated within the RBI by appropriate restructuring and retraining 
of  the  existing  officers  and  staff.  The  functions  of  this  department  will  include  among  other  things, 
formulation  of  payment  system  policies,  regulation  of  payment  system,  implementation  of  Core 
Principles of the BIS relating to payment system, etc.  
Finally,  with  regard  to  the  financial  sector,  banks  have  always  been  concerned  at  the  regulatory 
burden on them due to the CRR requirement. RBI desires to move to a 3 per cent CRR regime, but at 
the current stage, early movement can be considered only if it is a package and one of them relates to 
the  present  way  of  maintenance  of  cash  balances  by  banks  with  the  RBI.  Apart  from  this,  as 
mentioned in an address yesterday, the time has come to take a hard look at the access of banks to 
call money. The call money window should be used to iron out temporary mismatches in liquidity and 
not on a sustained basis as a source of funding their normal requirements. An option to be discussed 
is  reducing  banks’  access  to  the  non-collateralised  call  market  to  about  2  per  cent  of  aggregate 
deposits as in the case of urban co-operative banks, or, as an alternative to 25-50 per cent of their net 
owned  funds.  Simultaneously,  in  order  to  gain  greater  effectiveness  in  money  market  operations  of 
RBI  through  Liquidity  Adjustment Facility,  the automatic access of refinance facility from the RBI to 
banks would also have to be reassessed. Thus, as CRR gets lowered and repo market develops, the 
refinance  facilities  may  have  to  be  lowered  or  altogether  removed,  and  the  access  to  the 
non-collateralised call money market restricted with the objective of imparting greater efficacy to the 
conduct of monetary policy. After all, for a central banker, the paradigm shift in public policy has to 
mention monetary policy.  
Thank You. 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 7
