 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in 
Maastricht, 7 February 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, as the Treaty on European Union was signed in Maastricht exactly ten years 
ago today, it was decided that it would be fitting to hold the fifth meeting of the Governing Council of 
the ECB outside Frankfurt here in this city in order to mark the tenth anniversary of what has become 
known  as  the  "Maastricht  Treaty".  Indeed,  the  Governing  Council  today  met  in  the  same  rooms  in 
which the Heads of State and Government successfully concluded the Treaty negotiations. I should 
like to thank Governor Wellink, the Queen's Commissioner in the Province of Limburg, the staff of de 
Nederlandsche  Bank  and  the  city  of  Maastricht  for  their  hospitality  and  for  the  outstanding  way  in 
which the meeting has been organised. 
When  the  Maastricht  Treaty  was  signed,  many  doubted  whether  Economic  and  Monetary  Union 
(EMU) would ever amount to more than the solemn words of a Treaty or a laudable objective to be 
reached at some point in the distant future. However, during the 1990s, policy-makers, governments, 
central bankers and other political and economic agents showed great resolve and determination to 
ensure that the single currency would become a reality. Today, we can look back on a period of more 
than three years in which the ECB has successfully pursued a stability-oriented single monetary policy 
serving more than 300 million citizens. And we all have the tangible proof of Monetary Union in our 
pockets,  following  a  highly  successful  cash  changeover  process  which  represents  another  historic 
milestone  in  the  process  of  European  monetary  integration.  Indeed,  already  now  the  level  of  cash 
payments  in  euro  is  close  to  100%  in  all  the  countries  of  the  euro  area.  This  means  that  the  cash 
changeover can be considered as good as complete, i.e. well before 28 February, after which date the 
legacy currencies of the euro will no longer be legal tender in any euro area country.  
Together with the Treaties founding the European Communities, the Maastricht Treaty is one of the 
most important and visionary legal texts in the history of the European integration process. With the 
euro, the Treaty offered tangible proof of what the vision of European Union is about, namely bringing 
the people of Europe closer together and ultimately facilitating their lives. Having been instrumental in 
laying the foundations for the euro, the Maastricht Treaty will remain vital and indispensable for the 
successful functioning of EMU. The medium-term macroeconomic policy framework laid down in the 
Maastricht Treaty has contributed to a stable macroeconomic environment, and will continue to do so. 
In addition, the Treaty provides for a clear allocation of responsibilities between EU institutions and 
Member States, as well as clear mandates for all involved. The maintenance of price stability – the 
ECB's primary objective –, the independence of the Eurosystem and the provisions safeguarding fiscal 
discipline, in particular as enshrined in the Stability and Growth Pact, are among the hallmarks of this 
framework. Furthermore, the path towards participation in the euro area mapped out in the Maastricht 
Treaty, focusing on sustainable economic convergence as a prerequisite for adoption of the euro, will 
also  serve  to  guide  prospective  Member  States.  The  name  Maastricht  will  therefore  always  be 
connected with the euro and will forever have a prominent place in the history of Europe.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  our  regular  examination  of  recent  monetary,  financial  and  economic 
developments.  The  Governing  Council  concluded  today  that  there  was  no  reason  to  change  its 
previous assessment. Accordingly, the key ECB interest rates were kept unchanged at a level which 
remains appropriate for the maintenance of price stability over the medium term.  
Starting  with  the  analysis  under  the  first  pillar  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  three-month 
average of the annual growth rates of M3 rose to 7.8% in the period from October to December 2001, 
from  7.4%  in  the  period  from  September  to  November.  The  Governing  Council  considers  that 
monetary  developments  thus  far  do  not  indicate  risks  to  price  stability.  The  build-up  in  liquidity 
reflected  in  these  data  occurred  in  an  economic  and  financial  environment  characterised  by 
exceptionally high uncertainty worldwide and should therefore be only temporary. This assessment of 
low inflationary risks is also supported by the declining trend in the growth rate of loans to the private 
sector.  However,  a  continuation  of  strong  M3  growth  could  call  for  a  reassessment  of  monetary 
developments, especially if there is further evidence of a recovery in the euro area economy. 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 1
 Regarding  the  second  pillar,  while  actual  euro  area  production  growth  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last 
year and in the early part of this year is still expected to be subdued, new data confirm our expectation 
of a gradual improvement in economic activity in the course of the year. Uncertainty as regards the 
global environment seems to be gradually decreasing. In the euro area, the economic fundamentals 
remain  sound  and  financing  conditions  favourable.  Together  with  higher  growth  in  real  income, 
stemming from the past and future declines in inflation, these factors should support overall demand. 
This assessment appears to be reflected both in recent improvements in survey data and in financial 
market  developments.  Although  the  timing  and  strength  of  the  upturn  remain  uncertain,  the  overall 
evidence points to a resumption of economic growth.  
We  also  continue  to  expect  no  medium-term  upward  pressures  on  inflation.  However,  as  already 
indicated on several occasions, annual inflation rates at the beginning of this year will be somewhat 
erratic. Preliminary HICP data for January 2002 confirm this expectation  but should not give rise to 
concerns as regards the medium term. The recent increase in inflation was to a large extent due to 
exceptional and short-lived factors – such as particularly adverse weather conditions in some parts of 
the euro area, which led to increases in food prices – as well as to the anticipated influences of indirect 
taxes  and  base  effects  resulting  from  developments  in  energy  prices.  Taking  these  factors  into 
account, there is no evidence so far of a significant impact on the price level as a result of the euro 
cash  changeover.  Nor  do  we  expect  substantial  effects  in  the  months  to  come.  There  is  reason  to 
assume  that  the  physical  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  will  strengthen  competition, 
thereby supporting the maintenance of price stability. 
Beyond the short term, the outlook for inflation remains favourable. One important concern, however, 
relates to forthcoming wage negotiations. If wage moderation  is maintained, as  we currently expect 
and in any case consider warranted in order to foster employment growth, and assuming that other 
determining  factors  also  develop  favourably,  annual  inflation  rates  should  fall  safely  below  2%  this 
year. They should also remain at levels consistent with price stability.  
Finally,  let me underline the importance  which the Governing Council attaches  to the Stability and 
Growth Pact and its strengthening through diligent implementation of the appropriate procedures. The 
responsibility for these procedures lies with the European Commission and the ministers of finance. 
The Governing Council fully supports all steps to  avoid the occurrence of excessive  deficits and all 
efforts to reduce the public debt and bring the fiscal stance into line with the stability programmes in 
individual  member  countries  in  order  to  ensure  the  credibility  of  the  commitments  made  under  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. In the same vein, we very much support the continued initiatives to foster 
structural reform. We welcome the focus placed on these issues in the context of the forthcoming 
Barcelona summit and we are looking forward to swift and determined delivery of essential structural 
reforms in the goods, services and labour markets to promote the euro area's growth potential. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2002
