 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Corporate governance and aspects of the regulatory 
framework instituted in Malaysia 
Special address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 2nd Seminar 
for  Central  Banks  and  Monetary  Agencies  on  AAOIFI’s  Accounting  Standards,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
29 May 2002. 
 Assalamu`alaikum Warahmatullahi Wabarakatuh and Good Morning 
Malaysia is indeed honoured to host this annual Seminar organised by the Accounting and Auditing 
Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) for Central Banks and Monetary Agencies on 
AAOIFI’s Accounting Standards for Islamic financial institutions. 
Since its establishment in 1990, AAOIFI has made a significant contribution in formulating and issuing 
accounting and auditing standards for Islamic financial institutions. The standards issued by AAOIFI 
have contributed towards the improved quality of financial statements and reporting methodology of 
Islamic financial institutions. AAOIFI has also issued standards on the role of Syariah committees as 
well  as  the  code  of  ethics  that  should  govern  the  accountants  and  auditors  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions. Undoubtedly, efforts by AAOIFI have accelerated the pace of transparency and corporate 
governance of Islamic financial institutions globally. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A  well  functioning  and  efficient  banking  system  is  vital  for  achieving  robust  economic  performance. 
Within the context of the economy, the banking institutions perform the important function of mobilising 
funds  that  are  channelled  to  productive  investments  thereby  generating  economic  activity.  In 
performing  their  intermediation  function  of  channelling  funds  between  the  savers  and  investors, 
depositors need to be assured of the safety of their deposits and the efficiency in the manner in which 
the  funds  are  mobilised  and  channelled  to  productive  investment.  Through  their  extensive  branch 
network,  and  now  through  internet  banking,  banking  institutions  are  able  to  efficiently  reach  an 
extensive  customer  base  nationwide.  As  a  custodian  of  public  funds,  maintaining  integrity  and 
confidence in the banking sector is vital towards ensuring the stability and soundness of our financial 
system. 
The trust of the public in banking institutions is inspired by the confidence in the safety and security of 
deposits, and that these funds will be professionally managed. Banking business involves risks and 
these risks need to be rigorously managed if public confidence in the banking system is to be secured. 
These risks involves credit risks, market risks, sovereign risks and foreign exchange risks, to name a 
few. There is therefore no room for negligence. This emphasize that the business of banking is too 
important  to  be  left  to  self  regulation.  The  regulatory  framework  put  in  place  by  Central  Banks  are 
aimed  to  ensure  the  soundness  and  efficiency  of  the  system  and  the  protection  of  the  interest  of 
depositors and investors. 
Before proceeding further, I would like to touch some aspects of the regulatory framework instituted for 
the  Islamic  banking  industry  in  Malaysia.  In  Malaysia,  we  have  embarked  on  the  concept  of  dual 
banking where the Islamic banking system operates in parallel with the conventional banking system. 
In our context, the Islamic banking system comprises the Islamic banks and the conventional banks 
offering Islamic banking products and services. In this regard, the main challenge to the regulator is to 
formulate  a  regulatory  framework  for  Islamic  banking  that  is  in  line  with  Syariah  principles.  Our 
approach is two-fold, firstly to adopt the existing international regulatory standards where it complies 
with  Syariah,  and  secondly  to  develop  a  separate  regulatory  framework  to  address  the  unique 
characteristics of Islamic banking. 
As far as the first approach is concerned, the Islamic banks and the conventional banks with Islamic 
windows observe similar international standards as well as the prudential and supervisory concerns 
such  as  the  Basel  Concordat  on  minimum  RWCR  of  8%,  statutory  reserve  requirement,  corporate 
governance  standards,  risk  management  standards,  financial  disclosure  and  know  your  customer 
policy. They are also subject to similar supervision, surveillance and monitoring by the Central Bank. 
These  policies  have  been  implemented  efficiently  as  most  of  these  requirements,  if  not  all,  are  not 
against the injunctions of Syariah. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 1
 The second approach refers to the implementation of Islamic banking within the conventional set-up. 
Bank Negara Malaysia has advocated for the “bank within a bank” concept for the conventional banks 
with Islamic windows to enable the Islamic banking divisions in the conventional bank to provide the 
strategic  focus  and  autonomy,  maximise  synergy  for  economies  of  scale  and  capitalise  on  cost 
efficiency.  These  measures  would  also  act  as  a  firewall  to  ensure  strict  compliance  to  Syariah.  To 
achieve this objective, we have made it mandatory for the conventional banks to establish a dedicated 
Islamic banking division within the bank, create and observe a minimum Islamic banking fund, opening 
separate  clearing  account  with  the  Central  Bank  to  facilitate  effective  separation  in  the  payments 
system as well as to have a separate accounting disclosure. Having these policies and infrastructure 
in  place,  we  have  been  able  to  operate  the  dual  banking  system  in  a  structured  and  systematic 
manner. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Although the regulations are in place, close oversight and updated statistical reporting, supported by 
close  monitoring  through  the  early  warning  system,  are  necessary  as  measures  to  avoid  banking 
failures.  The  global  experience  has  shown  that  not  all  banking  failures  are  due  to  economic  and 
financial crises. The global experiences has shown that banking failures can be caused by the lack of 
good corporate governance in the banking institutions. Lack of transparency, lack of oversight, weak 
internal controls, lack of checks and balances, incompetent directors and abuse of power are among 
the elements of poor corporate governance. Hence, even the best regulations and supervision and the 
best financial safety nets cannot prevent such banking failures. 
The regulation of banking institutions therefore needs to be complemented and reinforced with good 
corporate  governance.  In  the  context  of  the  banking  industry,  corporate  governance  involves  the 
manner in which the business and the affairs of the individual banking institutions are being governed 
by their board of directors and senior management, how the economic returns are generated to the 
owners, the day-to-day running of the operations of the business and the consideration of the interests 
of recognised stakeholders including depositors; and how they behave in a safe and sound manner, in 
compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In this context, the transparency in the conduct of 
banking institutions, facilitated by the proper accounting standards that reflect the true and fair value of 
banking  operations  would  lead  to  greater  accountability  and  responsibility  of  the  part  of  the  bank’s 
management. 
Islam  strongly  advocates  all  forms  of  positive  governance.  These  values  and  ethical  conduct  have 
already  been  in  built  and  inherent  in  the  Muslim  community.  Islamic  corporate  governance  serves 
through its underlying principles of economic well-being of the Ummah, universal brotherhood, justice 
and  equitable  distribution  of  income.  Therefore,  while  the  virtues  of  Islam  have  always  advocated 
corporate governance, the challenge to us lies in its application. For Islamic banking institutions, good 
corporate  governance  should  have  already  been  embedded  in  all  aspects  of  their  operations.  The 
issue of corporate governance is therefore not foreign to Islamic banking. 
In Malaysia, the principles of corporate governance have been well documented and applied across all 
business entities, particularly public listed companies. As good corporate governance is part of Islamic 
values,  Islamic  banking  institutions  need  only  to  adapt  to  the  code  of  ethics  of  the  corporate 
governance  to  their  business.  In  the  Malaysian  context,  the  same  good  corporate  governance 
practices are applied for both conventional and Islamic banking institutions. To enhance the standard 
of  corporate  governance  in  the  banking  sector  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  introduce  measures 
including  among  others,  specific  guidelines  on  the  code  of  conduct  for  directors,  officers  and 
employees of the banking institutions and guidelines on the directorship and the prohibition of loans to 
directors, staff and their interested corporations. The main objective of these guidelines is to engender 
public confidence in banking institutions and to ensure that the management and board of directors 
exhibit integrity and professionalism in the running of the banking institutions. 
Banking institutions are prohibited from the extension of financing and credit facilities to related parties 
including  its  directors  and  staff  as  well  as  family  members  and  interested  corporations.  Such 
prohibitions are aimed at preventing misconduct and irregular practices in provision of finance whilst 
ensuring  fair  and  equitable  treatment  to  the  public.  These  governance  are  universal  in  nature  and 
therefore, Islamic banking institutions would not be faced with any difficulty in adopting these values. 
Secondly,  the  objective  is  to  prevent  conflict  of  interests  and  accord  responsibility  on  the  banking 
institutions  to  provide  complete  and  accurate  information.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  undertaken  a 
number  of  initiatives  in  promoting  transparency  and  good  banking  practices  in  Islamic  banking 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2002
 institutions.  To  achieve  these  objectives,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  adopted  an  all-encompassing 
approach  which  is  focussed  on  strengthening  the  institutional  capacity  of  the  Islamic  banking 
institutions,  broadening  the  range  of  financial  products  and  services  and  deepening  the  Islamic 
financial markets by intensifying research and development efforts as well as creating awareness in 
addition to strengthening the regulatory framework for Islamic banking. 
One aspect that has been carried out by Bank Negara is the introduction of a structured framework in 
the determination of the rate of return for Islamic banking operations. Previously, there were various 
modes of framework in the disclosure of the rate of return used by the Islamic banking institutions and 
it has, to a certain extent, made it difficult to assess the performance of the Islamic banking industry. It 
also  created  distortions  in  the  rate  of  return  as  the  spreads  can  vary  significantly  among  Islamic 
banking institutions. The new framework addresses the issue of uniformity as banks are required to 
observe  a  single  framework,  thereby  reducing  the  potential  for  distortions  in  the  rate  of  return,  and 
generating a more equitable distribution of income, as well as increasing the level of transparency. On 
the part of the regulator, it has provided us with better means of assessing the efficiency of Islamic 
banking institutions as well as their profitability, prudent management and fairness. 
In a dual banking system as that operating in Malaysia where conventional banks also provide Islamic 
banking  facilities,  the  regulator  is  accountable  to  instil  confidence  to  the  public  of  the  existence  of 
firewalls between the conventional and Islamic funds. Since the introduction of a dual banking system 
in  Malaysia  and  the  inception  of  the  Islamic  banking  institutions  participating  in  Islamic  Banking 
Scheme  (IBS  banks),  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  made  it  mandatory  for  the  Islamic  banking 
operations in these institutions to be separated from the conventional banking operations. Apart from 
the requirements for the internal separation of the accounting books, the further step has been taken 
to require the conventional banks to disclose the fair and true value of the Islamic banking operations 
in the form of Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Statements as part of the Notes to the Accounts in 
the principal financial statements of the conventional banks. This is to duly reflect the different risks 
and unique characteristics inherent in the Islamic banking as compared to conventional banking. 
A  distinct  feature  of  Islamic  banks  vis-à-vis  conventional  banking  is  the  requirement  to  set-up  a 
Syariah advisory council within the Islamic bank. From the perspective of corporate governance, the 
establishment of Syariah advisory council is important to instil public confidence on the purity of the 
operations  of  the  Islamic  banking  institutions.  The  Syariah  advisory  council  serves  as  a  check  and 
balance to ensure that the management and operations of the Islamic banking institutions does not 
deviate from the Islamic principles in the formulation of the policies. Towards this end, Bank Negara 
Malaysia  is  currently  drawing  up  the  guidelines  to  strengthen  further  the  existing  Syariah  advisory 
committees  at  Islamic  banking  institutions.  Amongst  others,  the  guidelines  will  outline  the  role  and 
responsibilities of the Syariah advisory committee of the Islamic banking institutions with the view to 
ensuring that the decision-making process that require Syariah inputs have undergone the necessary 
thorough and rigorous process. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
With the establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB), it is envisaged that the level of 
transparency  and  quality  of  corporate  governance  of  Islamic  banking  institutions  will  be  further 
enhanced. The IFSB is expected to play a prominent role in promoting prudent, transparent and the 
robust development of the Islamic financial services industry through the promulgation of international 
prudential standards that are consistent with the Syariah principles. We are honoured that Malaysia 
has been chosen to be the IFSB secretariat and hope that the IFSB will achieve its noble objectives as 
an effective prudential standard setting body for Islamic financial institutions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
While significant progress has been achieved in Islamic banking there remains much to be undertaken 
both by the regulators as well as the industry if the true potential is to be realised. This Seminar is one 
of  the  platforms  for  regulators  and  financial  institutions  to  come  together  to  share  views  and 
experiences in regulatory issues particularly pertaining to accounting standards, financial framework 
and  transparency  in  the  Islamic  banking  operations.  I  also  hope  the  participants  would  take  the 
opportunity  to  acquire  as  much  knowledge  as  possible  during  these  two  days  from  the  invaluable 
insights presented by the distinguished speakers. 
On that note, I wish you a successful Seminar. Thank you. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 3
