 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in 
Frankfurt, 3 January 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  which  was  also  attended  by  the  President  of  the  ECOFIN  Council, 
Mr. Rato, as well as by Commissioner Solbes. 
As usual, we examined recent monetary, financial and economic developments. The Governing 
Council concluded that recent developments are in line  with the interest rate decisions taken in the 
course of last year. We have therefore decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. We 
also  confirmed  that  the  current  level  of  key  ECB  interest  rates  remains  appropriate  for  the 
maintenance of price stability over the medium term. 
Starting  with  the  analysis  under  the  first  pillar  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  three-month 
average of the annual growth rates of M3 rose to 7.4% in the period from September to November 
2001, from 6.7% in the period from August to October. These high levels of the growth rate of M3 over 
the past few months reflect a particularly marked preference for liquid holdings by euro area investors 
in an economic and financial environment characterised by exceptionally high uncertainty worldwide. 
However,  this  should  remain  a  temporary  phenomenon  which  does  not  indicate  future  inflationary 
pressures. This judgement notwithstanding, the continued acceleration of M3 and the ongoing process 
of  building  up  liquidity  will  require  a  thorough  analysis  of  monetary  developments  in  the  months  to 
come. 
Regarding the second pillar, recent information has confirmed our earlier assessment that economic 
activity in the euro area was weak in the second half of 2001 and will probably remain so in early 
2002.  However,  there  are  signs  which  point  to  a  gradual  recovery  in  the  course  of  this  year,  as 
reflected, for example, in financial market developments or in recent survey data which indicate that 
the decline in confidence may have bottomed out. There are no fundamental imbalances which would 
require  a  longer  correction  process,  and  the  general  positive  conditions  for  an  improvement  in 
economic  activity  remain  in  place.  Financing  conditions,  in  particular,  are  very  favourable,  and  the 
expected  further  decline  in  consumer  price  inflation  will  lead  to  higher  growth  in  real  disposable 
income which should support domestic demand. All in all, available data remain in line with a recovery 
of  the  euro  area  economy  this  year,  while  the  timing  and  strength  of  this  upturn  remain  uncertain. 
Continued close monitoring of further incoming information is thus warranted.  
In the current economic environment we do not expect medium-term upward pressures on inflation. 
However, as has been stated several times in the past, annual inflation rates for the months to come 
may  be  somewhat  erratic  on  account  of  base  effects  as  a  consequence  of  the  unwinding  of  past 
increases  in  energy  prices  and,  albeit  to  a  lesser  extent,  in  food  prices.  In  this  connection,  the 
possibility of some short-lived upward movements in the annual rate of inflation cannot be ruled out, 
but this should not be a cause for concern. Likewise, downward shifts resulting from such base effects 
later in the spring should not signal a change in the longer-term outlook for price stability. As regards 
the cash changeover, we do not expect any noticeable effect on the price level, largely due to strong 
competition in the retail sector, continued awareness on the part of consumers and the commitment of 
governments  not  to  increase  the  average  level  of  administered  prices;  however,  we  will  of  course 
remain vigilant. 
Beyond short-term developments, we expect that wage moderation in the euro area will continue and 
that demand pressure on prices will remain subdued, although there are some grounds for concern 
about forthcoming wage negotiations. It is therefore particularly important to point to the indispensable 
role of continued wage moderation in fostering employment and maintaining a favourable outlook for 
price stability. On the basis of current information, annual inflation rates should fall safely below 2% 
this year and thereafter remain at levels consistent with price stability over the foreseeable future. Any 
factor which might alter this assessment in either direction will be carefully examined.  
Let me also stress today how important it is for fiscal policies to maintain a medium-term orientation 
within  the  framework  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  The  current  weakness  in  economic  growth 
BIS Review 1/2002 
 1
 undoubtedly presents a particular challenge for those countries which have not yet attained budgetary 
positions close to balance or in surplus or which have high public debt-to-GDP ratios. However, rather 
than being detrimental to a return to sustainable economic growth, their adherence to their medium-
term objectives will strengthen consumer and investor confidence. Countries without fiscal imbalances 
can, of course, allow automatic stabilisers to operate fully. That said, however, there is no case for 
fiscal activism. 
Finally, I should like to reiterate our views on structural reform - particularly following the successful 
introduction  of the euro banknotes and coins. The key  challenge for the  euro area, now more than 
ever, is to continue to strengthen the forces of production and expand the trend output growth of the 
economy in a decisive manner. This  will require  a  deepening  of structural reform in the  labour  and 
goods markets, as well as technological innovation. Likewise, governments should pursue determined 
reforms with regard to the size and structure of public expenditure and revenue, also in order to create 
room for further tax cuts and to absorb the fiscal costs of population ageing. Together with continued 
wage  moderation  aimed  at  sustaining  recent  labour  market  gains,  these  reforms  will  foster 
employment and investment. 
With  the  ECB  pursuing  its  primary  objective  of  price  stability,  with  governments  willing  to  foster 
structural  reforms  and  conduct  stability-oriented  fiscal  policies,  and  with  wage  developments 
consistent with job creation and price stability, the euro - which is now also available in the form of 
banknotes and coins - will represent an economic area characterised by macroeconomic stability and 
economic dynamism. 
We are now at your disposal for questions.. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2002
