 Glenn Stevens: International economic and financial issues - an RBA 
perspective 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Banking  &  Finance  News  Magazine,  Asia  Australia  Investment  Conference  &  Expo,  Sydney, 
16 May 2002. 
 Let me begin by thanking Australian Banking & Finance News Magazine for the invitation to speak to 
you today. It is very pleasing to see such a distinguished group of speakers talking about the financial 
services industry in the region, an activity in which Australia, and especially Sydney, is very heavily 
involved. 
I have been asked to give a perspective on the international economy. This is something of a change 
of gear from most of the other presentations you have heard today, and as I set out to prepare these 
remarks I wondered what I might say that would retain your attention. On reflection, however, I think 
the  current  state  of  the  world  economy  is  of  quite  some  interest  for  those  who  are  involved  in  the 
financial  services  sector.  Moreover,  there  are  some  long-run  trends  where  the  financial  services 
sector’s role will be critical. I’d like to explore some of these issues briefly in the time available. 
I will not say much at all about the Australian economy, because the focus here is on the region and 
the world. Of course, the Bank’s views about the Australian economy were spelled out in detail in the 
Statement on Monetary Policy released last Friday. This week we have also had the Budget. That is 
surely enough to digest on Australia. 
What’s happening in the global economy at present? 
Let me begin by talking about where we are. The global economy, and especially the Asian region, 
has seen its share of fluctuations over the past few years. On the latest estimates it appears that, as 
measured by the IMF, the world economy expanded by about 2½ per cent in 2001. This was about 
half the pace recorded in 2000, which was an exceptionally strong year. 
 Growth in the major industrial countries (the G7) was even lower. Over the four quarters to the end of 
2001, real GDP for this group of countries recorded almost no growth, which was the weakest result in 
any twelve-month period since the early-1980s global recession. This reflects, of course, the fact that 
the US economy experienced a recession during last year, and so did Japan and Germany. 
Yet  this  outcome  was  better  than  might  have  been  thought  likely.  During  the  second  half  of  2001, 
people  began  to  worry  that  the  US  in  particular  would  encounter  a  more  severe  and  protracted 
recession than has, in fact, turned out to be the case. We at the RBA became quite concerned about 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 1
 this as well, not so much because of the terrorist attacks per se - whose direct short-term economic 
impact  we  thought  likely  to  be  relatively  small  -  but  simply  because  economic  problems  can 
accumulate  towards  the  end  of  long  expansions,  which  then  intensify  any  subsequent  downturn. 
Arguably, the US economy had acquired some such imbalances - with some asset values falling from 
very high levels, an unusually high level of business investment raising the question of whether there 
might  have  been  over-investment,  and  questioning  in  some  quarters  about  whether  consumer 
spending had run too far ahead of income. 
 
 
As things have turned out, fears of a sharp slump have not been realised. On the contrary, as of May 
2002, it seems that the US has begun to recover from what now appears to have been the shallowest 
recession  in  recent  history,  at  least  as  measured  by  the  behaviour  of  GDP.  Using  the  metric  of 
unemployment,  if  it  wasn’t  the  shallowest  recession  in  recent  times,  it  was  close.  This  is  a  better 
outcome  than  most  thought  likely  during  the  second  half  of  last  year,  and  is  much  better  than  the 
“downside risk” scenarios which were contemplated at that time. 
Reflecting these outcomes, forecasters stopped continually downgrading their assessments about the 
future  earlier  this  year,  and  have  become more  confident  over  recent  months  that  global  economic 
activity will strengthen as 2002 progresses and that 2003 will be a pretty good year. They expect this 
to be led by an improving US, with Europe and East Asia turning up as well. Not much contribution to 
growth  is expected from Japan  in  the short term, but at least performance there is not expected to 
worsen. 
There is, of course, a long way to go to see whether those expectations turn out to be correct, but they 
are  not  unreasonable  expectations  to  hold  in  the  present  circumstances.  The  US  turning  point  is 
clearly already behind us. It is pretty obvious, furthermore, that macroeconomic policies in the US are 
exerting a considerable expansionary impetus. In fact, monetary policies in almost all countries have 
been quite easy over the past year, which in itself increases the probability that growth will strengthen 
rather  than  fade  away.  In  short,  while  it  is  not  time  to  throw  our  hats  in  the  air  about  the  world 
economy, things look distinctly better than six months ago. 
Aspects of the US economy 
It is worth dwelling for a little while on the recent experiences of the US, and not just because it is the 
world’s largest national economy in terms of production of goods and services. The US economy is 
also a dominant force affecting global capital markets, and in the past five years it has been subject to 
some unusual influences which are still running their course. 
There  has  been  a  remarkable  degree  of  investment  in  information  technology  and  communication 
capacity in the US. This has been a feature of other countries too, but it was most pronounced in the 
US,  raising  the  share  of  overall  business  investment  in  GDP  to  historically  high  levels  in  the  late 
1990s.  Expectations  about  returns  to  this  investment  have,  until  quite  recently  at  least,  been  very 
optimistic. For that reason, the US has been a powerful magnet for capital, and much of America’s 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2002
 additional investment has been funded with savings sourced in other countries. Associated with that 
has been a rising level of the US dollar, high levels of domestic asset prices and hence substantial 
gains in household wealth. That, in turn, helped to support a prolonged period of strength in household 
consumption spending. All of this contributed to a robust and lengthy period of economic expansion 
until early 2001. 
It is striking, moreover, that this long expansion followed a pretty mild recession in the early 1990s, 
which had itself followed a pretty good expansion in the 1980s. So, in fact, the US has had a good two 
decades  by  the standards  of other advanced economies,  with  its performance outstripping those of 
Europe, or Japan, with the margin quite wide during the 1990s. This persistent out-performance by the 
US economy has made it the benchmark for most things economic and financial. The dominance of 
the US model of market capitalism seemed, by the end of the 1990s, to be unassailable. 
The  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  all  this,  moreover,  was  pivotal.  US  equity  and  debt  markets 
channeled vast quantities of capital into the corporate sector, and especially the high-tech sector, at 
quite low cost. In 2000, equity market issuance by US corporates was eight times the rate just three 
years earlier, at price-earnings ratios which were exceptionally high. This rapid increase in the supply 
of almost costless equity capital seems to have been driven by the conviction that returns from some 
of  the  new  technologies  would  be  enormous  for  their  producers  and,  dispersed  across  the  US 
economy, their users in terms of productivity. The financial services sector provided the machinery for 
all  this  to  happen,  itself  using  the  improvements  in  information  and  communications  technology  to 
lower its costs. 
Up to a point, this was a model of what the financial sector is supposed to do: allocate capital, and by 
seeking out the highest returns, maximise the growth potential of the economy. Regrettably, as often 
happens  in  a  prolonged  boom,  excesses  emerged.  Investors  increasingly  tended  to  become 
mesmerised  by  the  apparent  success  of  firms  with  business  models  whose  worth,  in  more  sober 
times, would have been regarded as dubious. In addition, practices developed in some areas which, in 
hindsight, are pretty hard to defend. Statements of corporate earnings, for example, turned out to be 
quite misleading in some celebrated instances, raising questions about the behaviour of management, 
and  the  role  of  auditors.  Distorted  incentive  structures  and  accounting  rules  are  seen  as  having 
contributed to this process, and to the fact that the advice given by analysts to their clients was, in a 
number of cases, less than impartial. And so on. 
I do not recount this to point fingers of blame at anyone in particular - it is, I fear, part of the human 
condition that such things happen near the end of most booms, even ones whose initial development 
is  well  based  in  fundamentals.  The  temptation  to  talk  up  prospects,  and  the  desire  on  the  part  of 
investors to believe the talk, becomes almost irresistible. But these things do have real costs: capital is 
misallocated,  or  simply  lost;  as  a  result,  someone’s  savings  are  depleted,  and  the  economy  is  the 
poorer  for  not  having  used  those  resources  more  wisely.  Hence  the  importance  of  the  financial 
sector’s role in the economy. 
What appears to be occurring now is that pressure is building in the US for reforms to the problem 
areas. Without  wanting  to  speculate  about  the  outcomes, most  would  agree  that  some  reforms  will 
help to re-build confidence, which is beneficial for the finance industry in the US and, by extension, 
globally. We should keep in mind, though, that that  will  not stop  the tendency  towards  extremes of 
optimism and pessimism - that’s just human nature. 
All that said, any legacy from all this has not stopped a recovery in the US economy from beginning, 
even  though  it  may  well  have  some  impact  on  the  shape  of  it.  Over  recent  months,  people  have 
switched  from  debating  the  possible  size  of  the  downturn  to  talking  about  the  likely  strength  of  the 
upswing. The spurt of US growth in the March quarter was largely driven by a rise in production in the 
goods-producing part of the economy, where previous levels of production had been sufficiently low 
that inventories of goods had been falling. The current level of production can be sustained, but for 
ongoing growth in production what is needed is expansion in demand and prospects for demand are 
regarded as, to use the current language of choice, “uncertain”. It is not that demand is falling - it is 
growing. The issue is to what extent, and how soon, it might accelerate. 
In this context, the behaviour of business investment has been nominated (by the Federal Reserve, for 
example) as crucial. After such a prolonged period of massive capital investment, there was a very 
sharp  fall-off  in  capital  spending  by  US  businesses  during  2001.  It  was  this  component  of  demand 
which was responsible for pushing the US into recession. The pace of decline looks like it began to 
abate in the early part of 2002, but it  is not clear when investment spending might actually pick up 
again. 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 3
   Central to the outlook for investment will be the state of US corporate profits. The chart shows the best 
available measure of economic profits, from the US national accounts, measured as a share of US 
GDP. There was a period of strong profit growth from 1994 to 1997, but then the profit share tended to 
drift lower, before falling sharply during the first nine months of 2000. US corporations acted to reduce 
costs with alacrity over the past year. Profits then began to recover in the last quarter of 2001 and, 
based on preliminary information for the March quarter, that has probably continued. 
Equity analysts who make forecasts are expecting continued very strong growth in earnings over the 
coming  year.  Those  inclined  to  have  reservations  about  the  robustness  of  the  US  recovery  would 
wonder  whether  earnings  growth  expectations  might  be  somewhat  optimistic  (and,  for  that  matter, 
whether profits were actually as strong as commonly believed in the late phases of the expansion). 
That is not to argue that the US recovery, which is clearly under way, will peter out, just that it might be 
a fairly moderate affair compared with some other recoveries. 
Nonetheless, it is apparent that a pick-up of some degree is under way in profits, and even a moderate 
overall recovery  after a fairly shallow recession is a  good outcome. Furthermore, given that the US 
economy  has  surprised  many  by  its  resilience  to  date,  there  has  to  be  the  possibility  that  it  will 
continue to do so. 
Aspects of the Asian region 
Turning  to  the  Asian  region,  we  have  seen  encouraging  evidence  that  a  number  of  countries  have 
turned the corner on economic growth in the second half of 2001, after a period of contraction. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2002
 For  the  region  as  a  whole,  the  global  downturn  of  2001  was  much  less  traumatic  than  the  Asian 
financial  crisis  of  1997  and  1998  (though  this  is  not  true  for  every  individual  country).  There  are  a 
number  of  reasons  for  this  but  one  contributing  factor,  in  my  view,  was  that  economic  policies 
responded differently. Floating exchange rates were allowed to decline when under pressure, which 
helped to avoid any sense of crisis and associated contagion from one country to another. Monetary 
and fiscal policies were generally eased, something which, in many instances, was not possible during 
the initial phase of the earlier crisis. This meant that while the global slump did affect East Asia, the 
effects were ameliorated, rather than exacerbated, by the policy structures and responses. 
 
 Nonetheless, the recent experience may prompt some of the East Asian economies to think about the 
extent  of  their  exposure  to  the  high-technology  sector.  A  notable  feature  of  performance  after  the 
Asian  crisis  was  the  way  in  which  the  global  boom  in  that  sector  drove  growth  for  the  exposed 
economies.  And  in  the  subsequent  downturn,  there  seems  to  have  been,  not  surprisingly,  some 
association  between  the  degree  of  technology  exposure  and  the  extent  of  the  economic  slowdown 
across countries (see chart). 
A question  which these countries may face - probably  they  are already  asking it of themselves - is 
whether the sorts of growth rates they want to sustain can be so reliant on a relatively concentrated, 
export-led  approach  in  industries  where  the  products  are  increasingly  commoditised,  or  whether  a 
more diversified approach, including more growth in domestic demand, would be better. The answer 
which emerges will no doubt be important for trade and capital flows in the region in the future. 
No less important than that set of issues, and in many respects quite related to it, is the potential long-
run  impact  of  the  rapid  growth  and  internationalisation  of  the  Chinese  economy.  China’s  economic 
growth, at least as recorded by the official data, is remarkable for its pace and consistency during the 
past decade. China is fast becoming quite large as both a source of, and a destination for, goods and 
services. It is the second largest regional economy after Japan, for example, by a large margin. It is 
also a very large destination for international capital, receiving a significant share of the world’s cross-
border flows of direct investment in recent years (see table). 
Annual private direct capital flows to emerging markets 
US$ billion; 1999-2001 average 
Asia 
   of which China 
Western hemisphere 
“Transition” countries of Eastern Europe 
Other 
All emerging markets 
  56 
38 
38 
23 
47 
164 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 5
 Some of my colleagues in the RBA point out that the associated build-up of manufacturing capacity in 
China must have something to do with the tendency for international prices for manufactured products 
to decline over recent years, even in periods where global growth was pretty strong. Equally, the rapid 
growth of income and wealth in China will boost demand from that country, and presents opportunities 
for  foreign  companies,  not  least  in  financial  services  and  communications.  So  China  is  becoming 
increasingly  important  for  the  international,  and  especially  the  regional,  economies.  Other  countries 
have an increasing interest in the success of the efforts of the Chinese authorities to achieve balanced 
growth, financial stability and efficient allocation of the capital resources which are flowing into China 
from abroad. 
The  Japanese  economy  remains  in  a  very  difficult  position.  A  decade  ago,  no-one  would  have 
predicted  that  Japan,  an  economy  which  recorded  extraordinary  growth  for  a  generation,  would 
struggle to grow by an average of 1½ per cent per year during the 1990s. The mix of factors at work is 
quite a potent one, and includes again the aftermath of a period in which the financial system (among 
other things) did not function as it should have. Asset prices have fallen massively since the heady 
peak reached in the “bubble economy” period a decade or so ago. Hence the value of collateral for 
bank  loans  has  also  collapsed,  putting  enormous  strain  on  corporate  borrowers  and  the  financial 
system. The general level of prices is declining. Government finances are strained to the limit after a 
long sequence of fiscal packages. Monetary policy has lowered short-term interest rates to zero, and 
pushed an enormous quantity of cash into the system in an attempt to get some expansionary impetus 
to  an  economy  where  there  has  been  no  appetite  for  borrowing.  In  this  respect,  the  debate  about 
macroeconomics in Japan has seen the return of a number of themes prominent in the 1930s, and it is 
proving much more difficult to get Japan’s growth moving and its prices back to small positive rates of 
increase than most people would have expected. The US authorities have observed these problems 
and my belief is that their desire to avoid encountering such a scenario helps explain the aggressive 
nature of the monetary policy reaction of the Federal Reserve during 2001. 
The world economy would surely be better off were Japan to be able to make a decisive return to solid 
growth,  but  in  the  short  term,  forecasters  seem  to  have  little  confidence  that  that  will  occur.  Still,  if 
Japan performs in future like the average of the past few years, a pick-up in growth in other countries 
will see better global conditions. 
Europe 
Europe’s  economies  slowed  noticeably  in  2001.  Germany,  in  years  past  the  strongest  of  the  major 
European economies, has under-performed some others in recent years, such as France or the UK, 
and in 2001 saw a contraction in output in the second half of the year. 
In recent months, there have been some encouraging signs of a turn for the better, with surveys of 
business  confidence  generally  looking  firmer.  Most  people  expect  that  trend  to  continue,  though 
business people in Europe are presumably concerned about the current industrial unrest. 
The financial services sector and regional economies 
Other  speakers  today  have  no  doubt  talked  at  length  about  the  growth  prospects  for  the  financial 
services sector around the region, so I will not say much on that, but a few remarks are possibly in 
order. 
As an economy develops, the wealth of the community increases, and an increasing proportion of it is 
held in the form of financial claims. Banking systems develop and, usually later, capital markets where 
companies and governments can tap savings directly. 
In the old western industrial economies, this process typically took quite a long time. In Asia, these 
developments have been accelerated, as part of the rapid industrialisation and development of these 
economies in the past generation. By now, in some cases the sizes of financial systems are getting 
pretty large. In countries such as Malaysia, China and Korea, some very crude calculations (shown 
below) suggest that financial assets are, relative to the size of the respective economies, getting to be 
as large  as those in many high-income countries. In  Singapore and Hong  Kong, operating offshore 
financial centres, financial systems are also, of course, fairly large. 
6 
 BIS Review 32/2002
 Japan 
China 
Hong Kong 
Korea 
India 
Australia 
Thailand 
Singapore 
Malaysia 
Indonesia 
Philippines 
USA 
Gross financial assets* 
 US$ billion 
% of GDP 
 14,026 
2,288 
910 
842 
533 
790 
203 
257 
296 
105 
66 
28,451 
 338 
198 
562 
199 
111 
221 
177 
291 
338 
72 
93 
279 
*  Calculated as monetary assets, plus bonds and equities. Data for 2001-02. 
Sources: IMF; BIS; FIBV. 
In several countries, a good deal of repair work is being done on banking systems whose net worth 
was seriously eroded by the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and 1998. While this has often been labelled 
as  a  currency  crisis,  at  its  heart  it  was  also  a  banking  crisis.  Banks  -  and  not  just  the  ones  on  the 
ground in Asia - did not perform the function of allocating capital and managing risk as well as they 
should  have.  Lest  this  comment  sound  patronising,  I  hasten  to  add  that  we  in  Australia  had  an 
experience of a similar nature, though thankfully of a smaller order of magnitude, in the late 1980s and 
early  1990s.  Indeed,  most  countries  have  had  this  happen  at  some  stage,  and  usually  more  than 
once. 
In  the  past  ten  to  fifteen  years,  the  experience  in  the  old  industrial  countries  has  resulted  in  a 
strengthening of risk management in banks and in the supervisory process, something which is now 
being worked on in Asia. 
The  authorities  in  a  number  of  Asian  countries  are  also  seeking  to  promote  capital  market 
development so as to lessen their high degree of reliance on banking systems. It has been suggested 
that in times of stress, having more than one conduit for the provision of funding is a handy degree of 
diversification.  Share  markets  have  long  been  a  feature  of  the  Asian  financial  landscape  and  now 
bond  markets  are  developing  more  quickly.  China  again  features  here,  with  a  stock  of  bonds 
outstanding now second only to Japan’s in size in the region. 
The future seems likely to involve considerable further growth in the financial systems of many of the 
countries of Asia. I would think that Australian market participants are particularly well-placed to take 
part  in  the  development  of  these  markets,  given  the  maturity  and  sophistication  of  our  markets  for 
sovereign and corporate debt, and derivatives markets which are quite active and reasonably large in 
world terms. 
Conclusion 
The  world  economy  appears  to  be  gradually  improving,  and  we  are  seeing  this  reflected  in  better 
conditions for many of the Asian region’s economies. We are still unsure how things will pan out in the 
US, but the fact that we can debate the strength of an upswing, as opposed to the depth of recession, 
is a clear indication that things have been going better than expected. 
In  this  region,  there  remain  some  short-term  problems,  but  there  are  also  some  quite  important 
medium-term  trends  -  of  which  I  would  nominate  the  rapid  growth  of  China  as  probably  the  most 
important.  The  role  of  the  financial  services  sector  is  key  in  accommodating  these  trends  and  in 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 7
 helping savers and investors alike to maximise their opportunities. I am sure you all have fascinating 
challenges ahead. 
8 
 BIS Review 32/2002
