 Jaime Caruana: Presentation of the Bank of Spain’s annual report 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain, to the Governing Council of the Bank of 
Spain on the presentation of the annual report, Madrid, 14 June 2002. 
 A year ago I addressed you in my first presentation of an Annual Report, that for the year 2000. At the 
time I highlighted the importance of an impending event: the introduction of euro notes and coins. This 
event clearly symbolised the culmination of monetary union in Europe, a process set in train ten years 
earlier and coming to fruition against a background of enormous expectation not free from uncertainty. 
It  is  only  fair  today  to  start  by  stressing  the  success  of  the  cash  changeover,  which  was  notably 
smooth despite the complexity inherent in such a singular, large-scale and radically novel operation. 
Underpinning this success was the collaboration of all the sectors concerned: households and firms 
and,  in  particular,  the  banking  system  and  the  distribution  sector,  without  whose  contribution  the 
changeover of notes and coins would have simply been unviable. The fact that such a far-reaching 
change should have found such widespread support in society ultimately reflects European citizens' 
acceptance of their new currency and their confidence as to the benefits they may reap from it. 
With  the  culmination  of  this  process,  the  euro  area  is  consolidated  as  an  extensive  and  stable 
monetary zone. This is an effective instrument for increasing the prosperity of European citizens and 
one suited to playing a leading role in the international monetary system. It is also a magnet for other 
European countries whose integration into the area will give it greater worldwide influence. A dynamic 
process  is  now  under  way  in  the  area  in  which  those  economies  that  are  most  flexible  and  best 
equipped  with  physical,  technological  and  human  capital  will  be  those  that  most  benefit  from 
participation in the common European venture. 
To  date,  the  Spanish  economy  has  been  able  to  draw  on  its  progressive  economic  and  monetary 
integration  in  Europe  to  move  towards  correcting  some  of  its  structural  imbalances,  to  further  real 
convergence  with  the  core  European  countries  and  to  pursue  increasing  external  openness.  In 
parallel,  Spain  has  re-geared  its  economic  policies  towards  stability  and  has  pushed  through  the 
liberalisation of its financial, factor and product markets. This modernisation and openness drive has 
led  to  a  substantial  change  in  Spain's  position  in  the  world  economy,  which  includes  strategic 
ownership interests in certain regions in which it has invested strongly. 
Undoubtedly,  the  main  challenge  now  facing  the  Spanish  economy  is  to  consolidate  this  position 
against  a  background  of  heightened  competition,  rapid  technological  change  and  future  European 
Union enlargement. 
The Annual  Report presented today  illustrates the  benefits that the Spanish economy  has obtained 
from  participation  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  even  under  the  particular  circumstances  of  a 
generalised  slowdown  in  the  world  economy,  as  was  the  case  in  2001.  The  advantages  stemming 
from  price  stability,  budgetary  discipline  and  the  reforms  undertaken  are  enabling  the  phase  of 
lacklustre  growth  to  be  overcome  without  halting  progress  in  real  convergence.  The  pattern  has 
differed  from  previous  cycles,  where  the  imbalances  incubated  in  expansionary  phases  would 
inescapably result in periods of recession and job destruction. 
In this first part of my address, I shall give an overview of world economic developments last year and 
discuss  the  response  of  the  euro  area  economy  to  the  new  international  setting,  paying  particular 
attention  to  the  performance  of  the  Spanish  economy.  In  the  second  part,  I  shall  refer  to  matters 
relating to financial stability, banking supervision and the role of the Banco de España in these areas. 
The world economy 
The slowdown in the world economy in 2001 was more short-lived and milder than expected, despite 
the emergence of several  adverse shocks which  it  was thought, at the time, would have a strongly 
negative impact. First, there was the correction of the speculative bubble in the industries most closely 
related  to  new  technologies  and  telecommunications.  This  prompted  a  substantial  decline  in  these 
companies' earnings and their share prices on the stock market, and a rapid adjustment to the over-
investment  that  had  built  up.  Next  were  the  repercussions  of  dearer  oil  prices  in  2000,  which  were 
partly corrected in 2001 but which have rebounded again this year. Further, the crises in Turkey and 
BIS Review 38/2002 
 1
 Argentina  once  more  highlighted  the  vulnerability  of  some  emerging  economies  and  certain 
shortcomings  in  the  architecture  of  the  international  financial  system.  And  finally,  there  were  the 
attacks of 11th September, which had a specific and strongly depressive effect on confidence. 
Despite this build-up of adverse effects, the world economy proved notably resilient. This was all the 
more striking considering that on this occasion the downturn coincided in the three main areas (the 
United  States,  the  European  Union  and  Japan),  which  a  priori  heightened  the  risk  of  a  deep  and 
prolonged decline in world output. With the exception of Japan, the industrialised countries avoided 
going into recession, while the emerging economies, although seeing a decline in their growth rates, 
have on the whole remained more buoyant than the developed countries. 
The opening months of 2002 have gradually confirmed the greater buoyancy of the world economy. 
This is clearer in the United States, but is also perceptible in other countries. Activity, confidence and 
employment  indicators  have  all  firmed,  and  GDP  growth  forecasts  have  been  revised  upwards. 
Nonetheless,  elements  of  uncertainty  remain  in  place  over  the  strength  and  timing  of  the  ongoing 
recovery. These relate essentially to the persistence of certain imbalances in the US economy (linked 
mainly  to the shortfall in private saving and the high foreign deficit), the  weakness of the Japanese 
economy and the crises besetting certain emerging countries.  
It  is  worth  inquiring  into  the  causes  of  the  world  economy's  resilience  in  the  face  of  these  shocks. 
Firstly, it is probably indicative of the greater microeconomic flexibility of both the developed and the 
emerging  economies.  It  appears  the  structural  reforms  of  recent  years,  aimed  at  increasing  the 
adaptability  and  responsiveness  of  economies  to  adverse  effects,  are  beginning  to  bear  fruit. 
Consequently,  it  is  crucial  to  further  such  reforms,  especially  in  times  of  plenty,  when  their  cost  is 
lower, so that when lean times arrive the economy has the spontaneous adjustment mechanisms in 
place to reduce the cost and duration of the crisis. 
Secondly,  from  the  macroeconomic  policy  standpoint,  the  recent  economic  slowdown  shows  the 
importance  of  having  sufficient  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  leeway  to  be  able  to  react  to  adverse 
disturbances, meaning in turn that prices and public finances should have performed favourably during 
economic  upturns.  Fortunately,  on  this  occasion,  the  slowdown  found  the  main  economies  in  a 
relatively  balanced  inflationary  and  budgetary  situation.  This  was  conducive  to  a  monetary  policy 
response (which was more intense in the United States, in step with the sharper reduction in the pace 
of  activity  in  this  country)  and  to  the  operation  of  the  automatic  stabilisers,  without  jeopardising  the 
long-term fundamentals. 
The notable exception is Japan. Here there is no further room for additional stimuli on the demand 
side owing to the economic and financial problems inherited from previous years. And this has led to 
the economy going into recession for the third time in ten years. In the other industrialised countries, 
the prompt economic policy response largely accounts for the mildness of the slowdown. 
Thirdly,  part  of  the  explanation  for  the  swift  recovery  in  the  main  economies  in  the  face  of  the 
aforementioned shocks lies in the fact that efficient, sound financial systems are in place, which have 
been propitious to the smooth working of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. I will return to 
this idea later on discussing financial stability. 
In most of the main countries, then, the cuts in intervention rates have fed through appropriately to 
banks' lending and deposit rates, and the liquidity provided by central banks has passed through the 
credit channel to households and firms, where expenditure decisions are taken. The exception once 
more  here  is  Japan,  where  the  financial  sector's  problems  have  prevented  the  pass-through  of 
monetary policy stimuli. 
Fourthly, the limited knock-on effect of the Turkish and Argentine crises to other emerging countries, in 
contrast to similar previous situations, also contributes to explaining why the slowdown in the world 
economy has been relatively mild. This phenomenon is all the more notable given that two relatively 
large countries of potentially systemic significance are involved. And particularly so Argentina, which 
was the biggest sovereign issuer among the emerging countries. 
The more orthodox and disciplined policies of the main emerging countries have been rewarded on 
this  occasion  by  the  international  financial  markets.  As  the  dispersion  of  spreads  testifies,  markets 
appear  to  have  increased  their  ability  to  discriminate  between  countries  with  better  and  worse 
fundamentals.  This  greater  ability  has  been  partly  due  to  increased  transparency  in  the  emerging 
countries  themselves,  as  a  result  of  reforms  in  recent  years  including  the  application  of  statistical 
codes and standards of good practice. It is also partly attributable to improved risk management by 
investors on international financial markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2002
 In sum, behind the greater resilience of the world economy in facing adversities, it appears there are 
positive factors which have tended to increase economies' capacity for spontaneous adjustment, the 
responsiveness  of  macroeconomic  policies  and  the  discipline  exerted  by  international  financial 
markets.  Hence  the  importance  of  persevering  in  the  coming  years  along  these  lines,  especially 
bearing in mind the growing economic and financial interdependence of different countries and regions 
and their exposure to global shocks. 
Euro area and monetary policy 
The euro area fell prone to the slowdown affecting the world economy in 2001, although the impact on 
the euro zone differed from that on other areas. 
The initial idea that the euro area could sustain growth on its own has not held up in reality. Indeed, 
some  particular  features  of  the  area  (such  as  the  notable  falling  off  of  residential  investment  in 
Germany) exacerbated the slowdown in activity in 2001. Nonetheless, the euro area does appear to 
be emerging from this slump relatively satisfactorily, helped by the absence of significant imbalances 
and by an economic policy response which have contributed to shortening the recessionary bout and 
tempering its impact on employment. 
At the onset of 2001 inflation was on a rising path, influenced by various essentially temporary factors 
such as dearer oil prices, crises in the meat industry and the depreciation of the euro. Its trajectory 
changed mid-year, partly following that of oil prices, and it fell to 2% in December. Although inflation 
stood above the 2% level throughout the year, medium-term inflation expectations broadly converged 
towards  levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  This  contributed  to  wage  moderation,  preventing  the 
temporary rebound in prices from having a durable effect on inflation. 
Thus, against a backdrop marked by the progressive slowdown in activity, by moderate cost pressures 
and by price expectations on the part of agents that coincided with the monetary authority’s targets, 
the inflation outlook improved as the year unfolded. 
The  monetary  policy  stance,  marked  by  the  tightening  carried  out  in  2000  in  a  very  different 
macroeconomic  setting,  gradually  became  accommodative  of  the  new  circumstances  and  several 
interest rate cuts were applied, proving conducive to the economic recovery. 
I  would  like  to  underscore  two  different  factors  that  were  pivotal  to  the  assessment  of  the  inflation 
outlook and the intensity of the monetary policy response in 2001. The first was wage moderation, and 
the second the reaction by the economic authorities to the attacks on 11th September, particularly in 
the  light  of  the  sizable  rise  in  economic  uncertainty  and  the  immediate  deterioration  of  confidence 
levels. The firm, concerted response by the monetary authorities in the main economic areas softened 
the initial impact on financial markets and meant that the effects on the world economy were relatively 
short-lived, though sharp, and confined to specific sectors. 
Broadly,  the  design  of  the  euro  area  members'  fiscal  policies  in  2001  prevented  expansionary 
discretionary measures being adopted. Such measures would have jeopardised the sustainability of 
recent fiscal consolidation achievements and, given the lag with which such measures operate, they 
could  have  had  a  counter-productive  effect  on  the  cyclical  stability  of  the  economies  in  the  area. 
However, the available estimates of the structural budget balance show that, at the aggregate level, 
there was a slight deterioration last year as a result of the tax cuts applied in certain countries before 
the cyclical weakening had become apparent. 
Further,  fiscal  results  have  shown  that,  in  certain  countries,  not  enough  room  for  manoeuvre  was 
available to absorb the budgetary effects of the slowdown without drawing too close to the limits set in 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Clearly,  in  such  cases  the  consolidation  drive  made  has  not  been 
sufficient to attain a balanced budgetary position. In this respect, it is of paramount importance that 
EMU members maintain the commitments entered into under the Pact and do so symmetrically, as 
reflected in the conclusions of the Barcelona Summit. 
The appropriate response by economic policies to the slowdown in 2001 has therefore contributed to 
the recovery of the European economy apparently under way since the beginning of the current year. 
The intensity and duration of this new phase of recovery will be influenced by conditioning factors that 
are largely external to the area, such as oil prices, or the sustainability of the US recovery, given the 
persistence of its financial imbalances. But, above all, a sound recovery will depend on the ability of 
European economies to underpin their growth with domestic factors supportive of robust investment 
that increases productive capital. 
BIS Review 38/2002 
 3
 The  monetary  policy  stance  should  be  tailored  to  the  prospects  of  maintaining  price  stability. 
Particularly important in this respect (besides oil prices, which have already hampered any reduction in 
inflation  in  the  first  half  of  the  year)  is  continuing  wage  moderation  which,  in  some  countries,  is 
beginning to be questioned. 
The  single  market  and  monetary  union  provide  the  European  economy  with  a  particularly  suitable 
framework for developing its growth potential and for consolidating it as one of the central pivots of the 
world  economy.  Notwithstanding,  the  area  still  lacks  sufficient  flexibility  and  innovative  capacity  to 
compete satisfactorily  with other more dynamic areas, mainly  in the more technologically  advanced 
industries. The Barcelona Summit has clearly shown the ability of the European authorities to pinpoint 
key issues and to design a blueprint for reforms (of differing ambition but of equal importance) that will 
make  Europe  a  more  dynamic  economy.  While  greater  ambition  would  conceivably  have  been 
desirable, meeting the targets laid down in Barcelona on schedule would entail a qualitative change of 
enormous importance. 
The Spanish economy 
The  weakening  of  the  international  economy  and  the  loss  of  buoyancy  in  the  European  economy 
contributed in 2001 to prolonging the gradual slowdown in activity in Spain in train since the previous 
year, when the first symptoms of the previous lengthy expansionary phase having run its course were 
discerned. Consumption and investment in construction were the main underpinnings of growth in our 
economy,  while  productive  investment  and  exports  were  the  chief  components  dampening  it.  That 
said, GDP increased by 2.8% in 2001, clearly above the figure of 1.5% posted in the euro area. 
The  maintenance  of  high  job  creation  rates  during  2001,  set  against  the  slowing  trend  marked  by 
general developments in the economy, and the favourable financial conditions in place contributed to 
sustaining  household  income  and  helped  underpin  consumer  spending  and  residential  investment. 
However,  the  declining  course  of  investment  in  capital  goods  steepened  in  the  face  of  heightening 
uncertainty,  worsening  expectations  and  slowing  final  demand,  which  the  generous  financial 
conditions were unable to offset. The effects on activity were reinforced by the fall in the growth rate of 
exports as from the early months of 2001. 
In  any  event,  the  trends  apparent  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  2002  (namely  greater  growth  in  the 
economy  in  quarter-on-quarter  terms  but  with  something  of  a  loss  of  steam  in  job  creation  and  in 
consumption,  accompanied  by  a  check  on  the  rate  of  decline  of  investment  and  continuing 
sluggishness  in  exports)  are  consistent  with  a  scenario  of  gradual  recovery,  but  fail  to  dispel  the 
uncertainty over its intensity and scale. 
The profile of the Spanish inflation rate during 2001 was similar to that in the euro area as a whole, 
albeit maintaining a positive gap. After rising in the opening months, in the wake of dearer food and 
energy product prices, inflation dipped appreciably in the second half of the year, largely due to the 
course of oil prices on international markets. At the end of 2001 it stood at 2.7% in year-on-year terms. 
However, the initial data for 2002 have shown a more marked rebound in the 12-month growth rate of 
consumer prices than that recorded in the euro area as a whole, due partly to temporary factors that 
should be reabsorbed in the coming months. 
Of  concern  to  us  is  the  persistence  in  the  Spanish  economy  of  inflationary  biases  reflected  in  the 
inflation  gap  with  the  euro  area,  especially  when  they  are  manifest  in  the  behaviour  of  unit  labour 
costs. I shall refer to the risks this entails later. 
The change in the cyclical pattern of the Spanish economy 
As I said at the outset, these features of the recent slowdown in the Spanish economy have shown up 
a different pattern of behaviour than that followed in previous cycles. The factors accounting for this 
change are related both to the conditions of greater macroeconomic stability attained by the Spanish 
economy in its convergence towards and integration into the euro area, and to the progress made in 
terms  of  structural  reforms.  These  factors  have  had  a  bearing  both  on  the  balanced  nature  of  the 
upturn in the second half of the nineties and on the mildness of the recent deceleration. 
The  greater  macroeconomic  stability  has  been  underpinned,  as  is  known,  by  a  notable  fiscal 
consolidation  drive  and  by  wage  moderation.  In  the  upturn,  these  conditions  provided  the  economy 
with  a  most  significant  expansionary  boost,  prompting  rapid  convergence  towards  the  real  income 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2002
 levels  of  the  core  European  countries,  without  this  translating  into  the  emergence  of  significant 
macroeconomic imbalances. During the more recent phase of lower economic growth, the absence of 
imbalances  left  over  from  the  expansionary  phase  continuing  favourable  monetary  conditions  have 
tempered the intensity of the adjustment, allowing real convergence to continue. 
The presence of a credible environment of price stability and fiscal equilibrium is a necessary condition 
for  further  headway  in  real  convergence  by  the  Spanish  economy,  as  it  moves  into  a  phase  of 
recovery. Consequently, particular attention must be paid to the fiscal policy stance and to monetary 
and financial conditions. 
The  year  2001  saw  the  attainment  of  a  balanced  budget,  without  the  slowdown  in  the  Spanish 
economy  preventing  strict  compliance  with  the  commitments  made  under  the  Stability  Programme, 
consistent  with  the  requirements  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Last  year,  moreover,  new  fiscal 
discipline  measures  were  adopted  which  will  contribute  to  maintaining  sound  public  finances  in  the 
medium term. I refer here  to the budgetary stability  legislation  and to the new  regional government 
financing  arrangements,  which  increase  the  degree  of  fiscal  co-responsibility  of  the  regional 
governments under the transparency requirements demanded of general government. 
I have already mentioned that monetary and financial conditions in the Spanish economy were more 
generous than in the rest  of the  euro  area, although the significance of this difference lessened  as 
demand lost momentum. The credit aggregates grew at high rates for the third year running. That said, 
they did slow during the year, in step with cyclical developments, although this remains insufficient. 
The  growth  of  financing  to  Spanish  households  and  corporations  translated  last  year  into  a  fresh 
increase in this sector’s debt as a percentage of GDP, with the rise in lending to households for house 
purchases proving particularly notable. The greater ease with which the private sector has been able 
to  finance  its  spending  decisions  has  contributed  to  limiting  the  depth  of  the  ongoing  cyclical 
slowdown, but at the expense of incurring high debt levels. The increase in private debt is a logical 
response to the new setting of lower interest rates in the Spanish economy, but it has also increased 
the exposure of this sector to potential adversities. 
As  the  expansionary  effects  of  this  process  of  adaptation  by  our  economy  to  the  new  environment 
ease off, progress towards real convergence at similar rates to those at present will require that growth 
be underpinned by more stable factors. 
Main challenges facing the Spanish economy 
This overall positive assessment of the Spanish economy, even during the recent slowdown, should 
nonetheless  not  conceal  the  presence  of  certain  rather  unsatisfactory  aspects.  These  include  the 
positive gap with the euro area in terms of price and cost growth, the flatness of investment in capital 
goods and low productivity gains. To further real convergence, these problems must be overcome. 
In this connection, economic policy action should be geared primarily to promoting competitiveness, in 
the broadest sense of the term, where aspects linked to the behaviour of prices and costs combine 
with others related to growth potential. 
Regarding  the  behaviour  of  prices,  and  despite  the  substantial  progress  made  towards  nominal 
stability since the mid-nineties, the persistence of an inflation differential with the euro area poses risks 
in respect of future competitiveness. The wage restraint characterising the most recent phase of the 
Spanish  economy  has  passed  through  unevenly  to  the  sectors  exposed  to  competition  and  those 
sheltered  from  it.  In  the  exposed  sectors,  price  increases  cannot  be  far  removed  from  those  made 
abroad,  whereas  in  the  sheltered  sectors  there  has  been  a  continuous  tendency  to  widen  margins, 
irrespective of where the economy is in the cycle. Hence, the combination of a rather inflexible wage 
structure  and  still-insufficient  competition  in  certain  services  sectors  has  led  to  the  phenomenon  of 
dual inflation, which feeds the inflation gap with the euro area. 
Another fundamental variable for the economy's competitiveness is productivity, although it is difficult 
to measure and interpret. Clearly, what lies behind the low labour productivity gains in recent years is 
the beneficial effect of employment-promoting policies, which have raised the economy's employment-
generating  capacity.  However,  research  indicates  that  such  low  gains  may  also  be  reflecting  a  low 
increase in certain components of the stock of capital and an insufficient incorporation of technological 
progress. 
BIS Review 38/2002 
 5
 The  most  significant  means  of  expanding  the  economy's  growth  potential  has  therefore  been  the 
incorporation  of  workers  into  the  labour  force.  This  is  a  suitable  way  to  improve  the  Spanish 
economy’s endowment and utilisation of productive factors, and should be maintained. But it cannot 
be the sole avenue. In parallel, investment must be bolstered, especially in those forms of capital most 
conducive  to  the  incorporation  of  technical  progress  and  innovation.  Policies  supportive  of  a  more 
flexible and efficient corporate environment and aimed at the better functioning of the economy must 
also be persevered with. 
The investment in new technologies in recent years has already had a positive influence on Spanish 
productivity,  although  its  overall  effects  have  been  blurred  by  the  less  dynamic  behaviour  of  other 
types of investment. Looking ahead, a step-up in investment in technological capital will require the 
complementary  promotion  of  investment  in  human  capital  and  in  capital  goods  to  help  spread 
innovation across the economy as a whole. 
As regards policies aimed at promoting market flexibility and efficiency, the liberalising momentum of 
the  reforms  undertaken  must  be  carried  further.  The  Annual  Report  underscores  the  advisability  of 
land market reform, given its consequences for the formation of real estate prices and costs and its 
influence  on  labour  mobility.  It  further  stresses  the  need  to  pursue  liberalisation  and  competition 
policies in the network industries (telecommunications, electricity, transport and distribution, etc.), as 
the benefits of better workings here will spread to all productive activities. 
In the labour market, the persistently high ratio of temporary to permanent employees alongside a high 
unemployment level (especially among certain groups), with labour shortages in certain industries and 
regions,  highlights  the  need  to  press  ahead  with  reform.  In  particular,  the  incentives  for  effective 
participation in the labour market must be further improved, as must the decentralisation of collective 
bargaining, so that it is better suited to the conditions firms face and to workers' characteristics. 
To conclude this part of my address, let me stress the importance of building on the balanced budget 
obtained  in  2001  by  introducing  improvements  into  the  structural  aspects  of  general  government 
conduct.  Public  spending  must  be  increasingly  efficient,  so  that  it  contributes  to  increasing  the 
economy's stock of capital and productivity. Moreover, the necessary adjustments should be made so 
that  due attention to the growing demands that  will  be made of the public sector as a result of the 
ageing of the population (to cover pensions, health, care for the aged, etc.) will not lead in the long run 
to situations jeopardising public finances. 
Financial stability 
I shall devote the second part of my address to financial stability. From this perspective, I shall discuss 
the  main  consequences  of  some  of  the  earlier-mentioned  shocks  the  international  financial  system 
underwent last year. 
I should  like to  begin  with  some reflections  drawn from the crises experienced  by certain emerging 
countries.  First,  let  me  mention  the  importance  of  compatibility  between  the  exchange  rate  regime 
chosen  by  a  country  and  its  overall  economic  policies  and  institutional  structure.  No  exchange  rate 
regime  can,  on  its  own,  protect  an  economy  from  financial  crises  if  it  is  not  accompanied  by 
appropriate and coherent policies. 
A  second  reflection  is  that  the  presence  of  and  adherence  to  a  legally  sound,  open  and  stable 
institutional framework that is respectful of creditors' and debtors' rights is the only way to generate the 
confidence and support of international financial markets in such a way that domestic saving shortfalls 
may be financed. 
My third reflection considers the need for clear, credible criteria beforehand as to how to distribute the 
costs  of  crises.  Such  criteria  should  strike  a  balance  between  both  domestic  and  foreign  private 
creditors. 
Coverage  of  the  shocks  experienced  by  the  international  financial  system  last  year  would  be 
incomplete  without  some  reference  to  the  set  of  shortcomings  highlighted  in  the  so-called  ENRON 
case,  which  goes  beyond  the  particular  scope  of  this  company  and  reveals  weaknesses  of  a more 
institutional  and  systemic  nature.  These  events  were  significant  since  they  showed  that,  even  in 
economies  with  more  sophisticated  institutional  arrangements,  some  types  of  conduct  with  great 
destabilising potential may occur. The ENRON case was important not only in quantitative terms but 
also,  and  especially,  in  qualitative  terms,  witnessing  a  series  of  legally  dubious  practices  which  go 
beyond  the  strictly  financial  field:  conflicts  of  interest,  serious  corporate  governance  shortcomings, 
6 
 BIS Review 38/2002
 excessively ad-hoc accounting  practices deviating from prudential  principles and from what is a fair 
view  of  the  real  economic  situation,  manipulation  of  information,  etc.  And  all  this  set  against  the 
inoperativeness of the internal and external control mechanisms of the company. 
We have thus been faced with a broad litany of serious problems affecting many of the institutional 
requirements and elements that are so vital for maintaining confidence, for the efficient allocation of 
resources, for the orderly working of any financial system and for the effective supervision thereof. 
I  shall  return  to  these  matters  later.  But  let  me  first  say  that,  faced  with  the  above-mentioned 
multifarious shocks, the international financial system showed a capacity for resilience that should be 
viewed as highly satisfactory. It is not easy to assess which factors have contributed to increasing, and 
to what extent, such resilience. 
Among them, however, mention should be made of the following: the priority given to stability by many 
monetary and fiscal authorities during the preceding long expansionary phase; the improved workings 
of more integrated and better informed international financial markets with increasingly flexible trading 
systems;  the  high  levels  of  solvency,  via  own  funds  and  provisions,  attained  by  banks  during  the 
previous upturn, which has made it easier to soak up the losses now arising; and, finally, the advances 
made by many banks in risk management, providing for better risk identification and monitoring, risk 
diversification and the reallocation of risk towards final investors, on increasingly efficient derivatives 
markets. 
Despite the resilience of the international financial system, both the independent developments within 
the  system  and  the  aforementioned  events  which  perturbed  the  markets  have  repercussions  for 
banking  supervision.  These  are  worthy  of  mention.  Before  doing  so,  however,  I  shall  offer  a  brief 
overview of the financial situation last year in Spain. 
Spanish banking system 
Inevitably,  the  Spanish  financial  system  was  affected  during  2001,  albeit  unevenly,  by  the 
aforementioned shocks. The economic slowdown throughout the year translated into a lesser rate of 
banking  activity  than  in  previous  years,  resulting  in  growth  in  total  assets  of  7.3%  in  consolidated 
terms. Though below this, the growth rate of credit remained high, especially in respect of mortgage 
lending, which made for an increase in the level of debt and, in turn, saw credit markets gain weight 
relative to securities markets. 
The  Spanish  banking  system  was  scarcely  affected  by  the  shocks  discussed  earlier,  with  the 
exception of the Argentine crisis, whose repercussions were more telling. 
Notwithstanding,  our  banks  are  weathering  the  storm  caused  by  the  Argentine  crisis  thanks  to  an 
appropriate and prudent provisioning policy.  Although this has meant reduced earnings, these have 
still continued to outgrow those of most of the major international banks. 
The cyclical turnaround has also led to an increase in bad loans.  Yet owing to  the relatively strong 
growth of credit, this has not been reflected in default ratios, which have held at historical lows. The 
solvency of Spanish banking institutions was bolstered last year, breaking with the trend seen since 
1997,  although  this  improvement  is  mainly  attributable  to  secondary  capital.  As  a  result,  credit 
institutions'  capital  adequacy  ratio  stands  three  percentage  points  above  the  regulatory  minimum, 
calculated  in accordance  with  Spanish rules, and almost five percentage points higher according to 
the criteria of the Basel Banking Supervision Committee. 
As a result of the lower rate of banking activity, combined with the impact of the crisis in Argentina, 
with the consequences of the full implementation of the statistical provision and with the unfavourable 
performance  of  stock  markets,  the  growth  of  net  attributable  earnings  after  tax  declined  to  6.9%  in 
2001. Although this growth is but one-third of that posted the previous year, compared with our peer 
countries  it  may  be  viewed  as  satisfactory.  This  result  has  been  possible  thanks  to  the  favourable 
contribution of the traditional business segment in Spain. Reversing the trend of prior years, the net 
interest margin picked up slightly while operating expenses fell. As a consequence of the foregoing, 
the fall in the return on equity was cushioned. 
Spanish  banks  have  thus  successfully  negotiated  a  relatively  difficult  year.  Contributing  to  this, 
undoubtedly,  have  been  the  improvements  during  the  lengthy  expansion  in  general  and  risk 
management, in the containment of costs and in the reinforcement of solvency. These improvements 
should be built on. Regarding this latter issue, I wish to highlight the significant stabilising role that the 
BIS Review 38/2002 
 7
 so-called statistical provision has begun to play. The provision is designed to promote the provisioning 
of the foreseeable losses generated by credit risk at the time this risk is assumed, and not when, years 
later,  such  losses  begin  to  emerge,  frequently  on  the  downward  track  of  the  cycle  when  activity  is 
lower and the profit and loss account is weakened. 
I shall conclude this section  with a reference to the  position  in  2001 of Spanish securities markets. 
Apart  from  the  decline  in  equity  indices  and  trading  in  favour  of  fixed  income,  I  might  mention  the 
significant  headway  made  in  market  integration,  which  crystallised  in  the  creation  of  a  holding 
company  grouping  all  existing  secondary  and  derivatives  markets,  together  with  all  the  securities 
clearing  and  settlement  systems. This  process  of  vertical  integration  will  enable  the  unquestionable 
economies of scale and scope offered by the securities industry  in  Spain to  be harnessed, thereby 
enhancing their efficiency and strengthening their competitive position on the international stage. 
Banking supervision 
I shall commence the final part of my address, dedicated to banking supervision, with a summary of 
events last year in both the international and the Spanish financial system. 
Given  the  speed  of  change  in  the  financial  environment,  supervision  requires  an  ongoing  effort  to 
improve and adapt itself to changing circumstances. This means proving equal to market innovations, 
developments  and  trends,  but  also  involves  being  more  attentive  and  sensitive  to  the  changes  that 
arise in the demands society makes of the financial system and its supervisors. 
Accordingly, as supervisors we should test principles, theories and procedures against the reality of 
events in financial systems. Both within and outside Spain, last year provided us with representative 
cases  of  weaknesses  that  leave  no  room  for  complacency  and  which  require  fresh  thought  and 
responses. The rest of my speech will deal with these aspects. 
Let  me  begin  by  noting  that  no  new  initiative  it  is  sought  to  take  in  this  field  may  be  considered  in 
isolation.  It  must  be  part  of  a  two-dimensional  framework.  First  is  the  matter  of  international  co-
ordination, since in markets as interrelated as is currently the case, the stability and behaviour of the 
system has an international facet. And second is the multi-disciplinary dimension, since, as revealed 
by the welter of problems I discussed in connection with the ENRON case, it is becoming increasingly 
evident that no banking supervision model may be expected to be efficient if the rest of the institutional 
apparatus underpinning the rationale of the market economy does not function properly. 
Among  these  institutional  underpinnings,  there  are  two  which,  although  they  affect  all  companies,  I 
consider  to  be  of  particular  importance  for  the  workings  of  credit  institutions  and  for  their  proper 
supervision. 
The first  is  the  need  to  reinforce market  discipline.  On  the  basis  of  adequate,  reliable  and  updated 
information compiled by companies, duly verified by independent auditors and impartially evaluated by 
analysts and rating agencies, such discipline should simultaneously act as a deterrent to and penalise 
imprudent, inappropriate or simply mistaken behaviour. 
The  second  concerns  strengthening  corporate  governance.  Banking  supervision  cannot  and  should 
not  replace  company  directors  and  senior  managers  in  the  performance  of  their  functions  or  the 
discharging  of  their  responsibilities.  Naturally,  then,  the  contribution  of  bank  directors  and  senior 
managers is essential if sounder, more stable and more efficient systems are to be attained. 
Achieving  appropriate  corporate  governance  standards  contributes  to  corporate  health,  increases 
market confidence and promotes efficiency in the economy in general. Legislators, supervisors and, 
above  all,  entities  themselves  should  promote  the  sound  functioning  of  companies  through  the 
following  key  aspects:  management  transparency;  the  reliability  and  integrity  of  accounting 
information; the protection of shareholders; and the appropriate treatment of conflicts of interest. Also 
vital are the accountability of boards of directors and the suitability of their composition and procedural 
rules; guarantees that key decisions are adopted by the appropriate collegiate bodies and then duly 
recorded  and  conveyed  to  the  market  with  sufficient  transparency;  and  the  setting  up  of  audit, 
remuneration or appointment committees with clear objectives so as to ensure their effectiveness. 
To be effective, the adoption of any code in this area should be supported by appropriate structures 
and  procedures.  It  will  also  require  substantial  participation  and  commitment  by  the  company's 
directors  and  managers.  Specifically,  I  should  like  to  stress  the  importance  for  good  corporate 
8 
 BIS Review 38/2002
 governance  of  an  audit  committee  that  is  suitably  composed  and  committed  and  on  which  non-
executive directors form the majority. 
As  a  complement  to  a  good  corporate  governance  structure,  credit  institutions  should  be  equipped 
with a sound risk culture. Such a culture should infuse the design and workings of the organisation 
and its management criteria, systems and methods; it should be founded on control procedures whose 
reliability  has  been  duly  tested;  and  its  application  should  be  overseen  by  departments  possessing 
sufficient power and independence. All this should be substantiated by internal and external auditors 
and be highly visible to the market. 
Finally, I would like to stress the need for all types of financial institutions to apply due diligence. They 
should know their clients and systematically monitor their operations so they might prevent, and where 
necessary curb, not only money laundering and the funding of terrorism but also any other attempt to 
use  the  financial  system  for  illegal  or  unethical  purposes.  Beyond  the  obligation  all  individuals  and 
corporations have to observe and comply with the law, good practices in this area have an important 
supervisory dimension, as they play a decisive role when preventing or curbing such serious risks as 
those pertaining to reputation, legal risk, and so on. 
Despite  the  unquestionable  importance  of  market  discipline  and  good  corporate  governance,  these 
are complements to banking supervision  and, therefore, cannot replace  it  in respect of its essential 
task, namely "to promote the sound functioning and stability of the financial system", as stipulated in 
article  7  of  our  Law  of  Autonomy.  Without  exceeding  the  terms  of  this  legal  mandate,  proper 
compliance requires, as I stated earlier, that banking supervision should be able to adapt to changes 
in its environment. 
One  group  of  these  changes  covers  aspects  such  as  financial  innovation,  concentration  and 
internationalisation,  i.e.  all  developments  present  in  the  system  and  the  attendant  trends.  Banking 
supervision must know how to capture and interpret the latter, as part of a threefold aim: to encourage 
their positive aspects; to eliminate, or at least minimise, processes which may prove harmful; and to 
adapt its own procedures to new circumstances. Only in this way will banking supervision, observing 
to the full the system's underlying rationale and the initiative of its agents, be able to avoid or correct, 
at the lowest possible cost, the imperfections of the markets, especially the externalities that may harm 
third parties. 
The second no less important group of changes to which banking supervision must adapt is in relation 
to the demands posed by society. I consider two such demands to be particularly significant. The first 
is  the  growing  social  demand  that  supervision  should  promote  not  only  sound,  stable  and  efficient 
financial systems but systems, moreover, which are governed by increasingly stricter codes of conduct 
giving  rise  to  practices  and  conduct  subject  to  ever-higher  standards.  Among  the  practical 
consequences  of  this  demand  are,  among  others,  improvements  in  transparency,  in  corporate 
governance and in banks’ knowledge of their clients, as I mentioned earlier. 
On the basis of these tenets, and within the framework of international co-ordination I have referred to, 
banking systems as internationalised, interdependent, liberalised, dynamic and complex as those at 
present require an increasingly less intrusive and more incentives-based form of regulation, along with 
more preventive supervision. To achieve such regulation and supervision we are, at the national and 
international levels, setting aside ever more resources. 
The  relevance  of  all  these  matters  has  been  duly  reflected  in  the  work  of  different  groups  at  the 
international 
level,  addressing  the  associated  accounting,  financial  regulation  and  corporate 
governance  facets.  In  the  EU,  we  may  mention  the  action  envisaged  under  the  Financial  Services 
Action Plan, or the work of groups such as the High Level Group of Company Law Experts. And in the 
international domain we have the work of the International Accounting Standards Board. In Spain the 
Financial  Law,  currently  under  passage  through  Parliament,  heralds  many  improvements,  one  of 
which is particularly significant for banking supervision. This is, namely, the possibility of considering 
as  a  breach  of  disciplinary  rules  the  situation  whereby  a  credit  institution’s  solvency  and  viability  is 
jeopardised  by  administrative  or  accounting  shortcomings  or  deficiencies  in  internal  control 
procedures, including those relating to risk management. 
The methodology known as Supervision of Banking Activity under the Risk Approach, on which the 
Banco de España has been working, provides a framework suited to meeting the challenges posed to 
Spanish banking supervision by the aforementioned aspects. The Banco de España will assign more 
resources  to  complementing  traditional  supervision  with  the  evaluation  of  the  foregoing  qualitative 
BIS Review 38/2002 
 9
 aspects, including corporate governance codes of practice, procedures and structures. The results of 
this evaluation will bear on our determination of each institution’s risk profile. 
Let me conclude this section with a reference to the greater demands made of supervisors by society 
for  information  and  transparency.  The  obligation  of  professional  secrecy  imposed  on  supervises  by 
national  and  international  standards  and  the  necessary  discretion  with  which  constructive  banking 
supervision must be pursued are compatible with greater supervisory transparency. Indeed, that will 
allow for better knowledge, and thus control, of what are, at each moment in time, the priority goals of 
supervision, the problems it faces, the procedures to which it resorts, the means it assigns and the 
resulting measures drawing the foregoing elements together. In order to meet this - in my view - fully 
legitimate demand, and to foment knowledge and discussion on these matters, a Banking Supervision 
Report, which is at an advanced age of preparation, is shortly to be released. This will complement the 
new publication "Estabilidad Financiera" ("Financial Stability") launched in September last year. 
In our capacity  as a  Eurosystem central bank to  which additional functions  of great  importance are 
entrusted, we continued to make progress in 2001 along the lines marked out for the future last year. 
Major changes have been initiated in the areas of human resources management and technology, and 
the  directorates  banking  supervision,  internal  audit,  administration  and  works,  note  issuance  and 
circulation, and control and accounting have been reorganised. 
In all these changes, the collaboration of the Bank's staff has been excellent. I should thus first thank 
the Deputy-Governor and the Directors-General for their support and co-operation and, on their behalf, 
express  our  profound  gratitude  to  all  the  Bank's  staff  for  their  positive  attitude  and  hard  work. 
Particular acknowledgment is due to all those who, directly or indirectly, participated in the physical 
introduction of the euro. Without their dedication and effort, the success of the changeover would not 
have been possible. 
Finally, let me convey my gratitude to all the members of this Council for their invaluable support and 
co-operation.  Their  contributions  have  been  fundamental  in  ensuring  collegiate  decision-making, 
adding depth and quality to the process. 
10 
 BIS Review 38/2002
