 Hermann Remsperger: Economic outlook and economic policy challenges for 
Germany 
Guest lecture by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), Oslo, 23 September 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Yesterday, we elected a new parliament in Germany. As you are aware, economic matters played a 
key role in the election campaign. I would like to take up some of these matters today in Oslo. Under 
the heading “Economic outlook and economic policy challenges for Germany”, I would like, first, to talk 
to  you about the reforms that  are needed on the labour market as well  as in tax and social  policy. 
Second, I shall also ask the question of whether we need a new policy mix. And, finally, I shall look at 
the eastward enlargement of the European Union as a major economic policy challenge. 
My  simple  proposition  is  that  Germany’s  economic  outlook  depends  foremost  on  coping  with  the 
existing  economic  policy  challenges.  I  am  arguing  in  favour  of  domestic  reforms  in  Germany,  for 
careful handling of EU and EMU enlargement and for maintaining the fiscal policy rules in the policy 
mix of European Economic and Monetary Union. Not least, these rules have to be applied in such a 
way that “budgetary exuberance” is avoided in an upswing. 
I am therefore less concerned  with short-term cyclical movements than  with medium and  long-term 
economic trends in Germany. For this reason, I shall start by looking back and, in doing so, have to 
state  that  Germany’s  economic  development  over  the  past  decade  has  often  tended  to  be 
disappointing by international standards. 
A look back 
I.  
In  saying  that,  there  was  indeed  some  cause  for  optimism  at  the  start  of  the  1990s:  German 
unification, the opening-up of the east European markets, progress in European integration and, later, 
the introduction of the new currency provided a wealth of opportunities for growth. However, at least in 
some cases, things did not quite work out as had been hoped. 
Since the reunification boom petered out, Germany has been part of the group of countries with weak 
growth. While  the  GDP  of  the  present  EMU  countries  has  risen  by  a  total  of  15%  since  1995,  the 
corresponding figure for Germany is no more than 10%. In line with this, the annual average rate of 
growth  in  Germany,  at  a  good  1½%,  has  been  lagging  ¾  percentage  point  behind.  Comparing 
Germany with the euro area as a whole excluding Germany, the German shortfall in growth increases 
to just over 1 percentage point. In 2001, taken on its own, the figure was as much as 1½ percentage 
points. 
Now,  there  are  some  commentators  here  and  there  who  ascribe  this  performance  to  increasing 
globalisation. However, this argument does not hold up under closer examination. Following a period 
of  export  weakness  in  the  early  1990s,  the  German  economy  achieved  extremely  good  results  in 
foreign trade between 1994 and 2001. Given an overall moderate growth in GDP during the period 
mentioned of 14½%, real exports increased by 79½% and real imports by 67½%. 
One  of  the  factors  contributing  to  the  positive  development  in  exports  since  the  mid-1990s  was 
improved  price  competitiveness  of  the  German  business  sector.  This  meant  that  earlier  adverse 
developments were largely reversed. In the early 1990s, by contrast, price competitiveness had been 
severely affected by large wage increases, not least as a result of bringing pay in eastern Germany 
more closely in line with west German rates and also due to the sharp appreciation of the D-Mark. 
Although the German economy has become more dependent on other countries, it has to be said that 
most  of  the  structural  problems  in  Germany  cannot  be  blamed  on  developments  in  the  global 
economy. They are mainly home-made. 
Among other things, cyclical influences and special factors have contributed to Germany’s relatively 
poor performance in the euro area. Above all, it should be remembered that, already in the run-up to 
Stage  Three  of  European  monetary  union,  interest  rates  had  fallen  sharply  in  a  number  of  EU 
countries with previously fairly high short and long-term rates of interest. For example, interest rates 
BIS Review 55/2002 
 1
 for long-term government bonds in Italy and Spain, even in 1995, were 5 to 6 percentage points higher 
than the rates for German Federal Bonds. Besides, improved fundamentals, market expectations of an 
early  participation  in  monetary  union  are  likely  to  have  played  an  important  role  in  the  interest  rate 
convergence  process.  As  the  home  of  the  former  anchor  currency  in  the  ERM,  Germany  did  not 
benefit directly from this process of interest rate convergence. 
Another cause of relatively weak growth in Germany to be mentioned is, of course, the crisis in the 
construction  industry,  especially  in  eastern  Germany.  In  this  sector,  the  capacity  that  was  built  up 
immediately  after  reunification  exceeded  the  longer-term  ability  of  the  real  estate  market  to  absorb 
such capacity. Reduced construction activity depressed German economic growth. Without the decline 
in investment in construction since the mid-1990s, the shortfall in German growth compared with the 
euro area as a whole would therefore not have been so substantial. By contrast, construction activity 
in other European countries remained an important pillar of economic growth. 
Finally, consideration also has to be given to the fact that living standards in the monetary union are 
still very disparate. Since the poorer countries are supposed to catch up with the EMU average, they 
have to go on growing more strongly than those countries which have already achieved a high level of 
income. A comparatively low level of growth in an already advanced country should therefore not have 
too much importance attached to it. 
Labour market problems 
II. 
One very important - if not the most important - reason for the inadequate pace of economic growth in 
Germany  is  the  continuing  heavy  burden  of  taxes  and  social  security  contributions  as  well  as  strict 
regulations in parts of the economy. However, these reasons cannot explain the differentials in growth 
among  the  core  countries  of  European  Union,  which  have  similarly  serious  deficiencies  in  terms  of 
reform. Rather, they are a major cause of the shortfall in growth vis-à-vis the United States. Above all, 
there is too little labour market flexibility in Germany. Also, wage rate policy was indeed characterised 
by restraint in the second half of the 1990s, but its overall stance was, at best, neutral. Furthermore, 
differentiating pay in terms of skills, sectors and regions is not enough. Wage policy did not make a 
major contribution to the creation of new jobs. 
In periods of a cyclical downswing, the rise in unemployment in Germany was far sharper than the fall 
during periods when there was an upturn. For instance, the number of people out of work in western 
Germany  rose  from  its  cyclical  low  point  between  1991  and  1997  by  some  1.3  million  to  around 
2.5 million. By 2001, the number of unemployed had been reduced by no more than just over half a 
million. An additional factor to contribute to the high level of persistent unemployment is that, as firms 
see it, the skills to work evidently decrease the longer unemployment lasts. 
For non-working members of the labour force, the incentives to take up employment were limited by 
the high-level marginal burden imposed by taxes and other public levies. Most types of household in 
Germany  have  a  marginal  burden  of  taxes  and  levies  of  50%  or  more.  In  other  words,  from  every 
additional euro that is earned, around 50 cents are deducted. Moreover, social benefits which are at a 
high level by international standards act as a reservation wage. In Germany, it is difficult, especially for 
low-skilled persons, to find a suitable job. The “wedge” between gross and net wages also led to the 
emergence of a considerable black economy. 
Furthermore,  the  skills  profile  of  those  seeking  work  often  fails  to  match  that  of  the  jobs  on  offer. 
Unemployment would thus remain high even if the number of vacancies corresponded to the number 
of people looking for work. The German labour market is characterised by a high level of mismatch 
unemployment. The proposals of the Hartz Commission,  which  was set up by the previous Federal 
Government, and the embryonic reform of the labour exchanges, which is already under way, are an 
attempt to tackle that situation and to increase the efficiency of the job placement process. 
The  most  pressing  tasks  of  labour  market  policy  from  my  point  of  view  can  be  split  into  three 
categories: first, measures to increase the supply of labour; second, proposals on strengthening the 
demand for labour and, third, changes in the wage-formation process. 
One  of  the  things  to  be  examined  with  regard  to  increasing  the  labour  supply  is  whether,  say,  the 
period of time for drawing unemployment benefits does not lead to people remaining in unemployment 
longer than is  absolutely  necessary.  As I  have mentioned,  in  empirical terms, it is evident from the 
perspective  of  the  enterprises  that  the  skills  of  the  unemployed  rapidly  lose  their  value  the  longer 
unemployment  continues.  For  that  reason,  purportedly  generous  arrangements  may  even  become 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2002
 “poverty traps” for the unemployed. Combining social assistance and unemployment assistance also 
has to be considered. Neither of these types of state benefit is an insurance benefit. Rather, they are 
granted according to specific need. They should therefore be merged. 
Many experts agree that the demand for labour in Germany also suffers from the very complex legal 
arrangements relating to work contracts. Enterprises are so cautious in recruiting labour because it is 
so difficult to make redundancies. 
If there is to be a sustained decline in unemployment, some elements of the wage-formation process 
have to be subjected to more scrutiny. Collective pay agreements should set only general framework 
conditions in order to take greater account of the individual situation in which firms find themselves. 
We should now  admittedly not  overlook the fact that initial cautious steps have already been taken 
towards making the German labour market more flexible. The strict principle of regionally agreed pay 
deals  has  already  been  relaxed  somewhat  by  opt-out  and  opt-in  arrangements.  Furthermore,  the 
labour market has been made more adaptable with the extension of part-time work. Finally, with the 
help  of  Germany’s  training  system  it  has  been  possible  to  keep  youth  unemployment  at  a 
comparatively low level by European standards. According to Eurostat figures, the unemployment rate 
among under-25-year-olds amounted most recently to 9.3%, compared with 16.4% in the euro area as 
a whole. 
Tax and social policies 
III. 
All things considered, the underlying conditions for the German economy have also been improved by 
the  tax  reform  that  was  adopted  two  years  ago.  For  incorporated  enterprises,  corporation  tax  was 
lowered from 40% for retained profits (and 30% for distributed profits) to 25%. For non-corporations, 
the previous burden imposed by trade tax has largely been removed. Furthermore, their situation is 
also being eased by the fact that the income tax scale is to be lowered in stages until 2005. 
The  tax  reform  makes  restructuring  in  the  corporate  sector  easier  because  profits  from  sales  of 
corporations’  participating  interests are no longer subject to taxation.  However,  the tax depreciation 
facilities for spending on fixed assets have been made worse. 
There has been progress in Germany in the field of old-age pension provisions. The pension reform, 
which was adopted last year, pursues two objectives simultaneously. First, payments under the state 
pay-as-you-go  scheme  are  being  cut  back,  and,  second,  private  provision  is  being  strengthened. 
Pension  increases  over  the  coming  years  will  remain  below  the  level  of  increases  in  wages  and 
salaries.  This  means  that,  in  the  long  term,  the  increase  in  the  contribution  rate  will  be  around 
1½ percentage points lower than would otherwise have been the case. 
The pension reform will mainly benefit the younger generations. They will gain from the lower burden 
of contributions. They will have greater scope for making their own provision. For those who are older, 
however, the cutbacks in payments will weigh more heavily. 
The promotion of private old-age pension provisions nevertheless entails considerable burdens for the 
public sector budgets. Furthermore, what is known as the “Riester pension” has been constricted by a 
set  of  fairly  tight  regulations.  The  stock  of  capital  that  has  been  saved  up  may  be  paid  out,  for 
example,  only  in  regular  and  life-long  instalments.  In  contrast  to  this,  at  company  level,  a  flexible 
instrument  has  been  created  in  the  form  of  the  pension  fund.  Not  only  does  this  allow  largely  free 
decisions  on  investment,  it  also  makes  defined  contributions  possible  for  the  first  time.  Precisely 
because of the associated fiscal strains, there is hardly likely to be a significant increase in national 
savings as a result of this reform. However, Germany as a location for investment will probably play a 
greater role in future in the increasingly important market for pension products. 
All  things  considered,  there  has  indeed  been  some  economic  policy  progress  in  Germany. 
Unfortunately, it has been moving forward at no more than a snail’s pace. There is still much left to be 
done. 
Further reforms of the labour market and the social security system are a matter of urgency in view of 
the increasingly unfavourable age structure of the population in Germany. The ratio of people aged 
over 60 to the group of 15 to 59-year-olds was just under 40% in 2000, but this ratio might increase to 
around 80% by 2050. The higher age ratio will have an adverse impact on the social security system 
and, given the existing entitlement to benefits, will call for higher contribution rates. 
BIS Review 55/2002 
 3
 It is by no means certain whether the recent reform of the pension system will be sufficient to cope 
with these challenges.  An  additional factor  is that demographic developments  will place a strain on 
other parts of the social security system, such as the health insurance institutions and nursing care 
schemes. The welfare state system will have to be adapted to cope with these challenges if problems 
for  future  economic  growth  are  to  be  avoided.  As  a  general  guideline,  it  may  be  said  that  a  closer 
match  in  social  security  contributions  along  with  a  stronger  personal  contribution  by  the  individuals 
concerned will improve economic efficiency and thus open up opportunities for growth. 
EU enlargement 
IV.  
One of the reasons why I believe that the reforms inside Germany are so important is the fact the we 
are also facing challenges from outside. The planned enlargement of the European Union is certainly 
one to be mentioned. The negotiations which are currently being conducted with 12 countries, situated 
mainly in central and eastern Europe, are now far enough advanced for the first round of enlargement 
to take place as early as the middle of this decade. 
Especially from Germany’s point of view, setting the right course for the integration of the new member 
states is of considerable importance. Both Germany’s geographical location and its close  economic 
ties with its neighbours to the east mean that Germany is affected by EU enlargement more than other 
countries in the Union. 
Despite considerable progress in terms of macroeconomic stabilisation and in the implementation of 
market  economy  reforms,  the  erstwhile  socialist  countries  in  transition,  in  particular,  still  display 
significant structural differences from the current EU member states. One of these differences is that 
the accession candidates are in a process of catching-up economically. They generally have inflation 
rates which are higher than those in the more mature and more slowly growing EU member states. 
This is an outcome, first, of differences in productivity gains across countries and sectors - known as 
the Balassa-Samuelson effect - and, second, of shifts in demand. 
The resulting real appreciation does not pose an obstacle to EU enlargement in terms of progress in 
the liberalisation of foreign trade and its ensuing welfare gains for the EU as a whole. Nevertheless, if 
the EU accession candidates participate in monetary union before the existing structural disparities are 
eliminated,  the  single  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  will  not  meet  the  needs  of  all  the  member 
states. A hasty enlargement of EMU would therefore harbour stability risks for the euro area and might 
generate tensions among the participating countries. 
Accession to the EU, however, does not imply immediate full membership of EMU. Instead, the EU 
accession countries will participate initially as “member states with a derogation” in the Third Stage of 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The  precondition  for  full  EMU  membership  is  that  the  accession 
countries achieve a high degree of sustainable economic convergence. The convergence criteria laid 
down  in the  Maastricht Treaty are the  yardstick for this. These criteria set unambiguously verifiable 
requirements in terms of price stability, long-term interest rate levels, the government fiscal position, 
and  participation  in  the  exchange-rate  mechanism  of  the  European  Monetary  System,  ERM II.  In 
addition,  pursuant  to  Article 121  of  the  EU  Treaty,  the  examination  of  the  sustainability  of  achieved 
convergence “should also take account of ... the results of the integration of markets, the situation and 
development of the  balances of payment on current  account  and  ... the  development of unit  labour 
costs and other price indices”. 
The  convergence  criteria  are  designed  to  guard  against  inflationary  tendencies  within  the  monetary 
union and to prevent tensions arising from structural divergences in inflation. The task of stabilisation 
does make stringent demands on the monetary  policy  of the accession countries, but price stability 
may be regarded as a sine qua non of sustainable growth. For that reason, the accession countries - 
not least in their own interests - should not enter EMU until the process of catching up economically 
has already made significant headway and the adjustment function of the exchange rate can be more 
easily dispensed with. 
Such a step-by-step enlargement process would also be in Germany’s interest, since it would enhance 
the opportunities arising from an enlargement of the Union and limit the associated risks, especially 
the monetary policy risks. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2002
 Policy mix 
V. 
After discussing domestic reforms in Germany and my comments on EU enlargement, I would now 
like to deal with a third economic policy issue: the policy mix in the European Monetary Union. The 
present  division  of  tasks  is  based  on  the  insight  that  each  area  of  policy  should  concentrate  on  its 
relative strengths. The monetary policy of the European Central Bank is geared to price stability, for 
example.  In  line  with  this  perspective,  wage  policy  is  responsible  for  achieving  a  high  level  of 
employment and budgetary policy should ensure an efficient supply of public goods and fairness of 
income distribution but, in doing so, not impair incentives to work, to save or to invest. 
This  -  as  I  see  it  -  generally  tried  and  tested  allocation  of  responsibilities  is  often  the  subject  of 
criticism, however. Calls are made to allocate macroeconomic responsibilities differently, accompanied 
by  the  demand  that  monetary,  fiscal  and  wage  policymakers  should  coordinate  their  operations 
instead of focusing on their own strengths. 
According to this “new division of labour”, wage policy would have the task of keeping down inflation. 
This  would  be  conditional  on  wage  and  salary  earners  and  their  trade  unions  forgoing  pay  rises 
precisely  in periods  when  the  economy is booming - at  times when they could easily push through 
such increases. It is probable that there would then be a wage-price spiral, which also happens to be 
the historical experience in Germany and in other countries. There was no success in the early 1970s, 
for example, in restricting pay rises, even though the trade unions were tied into a corporatist alliance 
called “concerted action”. 
Frequently, the call is made that monetary policy should not be geared - or not be primarily geared - to 
price  stability,  but  attempt  to  stimulate  economic  activity.  That  way  of  seeing  things,  however, 
overrates monetary policy’s influence on developments in the real economy. Changes in the monetary 
policy stance act with varying time-lags on investors and consumers. Furthermore, it is often difficult to 
diagnose the cyclical situation properly. Finally, monetary policy action would have to be administered 
in  the  correct  cyclical  dosage.  In  the  age  of  globalisation  with  open  borders  and  integrated  capital 
markets,  that  would  be  very  difficult  to  do.  In  short,  there  is  little  to  suggest  that  the  monetary 
policymakers’ strengths lie in the fine-tuning of the business cycle. Monetary policy is far better suited 
to the long-term safeguarding of price stability. 
In considering the appropriate policy mix in the monetary union, the terms of the Stability and Growth 
Pact mean that the role of fiscal policy undoubtedly occupies centre stage. In the field of budgetary 
policy,  several  countries  are  having  considerable  difficulties  in  fulfilling  their  existing  European 
commitments. These provide for a 3% limit for the general government deficit ratio and, at the same 
time, a budgetary position that is in surplus or close to balance over the entire business cycle. Since 
the deficit in Germany, at 2.8% of GDP, already came quite close to the 3% ceiling last year - mainly 
on  account  of  the  tax  reform  -  the  risk  that  it  might  now  exceed  that  limit  in  the  current  year  has 
become greater. Furthermore, there are some doubts as to whether German fiscal policy will be able 
to deliver on the self-commitment - reaffirmed in spring - to achieve a budget position close to balance 
by 2004 unless there are further cuts in public payments. 
Given the budgetary problems that also exist in other EMU countries and in view of the weak cyclical 
situation,  calls  are  increasingly  being  made  for  a  relaxation  of  the  fiscal  policy  rules  in  European 
Monetary Union. The main point of criticism about the existing provisions of the Maastricht Treaty and 
the Stability and Growth Pact is their alleged inadequate cyclical flexibility. It is claimed, for example, 
that these rules force budgetary policy to act in a procyclical manner counter to the requirements of 
stabilising the economy. 
Such criticism does not, however, take due account of the rules of the European Stability and Growth 
Pact. It is, in fact, precisely the task of this pact to ensure that government budgets can “breath” during 
the business cycle without breaching the deficit limit of the Maastricht Treaty. Such flexibility is to be 
achieved through a budgetary position which is at least close to balance over the medium term - in 
other words, when seen over the cycle as a whole. If that condition is met, the automatic stabilisers 
can develop their full effect within the 3% margin. The fact that there is, even so, only a narrow “safety 
margin” from the limit in some countries should not be blamed on the fiscal policy rules. It is rather the 
case  that  there  has  been  a  failure  over  the  past  few  years  to  bring  about  a  structurally  balanced 
budget. 
“Softening”  the  fiscal  policy  rules  would  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the 
European Stability and Growth Pact. The associated capital market effects would also have adverse 
implications for economic growth. The existing fiscal rules are necessary in order to counter the even 
BIS Review 55/2002 
 5
 greater  latent  incentives  to  borrow  in  a  monetary  union  and  to  prevent  monetary  policy  from  being 
caught  up  in  the  slipstream  of  unsound  government  finance.  The  fiscal  policy  rules  strengthen  the 
functional independence of the European Central Bank and thus facilitate a stability-oriented monetary 
policy in the single currency area. Watering down those rules might give rise to conflict between fiscal 
policy  and  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  German  fiscal  policymakers,  too,  must  not  shirk  their 
responsibility  to  make  further  consolidation  efforts  so  as  to  achieve  a  budgetary  position  close  to 
balance in the medium term. 
If one wishes to achieve a balanced budget over the business cycle - in other words, if the intended 
benchmark for the structural deficit is zero - in order to assess the fiscal position of a single year it is 
analytically  necessary  to  adjust  the  budget  balance  for  cyclical  effects.  This  does  not  require  any 
addition to, or modification of, the Stability and Growth Pact. It is, in fact, a matter of implementing its 
rules in the stability programmes in a consistent manner. And that naturally also implies not under any 
circumstance calling into question the nominal maximum limit for the deficit of 3%. 
As  I  see  it  -  and  I  would  like  to  conclude  on  this  point  -  more  attention  has  to  be  paid  in  future  to 
budgetary policy transgressions not being allowed in times when economic conditions are favourable. 
During an upswing there exists a risk of “budgetary exuberance” - in other words, a lower deficit being 
interpreted as progress in terms of consolidation, even though it is due solely to an improvement in the 
cyclical situation. Particularly in periods when the economy is improving, finance ministers who take 
consolidation  seriously  have  to  look  not  only  at  the  unadjusted  budgets.  They  have  to  look  at  the 
adjusted budgets too. 
At  the  same  time  one  should  not  make  the  mistake  to  see  the  problem  with  the  adherence  to  the 
stability and growth pact under business cycle aspects only. In Germany these problems are also a 
symptom of an insufficient basic dynamism in the economy. We do not need to change the stability 
and growth pact. What we need are more reforms which lead to higher employment and growth. The 
newly elected German Parliament should approach these reforms with courage. 
6 
 BIS Review 55/2002
