 Niklaus Blattner: Value, vulnerability and resilience of the financial market 
infrastructure 
Speech by Professor Niklaus Blattner, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the SIBOS Conference, Opening Plenary, Geneva, 30 September 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
As a central banker sharing the responsibility for overseeing payment and settlement systems, I have 
of course been closely following the developments of the financial market infrastructure. There is no 
doubt  that  these  developments  have  greatly  contributed  to  an  enhanced  efficiency  of  the  financial 
sector. They have also highlighted the fact that not only the payment and settlement systems but also 
other providers of standardized services in the field, not least S.W.I.F.T., have become more important 
over time. The developments have further shown that safety and resilience have clearly gained more 
weight for the system operators, for the system participants as well as for the regulatory authorities. 
In the first part of my address I would like to consider the economic value added by the payment and 
settlement  infrastructure  and  to  briefly  discuss  the  driving  forces  underlying  its  development.  In  the 
second part I shall focus on the role of central banks as agencies of oversight. In the third part I shall 
describe  the  factors  that  shape  the  vulnerability  of  financial  markets  and  their  infrastructure  and 
examine how these factors have changed over time. The fourth part is devoted to the implications of 
identified  vulnerabilities  for  resilience.  In  the  fifth  part  I  shall  address  the  cost-benefit  issues  that 
sooner  or  later  inevitably  turn  up  whenever  measures  to  improve  resilience  are  discussed.  I  shall 
conclude with a summing-up of my main points. 
Value: significance and driving forces 
The  main  function  of  banks  is  intermediation.  In  its  basic  form  intermediation  takes  place  between 
borrowers  and  lenders.  Additional  intermediation  functions  are  -  among  many  others  -  making 
payments and buying and selling securities on behalf of clients. 
Over  the  past  decades  we  have  seen  a  huge  decrease  in  the  costs  of  intermediation.  This  has 
drastically changed the structure of the banking sector and, at a more general level, the structure of 
the whole financial sector. Two factors have triggered this change. 
First, competition in the markets has increased as a consequence  of reduced  trade  barriers and  of 
deregulation. Trade barriers not only in goods but also in services including financial services and in 
financial  assets  have  been  progressively  lifted.  This  has  led  to  rapidly  growing  interaction  among 
economies,  not  least  in  the  area  of  banking  and  financial  services.  Countries  participating  in  this 
process have seen their domestic financial markets become deeply integrated with markets abroad. 
Distance  and  location,  increasingly  becoming  less  of  an  obstacle,  no  longer  give  protection  from 
competition. This is globalization. 
Second, technological progress, especially in information technology (IT) and telecommunications, has 
exerted an all-pervasive pressure to innovate at the level of processes and products and has greatly 
affected  the  way  the  financial  sector  organizes  itself.  Innovation  has  sharply  reduced  the  costs  of 
telecommunications  as  well  as  the  costs  of  IT  equipment.  As  a  consequence,  the  costs  of  trading 
financial  services  and  financial  assets  have  decreased  enormously.  Additionally,  not  only  has 
innovation brought down costs, but it has also increased the scale and scope as well as the quality of 
services. Innovation made markets expand to a hitherto unknown degree. Indeed, the value of traded 
financial services and assets has gone up almost explosively. 
These developments have required the construction of an adequate trading, clearing and settlement 
infrastructure. A good example is the market for foreign exchange (FX). Today, FX is one of the few 
truly global markets. It is open 24 hours a day and participants from all over the globe are connected 
through  electronic  networks.  Here,  the  birth  of  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  (CLS)  is  of  utmost 
importance.  Since  September  9  of  this  year  the  settlement  of  FX  transactions  in  the  largest  seven 
currencies can take place on a Payment versus Payment basis. CLS has only been possible thanks to 
technological progress, the decrease in communication costs, and large trading volumes. The benefit 
is not only higher efficiency but also reduced risk. 
BIS Review 55/2002 
 1
 Let me sum up this first section  on  value  as follows: There is no doubt that market integration  and 
technological  progress  have  been  the  driving  forces.  They  have  led  to  sizeable  reductions  in 
transaction  costs.  This  has  permitted  the  creation  of  today’s  globalized  financial  industry  and  has 
made possible an impressive growth in value. 
The role of central bank oversight 
Now,  let  me  turn  to  the  role  of  central  bank  oversight:  Every  transaction  -  be  it  a  commodity  or  a 
service - eventually leads to a transfer of money. From trade to settlement at least one system of the 
financial market infrastructure is usually involved. Given this, it is not surprising that the regulators are 
keeping a keen eye on market developments. 
Central banks, with their core mandate of monetary policy, have an especially close relationship with 
the  payment  systems.  To  the  overseers  of  payment  systems  the  main  objective  is  safety.  The 
definition and standards of safety have evolved with the  years. For a long time the main interest of 
central banks in payment systems came from computer experts. Payment systems used to be viewed 
merely as ‘computers’ that cleared and settled payment obligations. In the late 1980s the focus started 
to shift towards the financial risks, i.e. credit and liquidity risk inherent in payment systems. Slowly it 
became common knowledge that payment systems could be a source of systemic risk by providing a 
channel through which the failure of one participant to meet its payment obligations could be passed 
on to other participants. In their own best interest and under the influence of the overseers operators 
started to protect their systems against financial risks - in most cases by  building Real-Time Gross 
Settlement systems (RTGS). Today almost every country is operating an RTGS system. 
There is now a  widespread consensus within the private sector and the central banking community 
about the kind  of operational requirements and financial risk controls that  are necessary  to make a 
payment  system  safe.  A  main  contributor  in  this  area  has  been  the  Committee  on  Payment  and 
Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS).  As  a  standard-setting 
body  the  CPSS  has,  for  instance,  drafted  the  Core  Principles  for  Systemically  Important  Payments 
Systems.  The  Core  Principles  are  a  testimony  of  the  consensus  about  standards  for  safety  and 
efficiency in payment systems. The CPSS has also played a leading role in raising the awareness of 
the risks involved in the settlement of foreign exchange transactions. It has also followed and to some 
extent promoted the CLS project since its beginning. 
The  safety  of  the  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructure  has  been  a  long-standing  concern  of  the 
overseers. Together with the financial industry they might even have enjoyed some pride while looking 
at  what  was  achieved  in  terms  of  efficiency  as  well  as  safety  and  soundness  of  operations  by  the 
industry. But clearly, since September 11, 2001, a new awareness of vulnerability has grown on us all. 
Those tragic events have made us rethink our approach vis-à-vis safety and operational risk. I think 
we  all  suddenly  realized  we  had  to  reassess  the  vulnerability  of  our  institutions  and  systems  and, 
where necessary, improve their resilience. 
Vulnerability - a quick survey 
Ensuring  that  companies,  consumers  and  investors  have  confidence  in  their  ability  to  effect 
transactions and access their funds, securities, and other financial assets is of the highest importance 
in times of crisis. Therefore it is clearly in the private and public interest to ensure that, in the event of 
any  large-scale  disruption,  systemic  consequences  are  minimized.  However,  minimizing  systemic 
consequences requires knowing the major vulnerabilities of the financial system. With this knowledge 
the  responsible  parties  in  the  private  sector  as  well  as  in  central  banks  and  government  can  in 
principle take adequate precautions and remedies. Three sources of vulnerability can be identified. 
A first source of vulnerability is economic concentration among large and complex financial institutions. 
This may strike you as odd. But size is a potential source of vulnerability and industrial consolidation 
usually  increases  size.  The  financial  industry  has  been  experiencing  numerous  mergers  and 
acquisitions. This has resulted in financial services offered by an increasingly small number of large 
and  dominant  players.  Even  if  only  one  of  these  players  were  to  stop  functioning  well  the  financial 
system as a whole might suffer. 
The  second  source  of  vulnerability  is  geographical  clustering.  Financial  institutions  are  heavily 
clustered in a limited number of important international financial centers. Economic concentration and 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2002
 geographical clustering tend to add up. A  huge number of firms, among them the industry’s giants, 
may be affected in one and the same location by one and the same disruptive event. 
A third source of vulnerability is the large degree of connectivity and interdependency of the financial 
sector. Y2K and the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, highlighted this type of vulnerability. One 
key  lesson  learnt  was  that  vulnerability  extends  beyond  these  systems  since  they  crucially  rely  on 
utilities such as electricity and telecommunications or on service providers like S.W.I.F.T. 
Let me sum up again. There are three major sources of a financial system’s vulnerability: economic 
concentration, geographic clustering, and connectivity and interdependency. The latter are an obvious 
characteristic  of  financial  networks.  Networks  contribute  to  increased  efficiency  and  facilitate  risk 
management. At the same time they also can act as channels as well as origins of systemic crisis. 
From vulnerability to resilience 
Hand in hand with a new awareness of the vulnerability of the financial system, those responsible for 
its safety and stability in private firms, in financial market infrastructures as well as in the regulatory 
agencies have recently been taking a new hard look at the financial system’s capacity for resilience. 
In retrospect the Y2K problem was a first mild but nevertheless rather valuable test. The Y2K test was 
mild in the sense that everybody had enough time to prepare for it. What helped in Y2K was the clear 
deadline. All the contingency and communication networks could be set up before the event. Many of 
us gathered here today knew exactly where we had to be on December 31, 1999, what we had to do 
and whom we had to call if there were problems. Still, Y2K was valuable to the financial community in 
so far as it opened our minds and increased our sensitivity for problems that nobody had encountered 
or envisaged before. 
Today,  however,  the  situation  is  different  and  considerably  more  complex.  The  events  of 
September 11, 2001, have clearly increased our awareness further. Looking back to the time before 
the attacks we seem to have tended to underestimate the probability and consequences of disruption. 
So what needs to be done to make sure that we do not continue to underestimate threats? How can 
the resilience in financial systems be improved? What are the responsibilities of each and all of us? 
At the level of a single financial institution objectives and measures - in terms of back up solutions, 
staff safety and training, testing procedures, and contingency  planning  in general - may have to be 
newly defined. A specific issue that has probably not yet received enough attention everywhere is the 
internal crisis management process. Establishing a crisis management committee, which coordinates 
decisions and communication in times of crisis, can be vital, especially for large and complex financial 
institutions acting globally. On top of this, crisis management needs to be tested in general. One of the 
simpler  scenarios  could  be:  what  happens  if  a  bank  is  -  for  whatever  reason  -  not  able  to  release 
S.W.I.F.T. messages? In addition, crisis management of a single institution must involve its customers, 
its business partners and peers, its service providers and its utility providers. Crisis management is 
therefore a very demanding activity. 
What  applies  to  single  financial  institutions  obviously  also  applies  to  institutions  of  financial  market 
infrastructure, to central banks and to institutions of supervision and oversight in general. The same 
insights apply to everyone: Be aware of the new dimensions of systemic risk within globalized financial 
markets  and  refrain  from  early  satisfaction  with  what  you  appear  to  have  achieved.  At  this  point,  I 
would  like  to  stress  that  the  overall  resilience  of  the  financial  sector  also  depends  on  the  financial 
strength  of  each  institution.  In  retrospect  it  might  be  said  it  was  a  benign  coincidence  that  the 
September 11, 2001 attacks happened in a period of comparatively favorable economic conditions in 
the financial industry. Under less favorable circumstances the capacity to absorb shocks could have 
been  considerably  smaller.  This  is  another  reason  why  the  rapid  implementation  of  the  new  Basel 
Accord on capital adequacy is so very important for the financial system as a whole. 
In  addition  to  this  it  is  obvious  that  further  and  new  tasks  arise  for  regulatory  agencies  and  central 
banks at the national as well as the international level. Addressing the issue of disaster recovery has 
to  become  part  of  the  routine  supervisory  process.  Supervisory  guidelines  and  examination 
procedures  are  being  adjusted  in  this  light  and  they  are  helpful  tools  in  increasing  resilience.  Also, 
when  overseeing  payment  systems  resilience  and  business  continuity  will  have  to  be  scrutinized 
anew. 
BIS Review 55/2002 
 3
 Finally, central banks must always keep in mind that they carry a big responsibility for resilience and 
stability through their role as liquidity providers. Time and time again, free and easy access to liquidity 
has proven to be essential in large-scale crises. Since central bank liquidity is usually granted against 
collateral, the linkage between the payment and the securities settlement systems has to be especially 
robust. The market participants have to know and understand the conditions of access to lending of 
last resort facilities provided by central banks so that they can shape their contingency planning and 
collateral portfolios accordingly. Simultaneously central banks have to take the necessary precautions 
to increase resilience at their own end. 
Costs and benefits of resilience 
Let me add some remarks on the costs and  benefits of improving resilience. My  conviction  will  not 
come as a surprise to you: investment in resilience does indeed pay out for the financial sector as a 
whole and for society at large, but it also pays out for financial market infrastructures and for each and 
every financial firm. In other words, I have no doubt that more still needs to be done at the level of 
single institutions, and, on top of that, at the level of the financial industry as a whole. 
However, voices have raised the concern that, in light of the ever-increasing cost of safety and against 
the background of the significant cost pressure due to deteriorating market conditions, investment in 
resilience  might  in  fact  be  increasingly  limited.  But,  as  I  said  before,  the  higher  requirements  for 
operational  reliability,  for  contingency  planning  and  for  crisis  management  stem  mainly  from  the 
financial  industry’s  own  development.  Clearly,  increasing  concentration,  geographic  clustering, 
connectivity and interdependency are highly beneficial, but they do also have a price when it comes to 
the reduction of risk. We cannot enjoy the benefits without paying this price. 
The point here is that we all have to be very careful about how we invest in resilience. And we have to 
make sure that no resources are wasted. For sure, the regulatory community will keep this in mind and 
will do its best not to impose unnecessary burdens on the private sector. 
Summary and conclusion 
Finally, let me sum up my main points. 
• 
     Today’s globalized financial industry shows impressive long-term value growth. This growth 
is  due  to  market  integration  and  technological  progress.  Together  they  led  to  sizable 
reductions in transaction costs and to expanding markets. 
Every transaction eventually leads to a transfer of money. From trade to settlement usually 
at  least  one  system  of  financial  market  infrastructure  is  involved.  Overseers  care  for  the 
safety of these systems. This is their responsibility. 
The  events  of  September  11,  2001,  made  the  industry,  the  regulators  and  the  overseers 
rethink their approach to safety. Consequently the vulnerability of the financial system and its 
resilience are currently being reevaluated. 
Three  major  sources  of  vulnerability  have  been  identified:  economic  concentration, 
geographic clustering and connectivity and interdependency. Networks by their very nature 
can act as channels as well as origins of systemic crisis. 
The  awareness  of  vulnerability  leads  to  new  and  substantial  demands  for  investment  in 
resilience. For instance, crisis management is a demanding activity. It involves private firms, 
financial  market  infrastructures,  public  supervisors  and  oversight  institutions.  Without  the 
cooperation of all of them crisis management cannot succeed. 
Investment  in  resilience,  however,  is  costly.  The  benefits  of  the  financial  sector’s  value 
growth  cannot  be  enjoyed  without  paying  this  price.  Should  the  price  not  be  paid  value 
growth would turn out to be unsustainable. There are no stable financial systems that are not 
at the same time highly resilient under crisis conditions. 
Allow me to expand on this last point: as a representative of a central bank I assure you that central 
banks are not likely to close an eye on this issue. Resilience of financial service providers in general 
and  of  the  financial  market  infrastructure  in  particular  has  been  placed  at  the  top  of  regulatory 
authorities’  agendas.  Indeed,  it  will  stay  there.  As  much  as  public  bodies  are  contributing  to  the 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2002
 resilience of the financial system as a whole, they will make demands of the private sector. As much 
as public bodies are willing to step in as coordinators before and during times of crisis and eventually 
as  lenders  of  last  resort,  they  also  want  to  see  private  sector  entities  being  involved  and  actively 
participating  in  shaping  resilience  and  resolving  crises.  The  responsibility  for  financial  stability  is  a 
shared responsibility. 
I am fully aware that none of us can precisely estimate today the economic consequences of what we 
all yet have to do in order to increase the resilience of financial systems. Since this resilience is bound 
to be tested  again  harshly sooner or  later,  there  is no alternative to rapid, serious, adequate  and  if 
necessary costly preparations by all of us. 
Let  me  end  by  expressing  my  gratitude.  I  enjoyed  contributing  to  the  exchange  of  information, 
evaluations and views. This is the essence of the SIBOS conference. I am particularly grateful since I 
know that all  of us in this  room as well as  those financial sector  professionals  who  were unable to 
attend  this  conference,  those  of  the  private  sector  as  well  as  those  from  the  public  sector,  willingly 
share  the  noble  responsibility  for  the  efficiency  and  stability  of  today’s  and  tomorrow’s  financial 
systems. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 55/2002 
 5
