 A Wellink: The Euro, a major challenge and catalyst for Europe 
Speech  by  Dr  A  Wellink,  President  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, for the Dutch Business Round Table, Zürich, 12 March 2002. 
 Introduction 
It was in here in Zürich over 55 years ago that Winston Churchill held his famous speech on the future 
of Europe. He depicted a United States of Europe that would put an end to centuries of conflicts and 
bring  prosperity  to  its  peoples.  Indeed,  since  then  we  have  come  a  long  way  in  actually  fulfilling  his 
grand vision, although without Switzerland - the nation he addressed - playing an active role.  
Of course, there are many reasons - mostly of a historical -political nature - why Switzerland chose to 
stay  outside  the  process  of  European  integration.  In  this  respect,  I  certainly  do  not  want  to  pass 
judgement. Nevertheless,  you find  yourselves surrounded by  an ever closer union of Member States 
that has also introduced a single currency. In this light, I would like to elaborate on the introduction of 
the  Euro  and  it´s  consequences  for  the  European  Union  -  taking  into  account,  where  possible  -  the 
position of this country.  
First, I shall briefly touch on the actual changeover to the Euro at the beginning of this year. Then I shall 
go into the merits that monetary union already brought over the last few  years. Finally, I will give my 
vision on future challenges and dynamics of the Euro. 
Changeover  
Ten years after the Treaty of Maastricht, the Euro finally found its way into the pockets of 300 million 
Europeans. This unprecedented process - comprising the distribution of 239,000 tonnes of coins and 
2 million  kilometres  of  notes  -  was  an  outstanding  logistical  success.  Moreover,  doom  scenarios 
predicting mass forgery, robberies and threats to public security proved wrong. 
Of course, a clear, central scenario and tight planning, especially within the European System of Central 
Banks,  provided  a  firm  foundation,  but  the  operation  remained  highly  dependent  on  local  players; 
transporters,  retailers,  bankers,  administrators,  law-enforcers.  In  fact,  there  were  also  a  number  of 
Swiss  companies  (Lanqart  (paper),  OVD  Kinegram)  involved  in  developing  and  producing  the  high 
quality Euro notes. The efforts of these local players and the sheer public enthusiasm for the Euro were 
central  to  the  success  of  the  changeover.  Indeed,  through  the  sale  of  so-called  eurokits,  people  on 
average had already 14 eurocoins in their pocket before 1 January. This “euro-eagerness” explains that 
by the first week, already 75% of cash payments were in Euro.  
In the Netherlands, this 75% level  was already reached on the second day,  and after one  week, the 
changeover  was  virtually  completed.  As  such,  it  was  not  without  pride  that  I  proclaimed  my  country 
European  champion  -  though  that  could  not  entirely  wash  down  the  bitter  aftertaste  of  missing  this 
year´s World Championship soccer. In hindsight, people felt well-informed about the Euro and found the 
Euro introduction in no way the drama that some had predicted.  
Finally, on 28 January, the Dutch Guilder was the first of the former euroland currencies that in practice 
lost its legal tender status. To ease the minds of Dutch Roundtable members present, Guilders can - 
under  certain  conditions  -  still  be  exchanged  for  Euros  at  my  central  bank;  coins  until  2007  and 
banknotes even until 2032. 
One  tiny  spot  on  the  otherwise  shiny,  new  currency  is  the  anecdotal  reporting  of  price  changes 
associated with the changeover. There is, however, little evidence of any significant effect on aggregate 
inflation figures in the Euro area. According to the European statistical office, Eurostat, the effect is likely 
to  fall  within  the  range  of  0.0%  to  0.16%.  On  a  country-by-country  basis,  the  possibility  to  round  up 
prices  would,  of  course,  be  linked  to  the  conversion  rate  of  the  national  currency.  For  example, 
calculating  back  from  Euros  to  German  Marks  is much  easier  than  from  Euros  to  Dutch  Guilders.  In 
addition, the cyclical position of the economy would influence the direction in which rounding may have 
occurred.  
BIS Review 16/2002 
 1
 For the Netherlands, our research suggests that there might have been a slight upward effect on the 
price level of 0,2% to 0,4%. Overall, competition and peer pressure from consumer organisations would 
clearly limit room for manoeuvre. Moreover, possible one-off effects will be more than compensated by 
increased price transparency over the years to come. 
The merits of the Euro so far 
This brings me to the reasons why the Netherlands decided to give up its beloved currency. Foremost, 
the  Euro  is  a  political  project  in  which  the  Dutch  could  not  afford  to  stay  out.  Integration  in  a 
supranational context protects the interests of smaller European players.  
In economic terms, the Euro increases macro-economic stability and cross-border price transparency. It 
reduces transaction costs by eliminating exchange rate risks. Moreover, the Euro is a catalyst for further 
economic  reform  and  integration.  In  this  respect,  the  economist  Andrew  Rose  recently  published  an 
interesting article on common currency arrangements. Using cross-country panel data, he shows that 
countries  with  the  same  currency,  trade  substantially  more  than  those  with  different  currencies. 
Interestingly,  the  impact  of  a  common  currency  is  also  larger  than  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime, 
which reduces volatility but retains separate monies.  
In this light, the Euro is the icing on the internal market cake by broadening and deepening its scale. 
But,  as  always,  the  proof  of  this  cake  is  in  the  eating.  Indeed,  the  three  years  of  the  Euro´s  virtual 
existence  confirm  the  Dutch  political  and  economic  motives.  Though  some  tend  to  be  misled  by  its 
exchange rate, the Euro has proven to be rock solid with low inflation and, with it, a credible European 
Central Bank. Now, with hard currency in hand, the public will become more aware of the fact that a 
Euro is a Euro, and that the internal stability of the Euro counts. Stable price developments and a low 
level of long-term interest rates provide a firm basis for growth. 
In addition, the Euro ended once and for all the uncontrolled spending dynamics of the past. Indeed, the 
EU is unique  in  having set itself a standard for sound government finances through  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact. In this light, you probably all heard about the early warning that the European Commission 
recommended  for  Germany  and  Portugal.  As  a  consequence,  both  countries  strongly  re-committed 
themselves to budgetary consolidation and the close to balance rule of the Pact. The outcome clearly 
reflects  the  respect  of  all  countries  involved  for  the  Pact,  and  underlines  the  credibility  of  the 
macro-economic policy framework in general. Thus, the Euro has offered a stable environment both to 
governments and business.  
Finally, the Euro has already made a spectacular impact on financial markets in Europe. These have 
become broader and deeper, with a sharp rise in both the volume of capital issues and the spread of 
credit quality. Compared to 1998, total international bond issuance in Euros have more than doubled, 
and now compares well with the level of dollar-bonds. The sharp rise in the corporate bond market has 
increased financing possibilities and enhances merger & acquisition activities in Europe.  
Switzerland and the Euro  
Being closed in by  Euro-territory,  the Swiss can  also reap  the Euro fruits, all be it partly, in terms of 
bigger investment and borrowing opportunities in the Euro-market. In addition, the trading environment 
has improved with more price transparency in comparing potential trading partners and less exchange 
rate  risks.  On  the  downside,  potential  exchange  rate  volatility  remains,  as  you  have  experienced 
between the Frank and the Euro. 
Given that business services and tourism are central to the Swiss economy, there is no doubt that Euro 
coins and notes will increasingly pop up cross border. Indeed, large retailers appear to accept Euros 
and a large number of cash dispensers in major cities and at the border produce Euro notes. I heard 
that in this city even ticket machines for car parks are made “euro-fähig”.  
Some point to a possible parallel use of the Euro in economies surrounding the Euro area. In fact, it was 
the British that first introduced the notion of a parallel currency back in the early seventies, and again 
during  negotiations  at  Maastricht.  As  an  alternative  to  monetary  union,  they  wanted  the  intangible 
European  Currency  Unit  to  compete  with  the  national  money.  Should  the  European  currency  prove 
stable and successful, it would by the laws of nature become the sole legal tender. Along these lines, 
Helmut Kohl argued recently that Switzerland would adopt the Euro in 2010 at the latest.  
2 
 BIS Review 16/2002
 However, I think that mature countries such as the UK, Sweden or Switzerland, are not likely to take on 
the Euro as national currency without further political integration with the EU. In other words, they will 
have to be part of - and committed to - Economic and Monetary Union. Here, we can draw a parallel 
with, for example, the limited role of the US dollar in Canada - despite the relative economic weight of 
the US and strong trading relations in the context of the North American Free Trade Area.  
Future challenges and dynamics of the Euro  
It  appears,  I  am  already  looking  into  a  crystal  ball,  so  let  me  move  on  to  the  future  challenges  and 
dynamics  of  the  Euro  for  Europe.  The  dynamics  of  the  Euro  clearly  lie  with  the  expectations  and 
pressures of markets and the public opinion at large. A good example is the recent agreement in the EU 
that  the  costs  of  cross  border  bank  transfers  should  be  substantially  reduced.  In  a  similar  vein, 
economic agents simply do not accept that cross border security transactions are more expensive than 
within  the  US.  Therefore,  the  European  Parliament  recently  accepted  the  report,  prepared  under 
chairmanship of Baron Lamfalussy, that foresees in speeding-up decision-making on the elimination of 
barriers in the European security market. This plan is part of an ambitious EU programme to create a 
truly integrated financial market by 2005.  
This  political  spin-off  is  not  limited  to  the  EU  alone.  For  example,  the  European  Commission  has 
recently  opened  discussions  with  Switzerland,  and  other  third  countries,  on  banking  secrecy  and  the 
fiscal treatment of savings. I understand that on the Swiss side, this sensitive dossier has been linked to 
other fields of negotiations such as Schengen and European immigration policy. It goes to show that 
even in third countries the impact of the Euro surpasses the economic domain.  
Clearly,  the  Euro  enables  the  “E”  of  EMU  to  reach  the  critical  mass  necessary  for  progress  in many 
policy  areas.  In  that  sense,  a  further  deepening  of  financial  markets  will  enhance  labour  mobility,  for 
example  through  the  portability  of  pensions  and  social  security  entitlements  across  borders.  More 
importantly, there are signs that labour market flexibility has been improving. Thus, the European labour 
force tends to absorb cyclical fluctuations more effectively. In a similar vein, wage negotiations appear 
to  adjust  faster  to  changing  economic  conditions,  while  inflation  expectations  have  decreased.  This 
change in behaviour is a reflection of the fact that in the Euro-countries exchange rate flexibility is no 
longer available to neutralise structural deficiencies.  
The extent of success is determined by one, major factor - European policy makers must recognise the 
Euro dynamics and live up to the expectations of long-term integration. Here lies the central challenge 
that follows from the introduction of the Euro: Politicians have to deliver. In that sense, the European 
Council, that convenes in four days´ time in Barcelona, will have to put its political weight behind the 
liberalisation of the energy market and the deadlines of the Financial Services Action Plan. Moreover, 
the Council should be committed to - for example - the speedy adoption of the European take-over and 
patent directives, both of which have been on the table for decades. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  A  representative  of  the  Deutsche  Bank  recently  said  that  ´there  has  been  a  lot  of 
positive Euro speak in the last couple of years, but nothing that has led to better growth´. I disagree; the 
virtual Euro has brought macro-economic stability and increased dynamics in the internal market, the 
financial market in particular.  
Moreover,  the  changeover  to  the  tangible  Euro  has  been  a  major  success  thanks  to  the  great 
acceptance  and  enthusiasm  around  Europe  for  the  common  currency.  The  historical  and  political 
importance of the Euro for “an  ever closer  union among  the peoples of Europe” (preamble Treaty  of 
Rome) is without any doubt. 
However, I agree that one needs to put the money where the mouth is. The benefits of the Euro can 
only be reaped to the full if its dynamics are acknowledged. In this respect, the Euro is a catalyst for 
more  growth  and  employment,  while  it  is  a  challenge  for  European  policy  makers  to  shape  the  right 
climate.  
In a way, the Swiss also face this challenge - the more, now that the EU is on the brink of a sizeable 
enlargement. Following Winston Churchill´s address here half a century ago, the time might come when 
sensitive questions on sovereignty and neutrality no longer tilt the balance against playing an active role 
in Europe. In fact, an historic breaking point might have been reached with the recent, public majority 
BIS Review 16/2002 
 3
 support for membership of the United Nations. Should Switzerland ever decide to take part in European 
integration, I am convinced that you will embrace the Euro as warmly as the Dutch did on 1 January.  
4 
 BIS Review 16/2002
