 Alan Greenspan: Federal Reserve Board's semiannual monetary policy report 
to the Congress 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
27 February 2002.  
 Since July, when I last reported to you on the conduct of monetary policy, the U.S. economy has gone 
through a period of considerable strain, with output contracting for a time and unemployment rising. 
We in the Federal Reserve System acted vigorously to adjust monetary policy in an endeavor both to 
limit the extent of the downturn and to hasten its completion. Despite the disruptions engendered by 
the terrorist attacks of September 11, the typical dynamics of the business cycle have re-emerged and 
are  prompting  a  firming  in  economic  activity.  An  array  of  influences  unique  to  this  business  cycle, 
however, seems likely to moderate the speed of the anticipated recovery. 
At  the  time  of  our  last  report,  the  economy  was  weakening.  Many  firms  were  responding  to  the 
realization  that  significant  overcapacity  had  developed.  The  demand  for  capital  goods  had  dropped 
sharply, and inventories were uncomfortably high in many industries. In response, businesses slashed 
production, and the resulting declines in incomes amplified the cyclical downturn. Real gross domestic 
product did not grow in the second quarter and contracted in the third. 
A  coincident  deceleration  in  activity  among  the  world  economies  was  evident  over  the  past  year, 
owing, at least in part, to the retrenchment in the high-technology sector and the global reach of the 
capital markets in which the firms in that sector are valued and funded. However, before the terrorist 
attacks, it was far from obvious that this concurrent weakness was becoming self-reinforcing. Indeed, 
immediately prior to September 11, some sectors exhibited tentative signs of stabilization, contributing 
to a hope that the worst of the previous cumulative weakness in world economic activity was nearing 
an end. 
That hope was decisively dashed by the tragic events of early September. Adding to the intense forces 
weighing on asset prices and economic activity before September 11 were new sources of uncertainty 
that began to press down on global demand for goods and services. Economies almost everywhere 
weakened  further,  a  cause  for  increasing  uneasiness.  The  simultaneous  further  slowing  in  activity 
raised  concerns  that  a  self-reinforcing  cycle  of  contraction,  fed  by  perceptions  of  greater  economic 
risk,  could  develop.  Such  an  event,  though  rare,  would  not  be  unprecedented  in  business-cycle 
history. 
If  ever  a  situation  existed  in  which  the  fabric  of  business  and  consumer  confidence,  both  here  and 
abroad,  was  vulnerable  to  being  torn,  the  shock  of  September  11  was  surely  it.  In  addition  to  the 
horrific loss of life, enormous uncertainties accompanied the unfolding events and their implications for 
the economy. Indeed, for a period of weeks, U.S. economic activity did drop dramatically in response 
to that shock. 
In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  strikes,  the  Federal  Reserve  engaged  in  aggressive  action  to 
counter  the  effects  of  the  shock  on  payment  systems  and  financial  markets.  We  provided  a  huge 
volume  of  reserves  through  open  market  operations,  the  discount  window,  and  other  means  to 
facilitate  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system. We  worked  closely  with  many  market  participants, 
industry groups, and other government officials on a broad range of financial infrastructure problems 
that needed to be resolved quickly and in the common interest. 
Still, market functioning was impaired for a time. The substantial damage to trading, settlement, and 
communications  facilities  forced  many  market  participants  to  their  backup  sites.  Owing  in  part  to 
careful and thorough contingency planning, many firms, markets, and exchanges were able to resume 
business within a few hours or days of the attacks. Nonetheless, the episode did reveal threats to, and 
vulnerabilities of, the operations of financial institutions that had not been previously considered and 
illustrated the significant interdependence of the modern financial infrastructure. Institutions will need 
to continue to work diligently toward ensuring that their backup capabilities are adequate. We at the 
Federal Reserve have been reexamining intensively our own contingency capabilities to ensure that 
our central banking functions can be performed in the most pressing of emergency circumstances. 
BIS Review 14/2002 
 1
 In the weeks following the attacks, along with the drops in activity and confidence, equity prices fell 
markedly, and lenders became more cautious, boosting risk premiums, especially on credits already 
considered  to  be  weak.  In  response,  the  Federal  Reserve  reduced  short-term  interest  rates 
considerably  further.  Longer-term  yields,  including  mortgage  rates,  fell  to  extraordinarily  low  levels. 
The monetary stimulus that we provided was visible not only in interest rates but also in a rapid growth 
of liquidity over the final months of the  year, as gauged by the broad monetary aggregates. As the 
fourth  quarter  progressed,  business  and  consumer  confidence  recovered,  no  doubt  buoyed  by 
successes in the war on terrorism. The improved sentiment seemed to buffer the decline in economic 
activity. 
Indeed, in the past several months, increasing signs have emerged that some of the forces that have 
been restraining the economy over the past year are starting to diminish and that activity is beginning 
to firm. The appearance of these signs, in circumstances in which the level of the real federal funds 
rate was at a very low level, led the Federal Open Market Committee to keep policy unchanged at its 
meeting in late January, although it retained its assessment that the risks were tilted toward economic 
weakness. 
One key consideration in the assessment that the economy is close to a turning point is the behavior 
of  inventories.  Stocks  in  many  industries  have  been  drawn  down  to  levels  at  which  firms  will  soon 
need to taper off their rate of liquidation, if they have not already done so. Any slowing in the rate of 
inventory liquidation will induce a rise in industrial production if demand for those products is stable or 
is falling only moderately.  That rise in production  will, other things being equal, increase  household 
income and spending. The runoff of inventories, even apart from the large reduction in motor vehicle 
stocks, remained sizable in the fourth quarter. Hence, with production running well below sales, the lift 
to income and spending from the inevitable cessation of inventory liquidation could be significant. 
But that impetus to the growth of activity will be short-lived unless sustained increases in final demand 
kick in before the positive effects of the swing from inventory liquidation dissipate. Most recoveries in 
the post-World War II period received a boost from a rebound in demand for consumer durables and 
housing from recession-depressed levels in addition to an abatement of inventory liquidation. Through 
much of last year's slowdown, however, spending by the household sector held up well and proved to 
be a major stabilizing force. As a consequence, although household spending should continue to trend 
up, the potential for significant acceleration in activity in this sector is likely to be more limited than in 
past cycles. 
In fact, there are a number of cross currents in the outlook for household spending. In recent months, 
low  mortgage  interest  rates  and  favorable  weather  have  provided  considerable  support  to 
homebuilding. Moreover, attractive mortgage rates have bolstered the sales of existing homes and the 
extraction of capital gains embedded in home equity that those sales engender. Low rates have also 
encouraged households to take on larger mortgages when refinancing their homes. Drawing on home 
equity in this manner is a significant source of funding for consumption and home modernization. The 
pace of such extractions likely dropped along with the decline in refinancing activity that followed the 
backup in mortgage rates that began in early November. But mortgage rates remain at low levels and 
should continue to underpin activity in this sector. 
Consumer  spending  received  a  considerable  lift  from  the  sales  of  new  motor  vehicles,  which  were 
remarkably strong in October and November owing to major financing incentives. Sales have receded 
somewhat  as  incentives  were  scaled  back,  but  they  have  remained  surprisingly  resilient.  Other 
consumer spending appears to have advanced at a solid pace in recent months. 
The substantial declines in the prices of natural gas, fuel oil, and gasoline have clearly provided some 
support  to  real  disposable  income  and  spending.  To  have  a  more  persistent  effect  on  the  ongoing 
growth of total personal consumption expenditures, energy prices would need to continue declining. 
Futures  prices  do  not  suggest  that  such  an  outcome  is  in  the  offing,  though  the  forecast  record  of 
these markets is less than impressive. 
Changes in household financial positions in recent years are probably damping consumer spending, at 
least to a degree. Overall household wealth relative to income has dropped from a peak multiple of 
about 6.3 at the end of 1999 to around 5.3 currently. Moreover, the aggregate household debt service 
burden,  defined  as  the  ratio  of  households'  required  debt  payments  to  their  disposable  personal 
income,  rose  considerably  in  recent  years,  returning  last  year  to  its  previous  cyclical  peak  of  the 
mid-1980s.  
2 
 BIS Review 14/2002
 However, neither wealth nor the burden of debt is distributed evenly across households. Hence, the 
spending  effects  of  changes  in  these  influences  also  will  not  be  evenly  distributed.  For  example, 
increased  debt  burdens  appear  disproportionately  attributable 
to  higher-income  households. 
Calculations by staff at the Federal Reserve suggest that the ratio of household liabilities to annual 
income  for  the  top  fifth  of  all  households  ranked  by  income,  who  accounted  for  44  percent  of  total 
after-tax household income last year, rose from about 1.10 at the end of 1998 to 1.20 at the end of the 
third  quarter  of  2001.  The  increase  for  the  lower  four-fifths  was  only  about  half  as  large.  Although 
high-income households should not experience much strain in meeting their obligations, others might. 
Indeed,  repayment  difficulties  have  already  increased,  particularly  in  the  subprime  markets  for 
consumer loans and mortgages. Delinquency rates may well worsen as a delayed result of the strains 
on household finances over the past two years. Large erosions, however, do not seem likely, and the 
overall  levels  of  debt  and  repayment  delinquencies  do  not,  as  of  now,  appear  to  pose  a  major 
impediment to a moderate expansion of consumption spending going forward.  
Although the macroeconomic effects of debt burdens may be limited, we have already seen significant 
spending  restraint  among  the  top  fifth  of  income  earners,  presumably  owing  to  the  drop  in  equity 
prices.  The  effect  of  the  stock  market  on  other  households'  spending  has  been  less  evident. 
Moderate-income  households  have  a  much  larger  proportion  of  their  assets  in  homes,  and  the 
continuing rise in the value of houses has provided greater support for their net worth. Reflecting these 
differences in portfolio composition, the net worth of the top fifth of income earners has dropped far 
more than it did for the bottom 80 percent. 
As a consequence, excluding capital gains and losses from the calculation, as is the convention in our 
national income accounts, personal saving for the upper fifth, which had been negative during 1999 
and  2000,  turned  positive  in  2001.  By  contrast,  the  average  saving  rate  for  the  lower  four-fifths  of 
households, by income, was generally positive during the second half of the 1990s and has fluctuated 
in a narrow range in the past two years. Accordingly, most of the change in consumption expenditures 
that resulted from the bull stock market, and its demise, reflected shifts in spending by upper-income 
households.  The  restraining  effects  from  the  net  decline  in  wealth  during  the  past  two  years 
presumably  have  not,  as  yet,  fully  played  out  and  could  exert  some  further  damping  effect  on  the 
overall growth of household spending relative to that of income.  
Perhaps most central to the outlook for consumer spending will be developments in the labor market. 
The  pace  of  layoffs  quickened  last  fall,  especially  after  September  11,  and  the  unemployment  rate 
rose sharply. However, layoffs diminished noticeably in January, and the reported unemployment rate 
declined though adjusting for seasonal influences was difficult last month. Moreover, initial claims for 
unemployment  insurance  have  decreased  markedly,  on  balance,  providing  further  evidence  of  an 
improvement  in  labor  market  conditions.  Even  if  the  economy  is  on  the  road  to  recovery,  the 
unemployment rate,  in typical cyclical fashion, may resume its increase for a time, and a soft labor 
market could put something of a damper on consumer spending. 
However, the extent of such restraint will depend on how much of any rise  in unemployment is the 
result of weakened demand for goods and services and how much reflects strengthened productivity. 
In  the  latter  case,  average  real  incomes  of  workers could  rise,  at  least  partially  offsetting  losses  of 
purchasing power that stem from diminished levels of employment. Indeed, preliminary data suggest 
that productivity has held up very well of late, and history suggests that any depressing effect of rapid 
productivity growth on employment is only temporary. 
The dynamics of inventory investment and the balance of factors influencing consumer demand will 
have important consequences for the economic outlook in coming months. But the broad contours of 
the present cycle have been, and will continue to be, driven by the evolution of corporate profits and 
capital investment.  
The retrenchment in capital spending over the past year and a half was central to the sharp slowing 
we  experienced  in  overall  activity.  The  steep  rise  in  high-tech  spending  that  occurred  in  the  early 
post-Y2K months was clearly not sustainable. The demand for many of the newer technologies was 
growing  rapidly,  but  capacity  was  expanding  even  faster,  and  that  imbalance  exerted  significant 
downward  pressure  on  prices  and  the  profits  of  producers  of  high-tech  goods  and  services.  New 
orders  for  equipment  and  software  hesitated  in  the  middle  of  2000  and  then  fell  abruptly  as  firms 
re-evaluated  their  capital  investment  programs.  Uncertainty  about  economic  prospects  boosted  risk 
premiums significantly, and this rise, in turn, propelled required, or hurdle, rates of return to markedly 
elevated levels. In most cases, businesses required that new investments pay off much more rapidly 
than they had previously. For much of last year, the resulting decline in investment outlays was fierce 
BIS Review 14/2002 
 3
 and unrelenting. Although the weakness was most pronounced in the technology area, reductions in 
capital outlays were broad-based. 
These cutbacks in capital spending interacted with, and were reinforced by, falling profits and equity 
prices. Indeed, a striking feature of the current cyclical episode relative to many earlier ones has been 
the virtual absence of pricing power across much of American business, as increasing globalization 
and deregulation have enhanced competition. In this low-inflation environment, firms have perceived 
very  little  ability  to  pass  cost  increases  on  to  customers.  To  be  sure,  growth  in  hourly  labor 
compensation has moderated in response to slowed inflation and deteriorating economic conditions. A 
significant falloff in stock-option realizations and in other forms of compensation related to company 
performance  has  likely  been  a  factor.  But  over  most  of  the  past  year,  even  those  smaller  hourly 
compensation  increases  outstripped  gains  in  output  per  hour,  on  balance,  precipitating  a  marked 
decline in profit margins.  
Business managers, with little opportunity to raise prices, have moved aggressively to stabilize cash 
flows by trimming workforces. These efforts have limited any rise in unit costs, attenuated the pressure 
on  profit  margins,  and  ultimately  helped  to  preserve  the  vast  majority  of  private-sector  jobs.  To  the 
extent  that  businesses  are  successful  in  stabilizing  and  eventually  boosting  profits  and  cash  flow, 
capital spending should begin to recover more noticeably. 
Part of the reduction in pricing power observed in this cycle should be reversed as firming demand 
enables firms to take back large price discounts. Though such an adjustment would tend to elevate 
price levels,  underlying  inflationary cost pressures should remain contained. To be sure, output per 
hour is not likely to accelerate this year as much as in a typical recovery because businesses have not 
delayed,  as  they  have  in  past  recessions,  shedding  workers  at  the  first  indications  of  weakened 
demand.  But  slack  in  labor markets  and  further  increases  in  productivity  should  hold  labor  costs  in 
check and result in rising profit margins even with inflation remaining low.  
Improved  profit  margins  and  more  assured  prospects  for  rising  final  demand  would  likely  be 
accompanied by a decline in risk premiums from their current elevated levels toward a more normal 
range. With real rates of return on high-tech equipment still attractive, that should provide an additional 
spur to new investment. Reports from businesses around the country suggest that the exploitation of 
available networking and other information technologies was only partially completed when the cyclical 
retrenchment of the past  year began. Many business managers are still of the view, according to a 
recent survey of purchasing managers, that less than half of currently available new, and presumably 
profitable, supply-chain technologies have been put into use. 
Recent  evidence  suggests  that  a  recovery  in  at  least  some  forms  of  high-tech  investment  could 
already be under way. Production of semiconductors, which in the past has been a leading indicator of 
computer production, turned up last fall. Expenditures on computers rose at a double-digit annual rate 
in  real  terms  last  quarter.  But  the  contraction  of  investment  expenditures  in  the  communications 
sector,  where  the  amount  of  overcapacity  was  substantial,  as  yet  shows  few  signs  of  abating,  and 
business  investment  in  some  other  sectors,  such  as  aircraft,  hit  by  the  drop  in  air  travel,  will 
presumably remain weak this year. 
On balance, the recovery in overall spending on business fixed investment is likely to be only gradual; 
in particular,  its growth  will doubtless be less frenetic than in 1999 and  early 2000--a period during 
which outlays were boosted by the dislocations of Y2K and the extraordinarily low cost of equity capital 
available  to  many  firms.  Nonetheless,  if  the  recent  more-favorable  economic  developments  gather 
momentum,  uncertainties  will  diminish,  risk  premiums  will  fall,  and  the  pace  of  capital  investment 
embodying new technologies will increase. 
Even  a  subdued  recovery  beginning  soon  would  constitute  a  truly  remarkable  performance  for  the 
American economy in the face of so severe a decline in equity asset values and an unprecedented 
blow from terrorists to the foundations of our market systems. For, if the tentative indications that the 
contraction phase of this business cycle is drawing to a close are ultimately confirmed, we will have 
experienced a significantly milder downturn than the long history of business cycles would have led us 
to expect.  Crucially, the  imbalances that triggered the downturn and that could  have prolonged this 
difficult period did not fester. The obvious questions are what has changed in our economy in recent 
decades to provide such resilience and whether such changes will persist into the future. 
Doubtless,  the  substantial  improvement  in  the  access  of  business  decisionmakers  to  real-time 
information  has  played  a  key  role.  Thirty  years  ago,  the  timeliness  of  available  information  varied 
across companies and industries, often resulting  in differences in the speed and magnitude of their 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2002
 responses to changing business conditions. In contrast to the situation that prevails today, businesses 
did not have real-time data systems that enabled decisionmakers in different enterprises to work from 
essentially the same set of information. In those earlier years, imbalances were inadvertently allowed 
to build to such an extent that their inevitable correction engendered significant economic stress. That 
process of correction and the accompanying economic and financial disruptions too often led to deep 
and prolonged recessions. Today, businesses have large quantities of data available virtually in real 
time. As a consequence, they address and resolve economic imbalances far more rapidly than in the 
past. 
The  apparent  increased  flexibility  of  the  American  economy  arguably  also  reflects  the  extent  of 
deregulation  over  the  past  quarter  century.  Certainly,  if  the  energy  sector  were  still  in  the  tight 
regulatory fetters of the 1970s, our flexibility today would be markedly less. That the collapse of Enron 
barely registered in the relatively recently developed markets for natural gas and electric power was 
encouraging.  Although  the  terrorist  attacks  hit  air  travel  especially  hard  over  the  past  few  months, 
deregulation  of  that  industry  has  demonstrably  increased  the  quantity  and  flexibility,  if  not  the 
profitability, of air travel over the past twenty years. Trucking and rail deregulation has added flexibility 
to the movement of goods across our nation.  
Both deregulation and innovation in the financial sector have been especially important in enhancing 
overall  economic  resilience.  New  financial  products--including  derivatives,  asset-backed  securities, 
collateralized loan obligations, and collateralized mortgage obligations, among others--have enabled 
risk to be dispersed more effectively to those willing to, and presumably capable of, bearing it. Shocks 
to the overall economic system are accordingly less likely to create cascading credit failure. Lenders 
have  the  opportunity  to  be  considerably  more  diversified,  and  borrowers  are  far  less  dependent  on 
specific  institutions  for  funds.  Financial  derivatives,  particularly,  have  grown  at  a  phenomenal  pace 
over the past fifteen years, evidently fulfilling a need to hedge risks that were not readily deflected in 
earlier decades. Despite the concerns that these complex instruments have induced (an issue I will 
address shortly), the record of their performance, especially over the past couple of stressful years, 
suggests that on balance they have contributed to the development of a far more flexible and efficient 
financial system--both domestically and internationally--than we had just twenty or thirty years ago. 
As  a  consequence  of  increased  access  to  real-time  information  and,  more  arguably,  extensive 
deregulation in financial and product markets and the unbundling of risk, imbalances are more likely to 
be  readily  contained,  and  cyclical  episodes  overall  should  be  less  severe  than  would  be  the  case 
otherwise.  If  this  is  indeed  the  case--and  it  must  be  considered  speculative  until  more  evidence  is 
gathered--the implied reduction in volatility, other things equal, would lower risk and equity premiums. 
Other things, however, may  not be  wholly equal. The very technologies that appear to be the main 
cause  of  our  apparent  increased  flexibility  and  resiliency  may  also  be  imparting  different  forms  of 
vulnerability that could intensify or be intensified by a business cycle. 
From  one  perspective,  the  ever-increasing  proportion  of  our  GDP  that  represents  conceptual  as 
distinct from physical value added may actually have lessened cyclical volatility. In particular, the fact 
that concepts cannot be held as inventories means a greater share of GDP is not subject to a type of 
dynamics that amplifies cyclical swings. But an economy in which concepts form an important share of 
valuation has its own vulnerabilities. 
As the recent events surrounding Enron have highlighted, a firm is inherently fragile if its value added 
emanates more from conceptual as distinct from physical assets. A physical asset, whether an office 
building or an automotive assembly plant, has the capability of producing goods even if the reputation 
of the managers of such facilities falls under a cloud. The rapidity of Enron's decline is an effective 
illustration of the vulnerability of a firm whose market value largely rests on capitalized reputation. The 
physical assets of such a firm comprise a small proportion of its asset base. Trust and reputation can 
vanish overnight. A factory cannot. 
The implications of such a loss of confidence for the macroeconomy depend importantly on how freely 
the conceptual capital of the fading firm can be replaced by  a competitor or  a new  entrant  into the 
industry. Even if entry is relatively free, macroeconomic risks can emerge if problems at one particular 
firm tend to make investors and counterparties uncertain about other firms that they see as potentially 
similarly situated. The difficulty of valuing firms that deal primarily with concepts and the growing size 
and importance of these firms may make our economy more susceptible to this type of contagion. 
Another,  more  conventional  determinant  of  stability  will  be  the  economy's  degree  of  leverage--the 
extent to which debt rather than equity is financing the level of capital. The proper degree of leverage 
BIS Review 14/2002 
 5
 in a firm, or in an economy as a whole, is an inherently elusive figure that almost certainly changes 
from time to time. Clearly, firms find some leverage advantageous in enhancing returns on equity, and 
thus moderate leverage undoubtedly boosts the capital stock and the level of output. A sophisticated 
financial system, with its substantial array of instruments to unbundle risks, will tend toward a higher 
degree  of  leverage  at  any  given  level  of  underlying  economic  risk.  But,  the  greater  the  degree  of 
leverage  in  any  economy,  the  greater  its  vulnerability  to  unexpected  shortfalls  in  demand  and 
mistakes. 
Indeed, on a historical cost basis, the ratio of debt to net worth for the nonfinancial corporate business 
sector did rise, from 71 percent at the end of 1997 to about 81 percent at the end of the third quarter of 
last year, though it is still well below its level at the beginning of the recession in 1990. The ratio of 
interest payments to cash flow, one indicator of the consequence of leverage, has crept up in recent 
years, reflecting growth in debt. However, owing to lower interest rates, it remains far below its levels 
of the early 1990s. 
Although the fears of business leverage have been mostly confined to specific sectors in recent years, 
concerns  over  potential  systemic  problems  resulting  from  the  vast  expansion  of  derivatives  have 
reemerged  with  the  difficulties  of  Enron.  To  be  sure,  firms  like  Enron,  and  Long-Term  Capital 
Management before it, were major players in the derivatives markets. But their problems were readily 
traceable to an old fashioned excess of debt, however acquired, as well as to opaque accounting of 
that leverage and lax counterparty scrutiny. Swaps and other derivatives throughout their short history, 
including over the past eighteen months, have been remarkably free of default. Of course, there can 
be  latent  problems  in  any  market  that  expands  as  rapidly  as  these  markets  have.  Regulators  and 
supervisors are particularly sensitive to this possibility. Derivatives have provided greater flexibility to 
our financial system. But their very complexity could leave counterparties vulnerable to significant risk 
that  they  do  not  currently  recognize,  and  hence  these  instruments  potentially  expose  the  overall 
system  if  mistakes  are  large.  In  that  regard,  the  market's  reaction  to  the  revelations  about  Enron 
provides  encouragement  that  the  force  of  market  discipline  can  be  counted  on  over  time  to  foster 
much  greater  transparency  and  increased  clarity  and  completeness  in  the  accounting  treatment  of 
derivatives. 
How these countervailing forces for stability evolve will surely be a major determinant of the volatility 
that  our  economy  will  experience  in  the  years  ahead.  Monetary  policy  will  have  to  be  particularly 
sensitive  to  the  possibility  that  the  resiliency  our  economy  has  exhibited  during  the  past  two  years 
signals subtle changes in the way our system functions.  
Our most recent experiences underscore this possibility,  along  with the  persistence of a long list of 
older,  well-tested,  economic  verities.  Inventories,  especially  among  producers  and  purchasers  of 
high-tech products, did run to excess over the past year, as sales forecasts went badly astray; alas, 
technology has not allowed us to see into the future any more clearly than we could previously. But 
technology  did  facilitate  the  quick  recognition  of  the  weakening  in  sales  and  backup  of  inventories. 
This enabled producers to respond forcefully, as evidenced by output adjustments that have resulted 
in the extraordinary rate of inventory liquidation we experienced late last year. 
For the period just ahead, the central tendency of the forecasts of the members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee is for real GDP to rise 2-1/2 to 3 percent during 2002. Such a pace for the growth of 
real output is somewhat below the rates of growth typically seen early in previous expansions. Certain 
factors,  such  as  the  lack  of  pent-up  demand  in  the  consumer  sector,  significant  levels  of  excess 
capacity in a number of industries, weakness and financial fragility in some key international trading 
partners,  and  persistent  caution  in  financial  markets  at  home,  seem  likely  to  restrain  the  near-term 
performance of the economy. 
In  line  with  past  experience  during  the  early  stages  of  expansion,  labor  market  performance  is 
expected initially to lag as firms rely primarily on overtime and shifts from part-time to full-time work. 
The  unemployment  rate  is  anticipated  to  rise  somewhat  further  over  2002,  to  the  area  of  6  to 
6-1/4 percent. FOMC members evidently anticipate that slack in resource utilization, the lagged effects 
of past declines in energy prices, and productivity growth will keep inflation low this year, with the price 
index for personal consumption expenditure increasing about 1-1/2 percent.  
Despite its forecast that economic growth is likely to resume at a moderate pace, as I already noted, 
the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  at  its  meeting  on  January  30  saw  the  risks  nonetheless  as 
continuing  to  be  weighted  mainly  toward  conditions  that  may  generate  economic  weakness  in  the 
foreseeable future. In effect, the FOMC indicated that until the dynamics of sustained expansion are 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2002
 more firmly in place, it remained concerned about the possibility of weak growth for a time, despite the 
very low level of the federal funds rate. 
Although there are ample reasons to be cautious about the economic outlook, the recuperative powers 
of the U.S. economy, as I have tried to emphasize in my presentation, have been remarkable. When I 
presented our report on monetary policy to this Committee last summer, few if any of us could have 
anticipated events such as those to which our nation has subsequently been subjected. The economic 
consequences of those events and their aftermath are an integral part of the many challenges that we 
now  collectively  face.  The  U.S.  economy  has  experienced  a  substantial  shock,  and,  no  doubt,  we 
continue  to  face  risks  in  the  period  ahead.  But  the  response  thus  far  of  our  citizens  to  these  new 
economic challenges provides reason for encouragement. 
BIS Review 14/2002 
 7
