 Tony Latter: Hong Kong's currency board today - the unexpected challenge of 
deflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Tony  Latter,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the 
conference on "Alternative exchange rate regimes in the globalised world", organised by Eesti Pank to 
mark ten years of the currency board in Estonia, Tallinn, 11 June 2002. 
 The conquest of inflation 
Those of us here today  who once studied economics almost certainly did so in a period of at least 
mild, if not quite rapid inflation. And those of us who are central bankers have for the majority of our 
working lives been struggling to cope with inflation. So it's hardly surprising that back in 1983, when 
the Hong Kong authorities pegged the Hong Kong dollar to the United States dollar, we didn't seriously 
contemplate any deflationary scenario. The US inflation rate in the early 1980s was averaging some 
4% pa and, not possessing any special forecasting capability in this field, we must have reckoned that 
it  would  remain  near  that  figure.  In  addition,  the  textbooks  would  have  told  us  that  structural  and 
developmental factors would tend to make Hong Kong's inflation rate somewhat faster than that of the 
US - as indeed it was for the ensuing fourteen years. Neither a significantly lower rate of US inflation 
nor  a  situation  where  Hong  Kong's  rate  was  significantly  below  the  US  rate  would  have  been 
considered at all likely. 
Yet Hong Kong now finds itself with a consumer price level that is 12% below the peak of four years 
ago, and with a GDP deflator some 15% below its peak and 22% lower relative to that of the US than it 
was four years ago. What is the explanation, and can one live with this? 
There is general consensus, supported by both recent IMF analysis and research conducted within the 
HKMA, that Hong Kong's deflation is predominantly cyclical. I shall return to Hong Kong in a minute, 
but let me first dwell for a moment on the global slowdown in inflation. 
Over the past four years the rate of consumer price inflation has averaged 2.5% in the USA, only 1.7% 
in Euroland, minus 0.3% in Japan, and minus 0.3% in Mainland China. In six other economies of east 
and south-east Asia taken together, the inflation rate fell to 2.7% on average in these four years as 
against 4.4% in the preceding four.1 This widespread slowdown  in  inflation, and in some cases the 
emergence  of  deflation,  is  not  just  a  cyclical  phenomenon.  There  are,  I  believe,  some  more 
fundamental institutional and structural factors which have been contributing. 
Underlying forces 
Successful central banks  
a. 
First  of  these  is  the  commitment  of  monetary  authorities  to  combatting  inflation  and  their  evident 
success in doing so (or even over-achievement in some instances). With so many of them represented 
here today, I do not need to elaborate further. 
The supply side - history repeats itself  
b.  
Second  is  the  argument  that  the  world  is  merely  reverting  to  its  more  natural  historical  state  of 
declining price levels, following the interruption of the second world war and ensuing decades.2 The 
current deflationary tendency is, on this view, being driven not only by the IT revolution but also by the 
evolution  of  China  and  some  other  emerging  economies  as  a  huge  competitive  and  price-reducing 
force in world markets, in a manner reminiscent of the productivity surge and market opening which 
                                                      
1   Average for Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand, weighted by nominal GDP. Indonesia is 
excluded  because  of  its  considerable  institutional  and  political  instability  in  the  period  -  it  suffered  particularly  intense 
inflation in 1998-99. 
I am grateful to Eisuke Sakakibara for a lucid exposition of this point in an address last month to the Hong Kong Foreign 
Exchange  and  Market  Practices  Committee.  The  69th  Annual  Report  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (pages 
77-81) provides an interesting snapshot of the topic, as seen three years ago. 
2  
BIS Review 38/2002 
 1
 produced  falling  price  levels  in  other  parts  of  the  globe  in  the  closing  decades  of  the  nineteenth 
century. 
Allow me to digress for a moment into this history. As illustrated in the accompanying charts, in the 
thirty years 1865-95 consumer prices are estimated to have fallen by 48% in the United States and 
27% in the United Kingdom - average compound rates of decline of about 2% and 1% respectively.3 
This  is  generally  regarded  as  having  been  a  supply-side-driven  phenomenon  arising  from  rapid 
productivity growth alongside abundant labour supply, aided by and the opening-up of new markets 
globally. Real GDP growth averaged 5-6% (boosted by immigration) in the USA and 1?% in the UK in 
that period. Subsequently, modest inflation took over, but inflation did not reach a serious scale until 
the first world war.4 
The  inter-war  years  were  rather  different  from  the  late  nineteenth  century  episode.  There  was  a 
mixture  of  deflation  and  inflation  -  but  with  the  former  being  more  the  result  of  monetary  policy 
mistakes,  such  as  those  associated  with  the  Great  Depression,  than  of  supply-side  forces  such  as 
were  so  plainly  evident  half  a  century  earlier.  Inflation  did  not  really  become  re-established  on  a 
significant scale until the second world war, after which it persisted for most of the remainder of the 
twentieth century. 
Most recently, the potential problems posed by deflation, particularly in a financially developed world 
where debt and balance sheets interact, have become apparent, most notably perhaps in Japan. 
All in all, there is perhaps a mixed message from these historical examples. It may be possible to live 
comfortably  with  a  modest  pace  of  deflation,  especially  if  it  reflects  benign  supply-side  influences. 
Nevertheless, monetary policy might usefully be engaged to avert it. 
Globalisation and the pervasiveness of the law of one price  
c.  
Returning to the factors behind current price trends, there is one aspect of globalisation which may be 
especially relevant. This is the rapid expansion of the range of globally traded output (in contrast to 
efficiency gains within some pre-defined range), with resultant implications for prices. In the past it was 
common to observe more rapid domestic inflation in economies enjoying faster productivity growth, as 
wages rose and the prices of non-tradables accelerated, dragging up the consumer price index. This 
mechanism, based on an assumed clear analytic distinction between price behaviour of tradables and 
non-tradables,  may  still  be  at  work,  but  surely  it  is  not  as  powerful  as  it  used  to  be.  The  range  of 
tradables  is  expanding  relative  to  that  of  non-tradables.  While  it  has  long  been  acknowledged  that 
progressively  more  goods  are  becoming  tradable  because  of,  for  example,  advances  in  freight 
transportation, the revolution in respect of services may now be more significant. Thus, many services 
which were in the past produced only in the country where they were consumed can nowadays be out-
sourced offshore or accessed from somewhere else in the world at the click of a mouse - back-office 
processing, multi-functional call-centre services, legal advice, logistics management, design services 
for everything from clothes to buildings, and even certain forms of medical consultation or education, 
to name but a few. Moreover, buyers of services increasingly elect to travel elsewhere to consume 
them. Thus the international price elasticity of a wedding ceremony, a game of golf, hospital or health 
spa  treatment,  or  conference  facilities  is  ever  rising.  Soon  there  will  remain  only  very  few 
location-specific activities - heritage tourism perhaps, but even that is not immune from the pressure of 
the law of one price, if one considers the competing heritage sites around the world. 
I see some evidence in Hong Kong of the impact of this process of more broad-based globalisation, 
and I am sure it is happening elsewhere too. Liberalisation of trade policies and the achievements of 
the  WTO  will  also  have  contributed.  Thus,  deflation  is  being  driven  in  part  by  the  expansion  and 
intensification of competition across an ever larger range of sectors and countries. This may explain 
why some price surprises on the macro-policy front in the recent past have been on the downside, but 
if central banks can digest this ingredient there is no reason why they should be more than temporarily 
knocked off course by it. 
                                                      
3   For the UK, the peak-to-trough comparison would be 1873-95, during which the average compound deflation rate was 1.7% 
pa. 
4   My thanks to HKMA colleagues Daryl Ho and Lu Dai for researching the historical data. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2002
 Hong Kong 
In Hong Kong, other contributors to deflation over the past few years have been the general strength 
of the US dollar and the process of price equalisation across the border with the Mainland, although 
both the IMF and we in the HKMA have found that this latter effect is rather weaker overall than a few 
well publicised examples might lead one to believe.5 
Hong  Kong's  deflation,  of  some  12%  in  CPI  terms  over  four  years,  seems,  however,  to  be 
considerably more than could be accounted for by the above list of essentially non-cyclical factors. We 
therefore  infer  that  much  of  it  has  been  cyclical.  To  what  extent  has  the  currency  board  been 
responsible for this cycle? 
About half of the fall in our CPI can be attributed to a collapse of property prices, which feed through 
both directly and indirectly to the CPI. This in turn was largely the result of the bursting of a previous 
asset price bubble. This is the part of our deflation which may appear most obviously to be linked to 
domestic monetary conditions rather than to any global cyclical factors. However, although it is clear 
that  monetary  conditions  in  Hong  Kong  were,  as  a  consequence  of  being  tied  to  those  in  the  US 
through  the  currency  board  mechanism,  looser  during  the  mid-1990s  than  one  might  ideally  have 
wished,  and  although  empirical  research  suggests  that  there  is  a  relationship  between  the  property 
cycle  and  interest  rates,  this  relationship  is  not  found  to  be  a  particularly  robust  or  powerful  one. 
Moreover,  there  were  other  factors  contributing  to  the  developing  property  price  bubble  in  the 
mid-1990s, such as the strong  overall  performance of the economy, linked to rapid development in 
Mainland China, some euphoria ahead of the return of Hong Kong to China in 1997, demographics, 
and the impact of local land release and public housing policies.6 The cessation or reversal of such 
influences helps explain the subsequent downturn. 
All in all, therefore, there is quite a range of factors which have come together to produce deflation in 
Hong Kong. There would be little point in asking precisely how much of deflation can be blamed on the 
currency  peg  since,  before  answering,  one  would  need  to  specify  what  sort  of  monetary  policy  the 
authorities would have pursued instead of a currency board. In the absence of a liquidity trap (possibly 
a significant proviso in this age), it should be possible to choose a policy which could succeed in the 
narrow objective of eliminating deflation, at whatever cost or benefit in terms of other policy objectives. 
But the currency board regime rules out such a choice, and in this sense it cannot escape from being 
ascribed some significance in the explanation of Hong Kong's price deflation. 
Does price deflation matter? 
In addressing this question, some attention tends to focus on the fact that negative inflation may in 
certain circumstances imply undesirably high real rates, and that, in particular, it rules out negative real 
interest  rates  (at  least  when  measured  simplistically  by  adjusting  nominal  rates  for  immediate  past 
price movements), which may be deemed appropriate during a period of deflation. But it is not obvious 
that real rates of themselves have much of an influence on the intertemporal consumption decision - 
for example, there is little evidence of people having abstained from purchasing electronic goods over 
the past several decades despite fairly certain knowledge that prices would be lower tomorrow, and 
there is a limit to the extent that one can delay buying food or clothing. And, as regards the investment 
spending, it is not the real interest rate calculated by reference to the CPI which is relevant, but the 
user cost - the nominal interest rate relative to the expected future net yield from the asset in question, 
adjusted for depreciation. Prices of different asset classes adjust according to market forces and the 
user-cost arithmetic, which may not be particularly sensitive to changes in the broader price level per 
se.  In  this  light,  it  is  at  least  questionable  whether  mild  overall  deflation  would  be  a  material 
impediment to investment decisions. 
What  might  be  more  significant  than  impact  of  deflation  via  the  interest  rate  is  the  effect  of  the 
deflationary  process  on  real  incomes  and  profits.  If  prices  are  driven  down  by  competitive  forces, 
profits are squeezed, which may impact adversely on future investment. It may serve as a harsh signal 
of the need to restructure or diversify. At the same time, if nominal wages remain unchanged, workers 
will have a gain in real income. We witnessed this in Hong Kong, but it did little to sustain consumption 
                                                      
5   See Philip Schellekens, "Deflation in Hong Kong SAR", IMF Working Paper, forthcoming; and Jiming Ha and Kelvin Fan, 
"Price convergence between Hong Kong and the Mainland", HKMA Research Memorandum, forthcoming. 
6  For  a  full  analysis  see Wensheng  Peng,  "What  drives  property  prices  in  Hong  Kong?",  HKMA  Research  Memorandum, 
forthcoming. 
BIS Review 38/2002 
 3
 because of caution over job security. After a while, both nominal pay began to adjust downwards and 
unemployment began to rise. Although it may still be true that many  of those in work are better off 
(having suffered reductions in pay of less than the amount of price deflation over the four year period), 
many  others  have  lost  their  jobs  or  have  had  to  settle  for  lower-paid  positions.  Meanwhile,  the 
reduction in real profits corresponding to the buoyancy of real wages may have dampened investment 
spending, although supporting empirical evidence is scarce. 
Overall  it  has,  in  practice,  proved  difficult  to  identify  what  impact  deflation  of  goods  and  services 
prices, of itself, may have had on activity. In general, however, because the degree of downward wage 
flexibility in Hong Kong is probably greater than elsewhere, the economy is believed to be better able 
than  others  to  cope  with  this  type  of  deflationary  pressure  and  to  avoid  severe  distributional 
disequilibria. 
Deflation  of  asset  prices  is  a  rather  different  issue.  We  have  certainly  experienced  some  negative 
wealth effects, particularly on household expenditure, as a result of the sharp drop in property prices. 
One factor enabling Hong Kong to live with deflation perhaps better than some other economies is the 
resilience  of  the  banking  system  and  its  ability  to  cope  with  debt  deflation.  A  long  tradition  of  fairly 
conservative prudential oversight of the banks has left them strong enough to weather the recession. 
Although  we  have  demonstrated  that  we  can  live  with  deflation,  a  modest  positive  rate  of  inflation 
might  nevertheless  be  preferred  to  our  current  modest  negative  rate.  And  it  would  certainly  be 
desirable to avoid gyrations of property prices of the sort which have brought such a sharp deflation 
there in recent years. However, we do not regard the exchange rate as a viable instrument for trying to 
dispel  deflation. We  would  not  consider  it  worthwhile  sacrificing  our  long  track  record  of  disciplined 
monetary stability for that purpose. 
Conclusion - lessons from the 1990s 
Allow me to set my concluding remarks in the contest of the specific question posed for this panel, 
namely "Fix versus float - what have we learned from the 1990s?" My answer falls into two parts. 
First,  the  1990s  served  to  confirm  what  had  already  become  apparent  from  our  experience  with  a 
currency  board  in  the  1980s,  namely  that  a  currency  board  can  be  a  viable  and,  arguably,  optimal 
regime  for  certain  types  of  economy,  but  not  all.  The  necessary  conditions  for  success  include 
sufficiently  flexible  costs  and  prices,  a  sound  banking  system,  adequate  fiscal  discipline  and  the 
requisite foreign exchange reserves to back the monetary base, preferably free of other encumbrance. 
Not all these desiderata were satisfied in one instance of a 1990s' currency board, which has since 
passed into history. 
The second lesson concerns the novel feature to emerge late in the 1990s and persist through to the 
current decade - namely deflation. Society globally has been re-learning how to live with this, after a 
gap of a lifetime. It seems perfectly possible to live with modest deflation, as our ancestors did, once 
you have adapted to it. We are reasonably confident that the US economy, to whose monetary stance 
we in Hong Kong are tied, will not develop in such a way as to make our problem - if that is indeed 
what it is - any worse. While a floating regime plainly provides greater flexibility to attempt to influence 
the  price  level  (although  such  attempts  may  not  always  succeed),  Hong  Kong  sees  no  reason  to 
abandon its monetary regime, which has served the economy well for almost twenty years. 
 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2002
     
Source:  International  historical  statistics:  Europe  1750-1993  /  B.  R.  Mitchell,  London:  Macmillan 
Reference; New York, N.Y.: Stockton Press, 1998  
BIS Review 38/2002 
 5
