 David Carse: Anti-money laundering and the role of supervision 
Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Hong 
Kong Institute of Bankers, Hong Kong, 23 August 2002. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
I welcome the opportunity to talk to the Institute on the subject of the fight against money laundering 
and the role that supervision plays in this. This is a good time to speak on this subject since we are 
currently reviewing our 1997 anti-money laundering guideline in the light of the latest developments in 
this area. I will use this speech to highlight some of the issues that we are addressing. 
It is also a useful occasion for me to remind the bankers gathered here today how important it is to 
combat money laundering. This should really go without saying and I do not intend to dwell on it too 
much.  The  key  message  is  that  authorized  institutions  (“AIs”)  should  view  anti-money  laundering 
systems  as  an  essential  means  of  self-preservation  -  and  not  as  a  nuisance  or  an  unnecessary 
expense that is imposed upon them. 
The events of 9/11 have heightened the international concern about money laundering. There is less 
and  less  patience  with  jurisdictions,  and  their  banks,  that  do  not  comply  with  the  international 
standards laid down by bodies like the Financial Action Task Force (“FATF”). The FATF has begun to 
“name and shame” jurisdictions that it regards as non-cooperative countries and territories (“NCCTs”) 
in tackling money laundering. Such NCCTs will be subject to sanctions if they do not come into line. 
Moreover, banks from NCCTs are caught under the newly enacted US Patriot Act. Such banks, and 
any others regarded as higher risk from a money laundering perspective, will be subject to increased 
scrutiny by their US correspondent banks and the US authorities. At worst, higher risk foreign banks 
could eventually find themselves shut out of the US payments system. 
Hong Kong has a good reputation internationally as a financial centre that takes seriously the need to 
combat money laundering. I am sure that you will agree that we all have a vested interest in keeping it 
that way - which means that we need to keep in line with international standards as they evolve. 
identify suspicious customers and transactions; 
report suspicious transactions to the Joint Financial Intelligence Unit (“JFIU”); and 
assist the law enforcement authorities through providing an audit trail. 
The role of the HKMA 
The  role  of  the  HKMA  in  this  is  to  work  with  the  other  relevant  authorities  in  Hong  Kong  -  the 
Commissioner  for  Narcotics,  the  law  enforcers  and  other  regulators  -  to  ensure  that  we  have  an 
effective framework to deter, detect and report cases of money laundering. Our particular responsibility 
relates to AIs. It is our job to verify that AIs have adequate policies, procedures and controls in place to 
enable them to: 
• 
• 
• 
We do this through  issuing guidelines that lay  down the minimum standards that institutions should 
incorporate in their anti-money laundering systems. We then carry out on-site examinations to check 
that these standards are being adhered to. This year we introduced a two-tier, risk-based approach 
towards  examinations.  In  cases  where  AIs  may  be  at  higher  risk  of money  laundering,  we  conduct 
more  in-depth  examinations  using  specialist  teams.  This  may  involve  sample  testing  and  visits  to 
branches to look at how controls actually work in practice and to ascertain at first hand the knowledge 
and awareness of staff. In more routine cases, higher level review of anti-money laundering controls is 
conducted, generally as part of our normal risk-based examinations. 
We  intend  to  supplement  our  own  examinations  with  a  system  of  self-assessment  by  compliance 
officers of AIs on risk indicators of money  laundering within  their own institutions and the quality  of 
BIS Review 47/2002 
 1
 controls. This will be done using a structured self-assessment framework that we aim to release to the 
industry  later  this  year.  This  should  help  the  HKMA  to  conserve  its  own  resources  and  direct  them 
where  they  are  most  needed.  But  it  should  also  serve  to  remind  AIs  that  they  have  the  primary 
responsibility for making sure that their own house is in order. 
The HKMA guideline 
Checking that standards are being observed is obviously important. But it is necessary to ensure that 
the standards themselves remain effective in dealing with risks. That is why we are currently engaged 
in reviewing our anti-money laundering guideline. 
In  doing  so,  we  are  making  particular  reference  to  two  main  sources.  The  first  is  the  paper  on 
Customer Due Diligence for Banks issued by the Basel Committee in October 2001. The other is the 
consultation  paper  released  by  the  FATF  in  May  of  this  year  on  its  review  of  the  FATF  Forty 
Recommendations  that  set  the  international  standards  on  anti-money  laundering.  I  would  strongly 
recommend  that  all  AIs  familiarise  themselves  with  both  documents.  Comments  on  the  FATF 
Consultation Paper are due by the end of this month. 
The process of revising the FATF Recommendations will probably not be completed until some time 
next year. Final revisions to our own guideline will probably have to wait until then. In the meantime, 
however, we are reluctant simply to leave our existing guideline unchanged. There may be a number 
of areas where it is possible for it to be updated to reflect the current international consensus and to 
draw together pieces of guidance on particular issues that have appeared in circulars over the last few 
years. We are considering the best way to do this. One option is to issue a supplement to the existing 
guideline, pending the final revisions. Whatever we do will, as always, be the subject of consultation 
with the industry. 
In  some  places  the  revised  standards  may  have  to  be  tighter  and  permit  fewer  exceptions  than  at 
present. But we will try wherever possible to be sympathetic to AIs’ concerns on compliance costs. 
Terrorist financing 
The most obvious thing we need to do is to incorporate into our guideline specific recommendations 
relating to terrorist financing. In particular, we need to make AIs aware of their responsibilities under 
the United Nations (Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance that was enacted in July of this year and will 
begin to come into operation in the near future. The New Ordinance is intended to meet Hong Kong’s 
commitments under the FATF’s eight Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing. To that end, it 
criminalises the financing of terrorism and associated money laundering and provides for the freezing 
of terrorist-related funds. It also imposes an obligation on AIs and other persons to report knowledge 
or suspicion that funds are linked to terrorism. 
We  have  already  asked  AIs  to  report  to  the  JFIU  suspicious  transactions  that  may  be  related  to 
terrorism. But the legal obligation to do so is now clear and unambiguous, as is the criminal offence of 
dealing in terrorist funds. AIs therefore need to ensure that they have the necessary measures in place 
to comply with the law. 
This is not an easy task. It is accepted that terrorist financing is difficult to detect even when AIs are 
provided with lists of terrorist suspects. The FATF published in April of this year a document called 
Guidance for Financial Institutions in Detecting Terrorist Financing that I would recommend you to look 
at. Among other things, this provides advice on the characteristics of financial transactions that may 
arouse suspicion, particularly when one or more of the parties is known or suspected to be a terrorist 
or terrorist organisation. 
Even if there is no evidence of a direct terrorist connection, a transaction should still be reported to the 
JFIU  if  it  looks  suspicious  for  other  reasons.  This  obviously  applies  to  remittances  as  well  as  the 
opening of an account. It may subsequently emerge that there is a terrorist link. Thus, success in the 
fight against terrorist financing depends in large measure on the overall quality of AIs’ controls against 
money laundering - in particular, their ability to detect suspicious transactions. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2002
  The customer due diligence process 
This in turn depends on an institution’s knowledge of its customers and what is a normal pattern of 
account activity for a particular customer. It is crucial therefore for AIs’ to have effective systems for 
customer  due  diligence.  The  main  essentials  are  already  there  in  the  HKMA’s  guideline,  which 
requires AIs to make reasonable efforts to determine the customer’s true identity. But the process may 
need to be articulated more clearly so that AIs are in no doubt about what they should be doing. 
The  FATF’s  Consultation  Paper  is  useful  in  spelling  out  the  main  elements  of  the  due  diligence 
process, namely: 
• 
• 
• 
to identify the direct customer; 
to verify the customer’s identity; 
to identify the person with beneficial ownership and control, who may be different from the 
direct customer; 
to verify the identity of the beneficial owner and/or the person on whose behalf a transaction 
is being conducted; and 
to conduct ongoing due diligence and scrutiny. 
• 
A  number  of  features  stand  out  from  this.  First,  the  process  of  know  your  customer  is  a  two-stage 
process  -  identification  and  verification.  Second,  there  is  a  clear  obligation  on  institutions  to  look 
behind the corporate veil, nominee or trustee to the ultimate beneficial owner. If necessary, this means 
following the chain of ownership or control to the natural persons at the very end of the chain. There 
are obvious practical difficulties in this, which we can discuss with the industry. But the basic issue is 
whether  it  is  safe  for  institutions  to  establish  a  banking  relationship  if  they  do  not  really  know  with 
whom they are dealing. 
The  third  point  to  note  is  that  the  due  diligence  process  does  not  apply  simply  at  the  time  the 
relationship  with  the  customer  is  entered  into.  It  must  be  an  ongoing  process  using  detection  and 
reporting  mechanisms  that  can  pick  up  large  or  unusual  transactions.  The  compliance  officer 
appointed to take overall charge of the institution’s anti-money laundering efforts should play an active 
role in the monitoring process and should not simply be the passive recipient of ad hoc reports from 
front-line staff. 
It also follows that AIs must not only know their customer but also know their customer’s business and 
the source of funds flowing into the account in sufficient detail to establish a benchmark against which 
to judge unusual transactions. This information will need to be updated, where appropriate, over the 
life of the account. 
High risk customers 
There is a certain basic amount of checking that must be done for all customers. But some may pose 
a  higher  than  average  risk  of  money  laundering  to  the  institution  and  thus  require  enhanced  due 
diligence.  AIs  should  therefore  adopt  a  risk-based  approach,  with  policies  and  procedures  for 
identifying higher risk customers. We shall try to offer AIs guidance on the type of risk factors that they 
should be looking out for. But basically these factors can be summed up in terms of: who the customer 
is;  what  he  does;  where  he  comes  from  and  where  he  does  business;  and  how  the  account  is 
operated. 
Judged against these benchmarks, possible examples of high-risk customers that AIs should be on 
the look-out for, include the following: 
• 
politically  exposed  persons  -  these  are  individuals  holding  important  public  positions  and 
those related to them. Banks that deal with corrupt PEPs expose themselves to risk of bad 
publicity, legal action and possible financial loss; 
other types of private banking customer - particularly from those jurisdictions where the risk 
of money laundering is severe or whose business makes them more susceptible to money 
laundering; 
correspondent banks - particularly those from NCCTs or other high-risk jurisdictions where 
there are doubts about compliance with FATF standards. Specifically, AIs should beware of 
  BIS Review 47/2002 
 3
  so-called  “shell  banks”,  which  operate  without  a  physical  presence  in  their  place  of 
incorporation; and 
corporate  vehicles  of  various  types  -  including  offshore  companies  and  trusts  where  the 
objective may be to disguise the beneficial ownership. 
Business introduced by intermediaries 
Even with a risk-based approach, the process of identification and verification is an onerous one. It is 
natural  therefore  that  AIs  may  wish  to  rely  on  the  due  diligence  procedures  undertaken  by 
intermediaries who introduce business to them. However, experience has shown that this can expose 
institutions to risk if the intermediaries do not do their job properly. In particular, in Hong Kong, there 
have  been  a  number  of  cases  where  secretarial  companies  or  company  formation  agents  have 
opened  bank  accounts  on  behalf  of  shell  companies  without  conducting  proper  verification  of  the 
underlying  principals.  There  are  cases  of  such  companies  being  used  as  the  vehicle  for  bogus 
investment schemes. 
We  wrote  to  the  industry  on  this  last  year,  and  the  basic  message  bears  repeating.  While  it  is 
permissible for AIs to rely on intermediaries to carry out checks on the identity of potential customers 
and the source of their funds, the ultimate responsibility still rests with AIs to know their customers and 
their customers’ business. 
Intermediaries  should  therefore  only  be  used  if  the  AI  is  satisfied  that  they  apply  due  diligence 
standards and procedures as rigorous as those of the AI itself and are “fit and proper”. It helps in this 
respect if the intermediary is itself regulated or is the member of a reputable professional body. The AI 
should  monitor  the  track  record  of  the  intermediary  and  the  performance  of  the  accounts  that  it 
introduces.  All  relevant  identification  data  used  by  the  intermediary  to  verify  the  customer’s  identity 
should  be  submitted  for  review  by  the  AI.  This  latter  requirement  is  not  currently  mandated  for  all 
intermediaries  in  our  current  guideline;  and  we  will  need  to  consider  whether  this  exception  is  still 
appropriate. 
A  further  issue  relates  to  the  treatment  of  client  accounts  opened  by  solicitors  or  accountants.  At 
present,  we  allow  such  intermediaries  to  rely  on  professional  secrecy  codes  as  a  reason  for  not 
disclosing the identity of the underlying principals. Non-disclosure may be acceptable in the case of 
pooled accounts where the funds held by the intermediary are co-mingled at the bank. But where the 
account is opened on behalf of a single client, the justification is much less clear. Again, this is an area 
where change may be required. 
Existing customers 
As I have already mentioned, it is likely that AIs will have to upgrade their due diligence procedures in 
some  respects  to  comply  with  changing  international  standards.  Obviously,  these  enhanced 
procedures  would  be  applied  to  new  banking  relationships.  But  this  begs  the  question  about  what 
should  be  done  in  relation  to  existing  customers.  To  what  extent  should  institutions  go  back  and 
undertake renewed verification of the identity of existing customers? 
Our current view is that we should not impose an across the board requirement in this respect, but it 
would certainly be sensible to review those existing customers who fall into higher risk categories. The 
six major banks in the UK have just announced that they will undertake a risk-based initiative of this 
type.  I  would  encourage  those  AIs  with  a  large  customer  base  to  do  the  same.  Other  triggers  for 
review of existing records may arise when a customer undertakes a significant transaction and where 
there is a material change in account operation or customer documentation standards. 
The way forward 
These are some, but by no means all, of the current issues we are considering in the context of our 
revised guideline. We hope to have something ready for consultation with the industry later in the year. 
While this may impose new obligations on AIs, we will try to ensure that these are of a nature that well-
managed institutions would adopt of their own accord. After all, in essence, they amount to no more 
than being sure that you really do know your customer. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2002
