 Svein Gjedrem: Inflation targeting in an oil economy 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at Sparebanken 
Møre, Ålesund, 4 June 2002. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Norway is unique in being both a fully developed economy and a major oil exporter. Last year, Norway 
was the  world’s third  largest exporter of oil. In the future,  we  will become an increasingly  important 
exporter of natural gas. 
The present value of remaining petroleum reserves has been estimated at NOK 2 200bn, or roughly 
1½ times our current GDP. The bulk of Norway’s petroleum wealth will be extracted over a period of 
40 years, from 1990 to 2030. 
New  technology  has  had  a  significant  impact  on  our  future  production  potential.  In  spite  of  rapid 
production growth, the estimated present value of our petroleum wealth has increased some 35-40 per 
cent over the last ten years, measured in real terms. As an example, the registered oil reserves in the 
Ekofisk field are larger today than when the field started production 30 years ago. 
Revenues from the petroleum sector have generated a fiscal surplus of some 10-15 per cent since 
2000.  A  similar  surplus  is  generated  on  the  current  account,  reflecting  capital  outflows  to  the 
Government Petroleum Fund. Even in 1998, when the oil price fell to 10 USD/barrel, Norway had a 
fiscal surplus of some 4 per cent of GDP. 
The  existence  of  abundant  natural  resources  can  be  a  mixed  blessing.  Experience  elsewhere 
suggests  that  the  sudden  occurrence  of  major  income  flows  tends  to  undermine  future  production 
potential. 
In  the  long  term,  it  is  difficult  to  ensure  an  efficient  distribution  of  wealth  between  and  within 
generations without triggering rent-seeking behaviour among households and firms. In the short term, 
the volatility in income flows and in terms of trade poses a challenge for monetary and fiscal policy. 
The mixed blessing of national wealth is not a new problem. Vigilant observers were already aware of 
this in the 17th century. In modern economic language, the Moroccan ambassador to Spain pointed to 
the problem of deteriorating competitiveness 300 years ago (see Chart 2). 
The  main  long-term  challenge  to  economic  policy  is  how  the  returns  on  petroleum  wealth  can  be 
phased into the economy without a deterioration of our future growth potential. 
Even with our substantial petroleum reserves, human capital is by far our most important resource. It 
accounts for over 80 per cent of Norway’s national wealth (present value of future labour). 
Income  from  oil  and  gas  is  transferred  to  financial  assets  through  the  government  budget.  These 
transfers  are  large  in  terms  of  GDP,  but  still  minor  compared  with  our  human  capital.  Oil  and  gas 
reserves account for about 7 percent of national wealth today, whereas in 2030 these reserves will be 
reduced to only 1-2 per cent. 
To meet these challenges, the Norwegian Government Petroleum Fund was established on 22 June 
1990. Its main objective is to manage assets and distribute wealth between generations. It also serves 
as  a  buffer  against  shocks:  changes  in  petroleum  revenues  are  absorbed  by  the  Fund,  not  by  the 
domestic  economy.  This  reduces  the  need  for  structural  adjustments  and  thus  promotes  exchange 
rate stability. 
The Fund invests only in foreign markets. Investments are spread between equities and fixed income 
instruments,  as  well  as  across  countries.  The  net  annual  inflow  to  the  Fund  equals  the  net  fiscal 
surplus plus the return on the Fund’s capital. 
In  March  2001,  a  broad  majority  in  the  Norwegian  parliament  (the  Storting)  adopted  a  new  set  of 
guidelines for fiscal and monetary policy. According to the new guideline for fiscal policy, petroleum 
revenues are to be phased in approximately in pace with the expected real return on the Government 
Petroleum Fund. 
  The  guideline  makes  fiscal  policy  predictable  and  anchors  it  in  a  long-term  strategy.  It  also  makes 
policy robust to changes in oil prices and ensures that petroleum wealth will be of benefit both today 
and in the future. 
The guidelines imply that the structural non-oil budget deficit will equal 4 per cent of the total value of 
the Fund. The non-oil deficit is thus financed by the return on the Fund, ensuring both long-term fiscal 
balance and a continued phasing in of petroleum revenues. 
The use of petroleum revenues will accordingly increase as long as the Petroleum Fund is expanding. 
Fiscal policy will contribute to stimulating aggregate demand in the Norwegian economy every year. 
This  annual  expansionary  fiscal  impact  poses  a  challenge  to  stabilisation  policy  in  general  and 
monetary policy in particular. 
Underlying real expenditure growth has exceeded mainland GDP for the last 4 years. Nominal growth 
in 2002 is 7 per cent. (The deflator, mainly wages, is 4½ per cent). 
Measured  as  a  share  of  GDP,  public  expenditure  is  growing  rapidly.  In  2002  alone,  this  share  will 
increase by some 2½ percentage points.  According to the Revised National  Budget, an increase in 
expenditure of 7 per cent this year will lead to an estimated growth in public sector consumption of 
only 1½ per cent. The rest will be spent on government transfers and wage growth. This is consistent 
with close adherence to the new fiscal guidelines. 
The  new  guidelines  for  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  were  introduced  simultaneously,  and  are  not 
independent of each other. Fiscal policy is geared towards the phasing in of oil revenues; monetary 
policy has been given a more explicit responsibility for macroeconomic stabilisation. Monetary policy is 
to be oriented towards low and stable inflation. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. 
Monetary policy affects the economy with considerable and variable lags. The key rate is set on the 
basis of an overall assessment of the inflation outlook two years ahead. If it appears that inflation will 
be  higher  than  2½  per  cent  with  unchanged  interest  rates,  the  interest  rate  will  be  increased.  If  it 
appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will 
be reduced. 
It is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too 
high. 
Up to March 2001, the Bank pursued exchange rate stability against European currencies. Implicitly, 
this meant that inflation in Norway had to be kept at the target for the euro area. From 1999 onwards, 
the  ECB’s  target  was  defined  as  an  inflation  rate  below  2  per  cent.  Since  the  introduction  of  an 
inflation target, the underlying inflation rate has been around 2½ per cent. The rate of increase in the 
headline CPI has shown somewhat wider variations, but averaged 2¼ per cent in the 1990s. 
The  use  of  oil  revenues  must  be  counteracted  by  a  tight  monetary  policy.  A  tight  monetary  policy 
implies relatively high interest rates, a strong krone, or both. 
As fiscal policy creates demand for resources in public services and other sheltered sectors, industries 
exposed to foreign competition may be faced with difficulties finding labour and higher labour costs. 
The contest for resources is likely  to lead  to a real appreciation of the krone and a deterioration  of 
competitiveness in our exposed sectors. 
The  krone  exchange  rate  has  appreciated  as  a  result  of  a  wider  interest  rate  differential  between 
Norway  and  other  countries.  Combined  with  low  growth  abroad  and  increased  trade  with  low-cost 
countries such as China, this has led to a fall in import prices. The relatively high price increases of 
Norwegian products reflect high wage growth and a tight labour market. 
The krone exchange rate, measured against the trade-weighted index, has appreciated around 13 per 
cent  in  the  last  two  years.  However,  the  krone  was  exceptionally  weak  in  mid-2000.  The  krone  is 
4-5 per cent stronger today than in the early 1990s, and about as strong as the previous high in early 
1997. Thus, the recent strong showing of the krone is not without precedent. 
Changes  in  the  oil  price  have  time  and  again  been  an  important  factor  behind  exchange  rate 
movements. Empirical evidence shows that the exchange rate is affected mainly by large fluctuations 
in  the  oil  price.  The  krone  tends  to  depreciate  if  the  oil  price  is  very  low,  as  happened  during  the 
Russian crisis in 1998. On the other hand, the krone did not appreciate accordingly when the oil price 
surged from 1999 onwards. Hence, the relationship between the oil price and the exchange rate has 
not been evident for the last two years. Since late 2001, however, our currency may have been used 
as a hedge against the upside risk to the oil price, and this may have contributed to its appreciation. 
  Another factor behind the appreciation of the krone is the current low risk premium in global currency 
markets (measured by a global risk index, GRI). Since the beginning of this year, lower risk premiums 
have accompanied a stronger krone. Developments in the GRI were also an important factor during 
the Russian crisis in 1998-1999. 
When global risk premiums and interest rates are low, investors may turn to higher-yield currencies. 
There is also a tendency for more peripheral currencies to attract increased attention when volatility 
between the major global currencies is subdued and risk premiums are low. 
The  interest  rate  differential  has  been  an  important  explanation  for  the  movements  in  the  krone 
exchange rate, at least since the summer of 1999. A higher interest rate differential has accompanied 
a stronger krone. The krone has appreciated significantly since the beginning of this year, however, 
and apparently somewhat more than what can be explained by the interest rate differential alone. 
One  explanation  may  be  that  market  participants  react  to  signs  of  pressure  in  the  economy  by 
adjusting their interest rate expectations in the longer term. This has an impact on longer-term interest 
rates. Thus, movements in the exchange rate may be a result of changes in forward rates, as well as 
current interest rates. 
Since  early  January,  the  12-month  money  market  differential  appears  to  have  followed  the  krone 
exchange rate more closely than the 3-month differential. The pressure on internal resources seems to 
have  resulted  in  expectations  of  tight  monetary  conditions,  which  contributed  to  the  recent 
appreciation of the krone. 
The  nominal  appreciation  of  the  krone  has  been  accompanied  by  a  significant  real  appreciation  of 
Norwegian labour. Measured in local labour costs, cost competitiveness has been deteriorating since 
1997. For a time, profits in the exposed sector were not affected by the increase in labour costs, as the 
krone  depreciated.  However,  this  depreciation  could  not  last,  as  it  would  have  ignited  domestic 
inflationary pressures. 
Tight labour market conditions warrant a relatively tight monetary policy. Norwegian interest rates are 
not  very  high,  however,  when  our  wage  growth  is  compared  with  that  of  other  countries.  On  the 
contrary,  the recent appreciation of the krone  will  have  a cushioning  effect on inflation and thus on 
interest rates. 
Since  1998,  the  increase  in  labour  costs  has  been  between  5  and  7  per  cent.  This  year’s  wage 
negotiations  were  no  exception.  It  now  seems  evident  that  wage  growth  will  be  significantly  higher 
than  our  previous  estimate  of  5  per  cent  this  year.  The  carry-over  to  next  year  is  also  substantial, 
especially in retail trade and the public sector. 
It is evident from this year’s wage negotiations that our labour market is tight. 
Norges Bank kept interest rates unchanged at the Executive Board meeting on Wednesday, 22 May. 
The Bank changed its stance on future inflation risks. The main reason was the higher-than-projected 
wage increases. 
According to the Bank’s assessment of the risks associated with the inflation outlook, the appreciation 
of the krone cannot fully counteract stronger wage growth, faster growth in consumption, a higher oil 
price and a somewhat more favourable global economic outlook. 
 
                                                                