 Nicholas Garganas: The Greek economy within the euro area 
Address  by  Mr  Nicholas  C  Garganas,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  to  the  Hellenic 
American Bankers Association, New York, 23 April 2002. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  able  to  address  you  today  about  the  transformation  of  the  Greek 
economy over the last few years. Since the beginning of 2001, Greece has been participating in the 
euro area as its 12th member. Her entry to the euro area reflects the substantial progress which was 
made with macroeconomic stabilisation and convergence of the Greek economy to those of the other 
euro area member states. Disinflation, helped significantly by the monetary and exchange rate policies 
pursued  by  the  Bank  of  Greece,  alongside  fiscal  consolidation,  ensured  that  the  Maastricht  Treaty 
criteria for euro area entry were all met by early 2000. 
Introduction of euro notes and coins 
From 1 January 2002, Greece, along with the other countries of the euro area, introduced euro notes 
and coins. The operation, conducted swiftly and smoothly, and warmly welcomed by the public, has 
gone remarkably well. The success is all the more remarkable as Greece effectively had two  years 
less than the  other euro  area countries to  prepare for the physical introduction  of the euro, since  it 
became a member of the euro area only from the beginning of 2001. 
While the cash changeover represented the concluding act of the move to the single currency, many 
of the benefits of the euro materialized even before joining EMU. The successful cash changeover, 
which  marks  a further move  towards  successful  integration  with  EU  partner  countries,  will  reinforce 
these positive effects. 
Sound economic fundamentals 
Thanks to the successful nominal convergence process in the second half of the 1990s, which was a 
condition  for  joining  EMU,  Greece  can  now  count  on  sound  economic  fundamentals  and 
macroeconomic stability. 
Fiscal  consolidation  was  rewarded  last  year  by  the  general  government  position  being  in  balance; 
public  debt,  although  still  high  at  just  under  100  per  cent  of  GDP  at  the  end  of  2001,  has  been 
declining continuously from its peak of just over 111 per cent in 1996. 
One of the most remarkable economic developments of recent years has been Greece’s success in 
restoring low inflation. Consumer inflation averaged 17.25 per cent in the twenty-year period to 1994. 
By mid-1999 it had fallen to about 2 per cent. Rising inflation after the autumn of 1999 can mainly be 
attributed to higher oil prices and depreciation of the drachma, which, in turn, reflected the weakness 
of the euro against non-European currencies as well as the drachma’s necessary convergence (from 
an appreciated level) to its central rate within ERM II by the end of 2000. After subsequently subsiding 
to  below  3  per  cent  in  the  final  three  months  of  2001,  in  January  of  this  year  inflation  again 
accelerated, largely on account of an increase in domestic unprocessed food prices caused by severe 
winter  weather.  After  falling  by  one  percentage  point  to  3.4  per  cent  in  February,  it  rose  again,  to 
4.0 per  cent  this  time,  on  account  of  rising  oil  prices,  renewed  pressures  from  unprocessed  food 
prices, as well as upward rounding of prices (expressed exclusively in euro since March 1st). If we 
look at the last three years (1999-2001) as a whole, however, inflation averaged 3.1 per cent, a level 
not experienced since the 1960s. While inflation in Greece has been above the euro-average in recent 
years, this is to be expected in an economy, which is growing at a relatively fast rate compared with 
those  of  its  trading  partners.  This  result  reflects  the  so-called  productivity  bias  of  fast  growing 
economies. 
Macroeconomic  stabilisation  has  been  accompanied  by  healthy  growth  rates.  Since  1996  output 
growth has exceeded the euro area average. Greek growth has averaged 3.5 per cent compared with 
2.4 per cent in the euro area as a whole. The growth rate of real GDP was 4.1 per cent in both 2000 
and 2001 (provisional data), significantly higher than the euro area average of 3.3 per cent and 1.5 per 
cent, respectively.  
BIS Review 29/2002 
 1
 The growth differential widened considerably in 2001 as economic activity in Greece, benefiting from 
macroeconomic stability and the euro- entry-related decline in interest rates, held up well in the face of 
the global slowdown which hit most other euro area countries.  
Trends in the labour market have also been relatively satisfactory in recent years. The unemployment 
rate declined to 10.4 per cent in the first three quarters of 2001, i.e. 2 percentage points than at its 
peak in late 1999. But unemployment still remains the second highest (after Spain) in the euro area. 
Growth prospects 
While the forecast for Greek economic growth in 2002 was revised downwards in the aftermath of the 
11 September events, real growth is nevertheless projected to be within the range of 3.5 to 3.8 per 
cent.  This  strong  output  performance  is  expected  to  continue  in  the  medium  term.  Output  growth 
should  be  sustained  over  the  medium  term  by  relatively  robust  domestic  demand,  underpinned  by 
improved economic fundamentals, strong private investment spending, expenditures in preparation for 
the Olympic Games of 2004 and economic infrastructure projects partly financed by EU Community 
support  funds.  The  growing  openness  and  export  orientation  of  the  economy,  mainly  towards  the 
economies  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and  the  Balkan  countries  should  also  foster  growth.  In 
particular  the  return  to  stability  in  the  latter  countries  has  benefited  Greece  significantly.  The  2001 
update of the Stability and Growth Programme of Greece projects an average annual real GDP growth 
rate close to 4 per cent in 2003 and 2004. 
Higher growth than the rest of the euro area is necessary over the long run if standards of living in 
Greece (measured by GDP per capita in PPS), which are at present around 71 per cent of the EU 
average, are to converge  on the  European average. However, further structural reforms may prove 
critical to enhance growth over the longer term and accelerate real convergence. 
Further economic benefits to be expected from EMU membership 
Aside from macroeconomic stabilisation and enhanced growth prospects, there are further economic 
benefits to be expected from the adoption of the euro.  
1. 
As I mentioned earlier, the adoption of the single currency has further increased economic 
integration with the European partner countries, which will stimulate trade and investment. 
Transaction costs and uncertainty are reduced. The euro contributes to a stable environment 
that is less exposed to exchange-rate fluctuations. These factors will boost investment and 
trade. They will also encourage tourism, an important sector of the Greek economy .  
The  euro  is  contributing  to  greater  efficiency  of  the  European  economy  by  acting  as  a 
catalyst for the integration of financial markets. Greek companies will have access to a wider 
and  deeper financial market,  which means a lower cost of funds. Indeed, short-term bank 
lending rates to enterprises fell by almost 7 percentage points in the period December 1999 
to December 2001; long-term rates fell by 5.5 percentage points over the same period.  
Membership of EMU makes low inflation prospects more credible, and thus contributes both 
to  lower  interest  rates  and  to  moderate  wage  demands  based  on  lower  inflationary 
expectations.  
Adoption  of  the  euro  is  also  promoting  greater  efficiency  of  the  Greek  economy  by 
stimulating reforms in product, services and labour markets. Deregulation and a reduction of 
state intervention, in part through privatization, are important in reforming markets for goods 
and services. Increased labour market flexibility is also being encouraged.  
Against  these  benefits,  it  could  be  argued  that  with  EMU  membership  Greece  has  lost  its 
independent  exchange  rate  and  monetary  policies,  which  could  be  useful  instruments  for 
improving competitiveness and employment. However, it cannot be said that this loss is very 
great.  In  small  open  economies,  especially  those  with  strong  trade  unions,  nominal 
devaluations  are  quickly  offset  by  wage  increases  that  aim  to  avoid  a  cut  in  real  wages. 
Hence,  nominal  devaluations  do  not  lead  to  sustained  real  devaluations.  Greece  clearly 
comes in this category. A similar line of reasoning applies to a monetary expansion leading 
to temporarily low interest rates.  
BIS Review 29/2001
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
2 
 
 Challenges for the future 
Membership of the euro area brings with it new challenges for economic policy in the years ahead. 
With independent monetary  and exchange rate policies no  longer available to target national  policy 
goals,  emphasis  has  shifted  towards  fiscal  policy  and  to  policies  to  promote  labour  [and  product] 
market flexibility as a means of restoring strong non-inflationary growth in the face of a negative shock. 
Budgetary  policy  will  continue  to  be  geared  to  maintaining  public  finances  close  to  balance  or  in 
surplus  in  the  medium  run,  while  supporting  growth  by  acting  in  a  counter-cyclical  manner  (and 
allowing  automatic  stabilizers  to  work  fully)  as  envisaged  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This  is 
supplemented by the Greek authorities’ goal of reducing the General Government debt-to-GDP ratio to 
60 per cent by 2010. The latter target is crucial given Greece’s presently high debt ratio and the need 
to make further progress on fiscal consolidation prior to the onset of expenditure pressures relating to 
the ageing population. 
Prudent fiscal policies will also be crucial to offset the progressively larger negative private savings – 
private investment gap which otherwise could induce unsustainable movements in the total savings – 
total  investment  gap  and  correspondingly  in  the  current  account  deficit.  In  2002,  the  general 
government surplus is expected to be 0.8 per cent of GDP. In 2003 and 2004 the projected budgetary 
surplus should average 1.1 per cent of GDP, according to the 2001 update of the Greek stability and 
growth programme. At the same time, the debt ratio is expected to decline from 99.6 per cent in 2001 
to 90 per cent of GDP in 2004. 
EMU  membership  is  acting  as  a  catalyst  for  further  progress  on  the  structural  front  and  for  the 
reinforcement  of  macroeconomic  stabilization  as  Greece  deepens  its  economic  and  financial 
integration  with  the  euro  area.  Continued  structural  reforms  will  tend  to  increase  total  factor 
productivity, which has been a significant driving force behind growth in recent years. 
In  this  respect,  considerable  progress  has  been  made  with  the  liberalisation  of  markets,  the 
safeguarding  of  competition  and  institutional  changes  aimed  at  ensuring  the  smooth  operation  of 
product and financial markets. Among these, the most important measures taken in 2001 were: the 
ending of the state monopoly in the electricity sector, the opening-up of the fixed telephony market and 
the awarding of UMTS licenses and supplementary CGM licenses. The liberalisation of sea transport, 
an area of major importance, is planned for this year. There has also been an extensive programme of 
privatisation.  Some  important  companies  (like  Olympic  Airways,  the  Piraeus  Port  Authority  and  the 
Postal Services) are scheduled to go through privatisation schemes this year. Some publicly-owned 
companies only recently scheduled for privatisation include the Postal Savings Bank and the General 
Bank,  the  Athens  Water  and  Sewage  Company  (already  partially  privatized)  and  the  public  gas 
company (DEPA). 
The government agenda for structural reform also includes pension reform at the centre of the current 
policy  debate  in  Greece  (social  dialogue  on  this  issue  was  launched  last  month  and  is  currently 
underway). Some steps are also being taken to reform the health care system, where there is vast 
room to improve service delivery and public expenditure control. 
The government is also proceeding to an overall tax reform; the proposals of an experts’ Commission 
were made public earlier this month; after public discussion, the government will make its decisions in 
the summer and new provisions will take effect as of January 2003. The tax reform is expected not 
only  to improve the efficiency  of the Greek economy, but also to reduce the administrative costs of 
collecting taxes and the compliance costs for the taxpayers. 
The challenge now is to broaden and deepen the efforts undertaken to date to strengthen competition 
and efficiency in factor and product markets, efforts which are essential to ensure real convergence. 
Further  progress  is  required  on  labour  market  reform.  There  remains  foremost  a  need  to  facilitate 
labour market entry and to improve training. In product markets, the privatisation progress should be 
combined  with  broader  measures  to  ensure  competitive  market  outcomes  across  the  economy. 
Further  efforts  to  reduce  bureaucratic  inefficiencies  are  also  required  to  lift  impediments  to  new 
businesses - including foreign direct investment.  
In conclusion, despite the slowdown in the world economy, the Greek economy continues to perform 
very well. Real convergence is the clear priority for the coming years and the authorities still face some 
major  challenges  to  facilitate  the  process.  Nonetheless,  the  commitment  of  the  authorities  to  both 
fiscal reform and policies to improve the operation of product and labour markets augurs well for their 
likely success in meeting these challenges over the coming years. 
BIS Review 29/2002 
 3
