 Yeo Lian Sim: Hedge funds - a mainstream alternative 
Keynote address by Ms Yeo Lian Sim, Deputy Managing Director (Market Conduct) of the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore, at the Hedge Funds World Singapore 2002, Singapore, 19 September 2002. 
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen 
 A decade of controversy and rapid growth 
Ten  years  ago  this  month,  speculation  that  Europe’s  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  (ERM)  would  be 
realigned  gained  momentum  and  the  British  pound  came  under  intense  pressure  in  the  foreign 
exchange markets. The rest, as they say, is history.  
Hedge  funds  have  come  a  long  way  since  the  Sterling  attack.  They  have  been  linked  to  other 
instances of market turmoil, like the Mexican Peso meltdown in 1994-95 and the Asian financial crisis 
of 1997-98. Studies have revealed little evidence that hedge funds were mainly responsible for those 
episodes. But their participation is not in dispute. 
Also  in  1998,  we  saw  the  near  collapse  of  Long  Term  Capital  Management  and  its  subsequent 
recapitalisation by  a consortium of banks brought  together  with  the help  of the  New  York Fed. The 
incident raised questions about the risks that large and highly leveraged hedge funds pose to systemic 
stability.  
It  was  to  address these concerns that  the Financial  Stability Forum (FSF), of which Singapore is a 
member, set up a working group on Highly Leveraged Institutions (HLIs). In March 2000, the group 
issued a sobering reminder: institutions that provide leverage to HLIs must improve their counterparty 
risk management and hedge funds need to enhance their disclosures.  
Along with these developments, or some say in spite of them, the hedge fund industry has continued 
to grow from strength to strength. There are now about 6,000 hedge funds worldwide, managing more 
than US$550 billion. In 2001, some US$140 billion of new capital was invested into hedge funds. By 
comparison, the entire industry was only US$20 billion in 19901. 
While high net worth individuals remain the main source of capital, hedge funds are becoming more 
popular  among  institutional  and  retail  investors.  Funds  of  hedge  funds  and  other  hedge  fund-linked 
products are increasingly being marketed to the retail market2. For example, ABN Amro launched the 
first retail fund of hedge funds in Singapore last month.  
There  are  a  number  of  factors  behind  the  meteoric  rise  in  demand  for  hedge  funds.  The 
unprecedented bull run in the US equity markets during the 1990s swelled investment portfolios. This 
led both fund managers and investors to become more keenly aware of the need for diversification. 
Hedge funds are seen as a natural “hedge” for controlling downside risk because they employ exotic 
investment strategies believed to generate returns that are uncorrelated to traditional asset classes.  
More recently, the bursting of the technology and telecommunications bubbles, the wave of scandals 
that hit corporate America and the uncertainties in the US economy have led to a general decline in 
stock markets worldwide. This in turn provided fresh impetus for hedge funds as investors searched 
for absolute returns. As one commentator put it, “Where else are they going to put their money?”3.  
 And  the  maths  is  compelling.  From  1987  to  2001,  the  Hennessee  Hedge  Fund  Index  posted 
annualised returns of 18%, higher than the S&P’s 13.5%. 
                                                      
1   Brooks,  C.  and  H.M.  Kat,  2001,  “The  Statistical  Properties  of  Hedge  Fund  Index  Returns  and  Their  Implications  for 
Investors”. 8th Annual Hennessee Hedge Fund Manager Survey, 2002. 
2   Financial  Stability  Forum,  11  Mar  2002,  “The  FSF  Recommendations  and  Concerns  Raised  by  Highly  Leveraged 
Institutions: An Assessment”. 
3   F-Times News, 10 Sep 2002. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 1
 The growing demand for hedge fund products has wrought changes on the supply side of the market. 
The prospect of untold riches has spurred on many former fund managers and proprietary traders to 
strike out on their own and set up new hedge funds. This year’s ranking of top 100 hedge funds by 
Institutional Investor magazine included several funds founded by “Tiger Cubs”, former employees of 
Tiger Management. Investors now have a wide array of hedge funds to pick from, instead of only a few 
prominent ones previously.  
With hedge funds entering the mainstream and becoming respectable, an increasing number of banks, 
insurance companies, pension funds and fund managers are investing in them. Some are also offering 
their  own  hedge  fund  products  to  meet  customers’  needs,  diversify  their  fee  income  and  stem  the 
outflow of talented staff.  
In short, the hedge fund industry has attracted a wider following in the last decade and is expected to 
broaden its appeal further in the years to come. 
Hedge funds in Asia 
This trend is also evident in Asia, where hedge funds are starting to take off. According to AsiaHedge 
magazine,  some  150  hedge  funds  operate  in  Asia,  of  which  30  were  established  in  year  2000  and 
20 last  year.  Currently  estimated  at  around  US$15  billion,  hedge  fund  investments  in  Asia  are 
expected to burgeon. Europe’s experience in this regard is encouraging, with its hedge fund industry 
quadrupling in size between 1999 and 20014. 
Industry participants believe that Asia could be the next region of growth for the hedge fund industry. 
Several factors support this view. Asian hedge funds currently account for a tiny  slice of the  global 
hedge fund pie and a mere trickle of the total financial wealth of high net worth individuals in Asia5. 
Demand  for  Asian  hedge  funds  should  increase  as  investors  in  the  region  build  up  a  better 
understanding of this new asset class. 
The  potential  of  Asian  hedge  funds  is  well-supported  by  fundamentals.  From  an  investment 
perspective,  the  volatility  in  the  Asian  markets  in  recent  years  has  allowed  long-short  and  other 
strategic  plays  to  outperform  regional  indices.  The  relative  inefficiency  of  the  regional  markets  also 
presents arbitrage opportunities.  
From a demand standpoint, US and European investors are expected to turn to alternatives in Asia as 
capacity  (and  quality)  in  their  home  markets  diminish.  Further,  the  improving  economic  climate  in 
South  East  Asia  should  help  foreign  fund  managers  and  investors  to  refocus  their  attention  on  the 
region. 
Hedge funds look set to play a larger role in Asia. 
The role of hedge funds in Singapore 
In  Singapore,  hedge  funds  form  part  of  the  expanding  menu  of  products  offered  by  the  asset 
management industry. This industry grew rapidly over the last ten years: assets under management 
increased eightfold from just over S$35 billion in 1992 to more than S$300 billion last year. For the 
reasons  mentioned  earlier,  asset  managers  and  investors  alike  are  finding  a  place  in  their  overall 
strategies for alternative investments including hedge funds, commodities and real estate. (Of course, 
judging by concerns about Singaporeans over-investing in property, one wonders whether real estate 
can indeed count as an alternative investment here.) 
That aside, hedge funds can contribute to the development of Singapore as an international financial 
centre  in  a  number  of  ways.  First,  as  evidenced  in  other  major  financial  centres,  hedge  funds  can 
attract  a  mix  of  supporting  professionals  such  as  fund  administrators,  prime  brokers  and  product 
specialists skilled at structuring new instruments. Other positive spinoffs include fund of hedge funds 
managers and consultants, who can add value to investors in the areas of hedge fund selection and 
allocation among different fund strategies. 
                                                      
4   Merrill Lynch/Cap Gemini Ernst & Young World Wealth Report, 2002. 
5   An estimated 1.7 million high net worth individuals (defined as individuals with more than US$1 million in financial asset 
wealth) in Asia hold in aggregate US$5.1 trillion of financial assets. (Merrill Lynch/Cap Gemini Ernst & Young World Wealth 
Report, 2002). 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2002
 Second, hedge funds can lead to more wide-spread use of innovative financial instruments and the 
development of cutting-edge technical and investment skills. Unit trusts typically go long-only on listed 
equities,  bonds  and  cash.  In  comparison,  hedge  funds,  with  their  broad  investment  mandates,  can 
employ a selection of designer instruments and creative investment strategies and face little (if any) 
restrictions on what they can hold. 
Third,  hedge  funds  can  add  to  the  liquidity  and  efficiency  of  our  capital  markets.  The  contrarian 
instincts  of  hedge  fund managers  provide  liquidity  and  help  curtail  unsustainable  asset  bubbles.  By 
seeking out arbitrage opportunities, hedge funds also improve the information flow and, consequently, 
the efficiency of the market. Further, specialist hedge funds that invest in unlisted stocks and unrated 
bonds facilitate fundraising by small, relatively unknown companies. 
Singapore’s regulatory approach 
Singapore’s approach to regulating hedge funds is risk-focused and differentiated, balancing the potential benefits 
with the risks that hedge funds could pose to the financial system.  
Hedge fund managers are regulated like any other fund manager that manages third-party funds in 
Singapore. Small or boutique fund managers, that manage funds for accredited investors6, are subject 
to less stringent licensing requirements because investor protection concerns are less acute. Smaller 
firms,  with  fewer  than  30  qualified  investors7,  are  exempted  from  licensing.  Hedge  fund  managers 
should find such operating structures conducive, as they are typically small outfits managing funds for 
a limited number of institutions and high net worth individuals.  
MAS applies the same risk-focused and differentiated approach to the marketing of hedge funds. MAS 
does  not  regulate  offers  of  collective  investment  schemes  and  hedge  funds  to  professional  and 
institutional investors in the financial sector as these investors are adequately skilled to evaluate for 
themselves  the  investment  characteristics  of  hedge  funds.  Similarly,  financial  institutions  can  offer 
hedge funds to sophisticated investors on the strength of an offering memo. 
MAS’  regulatory  oversight  of  the  marketing  of  hedge  funds  is  focused  on  retail  investors.  Retail 
investors  may  not  be  familiar  with  the  differences  between  a  hedge  fund  and  a  typical  collective 
investment scheme. In particular, key aspects such as legal structure, investment objectives, trading 
strategies and fees may not be fully appreciated. Unlike unit trusts where a growth fund usually invests 
in stocks and an income fund in bonds, there is no simple correlation between investment style and 
asset exposure for hedge funds. Hedge funds also tend to be leveraged and can trade in derivatives, 
whereas traditional funds have limited scope for borrowing and dealing in derivatives. 
Further, retail investors may be lulled into thinking that hedge funds are low risk investments based on 
studies showing hedge fund returns to be less volatile than mutual fund returns. Such statistics must 
be  carefully  considered  especially  since  hedge  fund  returns  are  anything  but  normally  distributed. 
Indeed,  they  are  negatively  skewed  and  exhibit  high  kurtosis.  A  fat-tail  event,  such  as  the  Russian 
default  in  1998,  was  enough  to  scuttle  any  profits  Long  Term  Capital  Management  might  have 
projected with its elaborate models.  
Retail  investors may  not realise that hedge funds also display other characteristics that make them 
riskier than traditional funds. For one thing, hedge funds have an average life span of 3.5 years, with 
one-third  of  newly-established  funds  folding  before  those  three  years  are  up  primarily  due  to  poor 
performance8.  Further,  hedge  funds  are  usually  subject  to  a  lock-up  period  and,  after  that,  fixed 
redemption windows, unlike unit trusts which are typically redeemable every trading day. 
This is not a preamble to a blanket prohibition on the marketing of retail hedge funds. Retail hedge 
funds will continue to be permitted under a comprehensive regulatory framework. MAS’ approach is to 
balance  investor  needs  and  investor  protection  on  three  pillars  –  enhanced  disclosure,  enabling 
regulation and enlightened investors.  
                                                      
6  
“Accredited investor” refers to an individual with net personal assets exceeding S$2 million or a corporation with total net 
assets of more than S$10 million. 
“Qualified investor” means an individual with net personal assets exceeding S$5 million, a corporation with total net assets 
of  more  than  S$10  million,  a  collective  investment  scheme  that  is  marketed  only  to  accredited  investors,  or  a  collective 
investment scheme that is not marketed in Singapore. 
7  
8   Brooks,  C.  and  H.M.  Kat,  2001,  “The  Statistical  Properties  of  Hedge  Fund  Index  Returns  and  Their  Implications  for 
Investors”. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 3
 To enhance disclosure in prospectuses for offers of investments (including hedge funds), Part XIII of 
the  SFA  which  came  into  effect  in  July  this  year  introduced  new  prospectus  checklists,  prospectus 
registration procedures and advertising regulations. A prospectus must contain all material information 
that  a  reasonable  investor  would  require  to  make  an  informed  investment  decision,  such  as  the 
investment  objective  and  specific  investment  risks  of  a  fund,  the  fees  and  charges,  and  the  track 
record of the fund manager. 
For the market to exercise discipline on prospectus disclosure, prospectuses that are lodged with MAS 
are posted on the MAS web-site for public comment for a minimum two weeks. We view this as an 
advance in speed and efficiency. As a safeguard, MAS may refuse to register a prospectus if it does 
not satisfy the disclosure requirements or if its registration is not in the public interest. If a prospectus 
is found to be misleading or deficient after it has been registered, MAS can serve a stop order on the 
prospectus to prevent further issuance or sale of securities to the public. 
Following a public consultation in August, MAS will issue comprehensive retail hedge fund guidelines 
by year-end that will include, among other things, a requirement for some specific information to be 
disclosed in both prospectuses as well as marketing materials. In particular, the material differences 
between the hedge fund offered and traditional funds. Also the fees and charges. For funds of hedge 
funds, the method of achieving diversification must be disclosed. 
Turning  to  the  second  pillar  –  enabling  and  flexible  regulation,  the  new  guidelines  aim  to  align  our 
hedge  fund  regulations  with  international  best  practice,  so  that  well-managed  hedge  funds  from 
established markets can be offered in Singapore. 
A key development is to  distinguish between single  hedge funds, funds  of hedge funds and capital 
protected hedge funds. Recognising that features such as diversification and capital protection would 
reduce the risk of investing in a hedge fund, MAS will introduce a lower minimum initial subscription of 
S$20,000 for funds of hedge funds. No minimum subscription will be required for capital protected and 
capital guaranteed hedge funds. Single hedge funds may continue to be offered to retail investors with 
a minimum initial subscription of S$100,000.  
To maintain professional standards, retail hedge funds must have at least two executives who each 
have  a  minimum  of five  years’  experience  in  managing  hedge  funds.  In  addition,  managers  should 
have at least three of those five years of experience managing funds of hedge funds if they offer this 
product. 
Redemptions  of  retail  hedge  funds  need  only  be  made  once  every  quarter.  This  is  an  accepted 
international practice. Managers who want to provide for more frequent redemptions are free to do so. 
Redemption procedures should be prominently disclosed. 
To facilitate the entry of foreign funds of hedge funds, there will be a flexible diversification rule. The 
rule will require any fund of hedge funds to be diversified either across 15 hedge fund managers or by 
having not more than 8% of its assets allocated to a single hedge fund manager. 
This would enable foreign funds of hedge funds to benefit from an earlier liberalisation introduced by 
the  SFA  in July  this  year,  which  allowed all recognised foreign funds (including hedge funds) to be 
offered directly to Singapore investors instead of only through feeder funds previously. For a foreign 
fund  to  be  recognised  by  MAS,  the  foreign  offeror  needs  only  to  register  a  foreign  company  in 
Singapore  and appoint a representative to act  as a liaison for investors. The fund and its manager 
should be from a jurisdiction with acceptable regulatory standards. 
While providing for direct offers of foreign funds into Singapore, the alternative feeder fund structure is 
still available. A Singapore fund of hedge funds can therefore feed into a foreign fund of hedge funds. 
Such alliances could benefit from the Singapore manager’s access to local investors as well as the 
foreign  manager’s  working  relationships  with  other  hedge  fund  managers.  Structures  that  involve  a 
foreign fund of hedge funds feeding into other funds of hedge funds  will also be allowed  with good 
reason and disclosure of all relevant fees and charges.  
Work has also begun on the third pillar – enlightened investors – which is an essential element of a 
disclosure-based regulatory regime. The Financial Advisers Act (FAA), which will become operational 
on 1 October, will create a class of financial advisers who can advise and inform investors on a whole 
range of investment products. These financial advisers would be able to promote public awareness of 
more sophisticated products such as hedge funds.  
As  part  of  the  regulatory  regime  under  the  FAA,  a  new  code  of  conduct  will  be  issued  shortly  to 
provide guidance on the standards of conduct expected of all persons who provide financial advice 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2002
 (including exempt financial advisers like banks and insurance companies). The standards will cover 
specific responsibilities with regard to hedge fund products such as explaining product features and 
risks, as well as making investment recommendations to clients. The new regulatory framework under 
the FAA is expected to raise the quality of advice on investment products and, along with that, investor 
sophistication.  
Within  MAS,  a  new  division  has  been  set  up  to  provide  an  overview  of  investor  education  efforts 
across the financial sector. In other financial centres, having a strong community of well-informed retail 
investors has helped in developing the sophistication of the financial markets. This is what we would 
like to see happening in Singapore. MAS will work closely with the industry to identify gaps and study 
ways of enhancing investor education in Singapore.  
The industry itself also has a major role to play. Given the untapped potential in the market, there is 
much to be gained, whether at the individual firm or industry level, by being more active in educating 
investors  about  the  nature  of  hedge  funds,  their  contribution  to  an  overall  wealth  management 
strategy, and the merits of different products. Only by winning and maintaining the trust of investors 
can the hedge fund industry seize the unique opportunities that are opening up in Singapore and the 
region.  
For  its  part,  MAS  will  maintain  its  calibrated  approach  towards  the  regulation  of  hedge  funds  and 
hedge  fund  managers.  MAS  will  also  continue  to  build  on  the  three  pillars  of  enhanced  disclosure, 
enabling and flexible regulation and enlightened investors to establish sound regulatory standards for 
the industry and foster market development. In each of these areas, we will need to work closely with 
industry players like yourselves. I consider this conference to be a useful step in promoting such co-
operation. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 5
