 Eva Srejber: Life outside Euroland 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, Second Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the annual meeting of 
the Economic Society, Helsinki, 11 February 2002. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to speak at the Economic Society's annual meeting. 
I intend to take developments in Finland and Sweden during the 1980s and 1990s as the starting point 
for my talk and to illustrate the similar experiences our countries have had. After that, I shall touch on 
the  economic  arguments  in  favour  of  and  against  EMU  membership  and  take  up  the  role  of  the 
Riksbank in this debate. As the political temperature has risen in the EMU issue in Sweden, I intend to 
conclude with some words regarding the potential timetable. 
Sometimes Finland and Sweden are compared in terms borrowed from family life or the world of sport. 
However, the question is not which brother or sister is the oldest, or who is ahead in the international 
economy race. Our countries are interwoven to such an extent today that  we often go in the same 
direction. However, in one area our two countries have chosen – at least for the time being – to take 
different paths. This applies, of course, to membership of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). 
Finland has for various reasons decided to participate fully from the start, while Sweden has decided 
to  "wait  and  see".  At  the  same  time,  one  should  remember  that  we  are  still  in  the  same  economic 
playing field, with the same regulations and the same referee, constantly striving to make economic 
progress to achieve the best possible welfare – a process that actually has no end. 
Similar experiences 
Economic  developments  in  Sweden  during  the  1980s  and  1990s  are  very  reminiscent  of 
developments in Finland. Like Finland, Sweden underwent an overheating at the end  of the 1980s, 
which was mainly due to an excessively high domestic demand, partly due to insufficiently tight fiscal 
policy, a rapid credit boom and rising asset prices in the wake of the successive deregulations - all 
within the framework of a fixed exchange rate regime that set limits as to how far the steering interest 
rate could be used to govern the level of domestic activity. The fact that Sweden and Finland did not 
have much to counter with when the currency crisis really got its claws into the European Exchange 
Rate  Mechanism  in  1992,  should  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  the  imbalances  built  up  within  their 
economies over several years. It was an uneven battle, although Sweden changed its fiscal policy and 
the Riksbank did all it could to defend the currency, raising its steering interest rate to 500 per cent. 
However,  Sweden  was  forced  to  abandon  the  fixed  exchange  rate  as  an  anchor  to  achieve  price 
stability in November 1992. Finland had replaced its fixed exchange rate regime earlier in the autumn. 
The  overheating  changed  into  a  severe  setback  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  Between  1990  and 
1994 the Swedish GDP fell by a total of 4.7 per cent. In Finland the fall experienced during the same 
period amounted to 10.4 per cent. Finland was hard hit by the large decline in export brought about by 
the collapse of the then Soviet Union. Open unemployment in Sweden rapidly soared from a level of 
around 3 per cent in 1991 to 8.2 per cent in 1993. In Finland, the number of unemployed increased 
from just over 6 per cent to 16 per cent. Some of this difference can, however, be due to the slightly 
different form taken by labour market policy in the two countries and to how unemployment is defined. 
The deficit in public finances increased considerably; in Sweden it was at worst 12 per cent of GDP in 
1993  and  the  borrowing  requirement  amounted  to  almost  17  per  cent.  The  deficit  in  Finland  in  the 
same year was 7.3 per cent of GDP. The crisis in the banking system at the beginning of the 1990s hit 
both Swedish and Finnish banks hard. 
Sveriges  Riksbank,  like  the  Bank  of  Finland,  found  itself  in  a  difficult  situation  at  the  end  of  1992, 
following  the  currency  crisis.  The  decision  on  a  new  monetary  policy  strategy  was  taken  in  an 
environment  where confidence in monetary  and foreign exchange policy  was  low. Earlier actions in 
economic policy – resorting on several occasions to devaluation in the cost crises that arose – as well 
as losing the battle of the fixed exchange rate were some explanations for this. 
Alternative strategies for finding an intermediate or direct target for monetary policy were investigated 
and the Riksbank studies solutions used in other countries. As in the case of Finland, we in Sweden 
were not used to working in an environment with a floating exchange rate. The last time Sweden had a 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 1
 floating exchange rate was for a few years in the 1930s. The general opinion among both politicians 
and economists was that a fixed exchange rate was the best solution for small, open economies that 
were very much dependent on other countries. This opinion has since changed – not only in Sweden 
and Finland, but also in many other countries. 
Sweden and Finland decided on a new strategy fairly quickly and their respective central banks chose 
more or less the same path. Monetary policy in both countries was aimed at maintaining price stability 
through inflation targeting. The formulation of the Swedish objectives, as published in January 1993, 
was rather more detailed, as we established that CPI inflation should be limited to 2 per cent with a 
permitted deviation interval of +/- 1 percentage point. Finland chose to formulate its inflation target as 
a stable, sustainable inflation rate of 2 per cent. The two countries thus had similar ambitions. Just as 
in Finland, the Swedish price stability target was initially a self-imposed commitment on the part of the 
central  bank,  but  afterwards  it  received  expressed  support  from  the  Swedish  parliament  and 
government. 
I shall now briefly describe developments in Sweden following the introduction of the inflation target. 
The Riksbank's target of an inflation rate of 2 per cent +/- 1 percentage point would apply, according to 
a decision by the General Council in January 1993, with effect from 1995. During the interim period 
from allowing the krona to float free until 1995, inflation and expectations would be brought down from 
the high levels that had prevailed during the 1980s. Confidence would be regained. 
The Riksbank decided to publish regular Inflation Reports in order to attain greater understanding for 
the  drawing  up  of  our  policy  and  the  bases  on  which  our  decisions  are  made.  The  importance  of 
transparency was reinforced in conjunction with the Riksbank being made more independent and its 
objectives  being  laid  down  in  a  special  act,  as  of  1999.  Transparency  makes  it  easier  for  our 
employers, the Swedish parliament, to evaluate us. The Riksbank now publishes four Inflation Reports 
a year, where we describe clearly and in detail actual inflation trends, report the bank's assessment of 
the future path of inflation and draw conclusions for the direction of monetary policy. In Sweden we 
have also chosen to publish minutes of monetary policy discussions at our meetings and to report how 
the Executive Board members vote on this issue. 
If  we  glance  back  in  time,  we  can  conclude  that  underlying  inflation  (UND1X)  has  on  average 
remained close to the target since its introduction. Inflation also came down towards the target level 
much more quickly than most analysts had believed when we announced our target in January 1993. 
My opinion is that one factor contributing to this was the determined defence of the fixed exchange 
rate through both interest rate policy and through the political system rallying to show willingness to 
change fiscal policy to contribute to price stability. The fiscal policy consolidation implemented later 
during the 1990s also contributed significantly to enabling price stability to be maintained. 
As the Riksbank's monetary policy is guided by the development of inflation one to two years' ahead, 
the inflation rate is sometimes allowed to deviate from the target in the short term. If monetary policy 
were  aimed  at  continuously  minimising  these  deviations,  it  could  require  major  adjustments  in  the 
steering  interest  rate,  which  would  in  turn  lead  to  large  fluctuations  in  production  and  employment. 
This was the reason behind the decision not to try to achieve the inflation target of 2 per cent as early 
as  1993  and  1994.  We  chose  instead  to  allow  the  first  effect  of  the  increase  in  import  prices  that 
followed  in  the  wake  of  the  floating  krona  to  have  an  impact  on  the  system  first  and  to  accept  a 
temporary  and  limited  rise  in  the  inflation  rate. What  we  wanted  to  avoid  was  the  second  round  of 
effects. It is also for this reason that we have tolerated a 'deviation interval' since 1995. 
While inflation has been low, growth in both Sweden and Finland during the inflation targeting period 
has  been  good  from  a  historical  perspective,  and  unemployment  has  fallen  gradually  from  the  high 
levels  during  the  crisis  years. There  has  been  a  successful  consolidation  of  public  finances  in  both 
countries and a fall in the central government debt measured as a percentage of GDP. Additionally, 
fiscal policy in Sweden has become more predictable with the introduction of a rolling nominal ceiling 
for public expenditure. Moreover, a number of measures have been taken to improve the functioning 
of  the  Swedish  economy.  These  include  deregulation  and  changes  in  the  tax  and  social  insurance 
systems.  This  has  meant  that  the  conditions  for  a  favourable  development  have  improved  and 
confidence in the Swedish economy has increased. 
At the end of 1996; however, Finland chose a different direction for its exchange rate policy by taking 
part in the ERM as a preparation for full participation in the EMU from its start in 1999, while Sweden 
decided in 1997 that it would 'wait and see'. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2002
 However,  an  unforeseen  obstacle  over  the  past  decade  has  been  the  large  fluctuations  in  the 
exchange rate. From an international perspective, these fluctuations have not been greater than those 
experienced by other countries with a floating exchange rate, but they have played a prominent role in 
the Swedish debate and have probably been discussed here in Finland too, bearing in mind our close 
trading connections. 
Let me say here that while the variations in the exchange rate have been larger than we anticipated, 
the effects of this volatility have been much less than might have been expected. Our central bank and 
many others with experience of managing a small, open economy with a floating exchange rate have 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  exchange  rate  fluctuations  have  had  less  effect  on  both  prices  and 
production;  while  exchange  rates  and  import  prices  have  varied  significantly,  the  impact  in  the 
consumer channel has been limited. 
What does the Riksbank have to say about a possible Swedish EMU membership? 
Over the past six months the political temperature has risen with regard to the EMU issue in Sweden. 
This is possibly a reflection of the fact that the Swedish people now see membership in a slightly more 
positive  way.  It  is  clear  that  the  physical  introduction  of  banknotes  and  coins  has  made  the  EMU 
project more tangible. 
The last time the Riksbank as an institution had reason to comment on the issue of whether Sweden 
should join the EMU or not was at the beginning of 1997 in connection with the presentation of the 
report  by  the  Swedish  EMU  commission.1  This  commission,  which  was  led  by  Professor  Lars 
Calmfors,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Sweden  should  postpone  a  possible  membership.  Four 
arguments for this standpoint were presented: The high level of unemployment risked becoming worse 
if  the  Swedish  economy  were  to  suffer  disturbances.  The  weak  central  government  finances 
comprised  a  restriction  for  fiscal  policy  and  risked  bringing  about  restraint  in  a  possible  economic 
slowdown. Poor popular support for membership of the union risked creating political tension. Finally, 
the  commission  made  the  assessment  that  the  EMU  would  initially  consist  of  a  small  group  of 
countries, which indicated that the political costs would of not joining would not be very great. 
When this was referred to the Riksbank for comment, the General Council replied that "the General 
Council finds that on balance Sweden should participate in the economic and monetary union from the 
start.”2 
The General Council played down the risks that Sweden might be exposed to economic disturbances 
that did not affect other members of the union, i.e. asymmetric disturbances. The General Council felt 
that  the  disturbances  Sweden  had  experienced  since  the  1970s  could  largely  be  regarded  as  self-
inflicted, mainly as a result of errors in economic policy. 
One  example  is  the  economic  slowdown  at  the  beginning  of  the  1970s  that  affected  Sweden  more 
than  the  rest  of  Europe.  The  cause  was  the  vigorous  fiscal  policy  restraint  brought  in,  which 
contributed to developments in Sweden coming out of synch with the rest of Europe. After that there 
was an attempt to "bridge over" the international economic downturn that followed in the wake of the 
oil  crisis.  The  cost  problem  was  checked  by  devaluation.  The  idea  was  to  keep  demand  up  until 
international economic activity showed an upturn. 
Another example is the beginning of the 1980s, when activity in the economy once more came out of 
synch.  Sweden  came  out  of  the  decline  faster  than  other  European  countries  by  means  of  two 
aggressive devaluations, but the cost was that inflation became stuck at a high level. 
The General Council also expressed scepticism, in its comments on the commission's report, of the 
statement that it would be possible to pursue an individual economic policy in the case of remaining 
outside EMU. 
With  hindsight,  one  can  perhaps  conclude  that  this  scepticism  was  a  little  exaggerated  in  that  the 
steering interest rate has been both higher and lower than in the euro area in recent years and the 
krona  has  fluctuated  substantially.  Given  that  a  country  has  systems  for  both  fiscal  policy  and 
monetary policy that inspire confidence, there appears to be somewhat better scope for action within 
the framework of an economic policy aiming at macroeconomic stability than was earlier assumed. 
                                                      
1  Sweden and the EMU, SOU 1996:158. 
2  The General Council of the Riksbank's comments 1997-02-06 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 3
 With regard to the labour market, it should be clear that the functioning of the labour market and the 
high level of unemployment no longer comprise as strong a restriction as they did in the mid-1990s. 
Unemployment in Sweden has fallen. Several factors have played a role in the decline. One of these is 
probably the fact that the wage formation system has been changed in a way that contributes to better 
concordance  between  productivity  and  wage  growth.  Nevertheless,  there  are  clear  signs  that  the 
labour market still comprises a problem area. 
A clear majority of the EU member states has now joined the monetary union, which was not evident 
when the Calmfors Commission made its assessment. The political cost of remaining outside of EMU 
has thus become greater, and public opinion has become more positive towards membership. 
I personally think that there are also new arguments that should be considered with regard to the costs 
of remaining outside the union. For instance, the economists Andrew Rose and Torsten Persson have 
made in-depth analyses of the effects on trade of a monetary union. There could be reason to believe 
that  the  positive  effects  are  slightly  greater  than  was  assumed  in  connection  with  the  Calmfors 
Commission's report. A single currency in the euro zone would remove the foreign exchange risk in 
around half of Sweden's foreign trade, while the other half would in this case continue with a floating 
exchange rate, as the euro floats against other currencies. A single currency thus provides less risk 
and thereby lower costs, which are most important to small companies and private persons. The larger 
corporations have greater capacity to manage foreign exchange risk, although they would also benefit 
from a lower foreign exchange risk. 
What role all of these economic arguments play in the final consideration of whether Sweden should 
join  the  EMU  or  not  depends  on  the  weight  one  attaches  to  the  economic  arguments.  The  EMU 
question contains so many different dimensions that are more than the purely economic dimensions I 
have taken up here. A central bank can have an opinion on the economic issues, but should, in my 
opinion,  keep  a  low  profile  in  the  final  decision-making.  It  is  clear  in  any  case  that  Sweden  has 
succeeded in recreating confidence in economic policy after the mistakes of the 1970s and 1980s. It is 
also  clear  that  we,  like  other  countries,  need  to  continue  to  pursue  an  economic  policy  aimed  at 
macroeconomic policy regardless of whether or not we participate fully in the third stage of EMU. It is 
good  to  be  prepared  for  action  with  regard  to  unforeseen  events  –  what  is  known  as  asymmetric 
shocks – whether we are inside the EMU or on the outside. There are several ways of achieving this 
both through strong public finances and a flexible economy. The Riksbank will certainly be asked to 
comment on the economic aspects again, particularly with regard to the commission appointed by the 
Swedish  government  to  investigate  the  stabilisation  policy  consequences  of  EMU  membership  and 
that will soon present its conclusions. However, the final consideration of all aspects should be made 
at the political level. A central bank should therefore, in my opinion, avoid any statements that could be 
interpreted as campaigning. 
The discussion of the timetable 
The timetable for a potential Swedish EMU membership will be decided in the political process. The 
Government  Bill  "Sweden  and  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union"  from  1997  states  that  if  the 
government should decide at a later date that Sweden should participate in the monetary union, the 
question would be put to the Swedish population for consideration. The signals from, for instance our 
Prime  Minister  Göran  Persson,  indicate  that  a  referendum  could  be  held  next  year.  Other  political 
leaders appear to be thinking along the same lines. If the result were to be a "yes", Sweden would 
present an application to the EU Commission and the ECB for an examination of whether we fulfil the 
legal  and  economic  convergence  criteria  for  inflation  rate,  long-term  interest  rates,  exchange  rate 
stability as well as the budget level and the public sector debt. 
If  Sweden  is  accepted  as  a  member,  there  would  then  be  a  negotiation  regarding  the  Swedish 
transition process; when membership would occur, what rate the SEK/EUR exchange rate would be 
fixed at, how long the transition and currency changeover periods would be, etc. To enable a rapid 
entry process, the Swedish parliament decided back in 1997 that Sweden should maintain the highest 
possible level of preparedness by continuing technical and practical preparations. The Riksbank has 
therefore  been  working  together  with  the  financial  sector  for  the  past  five  years  on  preparing  for  a 
possible future membership. This work is led by the SIFS Group (Consultation and Information within 
the Financial Sector) and the seventh situation report was completed in the autumn and is available for 
perusal on our website. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2002
 We can conclude that since the euro was introduced as an electronic currency in the euro zone on 1 
January 1999, the Swedish financial sector has offered a number of services in euro, e.g. payments, 
deposit and lending services as well as share trading. However, considerable efforts are still required 
to prepare the sector for a possible membership. These include extensive work to change over data 
and accounting systems that are currently set to kronor as the reference currency to euro. This is in 
order  to  achieve  a  properly  functioning  financial  infrastructure  in  euro  from  the  first  day  of  EMU 
membership. The most recent situation report describes two transition scenarios; one gradual scenario 
and one that is termed Big Bang. A gradual transition requires, as you here in Finland are well aware, 
that the exchange rate is fixed irreversibly from the date of joining the union and the euro becomes the 
national  currency,  while  banknotes  and  coins  in  the  old  currency  continue  to  remain  legal  tender 
during a transition period. During this period there is no compulsion to use the euro and nor is there 
any prohibition against it. The disadvantage of a gradual transition would be that, as euro banknotes 
and coins already exist in the euro zone, it may appear strange to the Swedish general public that they 
cannot use them fully in all transactions in Sweden right from the start. The advantages of a gradual 
transition are that the major technical and practical adaptations to the euro could be made in stages, 
while Sweden would be able to participate fully in all co-operation and decision-making forums in the 
euro zone from EMU membership, without having to wait until the practical work was finished. 
The  most  recent  report  states  that  in  a  gradual  transition  process  the  financial  sector  and  central 
government  sector  would  need  1-1.5  years  from  the  time  of  a  political  decision  until  the  SEK/EUR 
exchange rate was fixed in order to prepare. After this, a further one year would be needed for the 
financial  sector  and  two  years  for  the  central  government  sector  before  euro  banknotes  and  coins 
could replace the krona. This is 1-2 years shorter than the three years the current EMU countries have 
had to prepare. It would mean in total approximately 2-3 years from a referendum until the euro were 
introduced  completely.  However,  I  believe  that  this  preparation  time  can  be  shortened  somewhat, 
assuming  that  the  political  process  is  open  and  establishes  a  clear  timetable  and  that  a  transition 
process is chosen. It is worth remembering that there is nothing to say that EMU membership or a 
currency changeover should take place at the start of a year. For practical reasons it might be better to 
introduce the currency changeover in particular in, say, March or October. 
Another alternative described in the report is what is known as Big Bang, i.e. to begin the currency 
changeover at the same time as the krona exchange rate is fixed and membership of the third stage of 
the EMU takes place. This scenario would require a preparation period of 2-2.5 years. It would require 
that the euro could be processed in all transactions in Sweden, both physical and electronic, and by 
everyone in Sweden, from the local tobacconist to the Swedish national social insurance board and 
the major banks, right form day one. As this alternative at the same time requires a changeover in IT 
systems, other practical items such as accounting, tax payments and a physical currency changeover, 
it  makes  great  demands  for  co-ordination  and  information.  Bearing  in  mind  the  longer  preparation 
period prior to actual EMU membership required in this alternative, it would actually take longer until 
Sweden could fully participate in all co-operation and decision-making forums in Euroland than would 
a gradual transition process. The advantage with this scenario is that there does not need to arise any 
uncertainty  among  the  general  public  with  regard  to  the  position  of  the  euro  during  the  transition 
period, in that the euro could be used everywhere right from the start. 
We must therefore consider carefully what form a Swedish transition scenario should take, even if the 
discussions have generally favoured a gradual process. Here, Finland's experiences could certainly be 
of great value to us in the Swedish preparation work. 
Conclusions 
Regardless of whether or not Sweden chooses to take the same path as Finland and join the EMU, it 
is important to maintain  a  high level of ambition  with regard to keeping our public finances in  good 
condition, maintaining price stability and creating the right conditions for a good growth in productivity. 
This  creates  freedom  of  action,  regardless  of  whether  or  not  we  join  the  union.  There  are  both 
advantages  and  disadvantages  in  remaining  outside.  However,  the  question  will  not  be  determined 
merely by economic arguments, it is more a case of political arguments. It is important to remember 
this. 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 5
