 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 12 September 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  which  was  also  attended  by  the  President  of  the  Eurogroup, 
Mr. Christodoulakis, and Commissioner Solbes. 
At  today’s  meeting,  the  Governing  Council  continued  its  comprehensive  examination  of  monetary, 
financial and economic developments and assessed new evidence that has become available over 
the past few weeks. Our conclusion is that risks to price stability appear rather balanced. Against this 
background, the current level of key ECB interest rates is appropriate. 
As regards the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average 
of the annual growth rates of M3 was 7.3% in the period from May to July 2002, compared with 7.4% 
in  the  period  from  April  to  June  2002.  Hence,  there  is  no  indication  of  a  significant  reduction  in 
monetary growth over the last few months. The recent strength in M3 growth partly reflects both the 
low  opportunity  cost  of  holding  money  and  renewed  portfolio  shifts  into  M3  in  an  environment  of 
financial market uncertainty. In this context, monetary trends need to be assessed with caution. From 
a longer-term perspective, there is concern that more liquidity is available in the euro area than would 
be needed to finance sustainable, non-inflationary economic growth. However, at this juncture, there is 
less risk that excess liquidity will translate into inflationary pressure, given the environment of subdued 
demand. The trend in the growth of loans to the private sector also seems to point in this direction. 
Concerning the second pillar, the latest data confirm a modest recovery in real GDP growth in the 
euro area in the first half of this year. In the second quarter of this year real GDP growth is estimated 
to  have  grown  by  0.3%  quarter  on  quarter,  following  upwardly  revised  growth  of  0.4%  in  the  first 
quarter. In contrast to the first quarter, developments in demand appear to have been more broadly 
based,  as  activity  was  supported  by  private  consumption,  export  growth  and  inventories.  However, 
overall  domestic  demand  growth  remained  subdued  as  a  result  of  the  protracted  weakness  of 
investment. 
Looking ahead, the most likely scenario is that of ongoing, albeit modest, growth in real GDP in the 
second  half  of  this  year,  with  growth  rates  in  line  with  potential  growth  in  2003.  This  delay  in  the 
acceleration  of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  broadly  corresponds  with  the  world  economic 
outlook,  given  that  the  expected  pace  of  the  recovery  has  been  scaled  down  over  recent  months. 
Sharp  declines  in  stock  prices  are  having  negative  effects  on  consumer  and  investor  confidence. 
Consequently, the strength of the upturn in economic activity has become more uncertain, both inside 
and  outside  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  conditions  for  a  stronger  economic 
recovery  in  the  euro  area  remain  in  place.  On  the  domestic  side,  private  consumption  should 
particularly benefit from lower inflation and improved real disposable income, while investment should 
be supported by low nominal and real market interest rates. Finally, the gradual recovery of the global 
economy is also expected to continue. Nevertheless, risks to the economic outlook, both inside and 
outside the euro area, need to be monitored closely. 
Turning  to  price  developments,  in  July  annual  HICP  inflation  was  1.9%,  while  the  inflation  rate 
excluding unprocessed food and energy fell slightly to 2.5%, its first decline in 2002. Eurostat’s flash 
estimate for August, which indicates that annual HICP inflation increased to 2.1%, is fully in line with 
previous expectations that inflation rates were likely to fluctuate at around 2% for the remainder of the 
year.  However,  the  short-term  trend  is  also  dependent  on  oil  price  developments,  which  have 
increased significantly over recent months. 
Looking  further  ahead,  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  euro  exchange  rate,  as  well  as  the  overall 
economic  environment,  should  contribute  to  a  reduction  in  consumer  price  inflation.  Moreover, 
services price inflation is expected to moderate somewhat, following particularly strong increases in 
2002. However, for inflation rates to come down to levels below 2% in 2003, as currently projected by 
most  forecasts,  it  is  crucial  that  oil  prices  do  not  escalate  and  that  wage  moderation  prevails. With 
respect to  nominal  wage growth,  we have already  noted an upward trend over  recent  years,  which 
continued even when the economy started to slow down. While the information from the latest wage 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 1
 indicators  does  not  signal  a  further  acceleration,  wage  developments  remain  a  cause  for  concern, 
despite the weak cyclical situation. 
With regard to the devastating floods which have hit three member countries in particular, we deeply 
regret the substantial loss of life. The overall macroeconomic impact of these floods should be limited 
and  have  no  lasting  effects.  Certain  food  prices  could  temporarily  rise  as  a  result,  also  due  to  bad 
weather  conditions  in  other  euro  area  countries,  and  while  real  GDP  growth  could  initially  be 
dampened slightly it may subsequently be stimulated by reconstruction. 
Overall,  subdued  aggregate  demand  and  the  strengthening  of  the  euro  should  contribute  to  lower 
inflationary pressure. At the same time, other factors - in particular monetary developments, but also 
wage trends and oil price developments - might pose risks to price stability in the medium term and 
therefore need to be monitored closely. 
Regarding fiscal policies in the euro area, flood-related costs should lead to a review of priorities and 
a reallocation of expenditure. In addition, against the background of recent developments, it seems to 
be more warranted than ever to call on member countries to remain committed to the Stability and 
Growth  Pact.  Countries  with  sound  fiscal  positions  should  safeguard  their  achievements,  while 
countries  with  remaining  imbalances  must  avoid  deficits  in  excess  of  3%  of  GDP  and  implement 
determined  policies  in  order  to  progress  towards  budgets  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus.  This  is 
essential for maintaining and further strengthening confidence in the policy framework in the euro area 
and for establishing fiscal positions in all countries that allow automatic stabilisers to work efficiently 
without endangering sound fiscal positions in the longer term. 
In  the  field  of  structural  reforms  we  continue  to  urge  governments  to  implement,  in  a  determined 
way,  the  agenda  set  in  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines.  Structural  reforms  will  contribute  to 
expanding  the  euro  area’s  potential  for  non-inflationary  growth  and  to  reducing  its  high  level  of 
unemployment. At the same time, they will help to foster confidence among consumers and investors 
in long-term growth and employment opportunities in the euro area, thereby having a positive effect on 
spending and investment decisions in the short and medium term. Such confidence is fostered by a 
determined and broadly based implementation of the reform agenda, focusing, in particular, on labour 
and product markets. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2002
