 Masaru Hayami: The challenges facing Japan’s economy 
Speech by Mr Masaru Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Naigai Josei Chousa Kai (The 
Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 24 July 2002. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Led by an increase in exports and production, Japan’s economy is entering a cyclical recovery for the 
third  time  in  ten  years.  During  the  previous  two  recoveries,  during  1993-1996  and  1999-2000 
according to the Reference Date of Business Cycle of the government, momentum disappeared over a 
period of several months against a background of a slowdown in overseas economies and uncertainty 
surrounding  the  domestic  financial  system,  and  the  sustainable  growth  of  private  domestic  demand 
was not realized. 
Today, I would like to talk about the conditions and challenges for the economy to firmly return to a 
sustainable growth path this time around when some signs of recovery are finally being seen. In doing 
so, I will focus on three issues. First, how to strengthen the financial intermediary function. Second, the 
complete removal of the blanket deposit guarantee scheduled for April 2003. And third, the important 
role of the private sector in structural reform. 
II. 
Recent economic and financial developments and monetary policy 
Current economic situation 
A. 
After  the  deterioration  from  the  beginning  of  2001  because  of  sharp  downward  pressure  from 
IT-related  industries  worldwide,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  showing  some  positive  signs  due  to  a 
surge  in  exports  reflecting  the  recovery  of  overseas  economies.  Against  this  background,  inventory 
reduction has progressed rapidly, and production has recovered significantly. In addition, the TANKAN 
(Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) survey released early this month showed an 
improvement in corporate business sentiment. 
While we factored in, to a certain degree, the recovery of exports and production in the April issue of 
our Outlook Report (Outlook and Risk Assessment of the Economy and Prices, issued twice a year in 
April and October), the recovery is now slightly stronger than was expected at that time. 
However,  domestic  private  demand  components  continue  to  be  sluggish  reflecting  the  severe 
employment and income conditions, and downward pressure stemming from corporate balance sheet 
adjustment. 
Nevertheless, there are some positive signs in domestic demand reflecting the increase in exports and 
production.  Some  business 
the 
manufacturing sector, are showing signs that they have stopped declining. In addition, new job offers 
and overtime hours are slightly increasing reflecting the rise in production. 
Wholesale  prices  have  been  leveling  out  since  February  reflecting  higher  import  prices  and 
improvement  in  the  supply-demand  balance  which  is  due  to  the  completion  of  inventory  liquidation. 
However, consumer prices have continued to decline moderately. 
indicators,  such  as  machinery  orders 
investment 
fixed 
in 
Economic outlook 
B. 
Despite  such  positive  signs,  prospects  for  economic  recovery  have  not  necessarily  become  solid. 
Uncertainty has increased somewhat recently because of the fall in US stock prices and the US dollar, 
and their effects on Japan’s export conditions through developments in the US economy. 
The recent declines in US stock prices and the dollar seem to have been brought about by factors 
such  as  corporate  accounting  malfeasance,  concern  about  the  political  situation  worldwide,  and 
cautious  views  about  the  outlook  for  the  US  economy.  While  recent  economic  indicators  generally 
suggest  that  the  US  economy  is  recovering  and  that  productivity  has  been  continuing  to  increase, 
there is caution with respect to business fixed investment and corporate profits. 
BIS Review 45/2002 
 1
 With  such  developments  in  mind,  we  need  to  stay  vigilant  for  a  while  about  developments  in  the 
US economy, international capital flows inclusive of Latin American countries, stock prices worldwide, 
and foreign exchange markets. 
Recent monetary policy 
C. 
Next, I would like to move on to the recent conduct of monetary policy. 
In March last year when overnight interest rates reached virtually zero, the Bank, firmly determined to 
halt the continuing fall in prices, adopted a new framework for money market operations by shifting the 
operating target to the ‘quantity’ of liquidity, namely the outstanding balance of current accounts held 
at the Bank. Under the new framework, the Bank has conducted decisive monetary easing which is 
unprecedented in the history of central banking both at home and abroad. 
As  a  result,  short-term  interest  rates  across  the  board  have  declined  to  virtually  zero  percent,  from 
overnight call rates to those with three-month and six-month maturity. Medium- to long-term interest 
rates have also declined to extremely low levels. For example, yields on three-year JGBs are currently 
at  0.1-0.2  percent,  and  those  on  five-year  JGBs  are  at  around  0.4  percent.  The  growth  rate  of  the 
monetary  base,  an  indicator  of  the  amount  of  funds  provided  by  the  Bank,  has  been  increasing 
considerably at a rate close to 30 percent year on year. The ratio of monetary base to nominal GDP 
has been at its highest level in Japan’s history, except during World War II. 
Monetary  easing  has  played  an  important  role  in  preventing  deterioration  of  the  economy  and  has 
secured  financial  market  stability.  This  was  especially  so  when  the  economy  was  under  significant 
downward  pressure  following  the  terrorist  attacks  in  the  US  and  also  when  concern  about  financial 
system stability heightened from the end of December last year to the end of March this year. 
Since April this year, the economy has started to show positive signs, and liquidity demand in financial 
markets has gradually stabilized reflecting the abatement of concern about financial system stability. 
However, as mentioned earlier, the economic recovery is still in a nascent stage and there are also 
risks for the economic outlook. The Bank should therefore continue strong monetary easing to support 
recent positive movements. 
As I mentioned earlier, it is extremely difficult to revitalize Japan’s economy solely by monetary easing 
when it faces various structural problems. However, the Bank’s strong monetary easing will continue 
to  firmly  underpin  the  recovery  of  the  economy  by  stabilizing  financial  markets.  Furthermore,  it  is 
expected  that  the  effects  of  the  Bank’s  monetary  easing  measures  will  be  fully  felt  when  forward-
looking  economic  activity  increases  as  structural  reform  progresses  and  efforts  to  strengthen  the 
financial system bear fruit. 
Strengthening the financial intermediary function 
III. 
As  Japan’s  economy  is  finally  showing  signs  of  recovery,  whether  the  financial  system  can  fulfill  a 
growing need for funds in  the course  of the recovery is the key to  ensuring  a return to sustainable 
growth led by private demand. 
At the same time, it has been tackling the non-performing loan, or NPL, problem, which is a negative 
legacy  from  the  past.  Financial  institutions  should  strive  to  promote  the  disposal  of  NPLs  while 
reviewing  unprofitable  loans,  a  process  which  could  be  painful  for  many  firms.  However,  there  is 
basically no contradiction between fostering soundness of banking business and fortifying the financial 
intermediary function. 
I  would  like  to  outline  three  key  tasks  that  need  to  be  addressed  in  strengthening  the  financial 
intermediary function while improving financial system soundness. 
Securing lending margins 
A. 
First,  it  is  important  for  financial  institutions  to  set  lending  rates  in  line  with  credit  risk  (risk-based 
pricing). 
At  present,  a  large  proportion  of  the  loan  assets  of  financial  institutions  are,  in  fact,  unprofitable  if 
default  risk  is  taken  into  account.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  NPL  disposals  by  financial 
institutions  have  exceeded  their  ‘core’  profits,  in  other  words  interest  rate  margins  obtained  from 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2002
 lending, in each of the eight years since 1994. The risk-based pricing of lending rates is to secure the 
lending  margins  of  financial  institutions.  It  is  essential  that  financial  institutions  fortify  their  financial 
strength by striving to dispose of NPLs, reduce credit costs, and secure lending margins. 
I would like to emphasize that risk-based pricing is vital not only for financial institutions to increase 
profitability and secure soundness but also for firms to expand their opportunities to procure funds. 
Risk-based pricing will more than ever require firms to decide the size of their debts according to risks 
arising  from  their  business  and  borrowing  costs.  At  the  same  time,  firms  will  be  able  to  obtain 
necessary credit as long as they pay interest margins which cover the risk. Firms in a serious financial 
situation can also seek ways to overcome difficulties by clarifying how they can improve their business 
and  financial  situation  and  thereby  lower  borrowing  costs  through  close  dialogue  with  financial 
institutions. In Japan today, the mainstream of lending is corporate financing, which largely depends 
on the creditworthiness of  firms. Further use of other types of  lending, such as project finance that 
focuses  on  the  profitability  of  a  project  itself  would,  in  my  judgement,  strengthen  the  financial 
intermediary function. 
During the bubble period, financial institutions did not put much weight on examining firms’ profitability 
and risks when  negotiating lending conditions, as they  believed that collateral  would always secure 
their  loan  assets  and  land  prices  would  never  fall.  This  is  no  longer  the  case,  and  in  this  regard  I 
welcome the recent move on the part of financial institutions to strive to maintain close contact with 
firms to ensure common understanding about their profitability and risks. 
Financial  institutions  have  only  recently  started  to  further  utilize  risk-based  pricing  and  there  is  still 
room  for  further  improvement,  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  financial  strength  of  firms  needs  to  be 
bolstered to support financial institutions’ lending margins. Thus, it will certainly take a while for the 
positive effects of risk-based pricing to prevail in the banking sector. 
Securitization and sale of loan assets 
B. 
The second important task for strengthening the financial intermediary function is expanding markets 
for  the  securitization  and  sale  of  loan  assets,  and  extension  of  commitment  lines  by  financial 
institutions. 
The  secondary  market  for  loan  assets  has  been  developed.  In  this  market,  loan  assets,  which  are 
usually held by financial institutions until maturity, are traded among institutional investors and other 
financial institutions. Furthermore, a market for loan syndication is also being fostered whereby lending 
rates  are  determined  at  the  time  of  loan  extension  for  resale  in  the  market  for  loan  assets.  The 
outstanding  balance  of  loan  assets  transferred  to  a  third  party  by  the  original  lender  institution 
amounted to 6 trillion yen at the end of June. This, however, accounts for only a small portion of total 
bank loans of 433 trillion yen. 
Development  of  the  secondary  market  for  loan  assets  will  contribute  to  strengthening  the  financial 
intermediary function in two ways. First, it enhances the transparency of the pricing of credit risks and 
enables  risk-based  pricing  because  credit  risks  attaching  to  loan  assets  that  are  traded  can  be 
evaluated  by  markets  on  a  continuous  basis.  And  second,  it  strengthens  the  financial  intermediary 
function of financial institutions while maintaining their capital base. In addition, it efficiently reallocates 
risks among investors who are willing to, and have capacity to, take risks, and thus the capacity to 
take risks in the financial system as a whole will increase. 
Financial institutions can extend commitment lines. A commitment line is a contract between a bank 
and a corporate client which legally obliges the bank to extend loans upon request up to the amount 
and the term of validity which are agreed in advance. In this way, firms can obtain credit flexibly and at 
the  same  time  streamline  their  balance  sheets.  Since  their  introduction  in  1999,  commitment  lines 
have been widely used as a means of fund-raising not only by large firms but also small and medium-
sized ones. The contract amount of funds extended by commitment lines is slightly over 14 trillion yen, 
accounting for 3 percent of the total loans of financial institutions. I consider that the potential need for 
this type of funding is huge bearing in mind continuing efforts by firms to cut interest-bearing debt and 
improve their financial position. 
Expansion of the role of the capital market 
C. 
The third important task is to further develop the capital market. In Japan where bank lending (indirect 
financing) rather than capital markets (direct financing) is the main channel of financing, the financial 
BIS Review 45/2002 
 3
 intermediary  function  depends  heavily  on  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions,  and  this  has  been 
reaffirmed  by  events  of  recent  years.  Fostering  intermediary  channels  for  raising  funds  through 
markets  while  achieving  an  appropriate  balance  between  direct  and  indirect  financing  will  help  to 
buffer external shocks, thereby contributing to financial system stability. 
Given  current  economic  and  industrial  structural  changes,  how  to  smoothly  provide  funds  for 
innovative and new business efforts is another important issue to be addressed. It is essentially the 
responsibility  of  capital  markets,  such  as  the  stock  and  bond  markets,  to  provide  funds  to  such 
businesses which are ‘risky but quite promising.’ 
Even though Japan’s capital markets have been growing recently, there seems to be room for further 
growth. 
Firstly, funding from the capital market has been marking a year-on-year increase while bank lending 
has been declining. The share of corporate bonds and commercial paper (CP) in total fund raising has 
recently increased to around 20 percent. In the US, however, there is a wide range of markets from 
those  for  AAA-rated  bonds  to  those  for  non-investment  grade  bonds,  thus  fulfilling  a  variety  of 
corporate  fund-raising  needs.  In  Japan,  the  corporate  bond  and  CP  markets  are  virtually  limited  to 
bonds issued by firms with relatively high credit ratings. 
Secondly, markets for asset-backed securities (ABS) and asset-backed CP (ABCP) where firms raise 
funds by securitizing their assets such as sales credits and loan credit receivables have been rapidly 
expanding, but the volume and liquidity of these markets are still limited compared with those in the 
US. 
Role of the government and that of the Bank 
D. 
I have mentioned three important tasks to be undertaken to improve the financial intermediary function 
of  the  financial  system.  If  steady  progress  is  made,  funds  necessary  for  economic  growth  can  be 
supplied in significant quantities. 
That  said,  the  role  of  the  government  is  also  significant  in  preparing  an  environment  conducive  to 
strengthening the financial intermediary function. 
For example, in Japan, the loans extended by government financial institutions have generally been 
on  an  increasing  trend  as  a  proportion  of  total  loans  in  the  past  ten  years,  accounting  for  some 
20 percent, a level with no precedent in other countries. If the proportion is too high, depending on the 
financial environment, private financial institutions will have difficulty in carrying out lending activities 
based on market principles. From the viewpoint of promoting risk-based pricing, the role and function 
of  public  financial  institutions  should  be  discussed  taking  into  account  the  prevailing  financial 
environment. 
An  adequate  investment-related  tax  system  and  also  disclosure  system  are  very  important 
infrastructure for smooth provision of risk capital. Investment trusts are crucial in providing a  bridge 
from household savings to capital markets. Since the failure of Enron  last fall, investors have  been 
shifting their money away from investment trusts because some money market mutual funds that held 
Enron bonds fell below par. The recognition of risks and return through appropriate disclosure will be 
necessary to create mature markets for financial instruments including bonds and investment trusts. 
The Bank is also supporting private sector efforts to strengthen the financial intermediary function in 
various ways. 
As mentioned earlier,  we  are taking decisive monetary easing measures. These measures are also 
contributing to smooth corporate finance through encouraging positive lending activity on the part of 
financial  institutions  by  dispelling  concern  about  liquidity,  and  keeping  extremely  low  the  market 
interest rates which serve as a benchmark for setting lending rates. 
The Bank is constantly reviewing the operational tools for money market operations from the viewpoint 
of ensuring the effectiveness of monetary  policy, paying due regard to the  development of financial 
and  capital  markets.  For  example,  in  October  1999  and  in  December  2001,  the  Bank  decided  to 
accept  ABSs  and  ABCP  as  eligible  collateral  in  conducting  money  market  operations.  These 
measures not only enhance the Bank’s ability to provide funds, but also foster capital markets. The 
Bank  is  also  actively  taking  part  in  projects  to  improve  market  infrastructure,  such  as  improving 
securities settlement systems and setting rules regarding market practices. 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2002
 Change in the financial system and financial institution lending 
E. 
I should add that while all three ways mentioned will contribute to improving the financial intermediary 
function,  they  may  not  necessarily  lead  to  an  increase  in  loans  outstanding  extended  by  financial 
institutions in the short run. Arguably, financial institution lending is an important channel for monetary 
easing  effects  to  permeate  the  economy.  In  the  process  of  disposing  of  excessive  debt  and  NPLs, 
however, it should be noted that total loans outstanding could decrease as the financial intermediary 
function operates more smoothly and strengthens. 
IV. 
Financial system challenges arising from the complete termination of blanket deposit 
guarantee 
Toward  the  end  of  March  this  year,  a  significant  amount  of  deposits  shifted  from  time  and  savings 
deposits to demand deposits ahead of the April termination of blanket deposit guarantee for time and 
savings  deposits.  Though  the  shift  gradually  weakened  after  April,  it  seems  that  depositors  are  still 
risk-averse in general. Developments in the run-up to next April when blanket deposit guarantee will 
be completely terminated, for example the movement of funds and the possible effects on the financial 
intermediary  function  of  financial  institutions,  are  key  issues  not  only  in  terms  of  financial  system 
stability but also for the economy which is entering a recovery phase. 
In  this  regard,  an  imminent  task  for  Japan’s  financial  system  is  to  ensure  that  the  termination  of 
blanket deposit guarantee passes without any undue disruption. Individual financial institutions must 
make  further  efforts  to  secure  market  and  depositor  confidence  by  further  advancing  measures  to 
dispose of NPLs. 
A. 
Voices calling for the postponement of the complete termination of blanket deposit 
guarantee 
A  view  that  the  planned  complete  termination  of  blanket  deposit  guarantee  in  April  2003  should  be 
postponed has started to gain some ground. The background to this is the considerable shift of funds 
from  time  and  savings  deposits  to  demand  deposits  which  took  place  this  spring  before  the  partial 
lifting of deposit guarantee. 
Until  the  end  of  fiscal  2001,  the  government  fully  protected  deposits  whenever  financial  institutions 
failed, in order to restore financial system soundness by disposing of NPLs and non-viable financial 
institutions while maintaining system stability. 
However, we cannot maintain such generous measures indefinitely that insure deposits for an amount 
exceeding  that  covered  by  the  normal  deposit  guarantee  scheme,  that  is,  any  amount  exceeding 
10 million yen in principal and interest, since it would increase moral hazard. Thus, it was decided that 
blanket deposit guarantee would be terminated on all deposits next April after a transition period this 
fiscal year during which demand deposits are fully protected. 
Given  this,  I  believe  it  undesirable  to  maintain  blanket  deposit  guarantee  for  demand  deposits 
indefinitely. 
Needless  to  say,  in  order  to  terminate  blanket  deposit  guarantee,  circumstances  should  allow  for 
depositors to have confidence in individual financial institutions. To this end, it is essential to clearly 
indicate the path to overcoming the NPL problem. 
Prospects for overcoming the NPL problem are, unfortunately, not yet clear at this stage despite the 
large disposal of NPLs to date, as new NPLs have been emerging. In addition to the problems of the 
excessive debt of large firms, an issue even more crucial from now on in relation to the NPL problem 
will  be  the disposal of NPLs to small  and medium-sized firms in financial  difficulty  due to structural 
adjustment. Financial institutions need to make further efforts to dispose of their NPLs. 
Introduction of impairment accounting and the new Basel Capital Accord 
B. 
In relation to the disposal of NPLs, two issues must be borne in mind besides the removal of blanket 
deposit guarantee. One is the introduction of impairment accounting and the other is the revision to 
the capital adequacy regulatory framework. The idea of fixed asset impairment accounting rules is that 
when the profitability of firm’s fixed assets is lower than planned, the rules require firms to recognize 
the difference from initial plans as a loss, the aim being to narrow divergence between firms’ balance 
BIS Review 45/2002 
 5
 sheets and their actual business condition. The Business Accounting Council released a draft of the 
accounting  rules  this  April,  and  fixed  asset  impairment  accounting  rules  are  scheduled  to  be 
introduced from fiscal 2005. 
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  an  international  forum  on  banking  supervision,  is 
considering revising international bank capital adequacy requirements with a view to implementing the 
revised requirements from the end of 2006. 
The most important point of the revision is in line with that of the introduction of impairment accounting 
rules. The new accord will introduce a mechanism that acknowledges any deterioration in the value of 
financial institution’s loan assets at an early stage and requires banks to promptly increase their capital 
relative to the risks associated with a loan project and any change in degree of risk. Under the current 
1998  Basel  Capital  Accord,  financial  institutions  are  required  to  hold  the  minimum  requirement  of 
8 percent of capital to corporate loans, while under the new accord they will estimate the probability of 
default associated with each borrower according to its business condition and hold capital based on 
such estimates. Leading banks overseas have already adopted practices to acknowledge in a timely 
manner any deterioration in the value of loan assets within their credit risk management framework. 
The need to promote the disposal of NPLs 
C. 
Financial institutions should make every effort to address business management tasks, including the 
disposal  of  NPLs,  in  preparation  for  the  introduction  of  the  new  accounting  rules  and  regulatory 
changes.  If  the  complete  removal  of  blanket  deposit  guarantee  were  to  be  postponed  without  such 
efforts being made on the part of financial institutions, this would merely be putting off the decision. 
To overcome the NPL problem, it is important that financial institutions make, in advance, loan-loss 
provisions sufficient to dispose of their NPLs. Financial institutions are, then, expected to make further 
use  of  various  measures  that  have  been  introduced  to  date  such  as  the  expanded  function  of  the 
Resolution  and  Collection  Corporation  and  the  guideline  on  out-of-court  procedures  for  corporate 
reconstruction. 
Financial institutions that have used up most of their cushion of capital might be confronted with an 
inadequate capital base when they carry forward measures to drastically dispose of NPLs. If this gives 
rise to serious concern about a loss of confidence in the financial system as a whole, measures such 
as the injection of public funds should be taken in a timely manner, as I have repeatedly said in the 
past. If public funds are to be injected, it is essential that the receiving institutions implement measures 
to  improve  their  profitability  such  as  a  comprehensive  review  of  their  business  and  corporate 
restructuring. 
As the central bank, we will also swiftly implement necessary measures to maintain financial system 
stability, including the provision of liquidity, based on an accurate grasp of the situation through careful 
monitoring. 
Role of the private sector in structural reform 
V. 
My last topic today is structural reform in Japan. 
The necessity of structural reform measures is already widely recognized, and I have talked about the 
subject on various occasions. So today, I will limit myself to two points that may be the starting point of 
structural reform. 
The important role of the private sector 
A. 
The first is the significance of active participation by the private sector in pursuing structural reform. 
The government regards structural reform as an important task. In June this year, the so-called “Basic 
Policies  2002  (Basic  Policies  for  Economic  and  Fiscal  Policy  Management  and  Structural  Reform 
2002)” were decided which proposed concrete measures on issues such as economic revitalization, 
tax reform, and a review of government expenditure. However, what I feel somewhat lacking in recent 
discussions  is the fact that the leading role  in structural reform should  always be played by  private 
economic entities, that is, individual enterprises. 
6 
 BIS Review 45/2002
 Structural  reform  means  reallocation  of  production  resources  such  as  labor,  land,  and  capital  to 
enhance  productivity  in  the  overall  economy  in  response  to  significant  changes  in  the  economic 
environment such as economic globalization, aging, a declining birthrate, and the bursting of bubbles. 
It is not the government that decides how such resources should be reallocated. Efficient reallocation 
can only be realized through the economic activity, such as production and investment, of individual 
enterprises under the market mechanism. The same applies to overcoming financial system problems. 
The  main  force  in  enhancing  the  financial  intermediary  function  is  the  profit  incentive  of  financial 
institutions and investors. 
Tax reform, deregulation, and the review of pension and medical systems currently being promoted by 
the government are indeed important. However, these are basically done to provide an environment 
that promotes free and creative activity on the part of individual enterprises. 
We need not recite the words of Schumpeter, a prominent economist in the 20th century, to know that 
one  of  the  important  driving  forces  promoting  economic  growth  is  innovation  by  entrepreneurs. 
Historically, there are countless examples both in Japan and abroad where innovative enterprises and 
entrepreneurs  started  new  businesses  by  combining  available  technology  and  resources,  which 
created demand, and as a result enriched the overall economy. Therefore, I have little doubt that new 
business chances will emerge in line with changes in the financial and economic structure, and I look 
forward to seeing both enterprises and individuals pursuing innovation. 
Potential strength of the economy and timeframe for reform 
B. 
The second point of structural reform is the potential strength of Japan’s economy and the timeframe 
for such reform. Looking at recent arguments on the progress of structural reform, it is not hard to find 
ones  which  take  a  pessimistic  line.  Indeed,  while  the  situation  may  not  justify  an  optimistic  view, 
excessive loss of confidence may hinder momentum for reform. 
Looking  back,  the  Japanese  economy  has,  over  the  years,  overcome  various  big  changes  in  the 
economic environment such as the termination of convertibility of US dollar into gold, two oil shocks, 
and the Plaza Accord. All these severely impacted the terms of trade of a country with poor natural 
resources  and  a  high  degree  of  dependence  on  trade.  In  each  of  these  adjustment  phases,  Japan 
experienced  drastic restructuring, the exit of  weak enterprises, and  a change  in industrial structure. 
However,  from  the  efforts  and  ideas  to  overcome  such  ‘pains,’  higher  value-added  products  that 
satisfied the needs of the times that called for energy-saving products, diversification of life styles, and 
environmental concerns, were created and in turn enriched the Japanese economy. Japan would not 
be what it is today if it just avoided pains. And, I would like to stress that all this was achieved by none 
other than our nation’s private sector. 
Since the aftermath of the bursting of asset  bubbles still lingers, the structural  reform our economy 
needs may perhaps be more challenging than changes in the economic environment, which we have 
often  experienced  in  the  past.  While  it  goes  without  saying  that  we  need  to  quicken  the  pace  of 
structural reform, it is also true that such reform cannot be accomplished in a short time. 
The 1990s are often called ‘the lost decade’, but I do not think they were. Both in the industrial and 
financial  arena,  we  have  already  seen  reorganization  and  cooperation  on  a  scale  that  was 
unimaginable ten years ago. New business models adapting to globalization are beginning to emerge. 
Cross  shareholdings,  keiretsu  relationships,  and  long-term  employment  are  being  reviewed  in 
response  to  recent  changes  in  the  economic  environment.  Corporate  governance  is  also  changing 
steadily.  As  a  successful  outcome  of  these  developments,  export-oriented  enterprises  are  able  to 
secure profits even  in the  severe  environment presented  by  a sharp decline in production in the IT 
industry and increasing productivity in China and other East Asian economies. Though there are no 
real  observable  results  in  the  overall  economy,  I  believe  that  these  individual  efforts  will  in  the  end 
bear fruit. 
Fortunately, our country has abundant personal financial assets and foreign claims. This means that 
unlike countries where weakness in the economy directly leads to external debt repayment problems, 
Japan can ensure the necessary timeframe for reform. This is our country’s strongest advantage and 
may  perhaps  also  be  a  weakness  in  that  our  sense  of  crisis  may  be  lacking.  We  know  where  the 
problems lie. 
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  speech  today  by  repeating  that  the  present  situation,  where  economic 
recovery is beginning to be seen, is a good opportunity to overcome the challenges with a clear will 
and vision. 
BIS Review 45/2002 
 7
 Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 45/2002
