 Y V Reddy: India’s foreign exchange reserves - policy, status and issues 
Special  Lecture  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  National 
Council  of  Applied  Economic  Research,  New  Delhi,  10  May  2002.  Dr  Reddy  is  thankful  to 
Dr R K Pattnaik for his assistance 
 Mr. Chairman and friends, 
I am thankful to the National Council of Applied Economic Research, (NCAER) and in particular, to 
Dr. Suman  Bery,  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  make  a  presentation  on  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves. There are several reasons for speaking on this subject before this august gathering in the 
capital.  
First, the subject is receiving renewed global interest among policy makers and academicians against 
the  backdrop  of  increasing  globalization  of  emerging  economies,  acceleration  of  capital  flows,  and 
integration  of  financial  markets  domestically  as  well  as  globally.  The  debt  crisis  in  some  of  the 
developing countries in the early nineties, the East Asian crisis in 1997 and more recently the currency 
crisis of Argentina have posed several dilemmas to policy makers on forex reserves.  
Second, multilateral bodies, especially, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) are attempting several initiatives in regard to international financial architecture 
in  the  context  of  the  debt-banking-financial  crisis  in  several  countries,  and  matters  relating  to  forex 
reserves  have  become  an  important  component  of  this  initiative,  encompassing  issues  on  policy, 
management and transparency. 
Third,  there  is  some  interest  within  India  on  our  level  of  forex  reserves,  as  evidenced  by  several 
articles in financial dailies, economic journals and research papers. There are also some differences 
among academics on the direct as well as indirect costs and benefits of the level of forex reserves, 
from the point of view of macro-economic policy, financial stability and fiscal or quasi-fiscal impact. 
Fourth, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been adopting a proactive communication policy, particularly 
under the leadership of Governor Bimal Jalan, and accordingly it is appropriate that the relevant issues 
are also presented from the perspective of RBI. 
Finally,  there  is  some  personal  involvement  and  excitement  for  me  in  this  subject.  The  period 
1990-2002  has  been  a  journey  from  agony  to  comfort  in  matters  relating  to  forex  reserves;  for  in 
1990-91, sitting in North Block in Ministry of Finance in Delhi, I was one of those who had to ensure 
that given the very low level of forex reserves and the manner in which they happened to be deployed, 
there was enough cash balance to permit day-to-day forex payments of even a million U.S. dollars. In 
such a predicament, the threat of national humiliation as well as discomforting relations with foreign 
agencies obviously touched on personal pride. Furthermore, in crafting a liberalized forex regime in 
the  last  decade,  those  of  us  involved  in  the  process  of  reform  have  been  acutely  aware  of  the 
judgements  and  risks  involved  at  every  step  in  forex  reserves  policy  and  management.  Over  the 
period, without adding much to the stock of external debt, there has been a quantum jump in forex 
reserves. This position needs to be contrasted with the 1980s, when external debt, especially short 
term debt, mounted while the forex reserves got depleted. In fact, it is often held that, between 1956 
and 1992, India faced balance of payments constraints in all but six years, while during the last ten 
years, there has never been a feeling of constraint on this account, eventhough the period coincided 
with liberalization of external account, global currency crisis and domestic political uncertainties.  
This  presentation  attempts  to  capture  the  basic  concepts,  theory  and  practice  with  orientation  on 
issues  relevant  to  India.  The  questions  addressed  are;  What  are  forex  reserves?  Why  hold  forex 
reserves  and  how  did  the  policy  evolve? What  is  the  appropriate  level  of  reserves?  How  does  the 
current  status  appear  in  terms  of  indicators  of  adequacy  of  reserves?  The  presentation  proceeds 
further  to  focus  on  several  aspects  of  forex  management,  such  as  the  implications  for  quasi  fiscal 
deficit and communication policy of the RBI. The issues in regard to policy and management of forex 
reserves  in  India  are  posed  in  some  detail  while  the  concluding  part  contains  my  random  thoughts 
from  a  futuristic  perspective.  Given  the  broad  canvass  and  well  recognized  complexity,  the 
presentation, for most part, touches on the broad contours without going into abstruse technical and 
academic details. 
BIS Review 30/2002 
 1
 The subject of forex reserves may be broadly classified into two inter-linked areas, namely, the theory 
of reserves, and the management of reserves. The theory of reserves encompasses issues relating to 
institutional and  legal  arrangements for holding reserve assets, conceptual  and definitional aspects, 
objectives for holding reserve assets, exchange rate regimes, and conceptualization of the appropriate 
level of foreign reserves. In essence, a theoretical framework for reserves provides the rationale for 
holding  forex  reserves.  Reserve  management  is  mainly  guided  by  the  portfolio  management 
consideration i.e., how best to deploy foreign reserve assets? The portfolio considerations take into 
account  inter  alia,  safety,  liquidity  and  yield  on  reserves  as  the  principal  objectives  of  reserve 
management.  The  institutional  and  legal  arrangements  are  largely  country  specific  and  these 
difference  should  be  recognised  in  approaching  the  critical  issues  relating  to  both  reserve 
management practices and policy making.  
What are Forex Reserves? 
Conceptually, a unique definition of forex reserves is not available as there have been divergence of 
views in terms of coverage of items, ownership of assets, liquidity aspects and need for a distinction 
between  owned  and  non-owned  reserves  Nevertheless,  for  policy  and  operational  purposes,  most 
countries  have  adopted  the  definition  suggested  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (Balance  of 
Payments Manual, and Guidelines on Foreign Exchange Reserve Management, 2001); which defines 
reserves  as  external  assets  that  are  readily  available  to  and  controlled  by  monetary  authorities  for 
direct  financing  of  external  payments  imbalances,  for  indirectly  regulating  the  magnitudes  of  such 
imbalances through intervention in exchange markets to affect the currency exchange rate, and/or for 
other purposes.  
The  standard  approach  for  measuring  international  reserves  takes  into  account  the  unencumbered 
international  reserve  assets  of  the  monetary  authority;  however,  the  foreign  currency  and  the 
securities held by the public including  the  banks and corporate  bodies are not  accounted for in the 
definition of official holdings of international reserves.  
In India, the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934 contains the enabling provisions for the RBI to act as the 
custodian of foreign reserves, and manage reserves with defined objectives. The powers of being the 
custodian  of  foreign  reserves  is  enshrined,  in  the  first  instance,  in  the  preamble  of  the  Act.  The 
‘reserves’  refer  to  both  foreign  reserves  in  the  form  of  gold  assets  in  the  Banking  Department  and 
foreign securities held by the Issue Department, and domestic reserves in the form of ‘bank reserves’. 
The  composition  of  foreign  reserves  is  indicated,  a  minimum  reserve  system  is  set  out,  and  the 
instruments  and  securities  in  which  the  country’s  reserves  could  be  deployed  are  spelt  out  in  the 
relevant Sections of the RBI Act. 
In brief, in India, what constitutes forex reserves; who is the custodian and how it should be deployed 
are laid out clearly in the Statute, and in an extremely conservative fashion as far as management of 
reserves  is  concerned.  In  substantive  terms,  RBI  functions  as  the  custodian  and  manager  of  forex 
reserves, and operates within the overall policy framework agreed upon with Government of India. 
Why Hold Forex Reserves? 
Technically,  it  is  possible  to  consider  three  motives  i.e.,  transaction,  speculative  and  precautionary 
motives for holding reserves. International trade gives rise to currency flows, which are assumed to be 
handled  by  private  banks  driven  by  the  transaction  motive.  Similarly,  speculative  motive  is  left  to 
individual or corporates. Central bank reserves, however, are characterized primarily as a last resort 
stock  of  foreign  currency  for  unpredictable  flows,  which  is  consistent  with  precautionary  motive  for 
holding foreign assets. Precautionary motive for holding foreign currency, like the demand for money, 
can be positively related to wealth and the cost of covering unplanned deficit, and negatively related to 
the return from alternative assets.  
From a policy perspective, it is clear that the country benefits through economies of scale by pooling 
the transaction reserves, while subserving the precautionary motive of keeping official reserves as a 
‘war chest’. Furthermore, forex reserves  are instruments to maintain or manage the exchange rate, 
while enabling orderly absorption of international money and capital flows. In brief, official reserves are 
held for precautionary and transaction motives keeping in view the aggregate of national interests, to 
achieve  balance  between  demand  for  and  supply  of  foreign  currencies,  for  intervention,  and  to 
preserve confidence in the country’s ability to carry out external transactions. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2002
 Reserve assets could be defined with respect to assets of monetary authority as the custodian, or of 
sovereign government as the principal. For the monetary authority, the motives for holding reserves 
may not deviate from the monetary policy objectives, while for government, the objectives of holding 
reserves may go beyond that of the monetary authorities. In other words, the final expression of the 
objective  of  holding  reserve  assets  would  be  influenced  by  the  reconciliation  of  objectives  of  the 
monetary  authority  as  the  custodian  and  the  government  as  principal.  There  are  cases,  however, 
when  reserves  are  used  as  a  convenient  mechanism  for  government  purchases  of  goods  and 
services,  servicing  foreign  currency  debt  of  government,  insurance  against  emergencies,  and  in 
respect of a few, as a source of income. 
What are the dominant policy objectives in regard to forex reserves in India? It is difficult to lay down 
objectives  in  very  precise  terms,  nor  is  it  possible  to  order  all  relevant  objectives  by  order  of 
precedence  in  view  of  emerging  situations  which  are  described  later.  For  the  present,  a  list  of 
objectives  in  broader  terms  may  be  encapsulated  viz.,  (a)  maintaining  confidence  in  monetary  and 
exchange  rate  policies,  (b)  enhancing  capacity  to  intervene  in  forex  markets,  (c)  limiting  external 
vulnerability by maintaining foreign currency liquidity to absorb shocks during times of crisis including 
national  disasters  or  emergencies;  (d)  providing  confidence  to  the  markets  especially  credit  rating 
agencies that external obligations can always be met, thus reducing the overall costs at which forex 
resources are available to all the market participants, and (e) incidentally adding to the comfort of the 
market participants, by demonstrating the backing of domestic currency by external assets. 
At a formal level, the objective of reserve management in India could be found in the RBI Act, where 
the relevant part of the preamble reads as ‘to use the currency system to the country’s advantage and 
with a view to securing monetary stability’. This statement may be interpreted to hold that monetary 
stability  means  internal  as  well  as  external  stability;  implying  stable  exchange  rate  as  the  overall 
objective of the reserve management policy. While internal stability implies that reserve management 
cannot be isolated from domestic macroeconomic stability and economic growth, the phrase ‘to use 
the  currency  system  to  the  country’s  advantage’  implies  that  maximum  gains  for  the  country  as  a 
whole or economy in general could be derived in the process of reserve management, which not only 
provides for considerable flexibility to reserve management practice, but also warrants a very dynamic 
view of what the country needs and how best to meet the requirements. In other words, the financial 
return or trade off between financial costs and benefits of holding and maintaining reserves is not the 
only or the predominant objective in management of reserves. 
Evolution of Reserve Management Policy in India 
India’s approach to reserve management, until the balance of payments crisis of 1991 was essentially 
based  on  the  traditional  approach,  i.e.,  to  maintain  an  appropriate  level  of  import  cover  defined  in 
terms of number of months of imports equivalent to reserves. For example, the RBI’s Annual Report 
1990-91 stated that the import cover of reserves shrank to 3 weeks of imports by the end of December 
1990,  and  the  emphasis  on  import  cover  constituted  the  primary  concern  say,  till  1993-94.  The 
approach to reserve management, as part of exchange rate management, and indeed external sector 
policy  underwent  a  paradigm  shift  with  the  adoption  of  the  recommendations  of  the  High  Level 
Committee on Balance of Payments (Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan). The Report, of which I had the 
privilege of being Member-Secretary, articulated an integrated view of the issues and made specific 
recommendations on foreign currency reserves. The relevant extracts are:  
“It has traditionally been the practice to view the level of desirable reserves as a percentage of the 
annual  imports-say  reserves  to  meet  three  months  imports  or  four  months  imports.  However,  this 
approach would be inadequate when a large number of transactions and payment liabilities arise in 
areas  other  than  import  of  commodities.  Thus,  liabilities  may  arise  either  for  discharging  short-term 
debt  obligations  or  servicing  of  medium-term  debt,  both  interest  and  principal.  The  Committee 
recommends  that  while  determining  the  target  level  of  reserve,  due  attention  should  be  paid  to  the 
payment obligations in addition to the level of imports. The Committee, recommends that the foreign 
exchange reserves targets be fixed in such a way that they are generally in a position to accommodate 
imports of three months. (Paragraph 6.3) 
In the  view  of the Committee, the factors that are to  be taken into consideration in  determining the 
desirable level of reserves are: the need to ensure a reasonable level of confidence in the international 
financial  and  trading  communities  about  the  capacity  of  the  country  to  honour  its  obligations  and 
maintain  trade  and  financial  flows;  the  need  to  take  care  of  the  seasonal  factors  in  any  balance  of 
payments transaction with reference to the possible uncertainties in the monsoon conditions of India; 
BIS Review 30/2002 
 3
 the  amount  of  foreign  currency  reserves  required  to  counter  speculative  tendencies  or  anticipatory 
actions amongst players in the foreign exchange market; and the capacity to maintain the reserves so 
that the cost of carrying liquidity is minimal.” (Paragraph 6.4) 
With the introduction of market determined exchange rate as mentioned in the RBI’s Annual Report, 
1995-96  a  change  in  the  approach  to  reserve  management  was  warranted  and  the  emphasis  on 
import  cover  had  to  be  supplemented  with  the  objective  of  smoothening  out  the  volatility  in  the 
exchange rate, which has been reflective of the underlying market condition.  
Against  the  backdrop  of  currency  crises  in  East-Asian  countries,  and  in  the  light  of  country 
experiences  of  volatile  cross-border  capital  flows,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Annual  Report  1997-98 
reiterated the need to take into consideration a host of factors, but is noteworthy for bringing to the 
fore  the  shift  in  the  pattern  of  leads  and  lags  in  payments/receipts  during  exchange  market 
uncertainties and emphasized that besides the size of reserves, the quality of reserves also assume 
importance. Highlighting this, the Report stated that unencumbered reserve assets (defined as reserve 
assets  net  of  encumbrances  such  as  forward  commitments,  lines  of  credit  to  domestic  entities, 
guarantees and other contingent liabilities) must be available at any point of time to the authorities for 
fulfilling various objectives assigned to reserves.  
As a part of prudent management of external liabilities, the RBI policy is to keep forward liabilities at a 
relatively  low  level  as  a  proportion  of  gross  reserves  and  the  emphasis  on  prudent  reserve 
management  i.e.,  keeping  forward  liabilities  within  manageable  limits,  was  highlighted  in  the  RBI’s 
Annual Report, 1998-99. 
The RBI Annual Report, 1999-2000 stated that the overall approach to management of India’s foreign 
exchange  reserves  reflects  the  changing  composition  of  balance  of  payments  and  liquidity  risks 
associated with different types of flows and other requirements and the introduction of the concept of 
liquidity risks is noteworthy. 
“The policy for reserve management is built upon a host of identifiable factors and other contingencies, 
including, inter alia, the size of the current account deficit and short term liabilities (including current 
repayment obligations on long term loans), the possible variability in portfolio investment, and other 
types of capital flows, the unanticipated pressures on the balance of payments arising out of external 
shocks and movements in repatriable foreign currency deposits of non-resident Indians.” (Paragraph 
6.30) 
While focusing on prudent management of foreign exchange reserves in recent years, RBI’s Annual 
Report 2000-01 elaborated on ‘liquidity risk’ associated with different types of flows. The Report stated 
that with the changing profile of capital flows, the traditional approach of assessing reserve adequacy 
in  terms  of  import  cover  has  been  broadened  to  include  a  number  of  parameters  which  take  into 
account the size, composition, and risk profiles of various types of capital flows as well as the types of 
external shocks to which the economy is vulnerable. 
Governor Jalan’s latest statement on Monetary and Credit Policy (April 29, 2002) provides, an up-to-
date and comprehensive view on the approach to reserve management and of special significance is 
the statement : 
“a sufficiently high level of reserves is necessary to ensure that even if there is prolonged uncertainty, 
reserves  can  cover  the  “liquidity  at  risk”  on  all  accounts  over  a  fairly  long  period.  Taking  these 
considerations into account, India’s foreign exchange reserves are now very comfortable.” (Paragraph 
23)….“the prevalent national security environment further underscores the need for strong reserves. 
We must continue to ensure that, leaving aside short-term variations in reserves level, the quantum of 
reserves in the long-run is in line with the growth of the economy, the size of risk-adjusted capital flows 
and national security requirements. This will provide us with greater security against unfavourable or 
unanticipated developments, which can occur quite suddenly.” (Paragraph 24).  
The  above  discussion  points  to  evolving  considerations  and  indeed  a  paradigm  shift  in  India’s 
approach to reserve management. The shift has occurred from a single indicator to a menu or multiple 
indicators approach. Furthermore, the policy of reserve management is built upon a host of factors, 
some of them are not quantifiable, and in any case, weights attached to each of them do change from 
time to time.  
4 
 BIS Review 30/2002
 What is the Appropriate Level of Forex Reserves? 
Basic motives for holding reserves do result in alternative frameworks for determining appropriate level 
of foreign  reserves.  Efforts  have  been  made  by  economists  to  present  an  optimising  framework for 
maintaining  appropriate  level  of  foreign  reserves  and  one  viewpoint  suggests  that  optimal  reserves 
pertain  to  the  level  at  which  marginal  social  cost  equals  marginal  social  benefit.  Optimal  level  of 
reserves  has  also  been  indicated  as  the  level  where  marginal  productivity  of  reserves  plus  interest 
earned  on  reserve  assets  equals  the  marginal  productivity  of  real  resources  and  this  framework 
encompasses exchange rate stability as the predominant objective of reserve management. Since the 
underlying  costs  and  benefits  of  reserves  can  be  measured  in  several  ways,  these  approaches  to 
optimal level provide ample scope for developing a host of indicators of appropriate level of reserves.  
It is possible to identify four sets of indicators to assess adequacy of reserves, and each of them do 
provide an insight into adequacy though none of them may by itself fully explain adequacy. First, the 
money based indicators including reserve to broad money or reserves to base money which provide a 
measure of potential for resident based capital flight from currency. An unstable demand for money or 
the presence of a weak banking system may indicate greater probability of such capital flights. Money 
based  indicators,  however,  suffer  from  several  drawbacks.  In  countries,  where  money  demand  is 
stable  and  confidence  in  domestic  currency  high,  domestic  money  demand  tends  to  be  larger  and 
reserves  over  money  ratios,  relatively  small.  Therefore,  while  a  sizable  money  stock  in  relation  to 
reserves, prima facie, suggests a large potential for capital flight out of money, it is not necessarily a 
good predictor of actual capital flight. Money based indicators also do not capture comprehensively the 
potential  for  domestic  capital  flight.  Moreover,  empirical  studies  find  a  weak  relationship  between 
money based indicator and occurrence and depth of international crises.  
Secondly, trade based indicators, usually the import-based indicators defined in terms of reserves in 
months of imports provide a simple way of scaling the level of reserves by the size and openness of 
the economy. It has a straightforward interpretation- a number of months a country can continue to 
support its current level of imports if all other inflows and outflows cease. As the measure focuses on 
current account,  it  is relevant for small economies,  which have limited access and  vulnerabilities to 
capital  markets.  For  substantially  open  economies  with  a  sizable  capital  account,  the  import  cover 
measure may not be appropriate.  
Thirdly, debt based indicators are of recent origin; they appeared with episodes of international crises, 
as  several  studies  confirmed  that  reserves  to  short  term  debt  by  remaining  maturity  is  a  better 
indicator of identifying financial crises. Debt-based indicators are useful for gauging risks associated 
with  adverse  developments  in  international  capital  markets.  Since  short-term  debt  by  remaining 
maturity  provides  a  measure  of  all  debt  repayments  to  nonresidents  over  the  coming  year,  it 
constitutes a useful measure of how quickly a country would be forced to adjust in the face of capital 
market distortion. Studies have shown that it could be the single most important indicator of reserve 
adequacy in countries with significant but uncertain access to capital markets.  
Fourthly,  more  recent  approaches  to  reserve  adequacy  have  suggested  a  combination  of  current-
capital  accounts  as  the  meaningful  measure  of  liquidity  risks.  Of  particular  interest,  is  the  Guidotti 
Rule,  which  has  received  wide  appreciation  form  many  central  bankers  including  Alan  Greenspan, 
postulates  that  the  ratio  of  short  term  debt  augmented  with  a  projected  current  account  deficit  (or 
another measure of expected borrowing) could serve useful an indicator of how long a country can 
sustain external imbalance without resorting to foreign borrowing. As a matter of practice, the Guidotti 
Rule suggests that the countries should hold external assets sufficient to ensure that they could live 
without access to new foreign borrowings for up to twelve months. This implies that the usable foreign 
exchange  reserves  should  exceed  scheduled  amortisation  of  foreign  currency  debts  (assuming  no 
rollover during the following year).  
Alan Greenspan suggests a ‘Liquidity at Risk’ Rule that takes into account the foreseeable risks that a 
country  could  face  in  the  event  of  (a)  near  absence  of  a  purely  non-interventionist  exchange  rate 
policies and (b) cost-benefit trade-off in the quantity of reserve accumulation. Accordingly, a country’s 
liquidity  position  could  be  calculated  under  a  range  of  possible  outcomes  for  relevant  financial 
variables such as exchange rate, commodity prices, credit spreads, etc. While the concept of ‘Liquidity 
at  Risks’  has  been  broadly  discussed  at  different  fora,  it  appears  that  no  specific methodology  has 
been outlined. It has been left to institutions and countries to develop their own approaches.  
BIS Review 30/2002 
 5
 Level of Forex Reserves in India 
The Indian approach to determining adequacy of forex reserves has been evolving over the past few 
years, especially since the pioneering Report of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments, 
culminating  in  Governor  Jalan’s  exposition  of  the  combination  of  global  uncertainties,  domestic 
economy  and  national  security  considerations  in  determining  liquidity  at  risk  and  thus  assessing 
reserve  adequacy.  It  is  appropriate  to  submit  stylized  facts  in  relation  to  some  of  the  indicators  of 
reserve-adequacy described here without making any particular judgment about adequacy. 
The foreign exchange reserves include three items; gold, SDRs and foreign currency assets. As on 
May 3, 2002, out of the US $ 55.6 billion of total reserves, foreign currency assets account the major 
share at US $ 52.5 billion. Gold accounts for about US $ 3 billion. In July 1991, as a part of reserve 
management policy, and as a means of raising resources, the RBI temporarily pledged gold to raise 
loans. The gold holdings, thus have played a crucial role of reserve management at a time of external 
crisis. Since then, Gold has played passive role in reserve management. 
The level of foreign exchange reserves has steadily increased from US$ 5.8 billion as at end-March, 
1991 to US$ 54.1 billion as at end-March 2002 and further to US$ 55.6 billion as at May 3, 2002. The 
traditional measure of trade based indicator of reserve adequacy, i.e., the import cover (defined as the 
twelve times the ratio of reserves to merchandise imports ) which shrank to 3 weeks of imports by the 
end of December 1990, has improved to about 11.5 months as at end-March 2002.  
In terms of money-based  indicators, the proportion  of net foreign exchange  assets of RBI (NFA) to 
currency  with  the  public  has  sharply  increased  from  15  per  cent  in  1991  to  109  per  cent  as  at 
end-March  2002.  The  proportion  of  NFA  to  broad  money(M3)  has  increased  by more  than  six  fold; 
from 3 per cent to 18 per cent.  
The  debt-based  indicators  of  reserve  adequacy  show  remarkable  improvement  in  the  1990s.  The 
proportion of short term debt (i.e., debt obligations with an original maturity up to one year) to foreign 
exchange reserves has substantially declined form 147 per cent as at end-March 1991 to 8 per cent 
as at end-March 2001. The proportion of volatile capital flows defined to include cumulative portfolio 
inflows and short term debt to reserves has lowered from 147 per cent in 1991 to 58.5 per cent as at 
end-March  2001.  As  part  of  sustainable  external  debt  position,  the  short  term  debt  component  has 
decreased from 10 per cent as at end-March 1991 to 3 per cent as at end-March 2001. Similarly, the 
size of debt service payments relative to current receipts has decreased from 35 per cent in 1991 to 
16 per cent in 2001.  
Management of International Reserves 
In  the  recent  years,  for  several  reasons,  increasing  attention  is  being  paid  to  management  of 
international  reserves.  First,  advent  of  the  Euro  as  an  alternate  currency  to  US  dollar;  second, 
movement  of  many  central  banks  out  of  gold;  third,  changes  in  exchange  rate  regimes;  fourth, 
changing  views  on  reserve  adequacy  and  its  role  in  crisis  prevention;  and  fifth,  operational  use  of 
“reserve  targets”  in  calculating  financing  gaps  by  IMF.  The  attention  to  the  subject  is  evidenced  by 
increasing emphasis on transparency, accountability in various fora, and more recently, the issue of 
IMF guidelines on the subject.  
Operationally,  reserve  management  is  a  process  that  ensures  that  adequate  official  public  sector 
foreign assets are readily available to and controlled by the authorities for meeting a defined range of 
objectives  for  a  country.  A  reserve  management  entity  is  normally  made  responsible  for  the 
management  of  reserves  and  associated  risks.  Invariably,  the  reserve  management  entity  is  the 
central  bank  and  hence  the  objectives  of  reserve  management  tend  to  be  critical  as  they  would 
encompass the objectives of the monetary authority and the objectives of a portfolio manager or the 
custodian  of  reserves.  As  a  monetary  authority,  a  central  bank’s  primary  objective  is  to  ensure 
macroeconomic  financial  stability  in  general  and  external  stability  in  particular.  As  a  custodian,  the 
central bank’s main objectives are to ensure liquidity, safety and yield on deployment of reserves. 
In  considering  management  of  reserves,  the  benefits  and  costs  of  holding  reserves  are  constantly 
assessed. On the benefits, recent international financial crises have shown that holding and managing 
sufficient reserves and disclosing adequate information to markets helps a country to prevent external 
crises,  especially  those  stemming from  the  capital  account.  The  growing  appreciation  of  the  role  of 
reserves  in  crises  prevention  and  as  a  buffer  to  manage  exchange  market  pressures  has  given 
reserve management a more central role, now than before, in national economic policies. Maintaining 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2002
 high level of reserves to tide over external shocks, however, involves opportunity cost. The opportunity 
cost of holding reserves is the foregone investment because resources have been used to purchase 
reserves instead of increasing domestic capital. The marginal  productivity of domestic capital is the 
opportunity  cost  of  holding  reserves  and  reserves  management  seeks  to  minimize  the  opportunity 
costs against the benefits that accrue from holding reserves.  
The  objectives  of  reserve  management  vary  across  countries,  and  a  recent  survey  of  reserve 
management practices of select countries (IMF guidelines, 2001) provide good insights on the subject. 
First,  most  countries  hold  reserves  to  support  monetary  policy.  While  ensuring  liquidity  in  foreign 
exchange  market  to  smooth  out  undue  short-term  fluctuations  in  exchange  markets  constitutes  the 
primary  objective,  some  countries  take  a  cautious  approach  to  intervention.  Smaller  countries,  hold 
reserves mainly for consideration of transaction motives to meet external payment imbalances as well 
as a store of wealth. Precautionary motive of holding reserves to mitigate adverse external shocks is 
implicit  in  most  countries’  objectives  though  among  a  few,  it  finds  explicit  mention.  Few  countries 
explicitly use international reserves as the backing for monetary base and to maintain the stability and 
integrity of the monetary and financial system.  
From a policy perspective, the objective of holding reserves to support monetary policy is common to 
most  countries  and  the  objective  of  holding  reserves  in  regard  to  many  emerging  economies  is 
primarily  to  maintain  international  confidence  about  its  short-term  payment  obligations  as  well  as 
confidence in monetary and financial polices. 
Secondly,  most  countries  have  informal  coordination  between  debt  management  and  reserve 
management policies. As part of informal coordination, most countries take into account external debt 
indicators, particularly the maturity composition of short-term and long-term debt, as part of reserve 
management.  
Thirdly,  in  regard  to  transparency  and  disclosure  standards,  many  countries  adhere  to  the  IMF’s 
Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) requirement. Most countries publish data on external 
debt and reserves on an annual basis in either their central bank annual reports or other reports of 
Government.  
Fourthly, liquidity and safety (low risks) prevail upon reserve management entities in most countries as 
part of objective of reserve management. The yield objective is secondary to most countries in reserve 
management.  
Fifthly,  most  countries  use  benchmarks  for  managing  currency  composition  of  reserves  though 
information to the public about the benchmarks for the underlying currency composition of reserves is 
generally  not  made  available.  Information  about  the  underlying  norms for  adopting  the  benchmarks 
are, however available in a number of countries. 
Management of Forex Reserves in India 
In  India,  legal  provisions  governing  management  of  forex  reserves  are  set  out  in  the  RBI  Act  and 
Foreign  Exchange  Management  Act,  1999  and  they  also  govern  the  open  market  operations  for 
ensuring orderly conditions in the forex markets, the exercise of powers as a monetary authority and 
the custodian in regard to management of foreign exchange assets.  
In practice, holdings of gold have been virtually unchanged other than occasional sales of gold by the 
government  to  the  RBI.  The  gold  reserves  are  managed  passively.  Currently,  accretion  to  foreign 
currency  reserves  arises  mainly  out  of  purchases  by  RBI  from  the  Authorised  Dealers  (i.e.  open 
market operations), and to some extent income from deployment of forex assets held in the portfolio of 
RBI (i.e. reserves,  which are invested  in appropriate  instruments of select currencies). The RBI Act 
stipulates the investment categories in which RBI is permitted to deploy its reserves. The aid receipts 
on government account also flow into reserves. The outflow arises mainly on account of sale of foreign 
currency to Authorised Dealers (i.e. for open market operations). There are occasions when forex is 
made available from reserves for identified users, as part of strategy of meeting lumpy demands on 
forex  markets,  particularly  during  periods  of  uncertainty.  The  net  effect  of  purchases  and  sale  of 
foreign currency is the most determining one for the level of forex reserves, and these include such 
sale or purchase in forward markets (which incidentally is very small in magnitude).  
While operationally the level of reserves is essentially a result of sale and purchase transactions, the 
level is also one of the objectives of exchange rate policy, and the issue needs to be considered in the 
overall context of exchange rate management. The exchange rate is determined by the market, i.e. 
BIS Review 30/2002 
 7
 forces  of  demand  and  supply.  The  objectives  and  purposes  of  exchange  rate  management  are  to 
ensure that economic fundamentals are reflected in the external value of the rupee as evidenced in 
the sustainable current account deficit. Subject to this general objective, the conduct of exchange rate 
policy  is  guided  by  three  major  purposes:  first,  to  reduce  excess  volatility  in  exchange  rates,  while 
ensuring that the movements are orderly and calibrated; second, to help maintain an adequate level of 
foreign  exchange  reserves  and  third,  to  help  eliminate  market  constraints  with  a  view  to  the 
development  of  a  healthy  foreign  exchange  market.  Basically,  the  policy  is  aimed  at  preventing 
destabilizing speculation in the market while facilitating foreign exchange transactions at market rates 
for all permissible purposes. RBI makes sales and purchases of foreign currency in the forex market, 
basically to even out lumpy demand or supply in the thin forex market; large lumpiness in demand is 
mainly on account of oil imports, leads and lags and external debt servicing on Government account. 
Such sales and purchases are not governed by a predetermined target or band around the exchange 
rate. 
The  essence  of  portfolio  management  of  reserves  by  the  RBI  is  to  ensure  safety,  liquidity  and 
optimization of returns. The reserve management strategies are continuously reviewed by the RBI in 
consultation  with  Government.  In  deploying  reserves,  attention  is  paid  to  the  currency  composition, 
duration and instruments. All of the foreign currency assets are invested in assets of top quality while a 
good proportion should be convertible into cash at short notice. The counterparties with whom deals 
are  conducted  are  also  subject  to  a  rigorous  selection  process.  In  assessing  the  returns  from 
deployment, 
into  consideration. 
Circumstances  such  as  lumpy  demand  and  supply  in  reserve  accretion  are  countered  through 
appropriate immunization strategies in deployment. One crucial area in the process of investment of 
the foreign currency assets in the overseas markets, relates to the risk involved in the process viz. 
credit risk, market risk and operational risk. While there is no set formula to meet all situations, RBI 
utilizes the accepted portfolio management principles for risk management.  
interest  and  capital  gains) 
total  return  (both 
taken 
the 
is 
Forex Reserves and Quasi-fiscal Activities 
Central  Banks  perform  a  number  of  Quasi  Fiscal  Activities  (QFAs).  QFAs  can  be  defined  as  an 
operation or measure carried out by a central bank with an effect that can, in principle, be duplicated 
by budgetary measures in the form of an explicit tax, subsidy or direct expenditure and that has or may 
have an impact on the financial operations of the central bank. In a broader sense, QFAs also include 
certain activities, such as, those relating to exchange rates, open market operations and cash reserve 
ratio, which have fiscal implications but cannot be obviously duplicated in terms of explicit taxes and 
subsidies  in  the  budget.  Central  banks’  QFAs  broadly  arise  from  their  role  as  a  regulator  of  the 
financial system, as a banker to the government, and as a regulator of the foreign exchange system. 
QFAs of the central bank as a regulator of the foreign exchange often pertain to exchange rate and 
sterilized operations to offset the effect of unusual cross border capital flows.  
Impact of QFAs is difficult to quantify. First, the impact of QFAs is merged with the impact of other 
operations and thereby is reflected in the consolidated picture in the balance sheet of the central bank. 
It has not been possible to separate in the balance sheets the impact emerging exclusively from the 
QFAs  from  other  operations.  Secondly,  market  clearing  rates  cannot  be  accurately  predicted  in  an 
administered  interest  rate  regime  and  therefore,  it  would  be  difficult  to  estimate  the  element  of 
subsidy/tax  involved  in  such  operations.  Thirdly,  the  QFAs  are  performed  on  an  ongoing  basis 
covering innumerable transactions and, therefore, their measurement is virtually impossible. Fourthly, 
the impact of certain QFAs like credit ceiling and exchange related measures are not certain. 
On a very general plane it can be argued that sterilised intervention by the central bank to contain the 
liquidity  impact  of  capital  flows  often  involve  a  trade-off  between  low  return  assets  and  high  return 
assets as far as the Central Bank is concerned. Earning from the deployment of foreign exchange is 
understandably lower than the interest loss on account of open market sale of government securities 
essentially due to interest rate differentials.  
Communications Policies 
Issues in transparency and disclosure constitute an important aspect of reserve management, within 
the broader framework of monetary, fiscal and financial polices. Thus, the policy as well as all relevant 
information are articulated through a variety of means from time to time, the most significant being the 
Monetary  and  Credit  Policy  Statements  by  Governor,  RBI.  The  speeches  of  Governor  and  Deputy 
8 
 BIS Review 30/2002
 Governors are important sources of policy analysis, actions and intentions. The Annual Reports of RBI 
provide authentic version of RBI’s perspective as approved by its Board. The Report on Currency and 
Finance  provides  research  output  from  the  professionals  in  RBI.  The  periodical  publications,  Press 
Releases and Discussion Papers are also important sources of information.  
The RBI has been providing, on a regular basis, appropriate data directly relating to foreign exchange 
market  operations.  The  RBI  publishes  daily  data  on  exchange  rates,  forward  premium,  foreign 
exchange turnover etc. in the Weekly Statistical Supplement (WSS) of the RBI Bulletin with a time lag 
of  one  week,  the  movement  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the  RBI  on  a  weekly  basis  are  also 
published.  The  RBI  publishes  data  on  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  (NEER)  and  real  effective 
exchange  rate  (REER),  RBI's  purchases  and  sales  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  along  with 
outstanding  forward  liabilities  on  reserves,  etc.,  in  the  RBI  Bulletin  with  a  time lag  of  one  month.  A 
5-country and a 36-country trade based NEER and REER is published in the RBI Bulletin. The RBI 
has all along, been ahead of many developing and industrial country central banks, been publishing 
the size of its gross intervention (purchase and sale) per month and its net forward liability position. 
The daily reference rate of US dollar and Euro as well as the middle rates for four major currencies, 
viz., US dollar, GBP, Euro and Japanese yen are also available in the RBI website.  
As a part of the Special Data Dissemination Standards, IMF prescribed a data template for disclosure 
of  the  International  reserves  and  foreign  currency  liquidity  in  respect  of  countries,  which  have 
subscribed to SDDS. India’s approach to reserve management closely follows international standards 
and codes, especially with regard to transparency, disclosure, accountability and data dissemination of 
foreign  reserves.  India  is  among  the  49  countries,  which  have  adopted  the  SDDS  template  for 
publication  of  detailed  data  on  forex  reserves.  The  data  template  provides  some  information  on  a 
number  of  parameters  including  currency  composition,  deployment  of  forex  reserves  and  forward 
positions. These data are made available on monthly basis in the RBI website as well as the country 
section of the IMF SDDS site, from the month of October, 2001.  
Issues  
It is proposed to consider five sets of issues covering policy matters; adequacy; costs and benefits; 
management aspects; and dissemination of information. 
Policy Matters 
First, a critical issue is whether all the external assets are readily available for use. The management 
of foreign currency assets in India ensures such availability though in respect of a large part of gold 
which  is  a  small  part  of  official  reserves,  the  quality  is  not  in  a  form  that  is  readily  accepted  in 
international  financial  markets.  There  is  no  likelihood  of  use  of  gold  in  reserves  in  the  foreseeable 
future. Nevertheless, India has devised mechanisms by which a part of the gold holdings of RBI could 
be converted into usable foreign currency. An incidental issue relates to the policy on enhancement or 
otherwise  of  gold  component  in  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  the  way  it  is  managed.  The 
proportion of gold in our reserves is coming down in view of accretion to foreign currency reserves and 
the policy in regard to both holdings and management has been passive. 
Secondly,  an  issue  common  to  many  central  banks  is  the  advantage  in  clearly  spelling  out  policy 
objectives in regard to forex reserves. The mandate as well as the practice in India clearly indicate that 
maintaining  stability  is  an  overriding  objective  but  the  detailing  of  objectives  has  to  reckon  the 
changing  circumstances.  As  explained  in  the  presentation  on  evolution  of  policy  in  India,  a  very 
dynamic  view,  based  on  multiple  indicator  approach  has  been  adopted.  In  this  background,  the 
practice of detailing of the context and objectives as is being done in the recent Monetary and Credit 
Policy Statements of Governor Jalan appears to be very appropriate; since such statements indicate 
the objectives ex ante, supplementing the earlier practice of reporting the policy and management, ex 
post in the Annual Report. The major objective as articulated in recent Policy Statements appears to 
be  to  infuse  and  sustain  confidence  in  the  financial  markets  on  our  liquidity  position  and  operate 
therein as appropriate, with a view to containing volatility in forex markets and contributing to financial 
stability.  
BIS Review 30/2002 
 9
 Adequacy or Appropriate Level 
First, the dominant concern of policy is maintaining confidence in our ability to provide liquidity and, 
there  is  no  precise  way  of  defining  at  what  level  the  confidence  factor  would  be  undermined.  In 
practice, policy makers should make judgements on (a) the difficulties in reviving confidence once it 
starts getting eroded; (b) the focus of market participants on incremental changes more than total size; 
and (c) demonstration of willingness to use the reserves when warranted without committing to do so 
and getting locked into a straight jacket situation. The issue of managing the level of reserves thus 
becomes, in many ways, as important as the level itself.  
Secondly,  there  are  judgements  involved  in  assessing  whether  the  level  of  forex  reserves  provides 
comfort in the face of some weakness in domestic fundamentals. Such a comfort will perhaps not be 
forthcoming if the current account deficit is not sustainable or exchange rate is highly overvalued. For 
example,  it  has  been  argued  that  high  level  of  reserves  could,  under  some  circumstances,  give 
comfort against weaknesses in the financial sector or high public debt or encourage laxity in financial 
and fiscal policies. 
Thirdly, many indicators of adequacy of reserves do, to a significant extent, capture the potential for 
drawdown by non-residents while the factors governing drawdown by residents through capital flight 
are not easily assessed. Hence, the domestic perceptions of level of reserves add to the comfort in 
withstanding  drawdown  through  capital  flight,  and  experience  indicates  that  crisis  of  confidence  in 
currency often originates among residents.  
Fourthly, the leads and lags in trade and even invisibles can significantly influence supply and demand 
in  markets,  particularly  when  markets  are  not  fully  developed.  How  should  reserve  adequacy  be 
assessed  with  reference  to  prevalence  of  such  leads  and  lags?  If  the  leads  and  lags  can  be 
demonstrably impacted by discretionary administrative measures, the amount of reserves needed to 
moderate such leads and lags may be reduced. 
Fifthly, where there is lumpiness in demand and supply as is the case in India, the forex reserves have 
to  be  used  for  meeting  the  temporary  mismatches  in  forex  markets.  In  such  a  situation,  the 
incremental  changes  in  the  level  of  forex  reserves  may  also  be  correspondingly  large.  There  is  a 
tendency among the analysts and media to react negatively to erosion in a more intensive way and 
positively to addition to reserves in a less intensive way. A higher level of reserves may possibly give 
greater scope for changes by making them appear marginal. 
Sixthly, it was widely felt that contingent credit lines from private sector could be negotiated and thus 
actual  level  of  forex  reserves  to  be  maintained  may  be  correspondingly  brought  down.  The 
Contingency Credit Line (CCL) from the International Monetary Fund could also have similar effect. 
India had not accessed this facility, and in any case, experience of other countries has not been very 
satisfactory on this. 
Seventhly, bilateral or multilateral relations at government level do provide some indications, though 
on a judgemental basis, of the forex resources that may be readily accessed in case of difficulties. In 
other  words,  geopolitical  factors  do  give  different  levels  of  comfort  of  ready  availability  of  forex 
resources from official sector through bilateral or multilateral channels. India has to constantly make 
and  review  its  assessment  of  such  access,  noting  that  adequacy  of  forex  reserves  needs  to  be 
assessed  with  reference  to  changing  perceptions  of  the  economy  in  the  market  place  as  well  as 
among  governments  or  the  official  sector.  In  brief,  a  practical  issue  is,  how  much  of  judgemental, 
non-economic, and non-market considerations are relevant in assessing adequacy of forex reserves?  
Cost and Benefits 
First, a major question on the level of reserves relates to the scope for measuring overall economic 
costs and benefits of holding reserves. While concepts of marginal social costs, or opportunity costs 
are useful for analytical purposes, computation is difficult though assessments are not impossible. 
Second,  if  it  is  assumed  that  the  direct  financial  cost  of  holding  reserves  is  the  difference  between 
interest  paid  on  external  debt  and  returns  on  external  assets  in  reserves,  such  costs  have  to  be 
treated  as  insurance  premium  to  assure  and  maintain  confidence  in  the  availability  of  liquidity.  The 
benefits  of  such  a  premium  are  not  merely  in  terms  of  warding  off  risks  but  also  in  terms  of  better 
credit rating and finer spreads that many private participants may get while contracting debt. The costs 
of  comfort  level  in  reserves  are  often  met  by  some  benefits,  but  both  are  difficult  to  measure,  in 
financial or economic, and in quantitative terms. 
10 
 BIS Review 30/2002
 Third,  if  the  level  of  reserves  is  considered  to  be  significantly  in  the  high  comfort  zone,  it  may  be 
possible to add greater weight to return on forex assets than on liquidity thus reducing net costs if any, 
of holding reserves. 
Fourth, such calculations of costs of holding reserves by comparing return on forex reserve with costs 
of external debt may imply that addition to reserves has been made by contracting additional external 
debt.  In  India,  almost  the  whole  of  addition  to  reserves  in  the  last  few  years  has  been  made  while 
keeping the overall level of external debt almost constant.  
Fifth,  the  costs  and  benefits  of  adding  or  not  adding  to  reserves  should  be  assessed  with  a 
medium-term  view.  For  example,  in  case  there  is  uncertainty  about  capacity  to  acquire  needed 
reserves  at  a  later  date,  a  country  may  prefer  to  acquire  them  sooner  than  later.  Indeed,  an 
inter-temporal view of the adequacy as well as costs and benefits of forex reserves may be in order.  
Finally, it is necessary to assess the costs of not adding to reserves through open market operations 
at a time when the capital flows are strong. In other words, the costs and benefits of forex reserves 
may have something to do with the open market operations, both in money and forex markets than 
merely the level itself. In brief, the costs and benefits arise as much out of open market operations of 
the central bank as out of management of levels of reserves. 
Management Aspects 
First, sound legislative framework and institutional arrangements are fully in place, with RBI being the 
owner and custodian of reserves, but operating in consultations with government as necessary. There 
is no particular need for any changes in this regard. 
Second, RBI does not have the legal authority to borrow or draw against external credit lines from the 
non-official  sector.  Should  there  be  enabling  changes  in  the  law?  Similarly,  there  are  severe  legal 
limitations on active management of gold reserves to optimise returns and should they be relaxed? 
Deep seated conservatism is reflected in hesitancy to alter the legislative framework. 
Thirdly,  there  is  close  co-ordination  between  the  RBI  and  Government  with  regard  to  magnitudes, 
composition and maturities of external debt, both in official and private sector. Such co-ordination as it 
exists today is clearly enhancing the effectiveness of reserve management. 
Fourthly,  co-ordination  between  monetary,  exchange  rate  and  reserve  management  is  extremely 
important  and  it  is  ensured  operationally  and  articulated  publicly  through  the  Monetary  and  Credit 
Policy Statements, in a comprehensive manner.  
Random Thoughts 
First, there are important factors that contributed to the comfortable accretion to reserves in the last 
five years but often go unnoticed in any review of external sector policies in India. (a) The liberalisation 
of imports of gold has brought a large segment of unofficial imports and forex market into the official 
sector  and  reduced  large  transaction  costs  incurred  in  foreign  exchange.  In  fact,  meaningful 
development  of  forex  markets  was  enabled  by  this  measure  and  consequently  effectiveness  of 
intervention  in  forex  markets  enhanced.  (b)  Furthermore,  abolition  of  automatic  monetization,  and 
marketisation of Government borrowings provided opportunities to sterilize the capital inflows. In other 
words,  large  capital  flows  could  be  absorbed  into  the  forex  reserves  without  seriously  imparting 
volatility in forex or money markets because of simultaneous actions taken to develop these markets. 
In  fact,  there  are  occasions  in  recent  years  when  RBI  converted  non-marketable  government 
securities (ad-hoc treasury bills) in its portfolio into marketable ones by appropriate arrangements with 
government, to enhance its capacity to conduct open market operations. The criticality of the state of 
financial markets in the management of capital flows and forex reserves needs to be appreciated. 
Second, it is justifiable to ask about the prospects for reserve levels increasing in future. It must be 
recognised that two factors are responsible for significant addition to reserves in the recent past viz., a 
far lower level of current account deficit (CAD) than the expected sustainable level of about 2 per cent 
of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) each  year, and continued inflow of capital especially of non-debt 
creating  flows  as  more  or  less  planned.  In  this  background,  financing  of  an  average  CAD  of  about 
2.8 per cent of GDP as projected in the approach paper to the Tenth Five Year Plan, would require a 
minimum of two-fold increase in the size of annual capital flows from the present level. As indicated in 
the RBI Annual Report 2000-01, this would imply that the net capital flows would have to increase from 
BIS Review 30/2002 
 11
 about US $ 10 billion in the initial year of the Tenth Plan to about US $ 40 billion in the terminal year or 
an average of US $ 20 billion per annum during the Tenth Plan period. 
From a policy perspective, there are two facets of this coordination. To mobilise capital flows of this 
order, international investor confidence is critical. In order to maintain international confidence in the 
ability  of  the  country’s  payment  position,  accumulation  of  reserves  at  a  higher  level  is  an  important 
prerequisite. Moreover, in the event of capital flows of this order, the concern would be on absorption 
of  such  flows  and  its  associated  monetary  impact.  Policy  coordination  has  to  be  put  in  place  to 
synchronise  the  sustainable  current  account  deficit  with  sustainable  economic  growth  and  maintain 
adequate forex reserves 
Third, in this regard, an interesting issue is whether there are circumstances when external borrowings 
need  to  be  resorted  to,  merely  to  add  to  forex  reserves.  Review  of  literature  certainly  provides 
justification for such actions, especially when the issue of restoring or maintaining confidence in credit 
rating in external debt is involved. Similarly, such actions may be needed if sentiment in market needs 
to be influenced by the process. Finally, given the overall impact of increases in both forex reserves 
and external debt, it is possible to visualize circumstances when such operations are optimal. 
Fourth,  are  there  alternatives  to  managing  liquidity  through  maintaining  reserves?  In  this  regard, 
further  explorations  on  the  concept  of  “national  liquidity”  articulated  in  BIS  Policy  Papers  No.  8, 
September  2000  appear  to  be  useful.  Recent  crises  have  shown  that  countries  can  be  faced  with 
liquidity problems not only because of the foreign assets and liabilities of the government and central 
bank, but also because of the foreign currency liabilities of the banks and even the corporate sector. A 
crucial  difference  between  domestic  and  foreign  currency  debt  is  that  the  authorities  can  provide 
virtually  unlimited domestic currency  liquidity,  but are tightly constrained  in their provision  of foreign 
currency liquidity. This has led to consideration of a broad concept of “national liquidity”, though the 
relevance of a national balance sheet for policy purposes is controversial. One polar view is that the 
external  deficits  and  debt  that  are  the  result  of  decisions  of  the  private  sector  –  and  not  due  to 
government borrowing – are of little concern to policymakers. Such a view may be taken by industrial 
countries  since  their  access  to  international  liquidity  at  zero  risk  spreads  is  normally  assured. 
However, for emerging economies there are some arguments in favour of national balance sheet and 
national liquidity. Large net borrowings by some entities in the economy tend to increase country risk 
premia and thus raise the interest rate charged to all borrowers. One solution that has been suggested 
to counter  any such externalities  would be to  internalise them through some form of tax on foreign 
borrowing or to impose some controls. Furthermore, the exchange rate would overshoot if a country’s 
access  to  capital  markets  dried  up  and  it  were  suddenly  forced  to  repay  its  foreign  currency 
obligations, and this  would cause a deep recession.  Private sector external debt decisions have,  in 
fact,  impinged  on  fiscal  management  and  balance  sheets  of  official  sector  in  several  ways  in  the 
context  of  recent  crises.  Thus,  an  important  policy  aspect  is  the  question  of  whether  and  how  the 
official sector should take account of the maturity and currency mismatches of the private sector in 
structuring its own foreign assets and liabilities. 
The concept of a national balance sheet, of course, raises several tricky questions relating to private 
sector  foreign  assets  offsetting  liabilities,  and  the  extent  to  which  their  foreign  exchange  exposures 
fully capture vulnerability. In spite of all these complexities that are involved in the national balance 
sheet approach, there is merit in exploring such an approach to provide guidance to policy relating to 
reserves, both in terms of adequacy and management.  
Finally, an idea which received some attention recently (March 2002) during the gathering on ‘Finance 
for Development’ in Monterrey, Mexico, is that, instead of holding their reserves in dollars, a new form 
of global money viz., ‘global greenbacks’ could be issued, which countries could hold in reserves. The 
amount of money held by countries in ‘global greenbacks’ could be given to developing countries to 
finance  their  development  programmes  as  well  as  global  public  goods  like  environmental  projects, 
health initiatives, humanitarian assistance and so on. 
For countries that receive less than the amount that they need to put into reserves, the new ‘global 
money’  would  go  into  reserves  freeing  dollars  that  these  countries  would  otherwise  set  aside. 
Countries  that  receive  more  than  they  must  put  into  reserves  could  exchange  the  new  money  for 
conventional currencies. Eventually, all the new money will find its way into reserves, which in effect 
represent a commitment by countries to help each other in times of trouble. It has been argued that 
the  greenbacks  proposal  envisages  flow  of  funds  to  poor  countries  according  to  their  need  while 
contributing  to  global  economic  growth,  stability  and  equity.  Perhaps,  as  part  of  ongoing  exercises 
relating to international financial architecture, this idea deserves to be deliberated.  
12 
 BIS Review 30/2002
 Conclusion 
To  conclude,  the  theory  and  practice  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  as  complex  as  any  other 
contemporary economic issue. While it is not easy to provide answers to all the questions raised in the 
recent debate on foreign exchange reserves management policy, we in India have had Such a Long 
Journey from the Agony of 1991 to the Comfort of today and this has come about only by dint of hard 
work  and  implementation  of  Prudent  Policies  which  has  made  India,  a  respected  model  in  the 
Emerging World.  
BIS Review 30/2002 
 13
