 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Macro-economic developments in the UK and 
its effects on the West Midlands 
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the West Midlands 
Conference “20-20 Vision”, Birmingham, 20 September 2002. 
 Your conference title is “20-20 Vision” - which I thought initially - and not unreasonably - meant it was 
to be all about hindsight. And I happily accepted the invitation to speak on that basis, because, as we 
all know, 20-20 hindsight is very easy - as a lot of commentators have demonstrated just recently in 
their criticisms of US policy-makers in the light of the economic and financial market bubble which built 
up in the late 1990's! It was only later that I realised you intended that we should look forward to the 
year 2020 - that the conference was to be a foresight saga - and at that point I began to get cold feet! 
Central bankers are jolly lucky if they feel at all confident looking ahead 18 months, let alone 18 years 
- and sometimes recently - given the volatility in financial markets - its been difficult to predict what 
was likely to happen over the next 18 minutes! 
But  here  I  am,  and  what  I  thought  I  would  do  this  morning  is  to  try  to  provide  some  sort  of  UK 
macro-economic  context  for  your  discussion  of  the  challenges  facing  the  West  Midlands  by  first 
looking  backwards  at  some  of  the  trends  that  we  have  seen  over  recent  years  and  then  trying  to 
anticipate how those trends might evolve.  
People often tell me that retrospection is a sign of old age. But as I reflect on my 40 years at the Bank 
of England I am increasingly conscious of the remarkable change that has occurred over that time - in 
fits and starts certainly, but in the same general direction - from a heavily administered economic and 
financial system to one which is much more market based. 
Post-war controls on resource allocation had been largely dismantled before I started at the Bank. But 
the  financial  system  was  still  governed  by  all  kinds  of  direct  controls  -  exchange  controls,  credit 
ceilings  on  bank  lending  -  coupled  with  directional  guidance,  the  queuing  of  equity  issuance  and 
business  restrictions  -  on  the  activities  of  building  societies,  for  example;  and  there  was  direct 
intervention in the wider economy through prices and incomes policies and public ownership of large 
parts of industry, and so on. But all of that has now gone. It's true that plenty of regulation remains - 
reflecting public policy concerns relating to competition and consumer and environmental protection, 
employment  conditions,  health  and  safety  standards,  and  so  on  -  indeed  it  has  intensified  in  these 
areas.  The  business  opinion  survey  conducted  here  in  the  West  Midlands  earlier  this  year  by  the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants and the IOD - which had over 85% of respondents agreeing that 
red tape and bureaucracy are stifling business - suggests that some of you have noticed! But for the 
most part such regulation doesn't tell us what activities we can and cannot undertake, rather it sets the 
criteria we must meet and the standards we must observe in doing whatever it is we choose to do. It 
leaves  more  room  for  both  consumer  and  producer  choice,  and  more  room,  and  more  incentive, 
therefore for competition and innovation. 
Our  experience  in  the  UK  is,  of  course,  just  part  of  a  very  much  broader  and  continuing  evolution 
internationally  -  often  associated  with  increasing  political  democracy  -  from  varying  degree  of 
centralised  administration  to  an  increasingly  open,  market-based,  approach  in  all  parts  of  the  world 
reflected also in increasingly free international trade and investment. 
At  the  macro-economic  level  the  economic  advantages  of  freer market  competition  are  familiar.  No 
one could claim that it's perfect - especially in the light of the current volatility! But profitability is the 
best  means  that  we  have  so  far  discovered  for  directing  resources  -  whether  human  or material  or 
financial resources - into those activities in which they can be most productively employed. It provides 
a powerful incentive to increasing economic efficiency - and the higher sustainable growth rate that we 
need  to  satisfy  our  aspirations  for  improving  living  standards  -  by  encouraging  the  concentration  of 
production  on  those  businesses,  or  regions,  or  countries,  which  have,  or  are  able  to  develop,  a 
comparative advantage in particular products or services. 
That's  not  necessarily  how  it  seems  at  the  micro-economic  level.  Individual  businesses  and  their 
employees,  or regions, or  even countries  at the  international  level, tend to think of competition  and 
market-driven resource allocation as a zero-sum game: if one side wins the other necessarily loses. 
So  it's  not  surprising  that  existing  producers  are  tempted  to  resist  the  opening  of  their  markets  to 
BIS Review 53/2002 
 1
 is  a 
framework  of  macro-economic  stability.  For  much  of 
greater  competition  and  look  for  protection  where  they  can.  But  attempting  to  stem  the  tide  by 
acquiescing  in  protection  would  be  to  ignore  the  benefits  which  increased  competition,  and  more 
efficient  and  innovative  production  would  bring  to  society  at  large,  including  consumers,  as  well  as 
potentially more efficient producers and their prospective employees, wherever they are located. It is 
those benefits which make market competition a  positive-sum game at the macro-economic level. I 
don't  at  all  underestimate  the  pressures  on  businesses,  and  their  employees  and  surrounding 
communities, that struggle to retain their comparative advantage in a market economy. But standing 
still is not an option in today's world - nor will it be going forward. The one thing you can be reasonably 
sure of as you look ahead to 2020 is that you will be confronted with a continuing challenge to keep 
ahead of the competition in your existing industries and that  you will need to be able to respond to 
changing  demands  and  embrace  new  activities  to  replace  those  where  your  present  comparative 
advantage becomes impossible to sustain - as is unfortunately bound to happen in some cases. 
So my first point is that the market economy is with us to stay, with all that that implies. 
We've also learned that one of the conditions that are necessary if a market economy is to function 
effectively 
the  post-war  period 
macro-economic policy - not just in this country, but including in this country - focussed heavily on the 
short-term  management  of  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  It  paid  too  little  attention  to  the 
underlying, supply-side, capacity of the economy to meet that demand. Faced with slow growth and 
rising unemployment both fiscal and monetary policy were used, in combination, to stimulate demand 
until accelerating inflation and a worsening balance of payments threatened to run out of hand, when 
the  brakes  were  slammed  on  and  everything  went  into  reverse.  The  go-stop  policy  cycle  in  other 
words produced the familiar boom-bust business cycle. Over time this experience induced a pervasive 
short-termism  in  economic  decision-making  on  the  part  of  both  businesses  and  consumers.  That 
increasing short-termism in turn led to the increasing amplitude of the business cycle, so that inflation 
rose progressively higher from economic peak to peak and unemployment rose progressively higher 
from economic trough to trough. 
I am convinced that, with others, we really have taken on board the lessons of that experience. The 
requirements that public debt to GDP is kept at a stable and prudent level, with borrowing over the 
economic  cycle  limited  to  finance  investment  spending,  constrain  the  use  of  fiscal  policy  as  a 
short-term instrument. And monetary policy has been given the distinct role as the primary instrument 
for short-term aggregate demand management, with a target for retail price inflation, not simply as an 
end in itself, as some people still seem to imagine, but as a measure of the extent to which the growth 
of demand is held consistently broadly in line with the underlying - sustainable - growth of supply-side 
capacity. 
The past ten  years have in fact been a period of unusual stability in that broader sense for the UK 
economy as a whole. Inflation has been consistently low throughout that time - close to, and recently 
modestly  below,  our  present  2½%  target.  But  that  has  not  been  achieved  at  the  expense  of 
consistently  high  interest  rates,  and  weak  growth  and  high  unemployment,  as  many  people  initially 
feared that it would. In fact nominal interest rates have been as low as most of us can ever remember; 
the  overall  economy  has  grown  consistently  for  40  successive  quarters  without  interruption  at  an 
average annual rate of some 2¾%, which is comfortably above its long-term trend; and the number of 
people  in  employment  has  risen  fairly  steadily  to  close  to  an  all-time  high,  while  the  rate  of 
unemployment has fallen to a more than 25-year low. 
The overall picture is much the same for the West Midlands region. I don't have regional data for real 
economic growth, but using the deflator for the UK economy, your region grew from 1992 to 1999, at 
an annual average rate of 2.7% - very close to the rate for the UK as a whole. 
The number of people in employment in the region has also increased, with the employment rate now 
close to a 10 year high and in line with - in fact marginally above - the average for the UK of 74.6%. 
And the rate of unemployment - on the claimant count basis - at 3.5% is very close to its 25 year low. 
That's still a bit above the UK average rate, of 3.1% but it's very much better than the 10% rate of a 
decade ago. 
Now I know it hasn't felt like that for everyone - particularly for internationally exposed businesses and 
their  employees  and  for  the  regions  in  which  such  businesses  are  more  heavily  concentrated  - 
including the West Midlands with its relatively high concentration of manufacturing businesses. I am 
well aware that many of them - perhaps many of you - have been having a rough time over the past 
few years. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2002
 Although the UK economy as a whole managed to avoid recession, UK manufacturing output fell from 
a  peak  nearly  two  years  ago  by  around  7%  and  employment  in  UK  manufacturing  fell  by  225,000 
people, or some 6%. 
To put that into perspective, manufacturing output fell from peak to trough over much the same period 
by over 16% in Japan, by 7½% in the US and by 6½% in Germany; and manufacturing employment 
fell by 7¼% in Japan, 9½% in the US and nearly 3% in Germany. So the pressures on manufacturing 
were not confined to, nor did they originate in this country. 
There are two main reasons for the pressures on the internationally-exposed sectors of our economy. 
The first is the weakness of much of the global economy as a result of the Asia crisis and its aftermath 
in the late 1990's, and then, more recently, as a result of the sharp, synchronised, slowdown in the 
major industrial countries - as reflected in  the figures I've just given  you. The second reason is the 
strength of the sterling exchange rate, or more particularly the weakness of the euro for most of the 
time since its introduction some 3½ years ago. 
The frustrating thing for us has been that that there was very little that either we at the Bank or the UK 
Government could do directly to address the problems at source. 
That's  fairly  obvious  when  we  are  talking  about  the  weakening  of  domestic  demand  in  other  major 
countries. It's perhaps less obvious that we couldn't have done more to affect the exchange rate. It's 
not that we didn't care - as has sometimes been suggested. In fact we've repeatedly made it clear that 
we'd welcome a stronger euro because that could help to restore a better balance to the UK economy. 
The problem has been that  we  didn't know  how  to  bring it about, certainly  without  destabilising the 
overall economy. Many people think it's simply a question of reducing our interest rate by more than 
the ECB reduced theirs. But it really isn't as simple as that makes it sound. We did indeed do precisely 
that last year but sterling continued to strengthen - though it has in fact fallen back somewhat against 
the euro since as the euro has staged a moderate recovery. 
What we were able to do - given that inflation was somewhat below target - was to try to compensate 
for  the  external  weakness  by  stimulating  domestic  demand  here  in  the  UK.  In  a  situation  where 
business  confidence  -  and  therefore  investment  -  was  weak,  that  essentially  meant  stimulating 
consumer  demand.  It  was  not  without  risk  -  in  terms  of  the  build-up  of  household  debt  and  of  a 
possible house price bubble - but without it we, too, would have faced recession. 
Looking forward, there is a reasonable prospect that global demand will pick up gradually, and we may 
see  a  more  sustainable  pattern  of  exchange  rates  beginning  to  emerge  with  the  albeit  hesitant 
strengthening  of  the  euro.  There  are  in  fact  already  signs  that  manufacturing  output  has  started  to 
recover.  But  there  are  downside  risks  to  that  prospect  associated  with  the  renewed  volatility  of 
international financial markets over the summer, which we are monitoring very closely. 
But abstracting from these recent global and largely cyclical, effects, the more fundamentally important 
point,  looking  further  ahead,  is  the  likelihood  that  we  -  alongside  other  countries  -  will  continue  to 
operate  within  a  framework  of  overall  macro-economic  stability  -  as  a  necessary  condition  for  the 
effective functioning of the market economy. Those presumptions may well mean that manufacturing 
continues  its  gradual,  long-term,  relative  decline  -  as  a  share  of  total  output,  and  in  terms  of  the 
number of people employed - in all developed industrial countries, including the UK. But it does not 
mean that manufacturing output as a whole will contract in an absolute sense; on the contrary, past 
experience suggests that it will continue to increase, though the composition of output and techniques 
of production will continue to evolve. In that sense I very much share the view, of course, of the 49% of 
those surveyed by the ICA/IOD who disagree that manufacturing industry is in irreversible decline. It is 
entirely consistent with that view, of course, that other sectors, particularly the services sectors, will 
grow more rapidly and continue to increase their share of total output. 
The precise form of the macro-economic stability framework may well continue to evolve, and it would 
in particular be affected in some degree by the decision on whether or not we join the euro. Were we 
to do so, the nominal exchange rate certainty with our European partners, representing roughly half 
our international trade, would - depending partly on an appropriate entry rate, whatever that might be - 
be of considerable longer-term benefit to many of the internationally-exposed businesses, in whatever 
sectors, that have suffered from the volatility, and particularly the weakness, of the euro in the past few 
years.  And  the  greater  transparency  of  prices  and  costs  vis  à  vis  other  Eurozone  members  would 
enhance competition and the effective functioning of the single European market. There would also be 
benefits  from  the  integration  of  our  financial  markets  with  those  of  the  Eurozone.  The  potential 
downside  risk  -  and  one  can  debate  just  how  big  a  risk  it  is  -  is  that  the  macro-economic  stability 
BIS Review 53/2002 
 3
 framework - while based upon the same general philosophy as here in the UK - would in this case be 
directed to stability in the Eurozone as a whole. Monetary policy would be decided collectively by the 
ECB, and fiscal policy would be constrained by the European Stability and Growth Pact - so that the 
policy  stance  may  not  always  necessarily  be  consistent  with  the  particular  macro-economic  policy 
needs  of  individual  member  states.  The  essential  purpose  of  the  Chancellor's  assessment  of  the 
famous  five  tests  is  of  course  to  weigh  the  balance  between  these  potential  benefits  and  possible 
risks, and it will then be for the Government and ultimately the people of this country to decide. The 
outcome could have a bearing on the macro-economic context both for the UK as a whole and here in 
the West Midlands, but it is very difficult to predict what the effects might be.  
Whatever  the  outcome  of  the  euro  debate,  you  will  be  operating  in  a  market  economy  within  a 
stability-oriented macro-economic framework.  
The crucial point then is that the overall rate of growth that we can hope to sustain - which is the key to 
our future prosperity - will depend upon the vigour and flexibility of the supply-side of the economy. 
And improving our supply-side capacity is the major challenge confronting us all - at the national level 
but also here on the ground in the West Midlands. That's not something which monetary policy - which 
operates - as I say - on the demand side of the economy can do much about - at least directly. 
Government in all its forms - at the European, national, regional and local levels - has a vital role to 
play in this, by helping to improve the transport infrastructure, for example, and I know that you will be 
discussing that subject later this morning; or by raising the standards of education and training, which 
are  critically  important  in  terms  of  the  available  skills  of  the  workforce;  and  by  providing  the  right 
business incentives and encouraging investment. 
But the private sector, too, has a vitally important part to play - including at the regional level. 
Private  sector  businesses  clearly  have  a  strong  commercial  interest  in  the  prosperity  of  the 
communities  in  which they operate. And  I find increasingly  as I travel around the country  that  local 
businesses and their representative organisations - including both commercial and industrial sectors 
and the professional services sectors - are working together, with the local academic community, and 
with the regional and local authorities, to identify - on the basis of their local knowledge - the particular 
obstacles, and the particular opportunities, they face, recognising that there is a great deal that they 
themselves can do through partnership - including public-private partnership - to help create a more 
positive supply-side environment at the regional and local level. That partnership typically embraces 
not  only  issues  facing  the  mainstream  economy  but  extends  to  direct  involvement  in  activities 
designed  to  draw  into  the  mainstream  economy  communities  which  for  one  reason  or  another  are 
liable  to  be  left  on  the  sidelines,  but  which,  if  they  are  given  the  right  opportunities,  clearly  can 
contribute to both the economic prosperity and the social cohesion of the region.  
And  I find that  positive approach here too in the West Midlands. It's very much the purpose  of this 
conference - organised by AWM - Advantage West Midlands - alongside the IOD and the ICA. It's the 
purpose,  too,  for  example,  of  the West  Midlands  Regional  Finance  Forum  organised  by  AWM  and 
bringing together the banks and accountants, representatives of the ethnic minorities and community 
finance  organisations  -  including  Aston  Reinvestment  Trust,  as  well  as  academics  and  the  Small 
Business Service, with the aim of improving access to finance for business at all levels. 
You've already come a long way in the West Midlands. You have weathered the international storm in 
your  more  traditional  industries  far  better  than  might  have  been  expected,  and  you  have  been 
relatively successful in diversifying  into higher value-added and more knowledge-based industries. I 
wish I could claim that life will get easier looking forward to 2020 - but I can't promise that and you 
wouldn't believe me anyway! But what I do say is that working together, with your “can-do” attitude, 
you are as well placed as anywhere to overcome the challenges ahead - and I wish you all possible 
success. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2002
