 Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 14 June 2002 
 The National Bank has decided to leave the target range for the three-month Libor rate unchanged at 
0.75%  -  1.75%.  For  the  time  being,  the  three-month  Libor  is  to  be  kept  in  the  middle  of  the  target 
range.  Since  the  last  assessment  of  21  March  2002,  the  National  Bank  has  again  adjusted  its 
monetary  policy.  On  2  May  2002,  we  lowered  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  by 
0.5 percentage  points  to  the  current  level.  Some  time  earlier,  on  27  March  2002,  we  had  already 
lowered  repo  rates  by  approximately  10  basis  points,  which  led  to  a  corresponding  change  in  the 
three-month Libor. In both cases, we acted in response to the appreciation of the Swiss franc, which 
had led to an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions. Since March 2001, the National Bank has 
eased its monetary policy substantially, lowering the target range for the three-month Libor by a total 
of 2.25 percentage points. After the cyclical downturn in the second half of last year, there are now 
signs  that  the  world  economy  is  starting  to  pick  up,  which  will  also  benefit  economic  activity  in 
Switzerland. However, uncertainties regarding the upswing in Switzerland persist. For the time being, 
the National Bank will thus maintain its expansive monetary policy stance. This does not jeopardise 
price stability. Assuming that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 1.25%, average annual 
inflation is expected to hover between 0.9% and 1.6% in the next three years. For 2002, the National 
Bank still anticipates a growth rate of around 1%. 
The  difficult  situation  of  the  world  economy  has  had  a  marked  influence  on  the  development  of 
business activity in Switzerland in the past few months. Following a decline in the third quarter 2001, 
the economy stabilised in the fourth quarter, and in the first quarter 2002 gross domestic product again 
rose somewhat. Notably  exports and capital spending  were on the  decline during this  period,  while 
private  and  government  consumption  as  well  as  the  construction  industry  exerted  a  stabilising 
influence. On the whole, the development in the past six months fulfilled our expectations. 
We  assume  that  the  Swiss  economy  will  grow  extremely  moderately  and  below  its  potential  until 
mid-2002.  Growth  is  likely  to  pick  up  perceptibly  again  only  during  the  second  half  of  2002. 
Consumption  will  remain  robust  and  strengthen  economic  activity.  The  actual  upswing,  however, 
should be triggered by higher exports and these, in turn, will depend on improved economic conditions 
worldwide. With a slight time lag, capital spending is also expected to grow markedly again. As already 
stated,  we  still  believe  that  real  economic  activity  should  increase  by  around  1%  in  2002.  In  2003, 
growth  should  continue  to  approach  its  potential,  thereby  clearly  exceeding  this  year's  level. 
Unemployment is unlikely to rise much more, and the production gap should gradually disappear in the 
course of the coming year. 
I  shall  now  describe  the  development  of  inflation  over  the  past  few  months  and  explain  our  new 
inflation forecast in more detail. The dotted green curve in the graph shows our inflation forecast of 
December  2001.  At  that  time,  we  assumed  that  the  three-month  Libor  rate  would  remain  stable  at 
1.75% and accordingly expected a slight general rise in inflation to approximately 1.5% by the end of 
2004. The fluctuations in inflation predicted for 2002 reflect basis effects. Last December's forecast 
was based on the assumption that the US economy and the European economy would stagnate until 
mid-2002 and would then gradually return to their potential growth path. 
Our forecast of December 2001 slightly overestimated the development of inflation for the first quarter 
2002 and at the same time slightly underestimated inflation for the second quarter 2002. The deviation 
from  the  forecasting  path  is  due  mainly  to  the  development  of  oil  prices  and  the  changed  time  of 
collecting data on clearance sales prices for clothing and shoes. Year-on-year inflation, as measured 
by the national consumer price index, rose to 0.6% in the first quarter 2002 from 0.4% in the fourth 
quarter 2001. In April, inflation increased to 1.1%, while declining again in May to 0.6%. The distinct 
rise in April was largely due to yet again higher oil prices and higher prices for clothing and shoes. At 
1.6%, the price pressure on domestic goods still clearly exceeds that on foreign goods. 
The  dashed  red  curve  in  the  graph  shows  our  latest  inflation  forecast,  while  the  table  contains  the 
corresponding  average  annual  inflation.  Our  new  forecast  rests  on  the  assumption  that  after  the 
surprisingly strong first quarter, growth in the US will be considerably weaker in the second quarter of 
this year. Subsequently, however, the US economy should gradually return to its potential growth path. 
BIS Review 39/2002 
 1
 In Europe, the economy will stagnate until the middle of this year and should then again accelerate 
markedly. We expect that  the  dollar/euro rate  will remain at about the current  level and that  the oil 
price will be around $25 per barrel. 
On the assumption that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 1.25% during the next three 
years, inflation should average 0.9% in 2002, move up to 1.3% in 2003 and reach 1.6% in 2004. The 
forecast inflation will accelerate over time. Throughout the forecasting period, however, it will remain 
within the range of price stability. Until mid-2003, the forecast inflation will be considerably influenced 
by  basis  effects,  which  explains  the  various  fluctuations.  After  that  it  will  be  largely  determined  by 
monetary policy effects. 
Until the beginning of 2004, the new forecast is very similar to the forecast of December 2001. In the 
new forecast, however, inflation then rises rapidly and at the end of the forecasting period it is only 
barely within the range of price stability. This difference is primarily due to the even more expansionary 
monetary  policy  compared  with  last  December.  With  the  global  economy  improving  and  Swiss 
business  activity  picking  up,  an  enduringly  expansionary  monetary  policy  will  in  time  lead  to  higher 
inflation rates. 
We consider the current level of the three-month Libor rate as appropriate for the time being to enable 
the economy to return to sustainable, inflation-free growth. Monetary policy decision-making is difficult 
under present circumstances. Given the strength of the Swiss franc we have very considerably relaxed 
monetary policy and cut interest rates much more than the European central bank. We are aware that 
our expansionary policy entails certain risks. Yet we believe that in view of the sluggish development 
of the Swiss economy and the strength of the Swiss franc we are conducting a reasonable policy. To 
adopt a more restrictive monetary policy would be premature at the present time and might jeopardise 
the still fragile economic recovery, notably in the export sector. We are also of the opinion that we still 
have sufficient leeway to counter any increased price pressures in good time and that price stability is 
currently not threatened. 
The  National  Bank  must  be  ready  and  willing  to  react  to  changes  in  the  world  economy.  At  the 
moment, we see mainly two risks which might compel us to reassess the situation and to adjust our 
monetary policy course. For one thing, the economic recovery in Europe might be delayed somewhat. 
For another, the Swiss franc could again come under upward pressure. In both cases, the National 
Bank would react with adequate means. 
To  conclude  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  what  role  the  exchange  rate  plays  in  our 
monetary-policy decision-making process. We live in a system with flexible exchange rates. Such a 
system is very advantageous for Switzerland, but once in a while exchange rate fluctuations have to 
be reckoned with. We are currently going through a period characterised by a strong Swiss franc. In 
the  past,  there  have  always  been  phases  during  which  the  Swiss  franc  tended  to  be  very  strong. 
Experience has also shown, though, that there have always been corrective phases as well. 
It is the National Bank's responsibility to maintain price stability in the medium term, thus creating a 
favourable environment for the development of all sectors of the economy. For monetary policy, the 
exchange rate is an extremely important measure, as it influences the price level directly via import 
prices as well as indirectly via capacity utilisation in the export sector, and thus via economic growth. 
Particularly the last nine months exemplify the strong influence of the exchange rate on Switzerland's 
monetary  policy.  We  always  neutralised  the  tightening  of  monetary  conditions,  which  was  brought 
about by the appreciation of the Swiss franc, and rendered Swiss franc investments less attractive. 
We are aware of the fact that these measures do not provide relief to all sectors of the economy at the 
same time or to the same extent. The present situation is difficult for the export industry and for parts 
of the tourism sector. We should not forget, however, that enterprises in the rest of Europe also have 
to contend with unfavourable conditions. High inflation or calls for massive pay rises, as seen in some 
countries,  may  cause  production  costs  to  surge.  Switzerland  as  an  industrial  location  remains 
attractive.  Its  advantages  include  low  inflation,  high  social  stability,  performance-oriented  and  well-
trained  employees,  trade  unions  with  an  awareness  of  economic  correlations,  a  first-rate  public 
infrastructure and administrative system and, last but not least, a low interest rate level and favourable 
financing  possibilities  in  a  first-class financial  centre.  The  export  industry's  situation  should  improve 
rapidly  once  the  global  economy,  and  in  particular  the  European  economy,  start  to  rebound. 
Experience has shown that the export industry always does everything in its power to further increase 
its productivity and to remain competitive internationally in the current exchange rate environment. Its 
efforts  must  be  supported  by  a  strengthening  of  domestic  competition  in  Switzerland.  The  export 
industry will remain a key engine of growth in Switzerland and an essential basis of our prosperity. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2002
   The main ticks on the horizontal axis indicate the beginning of the first quarter of the respective year. 
The value for each quarter is recorded in the middle of the quarter. 
  
Inflation Forecast June 2002 with Libor at 1,25% 
2001 
2002 
2003
2004
Annual average inflation in % 
1.0 
0.9 
1.3
1.6
 BIS Review 39/2002 
 3
