 David Dodge: Inflation targeting in Canada - experience and lessons 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  prepared  for  the  Central  Bank 
Governor’s Panel on Inflation Targeting at a joint session of The American Economic Association and 
the North American Economics and Finance Association, Atlanta, 5 January 2002. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Bank of Canada’s website. 
 Thank you, Andrew. I am pleased to be in Atlanta today to talk to you about the Canadian experience 
with inflation targeting. 
In  the  1970s  and  1980s  we  found—in  common  with  many  other  countries—that  high  and  variable 
rates  of  inflation  created  a  lot  of  economic  damage.  And  it  took  a  long  time  and  a  lot  of  work  with 
various monetary policy frameworks before we got back on track. I would point to two particular sets of 
arrangements for policy during that time that were both designed to lead to low inflation rates. 
The first was monetary targeting—specifically, targeting the narrow monetary aggregate M1, beginning 
in 1975. A close relationship between M1 growth and inflation held only over very long periods of time. 
Moreover,  this  relationship  was  subject  to  sizable  downward  shifts  in  the  demand  for  money.  Such 
shifts did indeed occur. Thus, after a period of disinflation between 1975 and 1978, inflation picked up 
again  in  1979–82  despite  the  achievement  of  the  M1  target.1  Because  of  the  lack  of  longer-term 
success in bringing down inflation, this approach to monetary policy was unable to build confidence 
and understanding on the part of the public. 
The second policy approach took place from 1982-90, a period in which there was no clear monetary 
policy target. Rather, there was only a desire to bring inflation down and (particularly after 1987-88) to 
approach “price stability.” After the disinflation of 1982-84, there was no further progress in reducing 
inflation. And with no explicit target, there was still little understanding of monetary policy and no focus 
for inflation expectations.2 
The economic boom at the end of the 1980s, together with an oil-price shock and the introduction of 
the  goods  and  services  tax,  led  to  fears  that  inflation  would  again  escalate  and  stay  high.  It  was 
against this background that, in 1991, the Canadian government and the Bank of Canada agreed on 
targets for inflation reduction. Canada was the second country, after New Zealand, to set out formal, 
medium-term inflation targets. 
The Canadian experience: agreeing on a target 
I would now like to turn to the question of how we adopted inflation targets in the first place. The Bank 
of Canada operates under the Bank of Canada  Act. The preamble to the act notes that the central 
bank  is  established  “to  control  and  protect  the  external  value  of  the  national  monetary  unit  and  to 
mitigate by its influence fluctuations in the general level of production, trade, prices and employment, 
so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action, and generally to promote the economic 
and financial welfare of Canada.” In essence, this is like the broad mandate given to the U.S. Federal 
Reserve under U.S. legislation. 
Theory  and  empirical  evidence  suggest  that  there  is  no  long-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and 
production  levels.  Indeed,  there  is  evidence  that  a  low-inflation  regime  supports  higher  productivity. 
Moreover,  monetary  policy  has  essentially  only  one  instrument.  Therefore,  the  best  that  monetary 
policy actions can do to promote the welfare of Canadians is to aim for low, stable, and predictable 
inflation  with  a medium-term target horizon,  which  will maximize sustainable production  levels. This 
will have the important benefit of tending to mitigate fluctuations in production and employment. It is 
also the best way to protect the external value of the monetary unit under flexible exchange rates. 
The experience of the 1970s and 1980s left both the government and the central bank sensitive to the 
havoc  wreaked  by  high  and  unstable  inflation  rates  and  thus  moved  them  away  from  the  notion  of 
                                                      
1  Freedman (1983) and Thiessen (1983) discuss various aspects of the Canadian experience with M1 targeting. 
2  Duguay and Longworth (1998) discuss the search for a new anchor during the 1980s. 
BIS Review 2/2002 
 1
 trying  to  directly  fine-tune  short-run  output  and  employment  levels.  By  1990,  there  was  therefore  a 
growing shared desire to create a policy that would provide a better anchor for inflation expectations. 
It  was  important  that  both  parties  be  involved.  Since  1967,  the  Bank  of  Canada  Act  has  granted  a 
directive power to the government that allows it to openly instruct the Bank to carry out specific actions 
over a specific time period. This power has never been used. However, both it and the requirement in 
the  act  for  regular  consultations  between  the  Governor  and  the  Minister  of  Finance  highlight  the 
importance of consultations between the two parties on any major change in the objective of monetary 
policy.  In  a  democratic  society,  the  government  must  be  comfortable  with  the  overall  direction  of 
monetary policy. Moreover, for an objective to be credible, the government’s backing is required. And, 
because  of  the  expertise  that  resides  in  the  central  bank,  it  is  important  that  the  Bank  provide  the 
research and analysis regarding the framework that can deliver the agreed objective. 
An  agreement  was  indeed  reached.  It  was  announced  in  the  form  of  a  joint  press  release  on  the 
inflation-reduction  targets  at  the  time  of  the  February  1991  budget.  The  Bank  issued  a  detailed 
background document at that time elaborating on the framework it would use to achieve the targets.3 
Given  the  empirical  evidence  for  Canada,  showing  that  the  appropriate  horizon  for  aiming  at  an 
inflation target was about 1 1/2 to 2 years, the first formal target was set for December 1992 at a rate 
of 3 per cent (plus or minus 1 per cent). The series of targets announced in the agreement was aimed 
at bringing the 12-month CPI inflation rate down to  2 per cent (again, plus or minus 1 per cent) by 
December 1995. 
The decline in inflation was achieved in fairly short order, indeed faster than was consistent with the 
targets. By January 1992, inflation was close to 2 per cent. 
The agreement with the government has been renewed three times; in each case, the midpoint of the 
inflation target range has been confirmed at 2 per cent. Through this period—and with two different 
governments—there  has  been  a  growing  shared  appreciation  of  what  inflation  control  has  been 
contributing to Canada’s good economic performance. This includes the recognition of the automatic 
stabilizing feature of inflation targeting in response to demand shocks—a point that I will come back to 
later. 
Overall, the government and the central bank are on the same wavelength in terms of the objective of 
policy.  The  successful  implementation  of  a  monetary  policy  aimed  at  low,  stable,  and  predictable 
inflation and a fiscal policy aimed, in most circumstances, at running a small surplus with the goal of 
bringing  about  a  significant  decline  in  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  has  enhanced  the  credibility  of  both 
policies. 
The major lesson that  we  at the  Bank of Canada  draw from our experience  with inflation control is 
related  to  the  advantages  of  establishing  a  credible  anchor  for  monetary  policy  by  focusing  on  the 
predictability of inflation. That will be the theme of the rest of my talk. 
Establishing a credible anchor by focusing on predictability 
When the original inflation-reduction targets were announced in early 1991, the Bank was not relying 
on  a  credibility  effect  to  reduce  inflation.  And  subsequent  studies  have  shown  that  this  was  the 
appropriate  assumption—there  was  no  evident  reduction  in  the  cost  of  disinflation  arising  from 
credibility. What the Bank did say was that 
The  purpose  of  setting  out  formal  targets  is  to  provide  a  clear  indication  of  the 
downward path for inflation over the medium term so that firms and individuals can 
take this into account in their economic decision-making. . . . The inflation targets 
also  provide  information  on  the  specific  objectives  to  which  the  monetary  policy 
actions of the Bank will be directed in the period ahead and through the medium 
term.  This 
readily 
understandable  not  only  to  financial  market  participants  but  also  to  the  general 
public and should provide a better basis than before for judging the performance of 
monetary policy.4 
the  Bank’s  actions  more 
information  should  make 
                                                      
3  See Bank of Canada (1991). 
4  Bank of Canada (1991), pp. 10-11 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2002
 Credibility, inflation, and inflation expectations 
After inflation fell to 2 per cent, the expectations of forecasters and businesses soon began to fall in 
line with the targets. At first this was for expectations at the 2-year horizon. This then lengthened to the 
6- to 10-year horizon. Finally, long-term expectations of inflation in financial markets, as expressed by 
the  difference  between  30-year  yields  on  conventional  and  index-linked  bonds,  fell  in  line  with  the 
2 per cent target midpoint in 1997.5 
What was particularly noticeable after just a couple of years of targeting was that expectations over a 
2-year horizon or longer tended to be affected very little by what was happening to current inflation 
rates,  whether  for  the  total  CPI  or  for  a  measure  of  core  inflation.  This  was  in  marked  contrast  to 
earlier periods in Canadian history, in which expectations for the future had been fairly tightly linked to 
recently observed inflation rates. 
With the low inflation target becoming increasingly credible, the whole nature of the inflation process 
seemed  to  change.  The  short-run  response  of  inflation  to  measures  of  excess  demand  and  supply 
appears to have fallen during this period.6 And the response of inflation to relative price shocks, such 
as changes in the exchange rate and energy prices, also seems to have declined.7 These changes 
have had the effect of reinforcing the stability of the inflation process and, therefore, of inflation itself. 
Overall,  it  became  increasingly  evident  through  the  last  decade  that  the  inflation  target  deals  with 
expectational  problems.  Among  close  observers  of  the  economy,  as  well  as  businesses  and  those 
bargaining  over  wages,  it  promotes  a  much  greater  degree  of  confidence  and  understanding  than 
monetary targets or a vaguely expressed desire for price stability ever did. People care about inflation. 
Therefore, when the focus of policy is on inflation itself and when accountability is in terms of a specific 
measure of inflation, the public can see and interpret both what the central bank aims to do and what it 
actually accomplishes. 
Inflation expectations are important in exchange markets. Canada has chosen to operate in a flexible 
exchange  rate  regime mainly  because  of  the  asymmetric  shocks  that  it  faces relative  to  the  United 
States, its major trading partner. It is thus extremely important that Canada have a credible anchor for 
its monetary policy. The inflation target has played this role admirably. Shocks to the exchange rate 
have not threatened domestic monetary stability. 
Credibility and the real economy 
Greater  stability  on  the  inflation  front  was  also  associated  with  fundamental  changes  in  the  real 
economy  in  the  1990s.  The  average  duration  of  union  wage  contracts  and  financial  contracts 
lengthened markedly. New types of long-term financial contracts were created. And there were fewer 
work disruptions. While other factors also played a part in these changes, low and stable inflation was 
an important contributing factor.8 
The real economy also became more stable. Both the output gap and the unemployment rate have 
been less volatile over the past decade of successful inflation targeting than in the preceding 10 years. 
And in the last two years the unemployment rate has been at its lowest level in 25 years. 
How  is  it  that  the  variability  of  both  inflation  and  output  has  fallen?  I  believe  there  are  two  main 
reasons. First, the increased credibility of monetary policy has led to a more stable behaviour of the 
economy, as I have alluded to above. Second, policy itself has been improved by the forward-looking 
framework of inflation targeting, which has allowed Canada to avoid the major boom and bust cycles 
experienced  in  the  period  from  the  late  1960s  to  the  early  1990s  by  reacting  promptly  to  new 
information. 
In particular, when there are demand shocks, the inflation-targeting framework acts as an automatic 
stabilizer  for  the  economy.  For  example,  a  negative  shock  to  demand  leads  to  interest  rates  being 
lower  than  they  otherwise  would  have  been.  This  has  the  effect  of  moving  output  back  towards 
potential output and inflation back to its target midpoint. In this regard, it is important to note the role of 
                                                      
5  Perrier and Amano (2000) discuss the credibility of Canadian monetary policy. 
6  Kichian (2001) provides evidence on this point. 
7  See Bank of Canada (2000). 
8  See Jenkins and O'Reilly (2001). 
BIS Review 2/2002 
 3
 symmetric  responses  to  positive  and  negative  shocks,  facilitated  by  the  emphasis  on  the  target 
midpoint. 
In response to supply shocks, which take the form of inflation being higher than expected for a given 
level of demand, the focus on inflation 1 1/2 to 2 years ahead means that temporary shocks can be 
ignored  as  long  as  they  do  not  feed  into  inflation  expectations.  As  noted  above,  they  typically  no 
longer  do  so.  Consider  price  shocks  coming  from  volatile  components,  like  energy  or  fruit  and 
vegetable  prices.  As  our  operating  guide,  we  use  a  core  measure  of  inflation  that  excludes  such 
components.  This  gives  us  and  the  financial  markets  some  confidence  that  we  are  looking  at  the 
underlying trend of inflation. Thus, the interest rate response to what is perceived to be a temporary 
price shock can be minimal. As a result, there will be little movement in output. Output will therefore 
tend  to  be  more  stable  than  in  a  situation  where  a  lack  of  firmly  held  expectations  meant  that  the 
monetary authority had to react more strongly to price shocks, even if it believed that they would be 
fairly short-lived. 
As the public’s appreciation for the value of low, stable, and predictable inflation has grown, so has its 
predilection  for  discussing  monetary  policy  choices  in  terms  of  the  appropriate  inflation-targeting 
framework. In the periods leading up to the renewal of the inflation-targeting agreement between the 
Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Canadian  government  in  both  1998  and  2001,  the  debate  was  about  the 
appropriate level of the target (say, target midpoints of 1, 2, or 3 per cent) and some of the specific 
details, rather than about whether there should be a target for inflation at all. 
Refinements to increase predictability 
Our recent agreement in May of last year reaffirmed the target midpoint of 2 per cent. The Bank issued 
a  background  note  describing  the  refinements  in  the  way  that  it  will  implement  the  targeting 
arrangements.9 These refinements, which should increase the predictability of inflation over the longer 
term, are fourfold: first, extending the length of the agreement to five years from the three years of the 
previous two agreements; second, clarifying that the Bank aims at the midpoint of the 1 to 3 per cent 
inflation-target range; third, committing to give special attention  in the  Monetary  Policy  Reports and 
Updates  to  situations  where  CPI  inflation  persistently  deviates  from  the  target  midpoint;  fourth, 
modifying the definition of the measure of core inflation to better capture the underlying inflation trend. 
The  benefits,  in  terms  of  predictability,  of  having  a  longer  agreement  are  self-evident.  The 
reinforcement of the message that the Bank aims at the 2 per cent target midpoint, combined with the 
special attention to be given to persistent deviations from that midpoint, is meant to make it clear that 
we are not indifferent to the various outcomes in the target range. Rather, we consistently aim to get 
back  to  2  per  cent  over  a  horizon  of  1  1/2  to  2  years.  Following  such  a  practice  means  that  the 
average  inflation  rate  over  successively  longer  periods  of  time  will  tend  to  be  increasingly  close  to 
2 per cent.10 
Until  last  year,  the  Bank  of  Canada  used  as  its  core  measure  of  inflation  the  CPI  excluding  food, 
energy, and the effect of changes in  indirect taxes. Volatile food and energy  prices tend to reverse 
themselves fairly quickly. Therefore, since monetary policy actions affect inflation over a longer period, 
it would be inappropriate for monetary policy to try to offset the short-run movements in the total CPI 
caused by these fluctuations. Among food components, however, only fruit and vegetable prices are 
highly volatile. And among energy components, electricity prices have not been particularly volatile in 
Canada. Thus, our new measure of core inflation excludes only the volatile components of food and 
energy,  as  well  as  the  three  other  most  volatile  components  of  the  CPI:  tobacco  prices,  intercity 
transportation prices, and mortgage interest costs. As before, the effect of changes in indirect taxes on 
the  remaining  elements  is  also  excluded.  Not  only  does  the  new  measure  of  core  inflation  have  a 
stronger statistical basis for its creation, it is historically a better predictor of future total CPI inflation 
than the old measure.11 
Overall, we expect that these refinements will help to further increase the predictability of inflation in 
Canada  in  the  years  to  come.  This  should  add  to  the  benefits  that  the  Canadian  economy  has 
experienced from having a credible anchor in the form of the inflation-control targets. 
                                                      
9  See Bank of Canada (2001). 
10  This is shown in Crawford (2001). 
11  Macklem (2001) provides further details on the new measure of core inflation and its properties. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2002
