 Ernst Welteke: An institutional framework for monetary stability 
Opening speech by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the first conference 
of the Monetary Stability Foundation, Frankfurt, 5 December 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I am very pleased to welcome you to the first conference held by the Monetary Stability Foundation.  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  able  to  welcome  President William  Poole  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank 
St. Louis,  Professor  Otmar  Issing  and  Mr  Nout  Wellink  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  and 
Counsellor  Gerd  Häusler  of  the  IMF.  It  is  an  honour  that  Mr  Stanley  Fischer,  Vice-Chairman  of 
Citigroup, has found the time to be with us.  
Last but not least, I am especially delighted that so many prominent members of the academic world 
are taking part in this conference. I wish to extend a warm welcome to Professor Alan Meltzer on their 
behalf. 
The Monetary  Stability Foundation  was established  on 1 January this  year. But the idea behind the 
foundation is naturally much older than that. 
One thought that was uppermost in our minds was the desire to transfer the positive qualities which 
we have associated with 50 years of stable money in Germany into the new era of European monetary 
union. That was important to me from the very outset. 
And  that  is  why  I  was  very  happy  to  take  on,  together  with  Finance  Minister  Hans  Eichel,  the 
sponsorship of this major inaugural conference of the foundation. Hans Eichel will be addressing you 
tonight. 
Good  times  and  bad  times  have  taught  the  German  people  the  importance  of  stable  money  and  a 
stable financial system. 
One may well ask whether, in the light of this, it is really necessary to underline that point yet again. 
However, history has also taught us that such stability can never be taken for granted.  
Prior to the start of monetary union there were indeed fears that the end of the D-Mark might do harm 
to the stability culture. We took that worry seriously - as is shown by the Maastricht Treaty and as the 
ESCB's monetary policy makes clear.  
Naturally the intellectual basis of such a policy has to be continually examined anew.  Time and again 
new challenges arise and new developments have to be taken into consideration. I wish to cite just a 
few examples. 
Since  the  1960s  attention  worldwide  had  been  directed  primarily  towards  the  fight  against  inflation. 
However, the past few years have shown just how seriously the dangers of deflation have to be taken 
as well.  
The transformation process in the former Socialist countries has made us aware of just how important 
institutional frameworks are. We have now become more aware again of the importance of thinking 
about statutory frameworks, not least in the financial world. 
The academic debate about the correct strategy for monetary policy goes on and on. With the creation 
of the ECB the debate has actually become livelier again. 
I could cite many more examples to show that, even today, there is no automatic means of ensuring 
stable  money  and  stable  markets.  It  is  an  ongoing  task.  In  the  words  of  Goethe:  “What  you  have 
inherited from your fathers / Earn over again for yourselves, in order to possess it.” 
In this sense it is the task of the Monetary  Stability  Foundation to encourage research in this area. 
And, what is more, on a broad basis. 
The funds which are already available for this purpose come from the issue of a DM 1 gold coin by the 
Bundesbank.  
BIS Review 72/2002 
 1
 Indeed, last summer we experienced an unusually heavy demand for this gold coin. Part of the net 
proceeds, DM 100 million (or € 51 million), forms the foundation's capital base. This link to the D-Mark 
once again underlines quite clearly how much the foundation is bound to monetary stability. 
By far the greatest part of the foundation's funds will be used to finance a research unit, which is to be 
linked to a university. This research is to be of an interdisciplinary nature. Monetary stability is to be 
studied from the point of view of economics, finance and law. It is our desire that this centre will pursue 
new avenues of academic study and policy consultation. 
Interested  institutions  are  currently  being  asked  to  apply.  Eighteen  universities  have  expressed 
interest in the first round. However, it will take some time yet before the process can be finalised.  
A small part of the foundation's income will be used in future to finance scholarships and conferences. 
And that  brings me back to the point of our being here today:  the  inaugural conference of the new 
foundation. It is also my cue to hand you over to Professor Hermann Remsperger, Chairman of the 
Supervisory Board of the Monetary Stability Foundation.  
He  will  make  a  start  to  the  conference,  which  I  now  declare  open.  I  hope  that  all  of  you  enjoy  two 
interesting and informative days in Frankfurt. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2002
