 Nout Wellink: Central banks as guardians of financial stability 
Speech  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, at the seminar "Current issues in central banking", on the occasion of the 
opening of the new office building of the Central Bank of Aruba, Oranjestad, 14 November 2002. 
 It is a great honour for me to deliver a speech on the occasion of the opening of the new office building 
of  the  Central  Bank  of  Aruba.  This  is  an  important  milestone  in  the  short  history  of  this  institution. 
Since its creation in 1986, the relationship between the Central Bank of Aruba and the Nederlandsche 
Bank has been very close. Those of you who are familiar with the Dutch weather will understand that 
this relationship is something we especially cherish during this time of the year. But there are many 
more reasons why our co-operation has always been fruitful, and will remain so in the future. 
Indeed,  although  Aruba  and  the  Netherlands  have  a  different  history  and  different  traditions,  our 
central banks have much in common. First of all, we both gave up much of our monetary autonomy a 
long  time  ago.  The  Aruban  Florin  has  been  pegged  to  the  US  dollar  since  its  creation  in  1986. 
Likewise, the Netherlands had pegged its currency to the Deutsche Mark since 1983. This fitted in a 
longer tradition of stabilising the Dutch guilder  vis-à-vis the Deutsche  Mark since the  demise of the 
Bretton Woods system in 1971. Eventually, we gave up our own currency in 1999, to become part of 
the euro. A second common characteristic is that we are both small, open economies with a particular 
interest in a stable international financial system. While Aruba is an Offshore Financial Center, Dutch 
banks,  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  have  invested  a  substantial  part  of  their  assets 
abroad. Finally, a third similarity is that both our central banks have a broad range of activities. We are 
not only involved in monetary policy, but are also responsible for the prudential supervision of banks 
and  some  other  parts  of  the  financial  sector.  In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  be  open-minded 
organisations and to adjust to changes in the financial environment.  
Seemingly, a new trend is that central banks increasingly present maintaining financial stability as their 
core  task.  A  dozen  or  so  central  banks  in  the  industrialised  countries  have  launched  a  regular 
Financial  Stability  Review,  and  financial  stability  is  often  given  a  more  prominent  place  in  their 
organisation structure. Is this really new, or is it merely an explicit recognition of an activity that central 
banks have traditionally been involved with, albeit in a less visible manner? Central banks have always 
been involved in trying to preserve financial stability, for instance through their role as lender of last 
resort.  In  addition,  a  credible  monetary  policy  aimed  at  price  stability  encourages  confidence  in  the 
currency, which is a key element of a sound financial system. I think financial stability is now coming to 
the fore and is becoming more visible to the general public, mainly as a consequence of two major 
changes in the external environment of central banks over the past decades.  
First of all, the financial landcape has changed. Until, say, twenty years ago, the financial sector was 
clearly segmented. There was a distinction between financial intermediaries and financial markets. In 
addition, there was a rather strict distinction between types of financial institutions: banks, insurance 
companies  and  investment  funds.  Domestic  financial  systems  were  to  a  large  extent  isolated  from 
each other, because of capital restrictions and the virtual absence of cross-border mergers between 
financial  institutions.  Over  the  past  two  decades,  this  segmented  structure  of  financial  markets  has 
largely  disappeared.  Financial  institutions  have  expanded  and  increased  their  range  of  activities; 
mergers  have  taken  place  both  across  sectors  and  across  borders;  and  financial  markets  have 
become much more integrated at a global level. As a result, cross-linkages have become stronger and 
there is a greater risk that shocks are propagated through the financial system.  
Institutional developments are the second major change for central banks. These are closely related to 
changes in the financial landscape. In particular, the supervisory structure, which used to be organised 
along  the  same  segmented  structures  as  the  financial  sector,  became  increasingly  obsolete.  At  the 
same  time,  international  co-operation  has  become  crucial,  through  international  standards  like  the 
Basle Accord and more intensive bilateral co-operation between supervisors. In a number of countries, 
banking supervision has been integrated into broader supervisory frameworks. In the Netherlands, this 
is  done  by  a  very  close  co-operation  between  the  Nederlandsche  Bank,  which  is  responsible  for 
banking  supervision,  and  the  pension  and  insurance  supervisor,  PVK.  In  other  countries,  like  he 
United Kingdom, supervision has even become the responsibility of a separate agency. 
BIS Review 63/2002 
 1
 As  a  result  of  these  trends,  central  banks  have  re-orientated  themselves  regarding  their  role  in 
preserving financial stability. Personally, I am convinced that especially the banking sector remains of 
vital importance for financial stability, more so than other parts of the financial system. Given banks’ 
pivotal  role  as  both  financial  intermediaries  and  providers  of  payment  facilities,  problems  with  one 
institution can easily cause contagion effects. Central banks have an important task in mitigating these 
risks by offering secure payment settlement systems through which payments can be made in risk-free 
money. This also implies that central banks need to monitor their commercial counterparts intensively. 
At the same time, we cannot ignore the fact that commercial banks have become more exposed to 
other  parts  of  the  financial  system,  implying  that  our  surveillance  task  should  be  broadened.  For 
example,  banks’  increasing  use  of  credit  derivatives  to  transfer  their  risks  to  institutional  investors, 
implies that these investors’ ability to meet these financial contracts becomes a relevant factor. Let me 
elaborate  a  bit  on  this  new  development  in  central  banking,  and  how  we  deal  with  it  at  the 
Nederlandsche Bank. 
What do we mean by financial stability? According to our own definition at the Nederlandsche Bank, a 
stable financial system is capable of efficiently allocating resources and absorbing shocks, preventing 
these  from  having  a  disruptive  effect  on  the  real  economy  or  on  other  financial  systems.  Also,  the 
system  itself  should  not  be  a  source  of  shocks.  Our  definition  thus  implies  that  that  money  can 
properly carry out its functions as a means of payment and as a unit of account, while the financial 
system  as  a  whole  can  adequately  perform  its  role  of  mobilising  savings,  diversifying  risks  and 
allocating resources. Financial stability is a vital condition for economic growth, as most transactions in 
the  real  economy  are  settled  through  the  financial  system.  The  importance  of  financial  stability  is 
perhaps  most  visible  in  situations  of  financial  instability.  For  example,  banks  may  be  reluctant  to 
finance profitable projects, asset prices may deviate excessively from their underlying intrinsic values, 
or payments may not be settled in time. In extreme cases, financial instability may even lead to bank 
runs, hyperinflation, or a stock market crash.  
How  can  we  safeguard  financial  stability?  Although  this  concept  is  hard  to  capture  by  clear  and 
observable targets, our definition of financial stability gives some clues. Let me mention three. First of 
all,  potential  sources  of  shocks  need  to  be  identified.  Examples  of  shocks  are  interest  rate  hikes, 
financial crises in other systems, but also non-economic events like earthquakes and terrorist actions. 
Obviously, shocks are hard to predict, but having some idea of their potential magnitude is useful for 
making financial systems more resilient. A second factor to look into is the way shocks are transmitted 
to the real economy and to other financial systems. In particular, contagion and herding behaviour are 
important  transmission  channels.  Elements  to  survey  are  the  solvency  and  liquidity  of  different 
segments of the financial sector, the concentration of bank exposures, and problems that may arise 
due to a lack of information. The third issue, finally, is how the financial system’s vulnerability can be 
reduced  with  policy  instruments.  Examples  of  such  instruments  are  deposit  insurance,  supervisory 
guidelines, transparency codes and offering secure settlement systems. 
A combination of responsibilities for monetary policy, payment and settlement systems, and prudential 
supervision  makes  a  central  bank  particularly  well-equipped  for  its  role  as  a  ‘guardian  of  financial 
stability’. Our experience at the Nederlandsche bank shows that these three tasks are complementary. 
Vital information can be exchanged quickly within the same institution, which makes it easier to take 
appropriate  actions  if  necessary.  Furthermore,  the  three  disciplines  benefit  from  each  others’ 
expertise,  which  makes  it  easier  to  deal  with  complex  problems.  For  example,  macroeconomic 
analyses for the preparation of monetary policy may also be valuable for supervision, if banks have a 
large exposure on sectors in the economy with a weak performance. In addition, as financial market 
participants,  central  banks  automatically  obtain  information  about  market  sentiment  and  specific 
financial  institutions,  which  is  useful  for  their  supervision  task.  By  contrast,  separate  supervision 
agencies have to do without this direct source of information. 
Let  me  give  you  a  concrete  example  of  how  macroeconomic  information  can  feed  into  supervisory 
practices. During the second half of the 1990s the growth rate of mortgage lending in the Netherlands 
accelerated to more than 20% per year. At the same time, house prices doubled in about five years. 
This  was  worrisome,  not  only  because  of  inflationary  risks,  but  also  because  excessive  asset  price 
inflation could eventually threaten financial stability. Specifically, there was a risk of a self-reinforcing 
spiral,  with  rising  property  prices  leading  to  higher  loans  and  vice  versa,  and  with  house  prices 
departing  from  their  intrinsic  value.  To  get  more  grip  on  the  underlying  forces,  the  Netherlandsche 
Bank carried out an in-depth study among banks, based on both monetary and supervisory data. In 
this way, we obtained a clear insight in the development of bank lending criteria and other demand 
and  supply  factors,  which  made  it  easier  to  take  appropriate  measures  in  the  supervisory  field. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2002
 Specifically, we urged banks to improve their administrative controls and to carry out more stress tests 
to  assess  the  vulnerability  of  their  loans  portfolios,  and  extended  banks’  monthly  reports  of  their 
mortgage lending. 
The  terrorist  attacks  on  the  World  Trade  Center  on  September  11  last  year  again  illustrated  the 
benefits  of  having  monetary  policy,  payment  systems  and  supervision  under  one  roof.  This  was  a 
direct attack on the world’s main financial center, and the stability of the international financial system 
was  at  stake.  A  prompt  and  adequate  response  of  policymakers  was  crucial  to  mitigate  financial 
stability  risks.  At  the  Nederlandsche  Bank,  we  immediately  organised  a  crisis  meeting  with  our 
Governing Board and the heads of our departments of payment systems, supervision and monetary 
affairs.  In  the  subsequent  hours,  we  were  able  to  take  stock  of  the  main  potential  problems  in  the 
payment systems, liquidity problems in the money market and the situation at Dutch banks. Together 
with the other central banks in the eurosystem, the Nederlandsche Bank provided a liquidity injection 
of almost 70 billion euro, which proved to be sufficient to help the money market clear. The close co-
operation  and  direct  information  exchange  between  the  Bank’s  various  departments  has  truly 
facilitated the crisis management process. In this context, it should be stressed that the concerns that 
were at stake forced us to act quickly in a demanding environment characterised by uncertainty and 
risks of information shortages. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  changes  in  the  financial  landscape  have  strengthened  the  international 
dimension of financial stability. This is especially important for Aruba and the Netherlands, as we are 
both  small,  open  economies.  Given  our  economies’  international  exposure,  we  both  have  a  key 
interest in a well-functioning, sound international financial system. Because the main Dutch financial 
institutions  have  become  global  players,  shocks  may  come  from  many  sources.  This  has  made 
supervision  more  complex.  Aruba’s  position  as  an  Offshore  Financial  Center  (OFC)  has  also 
implications for its supervision policy, given the increased international attention for OFCs.  
In  the  past  years,  the  international  community  has  become  more  demanding  towards  OFCs.  Of 
course,  this  is  related  to  the  fight  against  money  laundering,  tax  competition  and,  most  urgently, 
terrorist  financing.  Nonetheless,  from  the  perspective  of  financial  institutions  there  are  legitimate 
reasons to use OFCs. Prime motives are low taxes and limited bureaucracy. There are also legitimate 
reasons for countries to develop an OFC. For Aruba, for example, it is an attractive way to diversify its 
economy, which is dominated by the tourism industry. In addition, historical factors make Aruba well-
suited as  an OFC. The country  has a sound legal system, is politically stable, has  a  well-educated 
population  and  has  relatively  good  airline  and  telecommunications  connections.  An  OFC  can  also 
have a positive impact on the resident financial sector, through better access to international capital 
markets and more financial expertise. However, despite these advantages, many OFCs realise that 
they cannot ignore the growing concerns regarding their role in the international financial system. 
Let  me  elaborate  on  the  importance  of  OFCs  for  international  financial  stability.  Note  that  in  our 
definition,  we  defined  a  stable  financial  system  as  a  system  that  prevents  shocks  from  having  a 
disruptive  effect  on  the  real  economy,  but  also  on  other  financial  systems.  The  latter  part  of  this 
definition  has  become  more  relevant  as  financial  systems  have  become  more  interrelated.  The 
importance of OFCs for international financial stability can be illustrated by a few figures. In the first 
quarter of this year, BIS reporting banks’ claims against OFCs comprised almost ten percent of their 
total  cross-border  claims,  creating  a  total  risk  exposure  of  almost  400  billion  US  dollars.  These 
exposures  are  larger  if  off-balance-sheet  activities  are  taken  into  account.  In  addition,  insurance 
corporations  and  investment  funds  also  use  OFCs.  Unfortunately,  information  on  these  off-balance 
and non-bank exposures is scarce. 
Two  years  ago,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  identified  OFCs  as  a  weak  spot  in  the  international 
financial  system.  In  particular,  OFCs  were  spurred  to  strengthen  their  supervision  and  regulation 
frameworks and co-operate more intensively with the onshore authorities. Subsequently, the IMF has 
been  asked  to  monitor  the  progress  in  this  area,  by  carrying  out  Offshore  Financial  Sector 
Assessments.  For  Aruba,  this  assessment  was  completed  in  June  of  this  year,  and  looks  very 
encouraging. After all, only two years ago Aruba was classified by the Financial Stability Forum as one 
of  the  OFCs  with  legal  structure  and  supervisory  practices  of  a  lower  quality.  Compared  to  other 
OFCs, offshore banks and insurance corporations are relatively unimportant in Aruba. By contrast, the 
large  number  of  small,  corporate  vehicles  is  of  particular  interest.  Actually,  almost  5000  offshore 
corporate  entities  are  registered  on  the  island.  Up  to  now,  these  were  not  supervised  and  not  very 
transparent, and therefore represented a potential risk from a financial stability point of view. Following 
the  IMF’s  recommendation,  however,  the  Central  Bank  of  Aruba  will  probably  be  appointed  as 
regulator of this sector. In particular, the Bank will supervise Company Service Providers, which act as 
BIS Review 63/2002 
 3
 legal representatives of the offshore corporate entities. As a motivation for recommending the Central 
Bank of Aruba, the IMF stressed synergies with the Bank’s other tasks. I agree. As I already indicated, 
at the Nederlandsche Bank we see important advantages of having various activities under one roof, 
and I am convinced that this new task will further strengthen the Central Bank of Aruba’s position as 
the guardian of financial stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let  me conclude.  Because of the rapid changes in the international financial 
landscape,  central  banks need  to  be  flexible,  indeed  more flexible  than  in  the  past.  By  considering 
financial stability as their main responsibility, central banks should be able to take up new tasks. Both 
the Central Bank of Aruba and the Nederlandsche Bank have proven to be flexible organisations. As 
small,  open  economies,  Aruba  and  the  Netherlands  are  more  vulnerable  to  external  shocks  and 
therefore  have  a  particular  interest  in  maintaining  financial  stability  at  a  global  level.  Given  this 
common interest, I am sure that the relationship and kinship between our central banks will remain as 
close as it has been in the past 16 years. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2002
