 Nout Wellink: The monetary strategy of the Eurosystem - an assessment 
Lecture  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements,  at  the  16th  annual  Tinbergen  Lecture  organised  by  the  Royal  Society  for 
Political Economy (Koninklijke Vereniging voor Staathuishoudkunde), Amsterdam, 18 October 2002. 
 Introduction 
The Bank has for some years provided the venue for the Tinbergen Lecture. Apparently, even without 
the former Palace of Crafts and Industries, this spot at the Frederiksplein has space available for the 
occasional social activity. The greatest event in this context was the Euro-summit of 1997. And in a 
symbolic sense, I would be happy to have the Bank move into Wim T. Schippers’ palace of crystal: the 
glass would exemplify the transparency which must characterise a central bank. This is especially true 
of its monetary policy, for which our Bank, together with the other central banks in the euro area, bears 
a  common  responsibility.  Transparency  promotes  a  central  bank’s  effectiveness  and  public 
accountability. In this spirit, I hope to offer some perspective today on the role of a monetary strategy 
as pursued by central banks in general, and by the Eurosystem in particular. 
The role of a monetary strategy 
Essentially, a monetary strategy reflects the way in which a central bank uses its primary instrument, 
often  a  short-term  interest  rate,  to  realise  its  objectives.  Rather  than  offering  a  mechanical 
decision-making tool, the strategy describes a procedure. It is a guide rather than a cookery book. And 
monetary strategy not only serves as a guideline for the internal analysis of economic and monetary 
developments; it also provides a framework for external communications. 
In  the  case  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  short-term  interest  rate  is  employed  in  the  pursuit  of  a  single 
objective. This is the primary objective of a low and stable inflation rate, in other words price stability, 
in  keeping  with  Professor  Tinbergen’s  famous  dictum  that  a  single  instrument  cannot  be  used  to 
pursue diverging objectives. Yet some central banks aim to stabilise real GDP growth or employment, 
as  well  as  achieving  price  stability.  The  American  Fed  is  a  case  in  point.  The  coexistence  of  dual 
objectives and a single instrument may be understood in two ways. First, a central bank may pursue 
what  it  perceives  as  the  most  favourable  combination  of  inflation  and  growth  stability,  without  fully 
realising  either.  Alternatively,  objectives  which  conflict  in  the  short  run  may  coalesce  over  time.  In 
ensuring low and stable inflation, a central bank contributes to sustainable and balanced growth in the 
medium term. 
Price  stability  also  has  a  normative  side,  in  that  inflation  or  deflation  result  in  the  redistribution  of 
income  and  wealth  without  democratic  legitimisation.  The  weaker  groups  in  society  are  particularly 
ill-equipped to defend themselves against this. My predecessor, Jelle Zijlstra, dwelled at length on the 
social dangers of inflation in a 1975 article for the Economist. If inflation is not combated effectively, to 
quote Zijlstra’s words, then "the principles of private enterprise and of democratic government will not 
be able to survive". Fortunately, nowhere in Europe is inflation such a threat as it was in the 1970s. 
Yet the unrest over the inflationary movements caused by the introduction of the euro banknotes and 
coins  shows  that  even  at  relatively  low  rates,  inflation  is  perceived  as  unjust  and  hence  must  be 
counteracted. 
Before discussing the stronger and the weaker points of the Eurosystem’s monetary strategy, I would 
like to make a qualifying remark. Just as many roads lead to Rome, so many strategies lead to price 
stability.  Some  academics  would  have  us  believe  that  the  macroeconomy  can  be  adequately 
described by a small number of equations, and they proceed to determine the optimal policy strategy 
by  applying  mathematical  techniques.  I  wish  things  were  that  simple  in  practice.  Even  in  1832,  the 
Prussian  military  theorist  Carl  von  Clausewitz,  in  his  authoritative  work  On  War,  remarked  that  a 
military strategy cannot be summarised in a simple rule. On the battle-field unexpected things happen 
all the time. Similarly, a central banker is confronted on a daily basis by the complexity of the economy 
and by unexpected events. This is the most important reason why a strategy is used in a procedural 
way for reaching monetary policy decisions, and is not used as a fixed rule. 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 1
 Monetary  objectives  and  strategies  differ  less from  country  to  country  than  is  often  thought.  This  is 
especially true in the current situation of low and more or less stable inflation rates. Policy decisions 
are sharper in nature during times of monetary crisis, whether amid high inflation, as in the days of 
Zijlstra’s presidency, or amid deflation, as in Japan today. It is in such times that differences between 
central banks come to the fore. 
The unique character of the Eurosystem’s strategy 
Concerning its decision-making, the Eurosystem’s monetary strategy has clearly been successful. The 
inflation rate in the euro area since the start of Stage Three of EMU has averaged 2%, precisely the 
upper  limit  of  price  stability.  We  are  at  this  limit  because  of  a  sequence  of  inflationary  shocks. 
Fortunately for the longer term, expected inflation rates remain low, at somewhat below 2%. 
The Eurosystem’s strategy is different from that of other central banks. It is made up of a quantitative 
definition  of  price  stability  plus  two  pillars.  Price  stability  is  defined  as  a  year-on-year  rise  of  the 
harmonised consumer price index of less than 2%. Price stability is to be maintained over the medium 
term. Deflation is expressly inconsistent with this definition of price stability. Deflation is, particularly in 
combination  with  a  fall  in  demand,  at  least  as  damaging  as  inflation.  Persistent  deflation,  in 
combination  with  the  fact  that  nominal  interest  rates  cannot  be  negative,  reduces  the  manoeuvring 
room for monetary policy. Moreover, deflation increases the real indebtedness of debtors. 
This  definition  reflects  a  desire  to  secure  inflation  expectations  on  a  low  level  without,  however, 
promising greater precision than can be achieved given the uncertainties in economic developments. 
In practice, we prefer an inflation rate roughly between 1% and 2%. Sometimes arguments are raised 
in  favour  of  stretching  the  price  stability  zone  to  3%,  as  a  target  rate  below  2%  is  seen  as 
overambitious.  These  arguments  are  based  on  the  misconception  that  a  price  stability  definition 
implies  an  inflation  targeting  goal.  Only  "inflation  targeting"  central  banks  aim  monetary  policy  at  a 
specific  inflation  target  over  a  specified  time  horizon.  That,  therefore,  does  not  hold  for  the 
Eurosystem. 
Under  the  so-called  first  pillar,  monetary  phenomena  are  analysed,  with  the  main  focus  on  the 
movement of the broad monetary aggregate, M3. Empirical data indicate that M3 is a good indicator 
for prices in the longer term. Like so many relations in the economy, however, this one is also beset by 
uncertainties.  For  this  reason,  money  growth  is  measured  against  a  reference  value  rather  than  a 
target  rate  such  as  the  Bundesbank  used  to  have.  The  second  pillar  consists  of  the  analysis  of  all 
other  information  relevant  to  future  price  stability.  Both  pillars  are  always  considered  in  tandem. 
Ultimately, monetary  policy decisions  are made  on  the basis of a broad  assessment of the risks to 
euro area price stability. These, very briefly, are the lines along which the Governing Council of the 
ECB reaches monetary policy decisions. 
Our strategy ensures a high degree of continuity with the German Bundesbank’s monetary policy. This 
has allowed the Eurosystem to benefit from the reputation of Germany’s central bank. At the same 
time, the strategy takes account of the fact that monetary authorities are confronted with uncertainty. 
This is reflected in the broad-based assessment of the risks for price stability, based on both pillars. 
The  uncertainties  are  greater  for  the  Eurosystem  than  for  other  central  banks,  given  the  additional 
uncertainties associated  with EMU. The transition  to  monetary union has changed the behaviour  of 
economic  agents,  partly  because  the  differences  in  interest  rates  that  used  to  exist  between  the 
countries of the euro area have almost disappeared. 
The most striking element in our strategy is the separate pillar for money in a broad sense. Although 
we call it the first pillar, this does not in itself mean that it is the most important one. The factors which 
are decisive in determining the prospects for price stability depend entirely on circumstances. Money 
growth is, at the moment, not the decisive factor. It has for some time clearly exceeded the reference 
value  and  the  resulting  situation  of  ample  liquidity  could,  over  the  longer  term,  lead  to  upward 
inflationary pressures. There is currently  little danger of this given the present economic weakness. 
Although the first pillar may not always be the most important one, money remains the logical starting 
point for our analysis. As a central bank, the Nederlandsche Bank naturally has closer ties to money 
than to other sources of inflation. To exaggerate slightly: money is our product, so that is what we first 
focus on. From a more academic viewpoint, a good case may be made for treating money separately. 
Macroeconomic  models  for  short-term  forecasts  usually  do  not  assign  a  specific  role  to  money, 
although  in  a  monetary  economy,  every  real  transaction  is  offset  by  a  financial  one.  Viewing  real 
phenomena from a financial angle therefore often provides new insights. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2002
 Our strategy emphasises the fact that monetary factors are important, though not all-important. In the 
short run, wage developments and other cost factors are of great significance for inflation. In a sense, 
therefore,  monetary  policy  in  the  Eurosystem,  like  that  of  the  Netherlands  in  former  times,  may  be 
characterised  as  "moderate  monetarism".  Accordingly,  the  members  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council 
take all indicators into consideration. Our procedure ensures that monetary aspects will be considered 
separately.  Some  of  us  attach  more  importance  than  others  to  monetary  indicators.  What  is  so 
attractive about  our strategy  is that  it leaves room to afford greater or lesser weight to the different 
indicators. In an economy as complex as that of the euro area, this is a sensible approach. 
Strategy in practice 
In  practice,  making  monetary  policy  is  difficult  because  the  economy  is  continuously  exposed  to 
shocks,  the  effects  of  which  are  sometimes  not  entirely  predictable.  One  might  think  of  sudden 
changes in the oil price caused by tensions in the Middle East; of failing crops; or of exchange rate 
fluctuations.  In  particular,  shocks  that  push  up  inflation  in  the  short-term  while  at  the  same  time 
reducing output, confront a central bank with difficult policy decisions. A strategy offers a guideline for 
choosing among the available options. 
In this context, some ECB watchers have urged the Eurosystem to direct its policy towards what they 
call "underlying inflation" instead of unadjusted inflation. In their view, underlying inflation is something 
of a cure-all. By assigning a central role to this concept of inflation, the Eurosystem would, as it were, 
be able to see through the direct impact of a shock on prices. The usual method to arrive at underlying 
inflation  is  by  disregarding  fluctuations  of  volatile  components  such  as  energy  and  food  prices  in 
calculating inflation. 
I myself reject a monetary policy explicitly centred on underlying inflation. Like other cure-alls, it is a 
piece of quackery. Rely on it too much, and it can become life-threatening. There is a real danger that 
a policy centred on an artefact such as underlying inflation would harm the ultimate goal, which is price 
stability. The public is not  interested  in underlying inflation,  but  in the  inflation  they can see  in their 
purses. For this reason, the European Treaty is also directed towards maintaining price stability, not 
towards underlying inflation. Another major objection would be that the categorical exclusion of, say, 
oil price rises from relevant inflation rate is based on flawed reasoning. Without doubt, oil price rises 
are often to some extent exogenous. Think of a decision by OPEC to raise prices or of rising tensions 
in the Middle East. To the extent that such a shock is exogenous, there is little reason to worry about 
more than the knock-on effect on, in particular, wages. But in many cases a rise in oil prices may also 
reflect increased economic activity. An oil price increase due to a greater demand for oil requires a 
different monetary policy reaction than a price increase caused by reduced supply. Underlying inflation 
cannot  offer  any  clarity  regarding  that  difference.  So  there  are  both  fundamental  and  statistical 
reasons  why  founding  a  policy  on  any  single  underlying  measure  of  inflation  would  be  to  court 
disaster. 
Although rejecting a central role for underlying inflation, the Eurosystem’s monetary policy still aims to 
absorb shocks as best it can. External shocks may temporarily push inflation beyond the limits of the 
price stability zone. This is one of the reasons why our definition of price stability has a medium-term 
orientation.  The  other  reason  is  that  monetary  policy  tends  to  pass  through  to  inflation  with  a  lag 
averaging some eighteen months. Yet it is very difficult to specify exactly what is meant by the medium 
term. Lag times vary, and during the time it takes for a policy decision to take effect on inflation, new 
shocks may occur. Seen in this light, a temporary inflation rate above 2% is not a disaster, and neither 
is an occasional fall in the price level. But eventually, the Eurosystem will have to deliver the goods, 
that is, price stability. That is the foundation on which the Governing Council renders account of past 
policy. 
The Council makes its decisions jointly. The responsibility for price stability is shared by all members. 
So  far,  the  Council  has  never  voted  over  its  interest  rate  policy,  which  points  to  a  high  level  of 
consensus.  But  this  emphatically  does  not  mean  that  everyone  has  always  agreed  on  everything, 
which in itself is a good thing. Consensus only implies that all members of the Council have been able 
eventually to go along with every interest rate decision. Has consensus slowed down monetary policy 
decision-making?  No,  it  has  not.  The  reason  why  is  that  the  Governing  Council,  although  eighteen 
members  strong,  is  homogeneous  in  character:  members  share  a  preference  for  price  stability. 
Consensus-building has been strongly supported by the obligation under the Treaty to work towards 
price stability. 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 3
 Communication 
If  we  look  at  the  bare  figures,  monetary  policy  has  been  a  success,  as  I  have  already  noted.  Yet, 
communicating  it  has  not  always  been  straightforward.  Several  aspects  may  be  distinguished.  On 
each of these aspects, however, progress has been made over time. 
In the first place, policy decisions have not always been correctly understood by the public. This is not 
very surprising, since the Eurosystem is a new institution with a new monetary strategy. However, now 
that it has come into its own, after a few years, this problem has begun to disappear, simply because 
the  public  has  become  more  accustomed  to  our  approach.  A  great  help  in  this  respect  was  the 
decision to halve the frequency of meetings where monetary policy is discussed to once every month. 
This has also reduced the extent of speculation over impending interest rate adjustments. 
In  the  second  place  there  was  –  apart  from  the  occasional  communication  error  –  too  much 
communication sometimes, especially in the early days. This may sound paradoxical, but what counts 
is  optimum,  not  maximum,  communication.  Too  many  messages  do  not  enhance  transparency, 
especially if they convey what seem to be contradictions. For this reason, the Governing Council has 
agreed that in the run-up to each monthly meeting, radio silence will be observed about developments 
with a direct bearing on monetary policy. 
Thirdly, communication is a complicated matter if one wishes to be as open as the ECB. Although it 
does not publish minutes of its meetings, the ECB is the only large central bank which holds a press 
conference directly after every  decision, to explain  its motives. At the same time, a communiqué  is 
published enumerating the considerations which have led to the decision. Compare this to the sober 
comments by the Bank when it pursued its independent monetary policy, pegging the guilder to the 
Deutsche mark. We used to confine ourselves to phrases like: "Domestic and foreign developments 
considered, the Nederlandsche Bank has decided to lower the interest rate on advances by 0.25% to 
5.25%." The question pondered these days is how the Eurosystem’s press releases may provide even 
more clarity on the considerations leading to interest rate decisions. This has been an ongoing issue. 
Having  said  this,  it  would  not  be  very  useful  to  publish  individual  members’  views  on  interest  rate 
policy. A single person may simultaneously harbour considerations in favour of and against a specific 
decision.  Besides,  in  the  European  context  there  would  be  the  risk  that  views  of  individual  Council 
members could be linked erroneously to the economic situation in their home country. What ultimately 
matters  is  the  credibility  of  the  Eurosystem  as  a  whole  and  publishing  the  opinions  of  individual 
Council members would add little, if anything, to that. 
To  sum  up,  the  monetary  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  offers  a  sound  framework  for  economic  and 
monetary analysis; it has been effective, in my experience, in guiding the monetary decision-making 
process within the Governing Council of the ECB. The results are favourable, considering current and 
expected inflation. There have been occasional communication problems, caused in part by the fact 
that the ECB is such a young institution with a unique monetary strategy. I record with satisfaction that 
here, too, there is less and less confusion. The strategy will be further refined as we learn from our 
experiences and from academic insights. The manner in which we achieve the aim of price stability 
may,  if  necessary,  be  adjusted;  the  aim  itself,  however,  stands  carved  in  stone.  Right  now,  we  are 
well-satisfied with the current strategy. Its flexible character makes it ideally suited to accommodate 
the accession to EMU of new Member States. The strategy can always  be explained more fully, of 
course. I hope that I have made a contribution in this respect today.  
4 
 BIS Review 60/2002
