 William J McDonough: Issues in corporate governance 
Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the William Taylor Memorial Lecture, Washington, D.C., 29 September 2002. 
 I am honored this evening to be invited to deliver the William Taylor Memorial Lecture. Bill Taylor was 
a very special person. He was deeply committed to public service and to the well-being of this nation's 
financial markets in his many years as head of Bank Supervision at the Federal Reserve Board and as 
chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. For many of us, he embodied the ideals of a 
central  banker  and  a  bank  supervisor:  measured,  professional,  impartial,  and  unstinting  in  his 
willingness to go the extra distance in his search for the right answers to the problems he needed to 
address. His years in the bank supervisory community were cut all too short. We have sadly missed 
the benefits of his wisdom. 
This evening I would like to honor Bill's memory by talking about some issues I know would have been 
of profound interest to him. Specifically, I would like to focus my remarks on the elements that make 
for a sound banking and financial system and the  issues that have been raised over this past  year 
which have led many to question the quality and integrity of the information available to our markets. 
Financial stability, as I have suggested on several occasions, can be achieved only by the interaction 
of  three  basic  necessities:  sound  leadership  at  the  firm  level,  strong  prudential  regulation  and 
supervision,  and  effective  market  discipline.  These  three  elements  provide  the  foundation  for  the 
health and soundness of the financial system as a whole.  
Sound leadership at the firm level is the first bulwark against financial system instability. It begins with 
good corporate governance: capable and experienced directors and management, a coherent strategy 
and business plan, and clear lines of responsibility and accountability.  
Boards of directors are meant to oversee the development of the overall strategy of the organization 
and the decisions made by senior management in pursuit of those strategic objectives. This means 
that individuals with skills and competencies consistent with the institution's strategic focus must be 
represented. In addition, boards should establish clear guidelines regarding the independence of their 
directors.  The  Senior  management  is  meant  to  set  the  business  strategy,  oversee  day-to-day 
decisions,  and  ensure  that  these  decisions  support  the  long-term  objectives  and  policies  as 
determined by the board.  
To  ensure  financial  stability,  execution  of  the  overall  objectives  of  the  firm  must  be  supported  by 
rigorous  internal  controls  and  effective  risk  management.  An  effective  internal  control  apparatus  is 
critical  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  the  information  produced  by  the  organization  is  timely 
and  reliable  and  that  errors  and  irregularities  are  discovered  and  corrected  promptly.  Such  an 
apparatus is also needed to promote the firm's operational efficiency and to ensure compliance with 
managerial policies, laws, regulations, and sound fiduciary principles. 
Effective  risk  management  is  based  on  a  foundation  of  good  corporate  governance  and  rigorous 
internal controls. Taking calculated risks is part of any business enterprise. That is well understood. At 
the same time, each firm needs to have in place the technical systems and management processes 
necessary not only to identify the risks associated  with its activities but also to  effectively measure, 
monitor, and control them.  
An effective risk management and control structure is not sufficient, however, if it is not accompanied 
by an institutional culture that ensures that written policies and procedures are actually translated into 
practice.  Ultimately,  a  firm's  culture  is  determined  by  the  board  of  directors  and  the  senior 
management it installs. In particular, the actions of senior management and the consistency of their 
decisions and behavior with the values and principles they articulate are critical to shaping firm culture. 
It is vital that managers make certain that their commitment to an environment that includes effective 
risk management and rigorous controls filters fully down the line to all employees in their organization.  
Official  regulation  and  supervision  provide  a  second  line  of  defense  against  financial  instability. 
Governments have long recognized that banking and other financial institutions, because of the nature 
of the functions they perform, must be subject to at least some form of regulation and official oversight. 
Governments  have  a  broad  mandate  here.  Their  job  is  to  ensure  that  markets  operate  in  a  fair, 
BIS Review 57/2002 
 1
 transparent,  and  efficient  manner,  and  that  participants  comply  with  the  rules  of  the  game. 
Governments  must  not  rely  on  outdated  notions  as  to  what  constitutes  risk  and  effective  risk 
management. Official supervision must evolve in line with the way financial institutions manage their 
activities, which is increasingly across business lines rather than across legal entities. 
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which I chair, has developed principles for sound and 
effective  banking  supervision  and  continues  to  add  to  its  guidance  on  minimum  and  advanced 
supervisory practices. Its proposed revisions to the Basel Capital Accord call for these principles to be 
applied  to  all  internationally  active  banks  within  a  more  dynamic,  risk-based,  and  process-oriented 
framework.  The  revisions  are  intended  to  align  regulatory  capital  requirements  more  closely  with 
underlying risks and to provide banks and their supervisors with a range of options for the assessment 
of capital adequacy.  
The  third  line  of  defense  against  financial  instability  is  effective  market  discipline,  an  increasingly 
important ally of policymakers in a global marketplace. What do I mean by market discipline? In my 
view, market participants, when armed with timely, and meaningful, and accurate information about a 
firm's performance, can, by their investment and credit decisions, encourage managers and boards of 
directors to manage their risks soundly. Equally important, market participants can penalize firms that 
do not manage their risks soundly. 
If market  discipline  is  to  be  effective,  however,  it  must  be  supported  by  substantial  and  meaningful 
public  disclosure  -  as  well  as  sound  accounting  standards  and  an  efficient  and  credible  legal 
framework.  Knowing  a  company's  appetite  for  risk  and  its  approach  to,  and  methodologies  for, 
managing  risk  is  essential  to  understanding  the  risks  of  being  a  shareholder,  a  creditor,  or  a 
counterparty. 
While  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  recent  years  in  improving  disclosure  practices,  it 
unfortunately remains the case that many of these practices have simply not kept pace either with the 
rapid changes in many firms' business activities and risk exposures or with how these exposures are 
measured  and  managed.  For  this  situation  to  be  fully  remedied,  notions  of  what  is  proprietary 
information and what should be in the public domain must change. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  need  for  dramatic  progress  in  improving  disclosure  practices. 
Clearly, a full appreciation of risk cannot be achieved without sufficient information. This past year has 
made all too clear that there is no greater enemy to financial stability than a loss of confidence - and 
nothing  undermines  confidence  more  than  a  lack  of  reliable  information.  Discipline  imposed  by 
markets might not be pleasant, but fuller, higher-quality information - in a word, transparency - bolsters 
the confidence of depositors and other creditors and thereby makes doing business easier and more 
secure for everyone. 
Progress on the disclosure front, however, will be limited until accounting standards are enhanced to 
ensure proper valuation and to reflect innovations over the past decade, in terms of both new products 
and modern risk management techniques. Accounting systems serve a variety of purposes, but none 
is more important than helping creditors and investors make rigorous and clear-eyed decisions as to 
which enterprises meet the market tests of efficiency, competitiveness, and profitability. 
Sound accounting systems also enable investors to determine the value of enterprises. In so doing, 
the  systems  assist  in  attracting  capital,  both  foreign  and  domestic.  In  my  view,  therefore,  ongoing 
efforts to enhance and harmonize accounting standards worldwide should continue and even intensify. 
This past year brought widespread questioning of the quality and integrity of the information available 
to the market and the behavior of some corporate executives. Although the developments that gave 
rise to this questioning are regrettable, there has, in fact, been a positive side. The public uproar that 
these developments have created and the turmoil they have generated in the financial markets have 
been  immensely  powerful  as  forces  for  meaningful  reform.  I  further  believe  that  the  painful 
experiences of this year will help educate a generation of younger managers about the importance of 
integrity and sound corporate governance based on independent oversight and strong internal checks 
and balances.  
The process of addressing these problems has clearly begun. In this country, we already have on the 
table a number of proposed changes from both private and public sector participants. These initiatives 
reflect a tradition in our country of cooperation between the private and public sectors that is a major 
reason for the effectiveness, efficiency, and flexibility of our financial markets. Let me touch briefly on 
what some of these proposals and new measures entail. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2002
 On the private sector side, the New York Stock Exchange approved a wide-ranging set of changes 
which it submitted to the  Securities and Exchange  Commission in  August. These proposals include 
proposed improved corporate governance standards as well as related changes to certain other rules 
on its books. Among its proposals, the New York Stock Exchange would require all listed companies 
to have a majority of independent directors as well as nominating/corporate governance committees 
and compensation committees composed entirely of independent directors. 
The NASDAQ Board of Directors also approved a number of improvements in corporate governance 
measures in May and July. Its proposals range from requiring shareholder approval for the adoption of 
all  stock  option  plans  to  increasing  and  strengthening  the  role  of  independent  directors  and  the 
authority of audit committees.  
The  Business  Roundtable,  which  represents  the  business  community,  stands  firmly  behind  the 
proposals  of  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  and  NASDAQ  to  improve  listing  requirements.  The 
Conference Board has endorsed reforms to stock option plans. Moreover, the major rating agencies 
are committing more of their resources to analyzing the quality of financial accounting and governance 
at the companies they cover - efforts that will complement the private sector reforms.  
The major initiative by the public sector has been the passage by Congress in July of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002. Although most of the new laws governing public companies are not immediately 
effective - and many require implementing regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission - 
several provisions were put into effect right away. One of these provisions required CEOs and CFOs 
to certify, as of the second quarter of this year, that their quarterly and annual reports fully comply with 
the  reporting  requirements  of  the  SEC  Act  of  1934  and  that  the  reports  fairly  present  the  financial 
condition  and  operating  results  of  the  firm.  Included  in  the  legislation  are  criminal  fines  and 
imprisonment for false reporting. 
These critical efforts at reform recall the private/public sector cooperation that was so successful in the 
preparations  for  the  Y2K  century  date  change.  Experience  has  shown  that  such  cooperation  works 
best when both sectors go beyond the need to solve the immediate problem - that is, when they work 
together to learn from past experience and to anticipate problems and thereby strengthen the financial 
system on a longer-run basis. 
Why  is  this  private/public  sector  cooperation  so  productive?  I  would  argue  that  it  is  because  each 
sector  has  its  part  to  play.  The  private  sector  is  motivated  by  self-interest,  the  public  sector  by  the 
public interest. In this instance, private self-interest and the public interest coincide: both have a stake 
in the healthy functioning of the financial markets. 
In a world of instantaneous communication, interconnected markets, and more complex instruments 
and  risks,  effective  cooperation  between  private  and  public  sector  players  is  vitally  important  for 
financial stability, both domestically and globally. At the same time, we must be certain that our joint 
efforts to ensure the safe and sound operation of our financial markets do not stifle the innovation and 
creative  energy  that  are  constantly  improving  how  financial  markets  operate  and  the  way  firms  do 
business. 
With these thoughts in mind, we must ask ourselves how, by working together, we can best meet the 
challenges to our financial markets posed by the loss of trust stemming from corporate governance 
breakdowns  and  misleading  accounting  practices  at  some  prominent  businesses.  In  answering  this 
question,  I  am  mindful  of  a  basic  reality.  Namely,  despite  the  successes  of  previous  private/public 
sector cooperative efforts, additional issues that need our attention will always arise because of the 
open and dynamic nature of our financial system. 
As I noted, we have already begun to address some of the causes for investor scepticism. Still, we 
have  much  to  do.  I  would  like  to  comment  on  four  broad  issues:  corporate  governance,  executive 
compensation, accounting, and disclosure. 
Corporate Governance  
1.  
Looking to the immediate future, I believe that one challenge for directors and executive management 
is to find outside directors who are sufficiently independent but still knowledgeable about and engaged 
in  the  business  of  the  company  on  whose  boards  they  will  sit.  Independence  reflects  qualities  of 
objectivity, experience, insight, and force of character. The need for directors to possess this blend of 
knowledge  plus independence is critical, given the increased technical complexity of most business 
activities and the rapid pace of change in financial markets and practices.  
BIS Review 57/2002 
 3
 Finding such outside directors can involve a tough balancing act. 
Directors who are paid too little or who are kept at the perimeter of the corporate structure may be truly 
independent  but  have  little  incentive  or  insufficient  knowledge  about  the  organization  to  govern 
effectively.  By  contrast,  directors  who  are  paid  well  or  who  are  fully  integrated  into  the  corporate 
structure  may  have  the  incentive  and  the  knowledge  to  govern  effectively  but  lack  the  desired 
independence to discipline incompetent or dishonest management. 
The  risk  is  that  as  outside  directors’  compensation  increases,  their  independence  may  wane  and, 
instead of functioning as watchdogs for shareholders, they may increasingly function as lapdogs for 
management.  Getting  the  right  balance  of  expertise  and  independence  so  that  the  board  does  not 
rubberstamp the decisions of top management is a major challenge. 
Another challenge in selecting outside directors is how to balance general business knowledge with 
specific industry knowledge and technical expertise in areas such as accounting, finance, and labor 
markets. Boards of directors clearly need individuals with a broad range of expertise. But as business 
problems evolve - and in large multinational corporations business inevitably changes - the range of 
expertise  needed  similarly  evolves.  Developing  a  well-rounded,  appropriately  balanced  board  of 
directors  is  a  tough  assignment.  It  is  especially  so  considering  that  the  shareholders  who  elect  the 
board  are  generally  a  diffuse  group  with  little  economic  incentive  or  capability  to  monitor  the 
corporation closely - until, of course, something goes terribly wrong. 
Added to these challenges is the difficulty of finding qualified directors who have the time to devote to 
the affairs of the company and who are willing to face the risk of shareholder lawsuits. Some qualified 
directors may be reluctant to serve for fear that the potential bad performance of the firm will damage 
their reputations. The irony is that directors who are most qualified may be the least willing to serve 
because  of  the  opportunity  costs  of  the  time  they  must  spend  and  the  potential  threat  to  their 
reputations. 
Given what has transpired over this past year, there may in fact be a need to reconceive the role of 
directors. Some firms reportedly are already moving away from the tradition of choosing the CEO of 
another  company  as  a  director  to  choosing  people  who  are  equipped  with  more  specialized  and 
technical knowledge. Still open, however, are questions concerning how much time directors should 
devote to their duties and what the appropriate remuneration should be. 
Executive Compensation  
2.  
I have already publicly expressed my views on the trend toward excessive executive compensation. 
As I argued earlier this month, I can find nothing in economic theory to justify the levels of executive 
compensation that are widely prevalent today. I believe that corrective action - taken voluntarily - is not 
only overdue but also morally sound. 
This evening, I would like to focus on the effects of public policy on executive compensation. As you 
know, in 1993, the IRS ruled that the maximum tax-deductible salary a company can pay an employee 
is  $1  million  per  year.  Compensation  above  $1  million  has  to  be  “performance-related”  to  be 
considered a tax-deductible expense. This change in public policy gave firms that wanted to minimize 
taxes  the  incentive  to  introduce  performance-related  pay  structures  for  executives  earning  above 
$1 million  a  year.  The  policy  change  is  a  key  reason  that  stock  options  have  become  the  most 
prevalent performance-related structure for executive compensation. 
Option-based  executive  compensation  raises  a  number  of  issues.  For  example,  one  feature  of  the 
1993 IRS ruling is that the $1 million salary cap for tax deductibility is nominal and not indexed. This 
means  that  as  the  average  total  compensation  for  executives  rises  over  time,  the  incentive  to  use 
stock options increases. 
Another issue stems from the fact that stock options are non-transferable. Therefore, an increasingly 
large fraction of an executive's compensation in the form of stock options represents a non-diversified 
risk.  Moreover,  if  the  firm  goes  bankrupt,  the  options  become  worthless  at  the  same  time  that  the 
executive’s job  is  lost. As  a result, firms may  have  to increase  the amount  of options they  offer an 
executive to offset the increased riskiness of this form of compensation. 
From  my  perspective,  a  more  neutral  tax  policy  toward  executive  compensation  would  reduce  the 
reliance on stock options and not penalize firms if they opted instead to use other forms of contingent-
pay mechanisms. A reconsideration of stock options is already under way. Clearly, there is room for 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2002
 changing the incentives that have been driven by tax policy. For me, what is key is that firms have the 
flexibility  to  structure  new  types  of  incentive  compensation  and  that  public  policy  be  responsive  to 
these initiatives. 
A  deeper  issue,  in  my  view,  relates  to  dividends.  It  is  true  that  dividend  payout  ratios  -  dividends 
divided by earnings -  have fallen over time and have been replaced  by  share repurchases, so that 
overall  payout  ratios  have  remained  remarkably  flat.  The  periodic  payment  of  dividends  to 
shareholders represents a formal corporate policy that is more precise and more visible than share 
repurchase  programs.  The  ability  to  make  dividend  payouts  is  a  barometer  of  cash  flow.  Dividend 
payments and the consequent need for external finance subject firms to market discipline.  
Currently,  however,  share  repurchases  offer  certain  advantages  over  cash  dividends  from  a  tax 
perspective.  For  one,  capital  gains  taxes  on  share  repurchases  are  lower  than  income  taxes  on 
dividends. Second, with share repurchases, investors can time their capital gains or losses, whereas 
with dividends, investors cannot choose when they will receive their taxable cash inflow.  
Regardless of any specific decision a firm may decide to make, I strongly support more transparency 
in financing and payouts, including share repurchase programs. In my view, public policy should aim to 
eliminate distorting incentives and to encourage instead the role of market discipline. Transparency is 
a necessary ingredient for market discipline to be effective.  
Accounting  
3.  
Accounting issues have gotten a lot of attention this past year. It may be helpful to distinguish between 
the business of accounting and the rules of accounting. I would first like to discuss the business of 
accounting. 
The accounting business has gone through a dynamic period of change over the past several years. A 
number  of  this  country's  accounting  firms  were  considering  or  had  already  begun  the  separation  of 
their consulting business from their more traditional accounting and auditing business well before this 
past year's turmoil. 
In this process, accounting firms face a difficult challenge. Once a firm has done a thorough job in its 
accounting  and  auditing  business,  it  is  well  positioned  to  apply  its  firm-specific  expertise  to  a 
consulting  problem.  However,  accounting  firms  are  no  longer  allowed  to  provide  accounting  and 
consulting  services  to  the  same  organization.  Thus,  the  challenge  for  accounting  firms  is  how  to 
develop a business model that will allow them to maintain some of their natural economies of scope 
and at the same time avoid the conflicts of interest proscribed by law. 
On a broader level, it seems to me that the accounting industry also faces important personnel issues. 
At  the  Federal  Reserve,  experience  has  shown  that  supervising  large,  complex  banks  calls  for 
supervisors  with  a  high  level  of  technical  expertise,  the  intellectual  ability  to  make  difficult  specific 
judgments  based  on  general  principles,  and  the  strength  of  character  to  remain  open-minded  but 
steadfast  in  the  face  of  pressure  from  the  management  of  supervised  institutions.  The  accounting 
industry needs to be certain it is attracting people with these same attributes.  
As  to  accounting  rules,  one  of  the  major  issues  today  concerns  executive  stock  options,  as  I  have 
noted.  Grants  of  stock  options  and  the  exercise  of  these  grants  are,  as  we  know,  disclosed  in  the 
footnotes  of  a  firm's  reports,  but  this  information  typically  is  not  accounted  for  in  the  firm's  income 
statement or balance sheet. Some might argue that,  as long as the  information on stock options is 
disclosed, exactly how the information is accounted for is unimportant since disclosure in and of itself 
is  sufficient.  In  theory,  this  view  may  be  justified.  In  practice,  however,  what  we  have  found  is  that 
information  that  is  disclosed  but  remains  off  the  accounting  statements  is  unlikely  to  be  fully 
incorporated into the price of the stock. 
Another  major  issue  with  respect  to  accounting  rules  -  and  there  is  some  overlap  with  disclosure 
issues  here  -  concerns  how  intangible  assets  and  complex  financial  transactions  are  treated. 
Intangible assets are generally thought to include a valuable trademark, a renowned reputation, or an 
efficient process in delivering goods or services. Each of these intangible assets has value, but this 
value can be lost in a heartbeat. While it is true that a tangible asset such as a factory can burn to the 
ground  overnight,  intangibles,  unlike  a  factory,  usually  cannot  be  insured.  A  challenge  to  current 
accounting  -  and  disclosure  -  rules,  therefore,  is  how  to  reflect  accurately  not  only  the  value  of 
intangible assets, but also their vulnerabilities to sharp downward revaluations.  
BIS Review 57/2002 
 5
 In terms of complex financial transactions,  this  past  year's events have made clear that accounting 
and  disclosure  rules  have  failed  to  keep  pace  with  financial  innovation.  Complex  financial 
arrangements, such as those funded offshore or through special-purpose entities, are not effectively 
addressed in today's accounting and disclosure rules. We also saw telecom equipment manufacturers 
run  up  billions  of  dollars’  worth  of  customer  guarantees,  which  under  current  accounting  and 
disclosure guidelines did not have to be recognized in financial accounts or disclosed to investors until 
their customers defaulted or were near default. 
In these cases, it seems clear, one of the basic tenets of accounting and disclosure rules - that there 
should be no “hidden” liabilities - seems to have been violated. I would like to see much more done to 
address these deficiencies without unduly burdening the readers of accounting statements. 
Disclosure  
4. 
Disclosure  is  most  useful  as  a  complement  to  accounting  statements.  The  need  for  mandatory 
disclosures will certainly continue, but firms should also be encouraged - and in some cases required - 
to make otherwise non-mandatory disclosures if accounting statements are misleading or incomplete.  
I would further argue that it is simply not enough for companies to disclose information. Investors also 
have  to  pay  attention  to  the  information  disclosed.  A  lot  of  information  underlying  the  proposed 
governance  reforms  is  already  disclosed.  For  example,  by  reading  proxy  statements,  investors  can 
make up their own minds about such issues as whether the audit committee members have sufficient 
financial expertise and how many stock options executives have received. 
What is clear is that the outstanding performance of the U.S. economy over the past decade lulled 
investors into a false sense of security. Recent events may, therefore, serve as a wake-up call - not 
only  to  management  that  the  market  is  watching  them,  but  also  to  investors  and  analysts  to  pay 
attention to the information already disclosed. 
While there have been many major improvements in disclosure practices over the past several years, 
with  hindsight,  I  think  that  less  progress  was  made  than  initially  hoped  and  more  could  have  been 
done. In short, I believe that there is a public policy need to rethink the entire disclosure framework.  
In  my  remarks  this  evening,  I  have  underscored  a  number  of  issues  that  I  believe  merit  immediate 
attention.  Not  one  of  these  issues  presents  obstacles  that  cannot  be  addressed  through  the 
cooperative  efforts  of  private  and  public  sector  participants.  There  are  currently  more  than 
6,000 publicly traded companies in the United States. Only a handful of these companies have been 
the object of concern this past year.  
At the  end  of the day, I have  no doubt that the underlying depth and flexibility of the U.S. financial 
markets - combined with the heightened awareness of individual investors and the general public - will 
provide  the  necessary  resilience  to  allow  private  and  public  sector  initiatives  to  take  root.  Through 
these cooperative efforts, I believe that we will see an even stronger financial system evolve. In this 
way, we honor the memory of the man whose life we celebrate this evening.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2002
