 Hermann Remsperger: Germany at the crossroads 
Speech  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Nomura Annual Euro Conference, Tokyo, 26 November 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
News  and  the  tone  of  comments  on  the  economic  situation  in  Germany  have  been  getting 
considerably  worse  over  the  past  few  weeks.  Take,  for  example,  the  weekend  edition  of  a  well 
respected newspaper of 16 November. One of the views expressed there was that – and I quote, 
“In Germany, nothing is going right. The government is boxed in by an inability to use monetary, fiscal 
or exchange rate policies to boost demand. Fear is growing that Germany will go the way of Japan, 
which has suffered 10 years of stagnation. The danger is that, like Japan, it would prefer to muddle 
through  than  take  tough  policy  decisions.  Germany  is  seen  as  a  stricken  giant,  the  sick  man  of 
Europe.” 
Such comments soon give rise to the notion that Germany is on the edge of deflation. To say it straight 
out:  that  is  not  a  view  which  I  share.  I  do  recognise  the  large  number  of  problems  that  exist  in 
Germany, but I do not perceive any deflation. In other words, I do not expect the general price level in 
Germany to decline on a long-term basis and GDP to shrink over an extended period. 
We at the Bundesbank are forecasting a continuing low rate of inflation and a moderate increase in 
GDP in Germany for the coming year. While the price outlook is gratifying, the prospects for growth 
are rather disappointing. 
I shall return to that outlook and the subject of deflation in a few minutes’ time. My simple proposition 
is that the outlook for Germany depends first and foremost on coping with the existing challenges to 
economic policy. In order to gain a better understanding of this, however, we should first take a look 
back. 
A look back 
Taking that look back reveals that, since the reunification boom petered out, Germany has been one 
of a group of countries with weak growth. While the GDP of the present EMU countries has risen by a 
total of 15% since 1995, the corresponding figure for Germany is no more than 10%.  
In  line  with  this,  the  annual  average  rate  of  growth  in  Germany,  at  1½%,  has  been  lagging 
¾ percentage point behind. Comparing Germany with the euro area as a whole excluding Germany, 
the German shortfall in growth increases to over 1 percentage point. In 2001, taken on its own, the 
figure was as much as 1½ percentage points. 
In  my  view,  both  temporary  and  long-term  factors  have  contributed  to  Germany's  relatively  poor 
performance  in  the  euro  area.  As  far  as  the  temporary  factors  are  concerned,  it  should  be 
remembered that,  already  in the run-up to Stage Three of  European monetary  union,  interest rates 
had fallen sharply in a number of EU countries with previously fairly high short and long-term rates of 
interest.  
For example, interest rates for long-term government bonds in Italy and Spain, even in 1995, were 5 to 
6  percentage  points  higher  than  the  rates  for  German  Federal  Bonds.  As  the  home  of  the  former 
anchor  currency  in  the  ERM,  Germany  did  not  benefit  directly  from  this  process  of  interest  rate 
convergence. 
Another  cause  of  relatively  weak  growth  in  Germany  is  the  crisis  in  the  construction  industry, 
especially  in  eastern  Germany.  In  this  sector,  the  capacity  built  up  immediately  after  reunification 
exceeded the longer-term ability of the real estate market to absorb it.  
Reduced construction activity depressed German economic growth. Without the decline in investment 
in construction since the mid-1990s, the shortfall in German growth compared with the euro area as a 
whole  would  therefore  not  have  been  as  great.  By  contrast,  construction  activity  in  other  European 
countries has remained an important mainstay of economic growth. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 1
 Consideration also has to be given to the fact that living standards in the monetary union are still very 
disparate. Since the poorer countries are supposed to catch up with the EMU average, they have to 
go on growing more strongly than those countries which have already achieved a high level of income. 
One very important – if not the most important and continuing – reason for the inadequate  pace of 
economic growth in Germany is the heavy burden of taxes and social security contributions. Added to 
this  are  strict  regulations  in  some  parts  of  the  economy.  Above  all,  there  is  too  little  labour  market 
flexibility in Germany.  
In periods of a cyclical downswing, the rise in unemployment in Germany was far sharper than the fall 
during periods when there was an upturn. For instance, the number of people out of work in western 
Germany  rose  from  its  cyclical  low  point  between  1991  and  1997  by  some  1.3  million  to  around 
2.5 million. By 2001, the number of unemployed had been reduced by no more than just over half a 
million. 
In Germany, the incentives to take up employment  are restricted by  the high-level marginal  burden 
imposed  by  taxes  and  other  public  levies.  Most  types  of  household  in  Germany  have  a  marginal 
burden of taxes and levies of 50% or more. In other words, from every additional euro that is earned, 
around  50  cents  are  deducted.  Moreover,  social  benefits  which  are  at  a  high  level  by  international 
standards act as a reservation wage. 
Many experts agree that the demand for labour in Germany also suffers from the very complex legal 
arrangements relating to work contracts. Companies are so cautious in recruiting labour because it is 
so difficult to make redundancies.  
As you may know, the German Parliament adopted a labour market reform only a few days ago. Its 
main  focus  is  on  a  more  efficient  placement  of  unemployed  persons  in  jobs  and  an  increase  in 
temporary employment through personnel service agencies. These  initial steps  towards  a reform of 
the labour market are, generally, to be welcomed. However, there is a danger of regular jobs being 
replaced by subsidised ones. 
If labour is not involved to a greater extent in the production process, it will be difficult in Germany to 
achieve a sustained high level of growth again. An environment that is conducive to growth, however, 
also has to include a fiscal policy which leads to a lower tax burden. 
Budgetary and consolidation policy 
In the current year, Germany will considerably exceed both the 3% limit for the deficit ratio and the 
60%  debt  ratio.  Now,  the  Federal  government  has  promised  a  package  of  measures  which  are 
designed to reverse the rapid deficit increase and to go back down below the 3% limit in the coming 
year. 
The volume of the package amounts to around ¾% of GDP in the coming year. In the years after that, 
it is envisaged that the volume will go up well above 1% of GDP. 
Making  a  final  judgement  on  the  structure  of  the  consolidation  package  is  difficult.  The  proposed 
measures could still undergo changes in the course of the legislative process. I therefore wish to make 
only a somewhat more general assessment at this point. 
The  measures  in  the  package  include  reductions  in  the  labour-market-related  spending  and  tax 
changes. In my view, the initiatives on the expenditure side are heading in the right direction. Through 
lowering the government spending, they are designed to reduce the burden of levies impeding growth 
in  Germany.  Cuts  in  subsidies  and  in  labour-market-induced  spending  are  especially  conducive  to 
improving the conditions for growth in the medium term. 
While the spending cuts and the measures to increase revenues are intended to balance each other in 
the coming  year,  a distinctly  greater role for the  initiatives to  increase revenue is envisaged for the 
years that follow. In principle, it is true that broadening the tax basis and abolishing tax exemptions 
can indeed be a part of a successful consolidation policy. 
However, in the sense of a fundamental simplification of taxation – which is called for in Germany – a 
thoroughgoing reform would be desirable. This could then also be embedded in a marked lowering of 
the tax rates. 
What  is  more:  the  tax  initiatives  by  the  German  government  are  not  just  a  matter  of  abolishing 
exemptions. They also include interference in regulations that are quite justified from a taxation point 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2002
 of view. For example: restricting the possibilities of offsetting losses would end the correct symmetrical 
treatment  of  profits  and  losses  under  the  tax  system.  This  would  make  investment  projects  less 
attractive  –  especially  those  associated  with  higher  risk  or  with  strongly  fluctuating  earnings 
expectations. 
As  I  see  it,  when  setting  out  the  specific  details  of  the  individual  tax  measures,  particular  attention 
should be paid to their impact on corporate investment – something which is especially important for 
medium-term growth.  Another point  to consider  is that the policy of enhancing  the attractiveness of 
private old-age provision and of Germany as a financial centre – should not be disrupted by a rise in 
the tax burden. 
Besides a reduction in the deficit ratio, it is also important not to lose sight of a lower overall burden of 
taxes  and  social  security  contributions.  Above  all,  the  high  and  rising  social  security  contributions 
represent a significant obstacle to employment and growth. The comprehensive review of government 
activity and of state benefits which is needed has to include the social security sector too. 
In this context, the tax reform that was adopted two years ago has brought some relief. The tax on 
retained profits was lowered from 40% to 30%. The top income tax rate will come down to 42% by 
2005. 
And there has been some progress in Germany in the field of old-age pension provisions. The pension 
reform, which  was adopted last  year,  pursues two objectives simultaneously. First, payments under 
the state pay-as-you-go scheme are being cut back and, second, private pension provision is being 
strengthened. Pension increases over the next few years will remain below the level of increases in 
wages and salaries. 
Macroeconomic assessment and outlook 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  cyclical  worries  in  the  global  economy  as  well  as  in  Germany  have 
undoubtedly increased once more in the course of this year. Since the spring, the economic climate in 
Germany has become cooler again.  
The slump in stock market prices and the rise in the cost of oil have played a major part in that. That 
development has been reinforced by the too high wage settlements in this year’s pay round. 
We in Germany are thus clearly in a very difficult economic situation. The current slight improvement is 
still very fragile. That improvement is due primarily to external stimuli and influences from inventories. 
The “cyclical breakthrough” has therefore not been achieved yet. In cyclical terms, we are still in the 
initial phase of an improvement that could quickly be put at risk again. 
Even so, the  economy  did grow somewhat in the first three  quarters of this  year. Thanks to orders 
from abroad, exports have once again made a major contribution to growth. Owing to an increased 
number of car sales, private consumption has assisted growth.  
In contrast to this, fixed capital formation is still putting a firm brake on growth. That applies not only to 
buildings but also to machinery and equipment. Although capacity utilization has picked up somewhat 
from its low at the start of this year, it continues to be significantly down on the normal level of capacity 
utilisation. Added to the problems in the corporate sector are financing conditions which, on the whole, 
have become more difficult.  
In  the  corporate  sector  there  is  great  uncertainty  about  future  profits.  If  one  looks  –  by  way  of  an 
example  –  at  enterprises  listed  on  the  stock  market,  analysts  have  now  made  a  considerable 
downward  revision  of  their medium-term  growth  forecasts  for corporate  profits.  But  even  the  down-
revised assessments remain based on the expectation of a distinct recovery in profits. 
The labour market has come even more heavily under pressure since the summer. It has been less 
and less the case that redundancies in manufacturing and the construction sector have been offset by 
a positive development in services. Economic activity is still too weak to relieve the labour market. 
Taking together all the data that are currently available, the economy as a whole cannot be expected 
to improve in the immediate future. The rate of GDP growth for 2002 will be below ½%. 
As  things  appear  at  present,  the  outlook  for  2003  is,  in  fact,  somewhat  better  overall.  But  many 
forecasts point to downside risks. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 3
 There might be cause for some optimism in a return to greater stability on the stock markets and if oil 
prices were to settle down at their present level. That would mean that risk premia on the financial 
markets  could  go  back  to  normal  again.  That  would  then  allow  the  favourable  underlying  monetary 
conditions to come into operation.  
Finally,  there  might  be  some  hope  in  the  passing  of  the  phenomenon  of  “perceived”  inflation. 
Admittedly, not a great deal of momentum can be expected from all of the cited factors. 
The  underlying  pace  of  economic  growth  will  remain  subdued  in  the  first  half  of  next  year.  When 
exports  gain  momentum  and  the  negative  confidence  effects  on  investment  and  consumption  peter 
out, the upturn from the second half of 2003 onwards will be somewhat stronger and more broadly 
based. 
However,  given  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  and  unused  capacity,  we  expect  no  improvement  in 
investment activity in the near future. We believe that investment activity will not take a turn for the 
better  until  the  second  half  of  next  year.  Experience  of  investment  behaviour  in  the  past  may  be  a 
further indication that the pick-up of investment in machinery and equipment will be modest. 
As regards investment in construction, leading indicators show that the downward adjustment process 
has not come to an end and is likely to continue in the near future. 
As I said at the very beginning, the outlook for inflation is much better than the outlook for growth. But 
before I turn to the price-side of the German economy, I would like to conclude my remarks on the real 
side of the economy with a few sentences on Germany’s export performance.  
Real world market shares of Germany 
Recently,  there  have  been  repeated  references  to  a  sharp  decline  in  German  world  market  shares 
since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  and  this  has  been  regarded  as  indicating  Germany’s  lack  of 
competitiveness.  Indeed,  the  development  of  world  market  shares  may  be  misleading  –  if 
conventionally  calculated  on  the  basis  of  nominal  foreign  trade  values  in  national  currencies,  which 
have  been  converted  by  current  exchange  rates  into  US  dollars  -  whenever  there  are  significant 
exchange rate movements of the dollar.  
Thus, a depreciation of the euro against the US dollar, if considered in isolation, necessarily results in 
a fall in Germany's world market shares, even if its real market shares actually remain constant. To 
avoid  these  distortions  it  seems  reasonable  to  calculate  real  world  market  shares,  which  are  by 
definition adjusted for changes in inflation differentials and exchange rates. 
In  contrast  to  the  nominal  world  market  shares,  Germany’s  real  shares  have  shown  a  significant 
increase since the mid-1990s. Germany’s share of global exports rose from 9 % in 1995 to 10 % at the 
end  of  2001  and  thereby  regained  the  position  held  in  the  early  1990s.  This  upturn  reflects,  in 
particular, the improved price competitiveness of Germany’s industry.  
Germany's  retrieval  of  its  former  position  on  the  world  market  since  the  mid-1990s  becomes  even 
clearer  if  the  country's  export  performance  is  considered  in  relation  to  the  other  industrial  countries 
and therefore account is taken of the fact that the industrial countries as a whole have been losing 
market shares to the emerging markets.  
If viewed in this context, the German share of the real exports of the industrial countries has increased 
by 2½ percentage points since 1995. At just under 16%, Germany's share exceeded recently even its 
old record levels from the late 80s. 
The debate on deflation 
In all probability, the German inflation rate will remain at a low level next year too. Germany is among 
the countries with the lowest inflation rate in the euro area. Such a development in German consumer 
prices  is  often  interpreted,  in  itself,  as  signifying  a  risk  of  deflation.  Some  analysts  are  already 
detecting conditions in Germany similar to those in Japan. 
In contrast to that, I can see the low inflation rate as having advantages for a cyclical recovery. Price 
stability is bolstering households’ disposable income. That is all the more important since the burden 
of  taxes  and  social  security  contributions  on  households  is  set  to  increase  noticeably  next  year. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2002
 Furthermore, the labour market will be overshadowed by slow economic growth for some time to come 
yet. 
So  far,  in  Germany  there  are  no  signs  of  any  price-expectation-induced  restraint  in  private 
consumption. Exactly in view of Germany’s long-standing stability culture, the idea that the expectation 
of higher inflation rates should have a growth-enhancing effect seems to me to be unrealistic anyway. 
In terms of labour costs as well, there are no grounds in Germany for a deflationary spiral – in other 
words, a general and long lasting price slump combined with self-perpetuating recessionary pressure. 
This year’s pay round has more than exhausted the real scope for income distribution. 
Finally, it should be borne in mind that the ECB, in quantifying price stability, has factored in not only 
price measurement problems but also a safety margin from the deflationary zone. 
What is making the deflation theory so popular in Germany at the moment is, I believe, weak potential 
growth. If potential growth is weak, even small disturbances can lead to very low growth rates or, in 
fact, to absolute declines in overall output. Looked at in that way, recessionary periods become more 
likely if potential growth is low. At the same time, the pressure on economic policymakers increases. 
When  deflationary  risks  are  under  discussion  in  Germany,  attention  is  soon  focused  on  monetary 
policy. Some economists claim that the ECB’s policy is not expansionary enough for Germany. It is 
argued that real interest rates are higher in Germany than in many other euro area countries because 
of our low rate of inflation. 
I believe, however, that it is not sufficient to look at real interest rates in isolation. We have to take into 
consideration  at  least  two  other  factors.  First  of  all,  it  has  to  be  pointed  out  that  the  relatively  low 
inflation  rate  in  Germany  results  in  a  real  depreciation  within  the  euro  area.  By  itself,  this  leads  to 
increased competitiveness on the part of the German economy. 
Second, with regard to wage rate policy, we repeatedly have to make clear that the rate of inflation in 
Germany is lower than the euro-area average. The more that fact is taken into account in collective 
wage negotiations, the lower will be the risk of deflationary tendencies. 
Financial markets 
In  the  discussions  on  deflationary  risks  in  Germany,  the  question  of  the  stability  of  the  German 
financial system is always raised as well. It is argued that while, in the US, households are bearing the 
brunt of declining asset prices, in Germany a wide range of financial institutions are being affected by 
the deterioration in asset prices and credit quality. Allow me to make four comments on that. 
My first remark concerns households. According to our own estimate, a 30% decline in equity prices 
dampens GDP by between 0.1 and 0.2 percentage point as a result of a fall in private consumption. 
This  is  much  lower  than  estimates  for  the  US.  The  difference  is  mainly  due  to  the  fact  that,  in 
Germany,  only  20%  to  25%  of  equities  are  held  by  households.  The  volume  of  total  shares 
outstanding in relation to GDP is well below the US figure. 
Second, I would like to point to the fact that a decline in equity prices also has an effect on corporate 
finance.  In  Germany,  however,  only  5%  to  7%  of  the  financial  needs  of  the  corporate  sector  are 
covered by the equity market. 
Nevertheless, access to the bond market has also become more difficult for some enterprises owing to 
the fact that their credit rating has declined. For some firms, the high risk premium on corporate bonds 
has pushed up financing costs. Since German non-financial enterprises obtain no more than about 2% 
of their funds through bonds, however, no severe problems are to be expected on that front either. 
German companies rely mainly on bank loans. And bank loans to the domestic private sector have 
shown hardly any further increase during the past few months. In September, they were only 1% up 
year over year. In actual fact, there are some indications that banks are showing a certain amount of 
restraint in their lending.  
In addition to narrow margins in lending business, the very high number of business insolvencies and 
the fact that many enterprises have a low level of capital is likely to have played a part in this. The 
quality of banks’ loan portfolios has deteriorated. 
However, our empirical studies have also clearly revealed that the cause of the weak credit growth in 
Germany lies not so much in the banks’ behaviour as in the situation of the economy as a whole. This 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 5
 means that the marked slowdown in credit  expansion is mainly the  outcome of a cyclically  induced 
subdued demand for credit. 
In  my  view,  the  currently  weak  development  of  credit  cannot  therefore  be  cited  as  evidence  of  a 
general credit crunch in Germany. 
Allow me now to come to my third point and make a few remarks on the insurance companies. 
The insurance sector in Germany is one of the most important institutional investors. In June 2002, the 
financial assets of the entire sector amounted to almost 1000 billion € at book values. More than one-
third of that amount was invested in the capital markets.  
By far the largest part of that figure was invested by life insurance companies, which – at the end of 
the first half of 2002 – had equities (excluding participating interests) and mutual fund shares to the 
amount  of  €160 billion.  Life  insurance  companies  have  invested  20%  of  their  financial  assets  in 
equities. 
The fact that share prices have now fallen by around 60% from their peak in March 2000 has led to a 
significant fall in insurance companies’ overall earnings and thus also to a reduction in capital bonuses 
for policyholders. 
So far, however, this has not generated any destabilising effects on the capital market. Even in 2002, 
insurance companies have still been making new investments of around €12 billion net in equities and 
mutual fund shares.  
Moreover, the insurance companies have a major self-interest in protecting the entitlements of their 
clients. They have has therefore established a rescue company for failing institutions, although – up to 
now – this company has not had to take any action. The extensive depreciation requirements due to 
the significant shares losses have been mitigated by legislation providing tax accounting relief. 
Fourth, I would now like to take a look at the German banks. The decline in the equity market has led 
to a reduction in the amount of hidden reserves.  
The  growth  weakness  of  the  German  economy  is  reflected,  above  all,  in  a  high  risk  provision 
requirement for domestic lending business. Added to this are low earnings from commission business 
and own-account trading.  
All of this has hit a banking system where, for structural reasons, margins are comparatively narrow 
anyway. By international standards, the German banking sector is characterised by a low degree of 
concentration as well as very strong competition. 
In my view, it is not justified to say there is a banking crisis in Germany. There is no liquidity crisis. 
German  banks  are  not  facing  a  massive  non-performing  loan  problem  as  are  banks  in  Japan.  And 
there is no real-estate bubble in Germany. 
Above all  we have to take into account that  the German banks are currently  taking comprehensive 
measures to improve their profitability. These measures concern, first of all, the cost side. The planned 
staffing adjustments will bring a significant easing of the situation. In addition to that, the process of 
consolidation which has been under way for some time among smaller banks will gain in momentum. 
And, finally, the German banking industry is showing a heightened risk awareness at present. All of 
these  factors  together  are  likely  to  give  a  renewed  boost  to  earning  power  and  thus  reinforce  the 
stability of the German banking system. 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2002
