 David Dodge: Promoting Canada's economic and financial welfare 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Calgary  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Calgary, 18 November 2002. 
 Good afternoon, and thank you for inviting me here today. It's been a difficult year for many sectors of 
the Alberta economy. Certainly, the severe drought hurt many western farmers, and investment in the 
energy sector was held back by low oil and gas prices. In addition, the slump in the telecom sector has 
affected Calgary. This said, we believe that the outlook is positive for the province's economy, and I 
would be very interested to hear your views about this in our discussion later.  
In a few minutes, I will spend some time talking about the Canadian economy and its prospects. But 
first, I want to discuss something that has preoccupied business leaders and public officials for most of 
this  year  –  the  need  to  restore  trust  in  financial  markets,  in  corporations  that  raise  funds  in  these 
markets, and in the financial professionals who monitor them.  
Restoring confidence in financial markets  
Let me tell you why the Bank of Canada is concerned about these issues. The Bank is not a regulator 
of financial institutions or markets. But we do have a responsibility to promote financial stability and to 
oversee systemically important clearing and settlement systems. And we are the fiscal agent of the 
government,  so  we  are  actively  involved  in  the  functioning  of  fixed-income  markets.  Therefore,  we 
have a keen interest in the efficiency with which financial markets operate.  
Confidence is key to the efficient operation of financial markets. In the United States, that confidence 
has been shaken by Enron, WorldCom, and other corporate and accounting scandals. Despite the fact 
that problems of that magnitude have not emerged in Canada, confidence in Canadian markets, and 
markets worldwide, has been affected by events in the United States. That is why we are watching 
closely  the  current  efforts  to  restore  confidence  and  trust  in  corporate  reporting  and  in  financial 
markets more  generally.  It  seems  that  there  have  not  been  exactly  the  right  incentives  in  place  for 
corporate  management,  boards,  and  their  auditors  and  investment  bankers  to  disclose  all  relevant 
information and to always act in a manner that is fully conducive to fair and open markets.  
The  market  itself  will  provide  some  of  the  solutions  to  the  problems  currently  undermining  investor 
confidence. But others may best be dealt with by regulation.  
The  market  does  impose  its  own  discipline.  It  rewards  firms  that  successfully  maintain  investor 
confidence, and punishes those that have abused investor trust or are not sufficiently transparent. I 
have been impressed by how seriously the private sector has responded to the challenges raised by 
the events of this year. Accounting bodies and regulatory agencies are also seeking ways to improve 
practices and restore confidence. They are re-examining the role and the responsibilities of external 
auditors to boards and shareholders – and how these can differ from other duties that auditors are 
sometimes asked to carry out by management. And they are asking if shareholders and boards have 
the tools and the power to hold management accountable.  
It's important that we continue to work on these issues and, moreover, that we are seen to be working 
on  them. We  live  in  a  world  where  impressions  matter  and  where  capital  markets  are  increasingly 
global.  Canadian  issuers  will  be  judged  not  only  against  our  own  standards,  but  also  against  the 
worldwide standards for accounting, disclosure, and governance.  
At the same time, we must be careful not to impose an overly onerous burden of processes and paper 
on businesses, particularly on smaller firms, given their importance to the Canadian economy. Let me 
be clear: the same principles must apply to all public companies. While all businesses must abide by 
the spirit of the new standards, it may well be appropriate that larger, more widely held firms should 
face more detailed requirements than smaller firms whose shares are not as widely held.  
The challenge of developing an appropriate Canadian formula is made more difficult because we do 
not  have  a  single  lead  securities  regulator,  as  do  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and 
Australia. I'm not here to argue whether or not Canada should have a single lead regulator. The point 
is we need to improve our current system, and we need to do it now. If we don't, we risk damaging our 
reputation in world capital markets.  
BIS Review 69/2002 
 1
 In  sum,  the  best  way  to  restore  investor  confidence  is  to  put  in  place  a  system  of  incentives  that 
encourages managers and boards to always act in the best interests of shareholders. Disclosure is 
key.  In  every  case,  shareholders  are  best  protected  with  full,  fair,  and  accurate  disclosure  of 
information. To quote a recent C.D. Howe report, "if reforms cannot help investors distinguish good 
and bad investment prospects, there is no avenue for improving confidence."  
This  brings  me  to  an  important  issue  for  the  Bank.  We  have  a  shared  responsibility  to  promote  a 
sound financial system – together with the Department of Finance, the Office of the Superintendent of 
Financial  Institutions,  the  Canada  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  as  well  as  provincial  and  other 
regulatory  bodies.  For  years,  the  Bank  has  been  conducting  analysis  and  research  related  to  the 
Canadian financial system, much of which has been published in the Bank of Canada Review, and in 
technical reports and working papers. We are now prepared to take a further step in the interest of 
making the information about our financial system more widely available. I am pleased to announce 
that the Bank of Canada will introduce a new semi-annual publication, The Financial System Review 
(FSR). We are planning for the first issue to be available late next month. In it, we will publish some of 
the Bank's ongoing work in monitoring financial system developments and analyzing the direction of 
financial sector policy. The FSR aims to promote knowledge of, and discussion about, changes and 
developments in the Canadian financial system. I would point out that we are not the only central bank 
to  publish  such  a  document.  For  example,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Swedish  Riksbank,  and  the 
International Monetary Fund also produce similar reports.  
Promoting economic welfare through inflation control  
While  we  work  to  promote  financial  stability  in  conjunction  with  other  agencies,  we  alone  are 
responsible for monetary policy. The foundation for that policy is the inflation-targeting system. How 
this system works may be familiar ground for some of you, but it is worth discussing again, especially 
during these uncertain economic times.  
The Bank of Canada Act calls on us "to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada." We 
want strong and sustainable economic and employment growth. The best way we can help to achieve 
that is to promote confidence among Canadians in the future purchasing power of their currency. In 
other words, we want Canadians to be confident that inflation will remain low, stable, and predictable.  
For over a decade, following a joint agreement with the federal government, the Bank has operated 
with a system of inflation-control targets. Under the current terms of the agreement, the Bank aims to 
keep the trend of consumer price inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range.  
Since we instituted the agreement, inflation expectations have become firmly anchored on our 2 per 
cent target. Well-anchored expectations promote economic growth and stability. Why? Investors can 
better  assess  the  future  value  of  their  investments.  Savers  can  be  more  confident  that  their  future 
purchasing  power  will  not  be  unexpectedly  eroded  by  inflation.  Debtors  can  better  assess  the  real 
burden of their interest payments. Wage and financial contracts can be set for longer terms. All of this 
is possible because people are confident that inflation will stay around 2 per cent over the medium 
term.  
Inflation and the "Output Gap"  
Our inflation-targeting system also helps to smooth the peaks and valleys of the business cycle and to 
avoid  the  boom-and-bust  pattern  seen  in  earlier  decades.  We  do  this  by  acting  in  a  symmetrical 
manner; that is, we pay equal attention to any significant movement in inflation away from the 2 per 
cent target, whether above or below.  
The  crucial  task  in  controlling  inflation  is  to  judge  how  the  economy  is  performing  relative  to  its 
economic  potential.  Economic  potential  is  a  very  important  concept,  so  I  want  to  take  a  minute  to 
describe it. Potential output, or production capacity, is the amount of goods and services that can be 
produced without putting pressure – in either direction – on inflation. When the economy is producing 
less  than  its  potential,  economists  say  there  is  an  output  gap.  That  gap  tends  to  put  downward 
pressure  on  inflation,  so  the  Bank  will  ease  monetary  policy  to  stimulate  growth.  We  do  this  by 
lowering our target for the overnight interest rate. When the economy is operating above its potential, 
excess  demand  builds.  This  puts  upward  pressure  on  inflation,  and  the  Bank  will  tighten  monetary 
policy  to  try  to  cool  the  economy,  bring  it  back  down  to  its  level  of  production  potential,  and  return 
inflation to the target.  
2 
 BIS Review 69/2002
 Keep in mind that changes in our policy rate work their way through the economy slowly. It takes up to 
two years for a change in interest rates to have its full impact on demand, output, and ultimately, on 
prices  and  inflation.  So  we  have  to  be  forward-looking  in  our  interest  rate  decisions.  At  our  fixed 
announcement  dates,  we  are  not  trying  to  affect  today's  inflation.  What  we  are  aiming  at  is  future 
inflation and acting pre-emptively to achieve a balance in supply and demand going forward.  
This  may  sound  easy  in  theory,  but  the  reality  is  complicated.  For  one  thing,  it  is  impossible  to 
measure the economy's potential with precision. All economists can do is to make their best estimate 
–  a  highly  educated  estimate,  I  might  add,  but  an  estimate  nonetheless  –  of  the  level  of  economic 
activity  that  represents  full  capacity.  And  since  one  cannot  measure  potential  with  precision,  it  is 
impossible to measure the exact size of the output gap or the amount of excess demand.  
So the Bank looks at a wide variety of indicators to assess how much pressure there is on capacity. 
We monitor Statistics Canada reports on how closely factories are operating relative to their capacity. 
We survey businesses across the country to see where firms are feeling production constraints. We 
look  at  data  from  the  labour  market,  as  well  as  figures  on  input  costs  and  wages. We  look  at  real 
estate market indicators. And, of course, we pay careful attention to financial market developments.  
We also measure inflation and inflation expectations. One key indicator is core inflation, which strips 
out the eight most volatile components of the consumer price index, along with the effects of changes 
in  indirect  taxes  on  the  remaining  components.  We  have  found  that  this  measure  gives  a  good 
indication of the trend of future inflation. Indeed, it has done a better job of predicting the path of total 
inflation than the CPI itself. All of this gives us a comprehensive view of how the economy is operating 
relative to its capacity, now and in the future. And I should point out that on the Bank's Web site, you 
can now find the latest data on the indicators that we look at when we assess capacity pressures.  
Canada's current growth prospects  
Let me now turn to our economic outlook, and tell you how our views have evolved over the year. In 
last April's  Monetary Policy Report,  we projected that economic growth  would  be in a range  of 3 to 
4 per cent, at annual rates, from the second half of this year to the end of next year. Excess capacity 
in the economy was expected to be eliminated in the second half of 2003. And we noted that since we 
had  taken  our  policy  interest  rates  down  to  historically  low  levels  in  2001,  we  would  have  to  raise 
interest  rates  in  a  timely  and  measured  way.  So  we  began  to  tighten  monetary  policy,  raising  our 
target  for  the  overnight  rate  three  times  between  April  and  July,  by  a  total  of  three-quarters  of  a 
percentage point.  
By late summer, however, uncertainties stemming from beyond our borders were beginning to mount. 
We noted that slower growth in demand in the United States was likely to hurt our exports in the short 
run. We also noted that global financial headwinds could affect spending by Canadian businesses and 
households. Finally, we said that concerns about corporate governance and the unsettled geopolitical 
situation could cause some firms and households to delay their spending.  
By  October,  the  cumulative  impact  of  slower  global  growth  and  the  financial  headwinds  led  us  to 
reduce our near-term growth projection for Canada. In our latest Monetary Policy Report, we say that 
we expect growth to average slightly less than 3 per cent, at annual rates, through to the middle of 
2003.  But  assuming  that  the  financial  headwinds  and  geopolitical  concerns  dissipate  in  the  second 
half of next year, we should see a strengthening of domestic and foreign demand and the resumption 
of above-potential growth in Canada.  
It is interesting to note that our current view on the level of economic activity in Canada by the middle 
of  next  year  is  not  far  from  where  it  was  back  in  April,  although  the  quarterly  growth  profile  has 
changed. We still project that the small amount of excess supply remaining in the economy should be 
taken up as output growth moves above potential growth in the second half of 2003.  
Finally, let me say a few words on inflation. In our October Monetary Policy Report, we noted that core 
inflation over the next few months would likely  be  higher than had been previously  anticipated. We 
cited  some  specific,  one-off  movements  in  relative  prices,  including  insurance  premiums  and  the 
effects of changes in the structure of Ontario's electricity market. We also said that core inflation would 
likely  move  still  higher  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  this  year,  because  of  the  "echo  effect"  of  the  price 
discounting that took place in 2001 following the 11 September terrorist attacks. But we said that core 
inflation should return to 2 per cent in the second half of next year. We are still of that view. However, 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 3
 because  of  the  change  in  electricity  pricing  in  Ontario,  the  monthly  pattern  of  price  movements  will 
likely be different than earlier expected.  
In October, we had indicated that higher crude oil prices could continue to push total CPI significantly 
above the target range at the end of this year. But crude oil prices have moderated in recent weeks. 
Should this moderation continue, total CPI will likely peak at a lower level than we thought in October.  
We also continue to expect that the total CPI will converge with the core rate, around 2 per cent, in the 
second half of next year. However, we will continue to watch this closely, to make sure that the one-off 
influences I mentioned earlier do not feed into prices more generally.  
To conclude, let me repeat what we said in our last Monetary Policy Report. As we go forward, we will 
need to remove some of the monetary stimulus now in place before the economy reaches its level of 
full potential. The pace of this action will continue to depend on the balance of domestic and external 
developments and on their implications for pressures on capacity and inflation in Canada.  
4 
 BIS Review 69/2002
