 Kristina Persson: Sweden and the Euro  
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Swedish Chamber 
of Commerce for Germany, Frankfurt, 27 November 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me begin by thanking the Swedish Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to this conference on a 
subject of immediate importance to Sweden and of course to the Riksbank. This is also a subject in 
which I have taken a strong interest for many years, as a Member of the Riksdag and also briefly as a 
Member of the European Parliament. 
We  live  in  a  challenging  time  for  the  euro  area,  facing  both  the  present  downturn  of  the  global 
economy,  and  the  future  enlargement  to  include  the  new  EU  members  from  Central  and  Eastern 
Europe. It is also a decisive period for Sweden, as the issue of EMU participation is now coming to the 
fore. 
Given that we are approaching a decision on a euro referendum in Sweden the Riksbank will naturally 
step up its preparations to ensure a smooth and rapid transformation of Sweden and the Riksbank to 
the Eurosystem. 
I will here today share with you some views on the development so far of the euro area and on the 
possible Swedish membership. My presentation will naturally focus on the economic aspects of EMU, 
but  let me nevertheless emphasize that I personally think that the political arguments for European 
cooperation remain crucial, especially at times when nationalism is on the rise on our continent. 
The day after tomorrow, the Swedish Prime Minister will hold consultations with fellow party leaders to 
come to an agreement on setting a date for a referendum on EMU. It now looks as if the referendum 
will  be  held  in  autumn  next  year.  If  the  outcome  of  the  referendum  is  a  yes,  the  Government  will 
propose the Swedish Riksdag that Sweden should seek an end to the derogation from full participation 
the Stage Three of the Monetary Union. The Riksbank will of course play a central role in this process, 
I will just briefly mention two aspects:  
On the one hand there is the less spectacular but no less important preparatory work for a transition to 
the euro. The Riksbank has held consultations with the financial sector and with tax and social security 
administrations. We have estimated that at least 18 months will be required to achieve the transition, if 
the introduction of banknotes and coins would come later. 
Another,  more  publicised  role  of  the  Riksbank,  is  that  of  the  Swedish  participation  in  ERM2.  The 
exchange rate regime in Sweden is today decided by the Government, while the Riksbank decides on 
issues concerning its implementation. If the Government decides to join ERM2, the Swedish finance 
minister  and  the  Riksbank  governor  will  be  parties  to  a  common  accord  with  euro  area  finance 
ministers and the ECB on a central rate between the Swedish krona and the euro in ERM2. And it is 
on this occasion the important step is taken, meaning a modification of the monetary regime. 
There  are  no  simple  criteria  for  determining  the  most  appropriate  central  parity  rate.  What  the 
Riksbank can do is to use the various models at our disposal and combine their results with expert 
knowledge  and  good  judgement  to  try  to  narrow  down  a  reasonable  interval  and  analyse  the 
consequences of different choices. All models and forecasts at the Riksbank's disposal now suggest 
that the real exchange rate will appreciate in the coming  years. The question is by how much. The 
different models give a wide range of estimates for the real appreciation, ranging from a few per cent 
up to 10 per cent from the current level. With the realistic assumption that inflation will be about the 
same in Sweden as in the euro area in coming years, this implies an interval for the nominal SEK/EUR 
rate that extends from approximately 8.20 to a little more than 9 kronor. 
Even if the Riksbank thus participates actively in the preparations for euro introduction it will not, as an 
independent and non-political institution, be actively involved in the referendum debate. In 1997, The 
Riksbank's governing board took a decision in favour of early participation in the EMU as a response 
to  the  government  report  on  EMU  membership  chaired  by  Professor  Lars  Calmfors.  However  the 
present Executive Board has not taken any common position ahead of the referendum, although the 
personal  views  of  several  board  members  on  EMU  are  well  publicised,  including  my  own  pro-euro 
stance. 
BIS Review 70/2002 
 1
 The euro area performance since 1999 and Sweden’s situation 
So what can we say about the state of the Monetary Union, some three years after its inception?  
Let me first emphasize that three years is a very short time span to evaluate a project of this scale, not 
nearly enough for anyone to make an authoritative judgement. But, undoubtedly, for those who had 
great expectations regarding convergence, increased competition and higher productivity during these 
first three years the euro will have been a disappointment in some respects. Many were hoping that 
the creation of the euro, with the integration of financial markets, increased cross-border competition 
and the reduced transactions costs, would usher in a period of higher growth and productivity gains for 
the euro area. 
Instead, we have seen a slowdown in productivity and an economic performance steadily below that of 
the US, and also slightly below that of Sweden and other pre-in countries. Since 1999 GDP growth 
has  on  average  been  2.3  percent  in  the  euro  area  against  2.9  percent  in  Sweden,  while  overall 
productivity in the euro-economy according to the OECD has been only 0.6 percent in the euro area 
1999-2001, against 1.0 percent in Sweden. 
So, at least superficially, it does not appear to be the case that Sweden has underperformed because 
of its non-participation in the euro area.  During the economic boom in 1999 and 2000 the euro area 
lagged  behind  the US and Sweden  in productivity  increases. And during the downturn  of 2001  and 
2002 Europe still underperformed the US and Sweden.  
This is the reality, and of course on a very simplistic level it makes poor publicity for EMU prior to the 
Swedish referendum. Yet I believe that it would be a mistake to blame monetary policy or indeed EMU 
itself for this disappointing performance. 
On closer inspection EMU as such has achieved its major objectives during the first three and a half 
years  of  existence.  Most  importantly  price  stability  has  been  successfully  achieved.  Headline  HICP 
inflation  was  below  the  stated  maximum  target  level  of  2  percent  in  1999  and  slightly  above  in  the 
following  years.  However  this  was  achieved  under  rather  adverse  conditions:  during  2001  and  the 
beginning  of  2002  prices  were  very  much  affected  by  the  triple  impact  of  animal  disease  (affecting 
meat prices), oil prices and the changeover to euro coins and notes. Core inflation, excluding the most 
volatile food prices and energy, has been reasonably close to the 2 percent level 1999-2002. Inflation 
expectations also appear to have been firmly anchored close to 2 percent. 
Now there has of course also been quite a high degree of divergence inside the area, with inflation 
ranging  from  over  5  %  in  the  Netherlands  to  1.8  %  in  France  in  2001  (and  even  lower  figures  in 
Germany  during  2002).  This  has  created  differences  in  real  interest  rates,  but  not  wide  enough  to 
explain the overall lag in productivity or growth. 
None  of  those  caveats  can  explain  the  euro  area's  poor  performance.  The  overall  macroeconomic 
climate is not the problem, in fact it has been rather favourable. 
I  might  add  that  the  macroeconomic  environment  has  been  rather  favourable  in  Sweden  too.  The 
period  from  1999  has  underlined  that  confidence  can  be  achieved  outside  EMU.  HICP  inflation  in 
Sweden has actually been lower than in the euro area, our price developments have also been in line 
with our inflation target, as have inflation expectations. The interest rate differential between Swedish 
and German bonds has been firmly in the low decimals and has even for a short period of time been 
negative. 
If overall macroeconomic conditions have been favourable, both in the euro area and in Sweden, the 
real  issues  and  problems  are  not  in  macroeconomic  policy,  but  on  the  structural  side,  in  product 
markets and in labour markets. 
In the euro area the recent fall in productivity in the business sector and increase in unit labour costs 
seem to reflect a high degree of labour hoarding, that is to say a refusal to cut staff when faced with 
lower demand, and thus poor reallocation of employment. There might be good reasons for this, such 
as  high  costs  for  finding  and  training  the  right  personnel  in  a  competence  driven  economy,  but  it 
nevertheless  indicates  that  wage  flexibility  needs  to  increase.  And  despite  this  overstaffing,  wage 
growth has not slowed down.  
Similarly,  studies  from  the  OECD  and  recently  published  research  highlight  that  the  important 
differential in growth between the US and Europe is the poor employment growth in Europe. The US 
certainly has the advantage of having a young and growing population, but Europe has large numbers 
of  unemployed  or  underemployed  people  who  could  become  mobilized  for  increased  growth  of  the 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2002
 economy, This need not imply that Europe must adopt US hiring and firing practices, there are other 
ways of achieving this, with economic incentives, labour market policies and education.  
Challenges for Sweden ahead of a possible EMU participation 
Wage formation is also an important challenge for Sweden prior to a possible EMU participation.  
The main issue after a possible participation in the euro zone will be the loss of the exchange rate and 
an independent monetary policy as stabilisation tools. If Sweden, within EMU, is out of step with the 
business cycle in the euro area, neither an exchange rate, nor Swedish interest rates are available to 
adjust for this. 
In reality, the exchange rate may in fact be a less efficient stabiliser than expected. It is quite apparent 
that  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  Sweden's  position  in  the  business  cycle  have  not  been  the 
only, sometimes not even the major, factors affecting exchange rate developments. If the weakening 
of the krona in 2001 did indeed cushion the blow from global recession, earlier periods of weakness 
have run counter to the overall improved relative growth performance. 
Personally, I believe that there might be a tendency in the Swedish debate to overstate the gains from 
having a flexible exchange rate in the longer run. Our recent experience shows that a small currency 
on the highly volatile financial markets risk being more affected than the bigger currencies by factors 
out of its control and with no direct relevance to their economic performance. One such example was 
the reaction on the currency markets in the days following the 11 September events. It is also quite 
apparent that the present strengthening of the krona was influenced by the Prime Minister raising the 
issue of a referendum on EMU.  
Furthermore, recent experience implies that the deviations from the euro average growth should not 
be very large in the normal case. Even if Swedish growth and productivity have been somewhat higher 
than those of the euro area since 1999, recent evaluations show that that the business cycles in the 
euro area and Sweden are fairly synchronised, despite the asymmetric shocks due to the crises in the 
mobile telecommunications and IT sectors.  
However, it cannot be ruled out that Sweden can become subject to serious asymmetric shocks, i.e. 
disturbances  affecting  Sweden  differently  from  the  rest  of  the  euro  area.  On  those  occasions  it  is 
important that Sweden has an alternative way of stabilising the economy. 
One possible instrument is of course to use fiscal policy. The Riksbank recently presented its views on 
the  government  report  "Stabilisation  policy  in  the  Monetary  Union"  where  we  elaborate  on  the 
possibility of using fiscal policy to stabilise inflation in a similar way as monetary policy does today. 
This  implies  that  fiscal  policy  is  given  a  clear  mandate,  with  clear  targets,  strong  institutional 
arrangements  and  a  high  degree  of  openness.  Of  course,  using  fiscal  policy  as  an  effective  tool 
additionally  implies  a  strong  budgetary  position  over  the  cycle  -  which  is  also  important  given  the 
present demographic trends which point to increased costs for supporting an ageing population. 
I believe this discussion could also be of some interest in relation to the present debate on the Stability 
and Growth Pact, as it stresses the importance of strengthening the institutional framework and the 
long term goals for national stabilisation policies in the monetary union, as opposed to a more passive 
policy simply letting automatic stabilisers take their course. And, like Sweden, the euro area needs a 
strong fiscal stance in order to cope with the future fiscal burden of ageing populations. 
Even more important than the alternatives for stabilising the economy are the structural reforms which 
are needed to increase potential growth and contribute to an economy more responsive to changing 
circumstances. If this is done successfully the problems of instability will probably not arise or will be of 
less significance.  
As we analyse Sweden's labour markets it is worrying that unit labour costs have increased slightly 
more rapidly in Sweden than in the Euro area recently. As the possibility to conduct an independent 
economic policy decreases, the need for functioning adjustment mechanisms increases which implies 
greater flexibility in factor and product markets in Sweden. This flexibility in the labour market could 
apply  both  to  increased  variability  in  nominal  wage  increases  and  to  increased  professional  and 
geographical mobility of the labour force.  
BIS Review 70/2002 
 3
 Potential gains from euro membership 
So far I have concentrated on some of the disadvantages of joining Monetary Union. But let there be 
no  mistake,  there  will  certainly  be  important  gains  from  EMU  for  Sweden.  While  large  Swedish 
corporations already enjoy many of the advantages of using the euro, being already well integrated 
into  the  European  market,  joining  the  euro  area  may  be  essential  for  small  and  medium  sized 
enterprises,  which  are  too  small  to  use  advanced  methods  of  handling  exchange  rate  volatility.  A 
recent survey revealed that 80 percent of the larger corporations in Sweden already invoice in euros, 
compared to only 15 percent of the small and medium-sized enterprises. 
Our overall macroeconomic models do not always capture the strength of these microeconomic forces 
at play at company level  when transaction costs are reduced and barriers for trade and investment 
lowered. Some of the recent research, such as the gravitation models presented by Professor Andrew 
K. Rose and others, which compare wide sets of countries, give very significant increases in trade and 
growth from currency unions. Similarly, comparisons of the remarkably high price differentials between 
comparable  and  neighbouring  areas  in  the  US  and  Canada  indicate  that  the  existence  of  price 
transparency affects prices. Today we focus very much on the price increases on some services after 
the introduction of euro coins and notes, but let us bear in mind that prices on durable goods that are 
more  subject  to  cross  border  comparisons,  have  indeed  increased  less  than  the  average  or  even 
decreased. There are already signs  of a convergence of prices on such durables and  there  is also 
area-wide euro pricing from some firms, which reflects increased price competition across borders. 
To  conclude,  the  Monetary  union  presents  an  attractive  proposition  for  Sweden,  given  that  we 
continue to improve the functioning of wage formation and labour markets and that we ensure a solid 
institutional foundation for fiscal policy to stabilise the economy. The same could in fact be said about 
the  euro  area  countries:  With  structural  reforms  and  more  solid  foundations  for  fiscal  policy,  the 
present EMU-countries would have much better possibilities for employment growth and productivity 
gains.  Monetary  Union  is  putting  pressure  on  both  industry  and  politicians  to  improve  their 
performance in the years to come.  
4 
 BIS Review 70/2002
