 Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 13 December 2002. 
 The National Bank has decided to leave the target range for the three-month Libor rate unchanged at 
0.25%–1.25%. For the time being, the three-month Libor is to be kept in the middle of the target range. 
Owing  to  the  low  level  of  inflation,  we  have  been  able  to  ease  monetary  policy  substantially  since 
March  2001,  having  since  then  lowered  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  by  a  total  of 
2.75 percentage  points.  We  took  decisive  steps  in  response  to  declining  economic  growth  and  the 
upward  trend  of  the  Swiss  franc.  Interest  rates  were  last  lowered  on  26  July  of  this  year.  The 
imponderables  with  respect  to  the  development  of  the  global  economy  remain  considerable,  and  a 
sustained economic upswing in Switzerland is not likely until some time in the second half of 2003. We 
are therefore maintaining our expansionary monetary policy and shall keep the attractiveness of Swiss 
franc investments low. This does not jeopardise price stability. Assuming that the three-month Libor 
rate will remain stable at 0.75%, average annual inflation is expected to lie between 0.7% and 1.6% in 
the next three years. For 2003, we are anticipating economic growth of just over 1%, while zero growth 
is to be expected in the current year. 
Economic activity 
In Switzerland, economic activity has stabilised somewhat in the last two quarters despite the delay in 
the  global  economic  upswing.  After  having  been  on  a  decline  during  four  quarters,  GDP  slightly 
exceeded the previous period's level in the second and third quarters 2002. Positive stimuli emanated 
from the development of exports and from consumption. 
Nevertheless,  the  economic  situation  in  Switzerland  remains  tight.  The  deterioration  on  the  labour 
market and the fall in stock market prices are depressing consumer sentiment and available income. 
Incoming orders and the order backlog in the export sector remain at an unsatisfactory level, a sign 
that the recovery in exports is still uncertain. Capacity utilisation in manufacturing and in construction 
continues to fall short of the desired level, while corporate investment activity is currently at a very low 
ebb. 
The  present  growth  slump  in  Switzerland  can  only  be  overcome  if  both  exports  and  equipment 
investment  increase  consistently. We  expect  exports  to  grow  markedly  in  line  with  the  international 
economic upswing in the second half of 2003. Equipment investment should follow with a slight time 
lag. Until the middle of next year, however, the Swiss economy is likely to grow only very moderately. 
Until then, unemployment could therefore continue to rise. Private consumption, which has long been 
the  mainstay  of  economic activity,  will  pick  up  only  slowly  next  year.  Real  economic  activity  should 
increase by just over 1% in 2003, while for this year we expect zero growth. 
Inflation forecast 
I shall now turn to the course of inflation and our new inflation forecast. Our inflation forecast of June 
2002  (the  green  dash-dotted  curve  in  the  graph)  shows  that  at  that  time  we  assumed,  based  on  a 
stable three-month Libor rate of 1.25%, that inflation would gradually rise to 1.9% in the first quarter 
2005. 
Year-on-year inflation, as measured by the national consumer price index, dropped to 0.3% in the third 
quarter 2002 from 0.7% in the second quarter. In October and November it rose to approximately 1%. 
These fluctuations are due mainly to changes in the exact points in time when data on clearance sales 
prices are collected. This is also the main reason why our forecast of June 2002 over-estimated the 
development of inflation in the third quarter 2002. 
Our new inflation forecast (red dashed curve) is based on the assumption that growth in the US will 
pick up again from the second quarter 2003 onward. The US economy is likely to achieve its growth 
potential stepwise until the beginning of 2004. In the EU, the upswing will take a little longer. We are 
not  expecting  a  significant  acceleration  of  growth  before  the  end  of  2003.  We  assume  that  the 
BIS Review 73/2002 
 1
 dollar/euro  rate  will  remain  at  about  the  current  level  and  that  the  oil  price  will  be  around  $25  per 
barrel. 
On the assumption that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 0.75% during the next three 
years,  inflation  should  average  0.7%  in  2003,  move  up  to  0.9%  in  2004  and  reach  1.6%  in  2005. 
Forecast inflation will remain below 1% until the end of 2004 except in the fourth quarter of 2002. In 
the course of 2005, however, a marked acceleration will set in, with forecast inflation reaching the 2% 
mark in the fourth quarter of 2005. 
The  new  forecast  is  consistently  below  that  of  June  2002.  It  reflects  the  delay  in  the  economic 
upswing. In the new forecast, inflation will rise more markedly at the end of the forecasting horizon due 
to an even more expansionary monetary policy since June. 
Expansionary monetary policy to be continued 
At our last media conference, I pointed out that the National Bank must be prepared to react quickly to 
changes  in  the  economic  situation.  When  the  delay  in  economic  recovery  became  discernible  in 
summer,  we  acted  immediately  by  again  lowering  interest  rates.  Since  then,  nothing  of  basic 
significance  has  changed  in  our  assessment  of  the  situation. We  shall  adhere  to  our  expansionary 
monetary  policy  in  the  foreseeable  future.  We  will  thus  contribute  to  the  economic  rebound  and 
continue to keep Swiss franc investments unattractive. The low interest rate level and the relatively 
strong  growth  of monetary  aggregates  currently  do  not  represent  a  threat  to  price  stability.  Once  a 
sustained economic recovery becomes discernible, we shall have to review our monetary policy and 
adjust it to the new circumstances. There is still no sign, however, that the time for this is approaching. 
On  the  contrary,  the  risks  still  point  downward.  Should  the  recovery  in  the  US  and  in  Europe  be 
delayed or should the Swiss franc appreciate markedly, the expected upswing in Switzerland would be 
threatened. In such a case, the National Bank is ready to react by appropriate means. Under present 
conditions, however, our monetary policy is sufficiently expansionary. 
Currently, the risk of deflation is being widely discussed. As can be seen from our forecast, this risk is 
likely  to  be  negligible  in  Switzerland  in  the  medium  term.  Certainly,  in  the  short  term  it  is  always 
possible for special effects, e.g. a marked reduction in the oil price, to lead to negative inflation rates in 
individual quarters. Nevertheless, we consider a continuously falling price level in conjunction with a 
strong decline in the demand for goods and in production improbable in the present circumstances. 
Our  expansionary  monetary  policy  and  the  flexibility  of  the  Swiss  economy  would  prevent  such  a 
development. 
In the present situation, however, other efforts are needed besides an expansionary monetary policy in 
order to maintain or to enhance the attractiveness of Switzerland as an industrial and business centre. 
The efforts aimed at a further liberalisation of the domestic economy may not be abandoned. Sectors 
suffering  from  structural  problems  must  improve  their  competitiveness  by  means  of  consistent 
adjustments. 
Our experience with the monetary policy concept 
Let me briefly describe the experience gained with our monetary policy concept. We introduced this 
concept  exactly  three  years  ago.  You  are  acquainted  with  the  main  elements:  definition  of  price 
stability,  inflation  forecast  as  main  indicator  and  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  rate  as 
operational target. 
Overall, our experience with our monetary policy concept has been good. Recently, this experience 
was discussed at an internal conference. Since the new concept was adopted, we have widened the 
basis of our monetary policy decisions and further developed our analysis of indicators and models. 
The  more  extensive  use  of  relevant  information  enabled  us  to  react  more  swiftly  and  with  more 
foresight than formerly to changes in the economic situation. 
Our monetary policy concept met with a positive public reception in Switzerland. The same applies to 
the financial markets and international organisations such as the IMF and the OECD. The concept has 
vastly  improved  transparency.  By  publishing  studies  on  internal  decision-making  processes  and  the 
forecasting models used, we have made further relevant information accessible. The public is thus in a 
better position to understand the reasoning behind monetary policy decisions. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2002
 So far, we have published our inflation forecasts regularly in June and December. We should like to 
take  this  a  step  further  and  will  in  future  publish  an  updated  inflation  forecast  after  every  quarterly 
assessment of the situation. This will further help to improve transparency. From 2003 onwards, we 
will also inform the public of our monetary policy by publishing new inflation forecasts in March and 
September. As in the past, we shall present our June and December inflation forecasts at our media 
conferences. In March and September, the inflation forecast will be published within the context of the 
press release on the quarterly assessment of the situation. 
Gold sales 
On 22 September this year, the Swiss people and the cantons rejected both the gold initiative and the 
counter-proposal. The National Bank, however, continues to implement its programme for the sale of 
half of its gold reserves. For the time being, the surplus gold reserves will still figure in our balance 
sheet. To date, approximately 660 tonnes of a total of 1,300 tonnes of gold have been sold. We see no 
reason  to  change  our  strategy:  these  assets  are  surplus  reserves  which  are  no  longer  needed  for 
monetary policy and which may be put to another use. In order to use the reserves for other purposes, 
the gold is sold and the proceeds are invested in securities. 
We  invest  the  proceeds  from  the  gold  sales  in  Swiss  and  foreign  securities.  The  portfolio  from  the 
surplus  reserves  is  thus  less  exposed  to  exchange  rate  fluctuations  than  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves. The earnings  deriving from invested  gold proceeds flow into the  SNB's income statement 
and thus become available for profit distribution in favour of the Confederation and the cantons. As 
from  2003,  annual  profit  distribution  will  amount  to  Sfr  2.5  billion.  The  profit  distribution  agreement 
concluded with the Confederation last April need not be revised. It already provides for an automatic 
revision of the situation in the event that the National Bank's earnings should permanently exceed the 
expected level. 
  
  
Inflation Forecast December 2002 with Libor at 0.75% 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
Annual average inflation in % 
0.7 
0.7 
0.9 
1.6 
BIS Review 73/2002 
    3
