 Ernst Welteke: European Monetary Union - experience and outlook 
Speech by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Svedbank, Stockholm, 
19 November 2002. 
 I 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is good to be here in Stockholm. Thanks to a good friend, my connections with Sweden have grown 
deeper  over  the  past  few  years.  Today,  I  have  the  pleasure  of  sharing  with  you  my  views  on 
experience of the Eurosystem during the almost four years of its existence. 
I  am  well  aware  of  the  ongoing  debate  on  your  membership  in  the  European  Monetary  Union. 
Therefore,  our  experience  might  be  of  particular  interest  to  you.  That  relates  to  monetary  and 
economic aspects as well as practical matters, such as the changeover of banknotes and coins. 
In addition, you have asked me to extend my view and also give an outlook for the near future. Again, 
most of the major challenges for the monetary union stem from the process of enlargement. Too often, 
enlargement  is  only  referred  to  with  respect  to  eastern  and  southern  Europe.  To  me,  an  equally 
interesting  and  important  question  is  whether  Sweden  and  other  countries  in  northern  and  western 
Europe (UK, Denmark) will join monetary union. 
I guess you may not have the answer to that yet. However, if I may, I would like to express a wish 
about that later on. 
II 
The  primary  objective  of  the  European  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  The 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  defined  price  stability  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%. At the same time, the 
Governing Council also stated that price stability “is to be maintained over the medium term”. 
Looking  at  the  annual  HICP  rate  in  the  euro  area  over  the  past  few  years  in  the  light  of  those 
requirements tends to reveal  a mixed picture. It  was only  in  1999 - the  year  which started  with the 
Eurosystem  -  that  the  annual  rate  of  price  increase,  strongly  influenced  by  developments  in  1998, 
remained within the defined stability corridor at 1.1%. Since then, the price norm has not been met. In 
2000, the average annual rate of inflation was 2.3%. In 2001, with Greece having joined the euro area, 
the figure was 2.5%. In the first nine months of this year, the rate was 2.2%. It is therefore no longer 
possible to speak of a short-term overshooting. 
In its defence, the ECB-council can point to a number of exceptional circumstances during the past 
few years - events over which the ECB has no influence and which have intensified upward pressure 
on prices. First, there have been, at times, sharp increases in international oil prices and thus also in 
European  energy  prices.  Second,  BSE  and  foot-and-mouth  disease  in  addition  to  unfavourable 
weather conditions, especially in southern Europe, led to a considerable rise in food prices at the start 
of 2001 and in early 2002. 
Excluding  the  volatile  components,  energy  and  unprocessed  food,  the  picture  is  significantly  more 
favourable. This gives a core rate of below 2.0% in 2000 and, at 2.0% in 2001, a core rate on the edge 
of the price norm. In the current year, however, that figure will clearly be exceeded. All in all, the larger 
currency area has cushioned the substantial price shocks. Especially, no additional yield spreads have 
occurred. 
So far, the general expectation that the euro area, with a single currency and a single monetary policy, 
would see a rapid convergence of price developments has not been fulfilled. Since 1997, there has 
been a trend widening in the range of data from the individual countries. This indicates that specific, 
persistent, national factors continue to shape price developments. One reason for this may be seen in 
consumer  habits,  which  vary  from  country  to  country.  Another  reason  consists  in  diverging  price 
trends, especially in the sector of non-tradable services or services of limited tradability. 
BIS Review 67/2002 
 1
 As a consequence, euro-area real rates of interest vary quite considerably. However, the national real 
interest  rate  is  not  the  same  for  each  sector.  The  relevant  real  interest  rate  differs  according  the 
different price developments. It is lower in the sector with higher sectoral inflation rates et vice versa. 
For the sector of tradables the real interest rates do not differ that much. 
European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  has  a  population  of  300  million  people.  That  is  around 
20 million  more  than  in  the  United  States.  However,  overall  output  in  the  euro  area  is  almost  30% 
lower and per capita income as much as one-third lower than in the USA. In many instances, there 
were  expectations  that  there  would  be  a  real  convergence  -  in  other  words  a  reduction  in  the 
prosperity gap. 
The necessary strengthening of economic growth in the euro area - so it was hoped - would more or 
less  occur  automatically.  In  this  context,  reference  was  made,  first,  to  the  expansionary  impact  of 
interest rate convergence down to the lower German level in the run-up to Stage Three, which mainly 
benefited the former “high interest rate” countries. Second, it was expected that the introduction of a 
single  currency  would  lead  to  a  better  allocation  of  the  production  factor  capital  as  a  result  of  the 
sudden  improvement  in  capital  market  integration.  Furthermore,  an  accelerated  restructuring  of  the 
corporate  landscape  owing  to  an  increased  number  of  mergers  and  participations  -  added  to  more 
intense competition in the euro area - were supposed to act as a “fitness programme” for European 
enterprises. Significant positive growth effects were also forecast owing to the disappearance of the 
foreign exchange rate risk within the euro area. 
So far, however, those expectations have only just started to be fulfilled. On an average of the years 
since 1999, the rise in overall output in the euro area, at just over 2% annually, has been noticeably 
slower than in the USA (2½%). The pace of expansion has also lagged behind that of the pre-ins, the 
United Kingdom and Sweden. The euro area has thus been unable to isolate itself from the cyclical 
slowdown in the USA, as had been hoped in early 2001. It has, in fact, more or less fully shadowed 
the  price  slumps  on  the  US  stock  markets  and  the  deterioration  in  sentiment  of  US  investors  and 
consumers, even though the bubble in the IT and telecoms sector was less pronounced here and the 
macroeconomic imbalances are less severe. 
The  differential  in  per  capita  income  compared  with  the  United  States  -  where  the  population  is 
growing considerably more quickly than in the euro area - has been narrowing somewhat since 1999, 
however. But this development is due to the fact that the USA was hit harder by the cyclical slowdown 
than the euro area was. Looking at the longer-term trends, the US lead in potential growth over the 
euro area - which the IMF puts at ¾ percentage point - is even larger than the difference in population 
growth. This means that, under these conditions, the per capita income between these two economic 
areas is even diverging. 
The euro area’s growth performance has, on the whole, been unsatisfactory. This is revealed not least 
by  the  fact  that  EMU,  despite  some  undeniable  progress,  still  represents  a  quite  heterogeneous 
economic area. This is shown by the wide spread of growth rates among the member countries. In 
2000, for example, rates of growth ranged from just under 3% in Italy and Germany to 10% in Ireland. 
The differentials in growth across the euro-area countries did narrow in 2001 and 2002. However, a 
number of member countries converged on the low German pace of expansion - and not the other way 
round, as would actually have been desirable. 
In almost every case, economic analyses of the euro area’s growth weakness come to the conclusion 
that  the  problems  lie  mainly  on  the  labour  market.  The  contribution  made  by  the  factor  labour  to 
economic growth in the  1991 to 2000 period  was no more than roughly  one-third as high as in  the 
United  States.  The  inadequate  involvement  of  the  factor  labour  in  the  production  process  is  also 
reflected in the high core level of structural unemployment that has emerged, above all, in the larger 
euro-area member countries. 
It follows from this that strengthening the forces of growth in Europe is not so much a macropolicy task 
but  more  a  challenge  to  structural  policy.  In  this  connection,  what  is  of  key  importance  is  the 
elimination of rigidities on the labour markets. Although significant efforts have been undertaken in that 
respect over the past few years, many pressing problems remain and governments as well as both 
sides of industry have to face up to them. 
The development of the external value of the euro has been disappointing in the first two years after 
its introduction. It was not so much depreciation in itself that was felt to be surprising and exaggerated 
but rather its scale. At their peak, the exchange rate losses on an trade-weighted average against the 
12 most important trading  partners  outside  the euro  area  amounted  to  23%. A crucial factor in this 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2002
 development was the strength of the US dollar, reflecting the decidedly robust pace of growth in the 
US economy up to early 2001. It is only since many high, and ultimately unfounded, expectations on 
the part of market players  had to give  way to  a more sober assessment that  this development has 
stabilised  and, to a certain extent, gone into reverse. However,  we are still a  long  way  off from the 
exchange rate relationships that existed before the changeover to monetary union. 
The depreciation has not inflicted lasting harm on the euro-area countries. The exchange-rate-related 
gain  in  competitiveness  in  trading  with  countries  outside  the  euro  area  has  provided  growth  in  the 
region  with  an  external  mainstay.  And  the  inflationary  effects  which  intermittently  strengthened  the 
oil-price-induced external price surge have been brought under control by monetary policy. 
In  the  long  run,  however,  business  in  the  euro  area  cannot  rely  on  such  advantages  continuing. 
Ultimately,  there  is  no  option  but  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  cost-side  risks  and  to  undertake  structural 
reforms  in  order  to  strengthen  the  efficiency  and  adaptability  of  the  euro-area  economies  on  a 
sustained basis from the inside. 
In the second half of the 1990s, there was a significant improvement in the fiscal position of general 
government in the member states of the euro area. The average deficit ratio in the euro area initially 
continued  to go down, as  did the government debt-to-GDP ratio. The fiscal policy framework in the 
monetary union, which is enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty and in the Stability and Growth Pact, has 
played  a  crucial  role  in  this.  The  majority  of  member  states  are  now  meeting  the  requirement,  laid 
down in the Stability and Growth Pact, that budgets should be close to balance or in surplus under 
normal cyclical conditions. 
However, some countries - including the largest economies in the euro area - have neglected to use 
the  years of favourable cyclical  development for consolidating their public finances. In many cases, 
welcome tax cuts were not adequately counter-financed by savings on the expenditure side, which led 
to a further deterioration in the underlying budgetary position. Together with cyclically induced strains, 
this has resulted in a situation where those countries are now finding it difficult to comply with - or are 
already  overshooting  -  the  3%  deficit  ratio  limit.  Germany  is  among  these  countries.  The 
EU-commission has already implemented the excessive deficit procedure. 
The fiscal policy problems of some countries have occasioned a debate on possible changes to the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  implying  a  softening  of  its  terms.  This  would,  however,  jeopardise  the 
objective of sound underlying fiscal policy conditions, which are a major and essential component of a 
monetary policy that is geared to stability. In order to preserve the credibility of the fiscal policy ground 
rules in the monetary union, what those countries need to do instead is undertake a speedy correction 
of the undesirable developments that have emerged and achieve structurally balanced budgets in the 
near future. This will make it easier for the European Central Bank to perform its task of maintaining 
price stability. Sound public finances, moreover, contribute to sustained economic growth and a long-
term increase in employment. 
Over the past four years, the Governing Council of the ECB has demonstrated that it takes its stability 
mandate  seriously.  With  its  consistent  and  forward-looking  monetary  policy,  the  Governing  Council 
has  succeeded  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  at  the  targeted  low  level.  That  success  is  all  the 
more notable in view of the fact that price developments in the euro area since January 1999 have 
been shaped, as described earlier, by a series of negative shocks. 
In terms of its monetary policy strategy, the ECB Governing Council has repeatedly had to contend 
with the accusation of a lack of transparency. Criticism was mainly aroused by the unclear weighting of 
the two pillars in the event of conflict. The ECB has now improved its communication with the markets 
to the extent that its interest rate decisions are, as a rule, correctly anticipated by the markets. But it 
still has to be said that the two-pillar strategy, owing to its complexity, makes heavy demands on the 
Eurosystem’s communications policy. 
Following a two pillar strategy the ECB council does neither ignore the possible threats by monetary 
expansion  nor  does  he  feel  bound  by  monetary  orthodoxy.  It  is  true,  that  inflation  is  a  monetary 
phenomenon. However, that holds only in the long run. For the short term inflation is also determined 
by a couple of non-monetary variables. In addition, growth of monetary aggregates can be disturbed 
by special determinants such as portfolio effects. Therefore, there suitability as indicators may suffer. 
As  a  consequence,  the  ECB-Council  pursues  a  more  broadly  based  approach.  A  second  pillar  is 
added. In monitoring  the  price developments and determinants the ECB-council judges the  inflation 
expectations over the medium term. 
BIS Review 67/2002 
 3
 For  the  euro-area  financial  markets,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  had  far-reaching  implications. 
These include, in particular, the rapid convergence of the national markets to form a fully integrated 
euro money market, the strong growth in the market for euro-denominated corporate bonds as well as 
the  wave  of  consolidation  in  the  case  of  banks  and  stock  exchanges.  It  has  gradually  become 
apparent, however, that a complete integration of the financial systems is currently still hindered by a 
large number of regulatory, tax and legal obstacles and eliminating those obstacles is proving to be 
complex and arduous. The Lamfalussy proposals are designed to accelerate that process. 
III 
Let me now turn to more practical aspects of the Monetary Union. European Monetary Union works. 
That  is  by  no  means  a  matter  of  course.  The  introduction  of  workable  common  instruments  for 
monetary  policy,  the  proper  functioning  of  payment  systems  and  the  harmonisation  of  statistical 
methodologies are crucial to the success of the monetary union. 
Most important among the technical aspects managed by the Eurosystem was, of course, the smooth 
introduction of euro banknotes and coins as sole legal tender. The 2002 cash changeover proved to 
be  a  formidable  challenge  for  cash  management  and  communication  departments.  The  legacy 
currencies were withdrawn from about 300 million Europeans as well as from outside the euro area, 
where especially D-Mark was in circulation. At the same time, the new currency was issued. 
To meet this challenge, a long and thorough preparation took place. The general framework for the 
changeover - including national changeover scenarios - was agreed at the European level as early as 
1999 and 2000. Close collaboration with third parties - mainly banks, retailers and manufacturers of 
cash handling machines - was initiated at an early stage. 
The withdrawal of national currency started in mid-2001. An award-winning campaign under the title 
“Don’t let sleeping coins lie”, the Bundesbank called upon the general public to hand in unused coins 
hidden  in  piggy  banks,  under  pillows  or  among  their  socks.  By  November  2001,  we  had  already 
collected more than 20% of all coins in circulation. Of course, a substantial amount of D-Mark is still in 
circulation. In comparison  to December 2000 almost 4% of all D-Mark banknotes are  in circulation. 
Some  of  it  may  never  come  back.  However,  the  Bundesbank  has  committed  itself  to  exchanging 
D-Mark banknotes for an indefinite period. 
The  logistical  preparations  for  the  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  cash  proved  equally 
successful. In order to smooth the final changeover, the banks were supplied with notes and coins in 
advance (front-loading). The banks, in turn, provided retailers with the new cash - a process known as 
sub-frontloading.  Of  course,  special  debiting  models  had  to  be  applied  for  the  credit  institutions  in 
order to limit the costs they incurred in the changeover. In addition, a set of coins worth about 10 euro 
(starter kits) was sold to the general public around Christmas time in order to familiarise them with the 
new coins and provide them with the small change that they would need early in the new year. 
Euro cash was put into circulation and change in euro was given from the very first few days of 2002 
onwards.  By  4  p.m.  on  2 January,  an  average  of  92%  of  automated  teller  machines  had  been 
converted  to  dispense  euro  notes  across  the  12  countries.  Moreover,  the  new  cash  rapidly  gained 
overwhelming  acceptance.  The  old  currencies  were  therefore  withdrawn  much  more  quickly  than 
expected.This  also  led  to  an  exceptionally  high  demand  for  low-denomination  euro  banknotes  and 
coins and even caused some short-term bottlenecks. 
Besides the logistical challenge, the changeover called for major efforts in communication. Every man 
and woman and child had to be familiarised with the new currency. That meant, at the very least, their 
denomination,  appearance  and  security  features.  Equally,  we  were  reluctant  to  make  the  security 
features known too early because of the potential threat of counterfeiting. 
And  indeed,  we  do  have  some  indications  that  the  euro  as  a  leading  currency  is  more  subject  to 
counterfeiters  than  the  former  national  currencies  of  smaller  countries.  Hitherto,  in  Germany  the 
number  counterfeited  euro  banknotes  is  limited  and  lower  than  before.  Therefore,  the  tremendous 
efforts to prevent counterfeiting proved worthwhile. 
All  major  instruments  of  communication  policy  were  used.  The  information  campaign  provided  the 
general  public  with  details  of  the  new  banknotes  and  coins.  There  was  close  cooperation  with  the 
press and the mass media. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2002
 Of  course,  the  differing  information  needs  of  the  general  public  and  of  professional  cash  handlers 
(banks, retailers) had be taken into consideration. Opinion leaders were informed and cash handlers 
were trained in working with the euro cash in advance. All accounting systems and each cash point 
had to be made ready for the new currency and the dual circulation period. As things turned out, the 
two-month dual circulation period was, if anything, too long. 
The changeover had given rise to fears of inflation There were three main aspects to this. First, there 
was the possibility that  businesses might try to recoup their changeover costs by putting  up prices. 
Second,  businesses  might  defer  scheduled  price  increases  until  after  the  changeover  owing  to  the 
need  to  display  prices  in  the  new  currency.  Third,  price  increases  might  occur  owing  to  rounding 
differences. However, the changeover itself did not have a major impact on consumer prices. Many 
consumer goods were subject to automatic conversion since they are paid by standing order out of a 
bank account. 
Nevertheless, even almost a year after the changeover, perceived inflation diverges significantly from 
the actual low rate of inflation. Consumers perceive inflation to be much higher and react accordingly. 
They  attach  greater  importance  to  price  developments  in  goods  and  services  which  they  buy  more 
frequently and pay for in cash. However, the harmonised indicator of consumer prices does cover a 
broad basket of goods. Higher perceived inflation occurred first in Germany but in the course of this 
year also in other member countries.  
The Governing Council of the ECB keeps a close watch on the development of perceived inflation - 
not only because this is crucial to acceptance of the new currency but also because it may additionally 
have macroeconomic implications, such as matching rising wage demands. 
All in all, the euro cash changeover is an outstanding example of the Eurosystem’s ability to cope with 
major challenges. 
IV 
At its last meeting, the ECB Governing Council discussed in depth the arguments for and against a cut 
in key interest rates. The rates were left unchanged, but we indicated that we would closely monitor 
the downside risks to economic growth in the euro area. 
After a rather mild recession in 2001,  economic growth picked up remarkably  only in the US. In  all 
other major economies, slight growth was mainly driven by external factors. Capacity adjustments - in 
particular  in  hi-tech  businesses  in  major  industrialised  countries  -  are  still  taking  place.  Therefore, 
investment prospects look clouded. 
The ongoing deflation in Japan is due to persistent structural problems in the banking sector. Recent 
announcements to reform the banking system have shed some light on possible solutions. As usual, 
however, it is harder to implement reforms than announce them. Japan, however, is benefiting a little 
from fairly strong growth in East Asian countries. Recent data may point at least to an end of recession 
during the ongoing fiscal year. 
Among the emerging markets, East Asia and eastern Europe have performed better than again-crisis-
ridden Latin America. The crises in Argentina and subsequently in Uruguay and Brazil have proved not 
to  be  as  contagious  as  earlier  emerging  market  crises.  Financial  markets  are  more  aware  of 
fundamental aspects nowadays. Contagion is more limited. 
However, economic integration with the other side of the Atlantic seems to be closer than ever. The 
devastating effects of September 11 were by no means confined to the United States. We realised that 
there have been major repercussions in the European economy, even though trade and financial flows 
reacted with a time lag and not as strongly. This psychological transmission channel is much faster 
than trade flows  or even financial investments. The  worsening  of the business climate in the US is 
having an impact on German investment. 
In spite of high expectations early this year, the euro-area economy did not accelerate after the first 
quarter. Among the reasons for this are oil prices, the considerable turbulences on financial markets 
and the looming threat of a military conflict. Both factors continue to be among the downside risks to 
the economy. 
Nevertheless, the ECB Governing Council expects growth rates to pick up and to return to potential in 
the course of 2003. Private consumption might benefit from rising real income due to lower inflation 
rates. Investment activity is supported by the low level of interest rates and a possible stabilisation on 
BIS Review 67/2002 
 5
 the  financial  markets.  And  improvements  in  the  world  economy  as  well  as  faster  trade  growth  will 
foster export development. 
The present annual inflation rate, 2.2% is very close to the mark for stability. Most likely developments 
indicate  a  declining  rate  in  the  first  half  of  next  year.  Of  course,  upward  risks  to  prices  are  always 
present. Most important among these are oil prices and labour costs. At the most recent meeting of 
the  Governing  Council,  price  risks  were  judged  to  be  balanced.  However,  the  described  growth 
scenario is subject to a great deal of uncertainty. The risks to the economy tend to be - I am sorry to 
say - on the downside. 
V 
The  outlook  for  European  Monetary  Union  in  the  medium  term  depends  first  and  foremost  on  the 
enlargement process and the union’s ability to cope with it. The ongoing enlargement of the European 
Union and joining EMU represent the most important challenge. 
The accession of the candidate countries in central and eastern Europe is a major item on the agenda. 
EU accession is decided on the basis of the criteria adopted at the Copenhagen European Council. 
Monetary  union  is  the  final  stage  in  a  process  of  evolution.  In  principle,  all  the  Maastricht  criteria, 
including  the  exchange  rate  criterion,  have  to  be  met  before  a  country  can  join  the  Eurosystem. 
Country-specific  exceptions  must  not  be  allowed  to  set  a  precedent.  At  most,  exchange  rate 
arrangements based on currency boards could potentially be considered equivalent to ERM II. 
For accession countries to join monetary union, they need to catch up by striving for real and nominal 
convergence.  The  past  few  years  have  already  seen  significant  progress  towards  real  and  nominal 
convergence.  However,  each  individual  accession  country’s  situation  must  be  judged  separately. 
Some countries already have a level of prosperity and convergence that is close to the EU average. 
Cases in point are Cyprus and Slovenia. Per capita GDP, expressed in purchasing power parities, is 
85% of the EU average in Cyprus and 69% in Slovenia. Those two countries generate a higher per 
capita  GDP  than  some  EU  countries.  Some  of  the  remaining  accession  countries  lag  considerably 
further behind. When looking at the averages, it should not be forgotten that, in some cases, there are 
major regional disparities within EU countries and accession countries. 
In real economic terms, the accession of central and east European countries is already a fact of life. 
Between 1993 and 2000 the share of accession countries’ total exports going to the EU rose to two 
third. Sixty per cent of imports come from the EU. 
The integration of central and east European countries has been made easier by progress in capital 
market  liberalisation.  Positive  macroeconomic  data  and  the  prospect  of  EU  accession  have  been 
leading to large-scale direct investment. Since 1999, direct investment has accounted for around 5% 
of all accession countries’ GDP. 
The heterogeneous nature of monetary union will increase along with enlargement - labour and goods 
markets therefore need flexible adjustment mechanisms. The single monetary policy is a catalyst for 
reforms in other policy areas. The nation states are in competition with one another to find the best 
solutions for economic, labour market and fiscal policies. Successful policy solutions set a benchmark 
for the less successful countries. 
Besides the economic criteria for a successful monetary union, the European System of Central Banks 
should be reformed to cope with enlargement. The present structures were designed for a 15-member 
monetary  union.  Reform  should  take  account  of  the  fact  that,  in  a  few  years’  time,  the  EU  could 
comprise as many as 27 members. Reform must therefore be designed to take account not just of the 
current round of enlargement, in which up to ten nations will join the EU. 
Let me conclude by making some comments on your debate about possible EMU membership. The 
ECB Governing Council is well aware of the ongoing public discussion in your country. Sweden would 
be  very  welcome  in  the  monetary  union.  More  than  that,  for  Sweden  -  neighbouring  Finland  and 
across  the  Baltic  Sea  from  Germany  -  EMU  membership  should  be  a  natural  choice.  In 
macroeconomic terms, membership would be of mutual benefit. The Swedish business cycle moves in 
notably close harmony with the euro area. Inflation, inflation expectations and long-term interest rates 
are closely correlated. 
6 
 BIS Review 67/2002
 At the core of the debate in your country lies the concern about the threat of an asymmetric shock. To 
my  mind,  the  Eurosystem  has  demonstrated  its  capacity  to  cope  well  with  economic  shocks.  In 
addition,  strong  asymmetric  shocks  are  increasingly  rare  in  times  of  ongoing  economic  integration. 
The possibility of major asymmetric shocks declines with the rising importance of trade, foreign direct 
investment and capital market integration. 
Swedish  banks have already shown  a greater  inclination to  invest  on foreign markets. They are, to 
some extent, among the leaders in terms of European integration. To sum up: economic and financial 
integration  is  deepening  within  the  monetary  union  and  even  with  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic. 
Therefore,  the  built-in-stabilisers  and  the  cushioning  effects  of  the  integrated  European  markets 
provide the shelter needed - for your country as well - to cope with asymmetric shocks. 
Sweden’s EMU membership is in your and our interests. I hope that very soon, on another visit to your 
beautiful country, I shall be able to use the same currency that I do in Rome, Paris or Frankfurt. 
BIS Review 67/2002 
 7
