 Bodil Nyboe Andersen: Recent financial and economic developments in 
Denmark 
Speech  by  Mrs  Bodil  Nyboe  Andersen,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Danish Bankers’ Association, Copenhagen, 4 December 2002. 
 Virtually  every  report  and  article  on  the  international  economic  development  nowadays  starts  by 
describing the unusually high degree of uncertainty. Not only has the expected upswing been deferred 
once again for another year, but it has also become more common to hear expressions of concern for 
the economy's course in both the USA and Europe. 
The terms recession, depression and deflation make frequent appearances in the headlines, and are 
often  used  interchangeably  to  describe  the  fact  that  things  are  not  going  as  well  as  we  were 
accustomed to up to 2000. 
Economists apply these three terms to describe different concepts: 
• 
Recession is the least serious situation. A rule of thumb says that a drop in output for two 
quarters running  is a “technical recession”. In the USA, the National Bureau for Economic 
Research  operates  with  a  more  sophisticated  definition  of  recession,  based  on  the 
development  in  a  number  of  macroeconomic  time  series.  According  to  this  definition,  the 
Bureau noted a year ago that the USA went into a recession in March 2001. Whether this 
recession is persistent or has now ceased will not be revealed until the figures have been 
revised and closely analysed, with a timelag of many months, and perhaps more than one 
year.  
Depression is a prolonged period of abnormally low growth and high unemployment. So this 
is a far more serious situation than recession. The term depression is used in particular to 
describe the persistent economic crisis in the 1930s.  
Deflation signifies a drop in the general price level, i.e. the opposite of inflation. A situation 
with  falling  prices  is  dangerous,  since  it  tends  to  have  a  self-reinforcing  tendency.  If 
sustained price drops are expected, purchases and investments will be postponed, and this 
in itself will deepen the crisis. 
  The confusion regarding these terms is exacerbated by the fact that “deflationary” is sometimes used 
merely to describe a tendency for the economy to dampen. 
Lower growth is not necessarily a major problem, however. After strong growth and pressure on the 
labour market, a calmer period can be healthy. 
The challenge here is that not all countries have experienced strong growth with the related reduction 
of unemployment up to and around the millennium rollover. 
For many  years, Japan's economic development has been alarmingly poor, and its state is close to 
depression.  Moreover,  Japan  also  experiences  deflation,  i.e.  falling  prices.  Japan's  economic 
problems appear very hard to solve by applying the traditional economic-policy instruments. 
In Europe, the German economic development in particular has given grounds for concern. Although 
remaining  Europe's  economic  locomotive  for  many  decades,  since  the  mid-1990s  Germany  has 
experienced  moderate  growth  and  high  unemployment.  The  international  economic  slowdown  has 
further amplified these problems. 
At  the  same  time,  Germany  faces  a  situation  where  a  large  budget  deficit  impedes  an  active  fiscal 
policy  to  counter  this  development.  Even  the  automatic  budget  reaction  in  the  face  of  a  further 
dampening will create problems for Germany's compliance with the budgetary requirements. 
What about Denmark? Do we have recession, depression or deflation? In fact we have none of them. 
Denmark  did  not  reach  very  high  growth  rates  at  the  end  of  the  1990s. We  experienced  moderate 
economic growth, but our employment situation was extremely favourable; in fact the labour market 
was under pressure. This situation has not changed significantly. 
BIS Review 72/2002 
 1
 The figures so far available indicate that Denmark's economic situation is robust, with some economic 
growth.  The  growth  has  been  sufficient  to  stabilise  unemployment  at  a  level  that  is  very  low  by 
European standards. Thus, so far the international economic slowdown has not presented noticeable 
problems for Denmark. 
The economic slowdown has generated debate within the EU with regard to the Stability and Growth 
Pact.  It  is  criticised  for  inflexibility  in  view  of  the maximum  permitted  budget  deficit  of  3  per  cent  of 
GDP. However, this limit is just one element of the Pact. In order to stay on the right side of 3 per cent, 
the member states are committed to respect the medium-term budgetary objective of positions close 
to  balance  or  in  surplus.  In  the  years  of  favourable  cyclical  development,  there  must  be  a  sound 
budget  surplus.  This  lends  flexibility,  i.e.  “leeway”,  when  the  business  cycle  weakens,  and  the 
automatic stabilisers come into play. 
However,  if  the  deficit  in  the  good  years  is  already  high,  there  is  no  margin  to  draw  on  when  the 
economy weakens. In this situation, the limit of 3 per cent is reached quickly. 
The fundamental idea behind the Pact is therefore in the good years to create room for manoeuvre via 
a strong budgetary situation. In this case too, Denmark is actually a good example. 
For  a  number  of  years,  Denmark's  fiscal  policy  has  contributed  to  creating  a  robust  situation  for 
government finances. Both the previous and the present government have maintained a sound fiscal 
policy with a satisfactory budget surplus. 
If Denmark's cyclical development also weakens, and unemployment rises, the budget will deteriorate 
when the automatic stabilisers set in. Lower fiscal revenues and higher expenditure on unemployment 
benefits are the classical examples of such budgetary reactions. Even if these effects are rather strong 
in Denmark, the underlying favourable budget situation will accommodate their impact. 
It  is  important  to  maintain  this  room  for  manoeuvre,  and  therefore  there  is  no  scope  for  any 
fiscal-policy relaxation. 
Danmarks Nationalbank has continuously emphasised the importance of a firm and consistent fiscal 
policy. This policy is vital to our credibility in maintaining the fixed-exchange-rate policy for which there 
is a broad consensus in Denmark. 
Over the years, many countries have been forced to abandon the fixed-exchange-rate policy due to 
speculation  against  the  currency.  But  in  virtually  every  case  this  speculation  has  arisen  due  to  the 
country's lack of the will or the ability to adhere to the “rules of the game” for a fixed-exchange-rate 
policy.  These  rules  impose  requirements  on  the  design  of  not  only  monetary  policy,  but  also  fiscal 
policy. 
For many  years, Denmark's observation  of these ground rules has been firmly  agreed between the 
government  and  Danmarks  Nationalbank.  Today,  the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  is  so  much 
embedded in our economic policy that it is actually no longer a basis for discussion. There is broad 
agreement that this policy has served us well, and after the rather chaotic foreign-exchange policy of 
the 1970s we have experienced many years of firm and stable economic development. 
Up to 1 January 1999, Denmark was part of the EMS, together with a large number of the EU member 
states.  Our monetary  and  foreign-exchange  policy  adhered  to  the  European  standard,  so  to  speak. 
However, all the other member states that were part of the old EMS have now introduced the euro, 
and we are the only one of the out-countries to participate in ERM II. 
Even  though  our  policy  is  unchanged  from  the  late  1990s,  this  is  no  longer  an  internationally  well-
known model. Therefore we have to do more ourselves to provide information on the goals and means 
of our monetary and foreign-exchange policy. We cannot just refer to the model. 
In principle, the fixed-exchange-rate policy is easy to explain. Currencies are traded twenty four hours 
a  day,  anybody  can  see  at  any  time  whether  the  exchange  rate  matches  the  target  set,  and  no 
econometric models are needed to see whether things are on track. 
Danmarks Nationalbank's aim is to ensure that the krone's rate against the euro is stabilised close to 
the  central  rate  within  ERM  II,  and  the  exchange  rate  is  the  sole  basis  for  our  monetary-policy 
deliberations. 
Among market players there is a degree of uncertainty concerning the exact size of the decimals that 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  considers  to  be  acceptable  fluctuation.  The  banks  often  demand  precise 
details. However, this is not something we are prepared to give. An exact description down to the final 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2002
 decimal place would eliminate the basis for the currency market in kroner against euro functioning as a 
real market, with the opportunity of profits and the risk of losses. In that case, Danmarks Nationalbank 
would quite simply take over the market's function. 
Our  efforts  are  designed  to  ensure  that  the  fluctuations  are  so  moderate  that  for  most  ordinary 
business  enterprises  -  in  contrast  to  foreign-exchange  dealers  -  they  no  longer  even  need  to  be 
considered. 
Our  instruments  are  also  well-known:  intervention  in  the  currency  market  and  adjustments  to 
Danmarks  Nationalbank's  interest  rates.  Although  the  market  itself  to  a  great  extent  stabilises  the 
exchange  rate  Danmarks  Nationalbank  intervenes  in  the  currency  market  when  necessary,  and  on 
these occasions often for considerable amounts. 
Danmarks Nationalbank's interest-rate policy is fundamentally that we “shadow” the interest rate of the 
European Central Bank. This means that we raise or lower the discount and lending rates in line with 
the ECB. In addition, we adjust the interest-rate spread to the ECB in the light of the foreign-exchange 
situation. We take account of the krone's position vis-à-vis the euro, and whether there has been any 
sustained inflow or outflow of foreign exchange. These adjustments can take place concurrently with 
adjustments to the ECB's interest rate, or at other times. However, the actual decisions are taken on 
the  basis  of  all  of  the  information  available  concerning  the  currency  market  at  that  particular  time. 
There is never an automatic reaction. 
During the  past  year,  there has been  great  interest in placing funds in kroner,  and  we have mostly 
purchased currency. The foreign-exchange reserve has therefore increased by around kr. 50 billion. It 
has also been possible to reduce the interest-rate spread in relation to the euro interest rate, and this 
is now as low as 20 basis points. 
When capital flows are reversed at some point in the future, we are of course also prepared to sell 
currency. Those who are familiar with our operations will be in no doubt that Danmarks Nationalbank's 
currency defence will be extremely resolute in terms of both intervention and widening of the interest-
rate differential. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  must  continually  monitor  the  krone's  position  in  the  market,  and  the 
decision-making  structure  must  be  designed  for  decisions  on  intervention  or  adjustment  of  interest 
rates  to  be  taken  at  any  time.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  the  flexibility  required  to  be  able  to  act 
immediately. 
In  recent  years,  many  central  banks  have  introduced  fixed  published  dates  for  monetary-policy 
decisions, but the fixed-exchange-rate policy is not compatible with such fixed decision-making dates. 
A central aspect is that measures can be taken immediately to halt any inappropriate exchange-rate 
movement in order to prevent a crisis from emerging. 
The  situation  in  the  currency  market  can  quickly  change.  When  conducting  a  fixed-exchange-rate 
policy, it is therefore not advisable to prepare the market for forthcoming changes in the interest-rate 
differential, as practised by many central banks with other monetary-policy objectives. 
Furthermore, we take the view that all parties in the market must have access to the same information, 
at 
from  Danmarks  Nationalbank.  Danmarks  Nationalbank's  monetary-policy 
announcements are thus published with great precision via several channels simultaneously. No hints 
are given to certain groups capable of interpreting such messages. Danmarks Nationalbank therefore 
never  comments  on  forthcoming  changes,  even  though  we  frequently  are  asked  questions  in  this 
respect. 
At the more technical level, we have ensured that the market participants receive information on the 
expected development in liquidity. On a monthly basis, Danmarks Nationalbank publishes estimates of 
expected  day-to-day  movements  in  the  banks'  overall  liquidity,  and  at  the  same  time  releases 
information  on  the  expected  dates  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank's  sale  or  purchase  of  certificates  of 
deposit. 
Additional  information  on  the  development  in  liquidity  is  published  on  a  daily  basis,  giving  market 
participants a good opportunity to prepare their positions, and to subsequently analyse developments. 
On this basis, there is normally no great uncertainty concerning the scale of Danmarks Nationalbank's 
interventions in the foreign-exchange market. 
Openness  and  transparency  are  generally  given  high  priority  in  our  modern  society.  For  monetary 
policy these are also the means to achieve the credibility which is so essential for a central bank to 
the  same 
time, 
BIS Review 72/2002 
 3
 implement the chosen policy. However, this must not be allowed to overshadow the fact that the safest 
path to credibility is over a long period to fulfil the promises one makes, or to put it bluntly: to practise 
what is preached. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2002
