 David Dodge: Economic and financial trends in Canada 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, 23 October 2002.  
 Today, we released our October Monetary Policy Report, in which we discuss economic and financial 
trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy.  
The Canadian economy has been expanding strongly so far this year and is now operating fairly close 
to its full  production capacity.  Consumer price inflation has risen  above the  2 per cent target and is 
expected to rise further before year-end because of high oil prices and a number of other relative price 
movements. What is important for monetary policy is that these one-off influences on specific prices 
not feed more generally into price and wage inflation.  
The Canadian economy has grown more rapidly than those of all other G-7 countries over the past 
year. Annualized growth exceeded 5 per cent in the first half of 2002—well above the growth of the 
economy's potential. We estimate that Canada's economy grew at an annualized rate of about 4 per 
cent in the third quarter. Thus, we have seen a significant reduction in the amount of excess supply in 
the economy so far this year.  
As we look ahead, global economic, financial, and geopolitical uncertainties are likely to moderate the 
rate of Canada's economic growth over the next three quarters. Growth should come in at the bottom 
of, or slightly below, the 3 to 4 per cent range that we anticipated in our last Update.  
Bear in mind that the output gap is very small. Assuming the uncertainties now clouding the outlook 
dissipate in the second half of next  year,  we expect  growth to accelerate to above  potential at that 
time, absorbing the remaining small amount of excess supply.  
The  Bank's  core  measure  of  inflation  is  running  above  our  earlier  projections.  This  largely  reflects 
sharp increases in home and auto insurance premiums and, in Ontario, electricity prices. Core inflation 
is also being pushed up by strong demand for housing.  
All told, core inflation is expected to peak at about 3 per cent by the end of this year. But, as the one-
time influences that I just mentioned fade, core inflation is expected to decline in the second half of 
2003, provided those one-time factors do not feed into price and wage inflation more generally.  
We must remember that the Canadian economy is now operating not far from its capacity. In order to 
sustain  non-inflationary  growth,  we  will  need  to  continue  to  remove  monetary  stimulus  before  the 
excess supply in the economy is completely absorbed. The pace and extent of this action will depend 
on  the  balance  of  domestic  and  external  developments  and  on  their  implications  for  pressures  on 
capacity and inflation in Canada.  
Now Malcolm and I will be happy to take your questions. 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 1
