 Ilmars Rimsevics: General economic developments and banking in Latvia 
Speech by Mr Ilmars Rimsevics, Governor of the Bank of Latvia, Riga, November 2002. 
 With  Latvia's  economic  indicators  confirming  sustained  stability  in  the  national  economy,  economic 
growth  is  likely  to  be  balanced  in  2002.  Amidst  somewhat  weak  economic  activity  in  the  external 
sector and downward adjustments of global economic growth projections for 2003, Latvia continues to 
report economic growth that is largely driven by domestic demand.  
The performance of the Latvian economy has also been recognized internationally: in November, the 
rating  agency  Moody's  Investors  Service  upgraded  Latvia's  credit  rating.  In  its  Regular  Report  on 
Latvia's  Progress  Towards  Accession,  the  European  Commission  has  acknowledged  Latvia's 
macroeconomic  stability  and  positively  evaluated  reforms  undertaken  to  enhance  the  country's 
competitiveness. The European Commission has nominated Latvia among the ten countries ready for 
accession to the European Union in 2004.  
Inflation remains low: in October, consumer prices rose 1.6% year-on-year and 0.8% month-on-month. 
The pick-up in consumer prices was largely a result of seasonal increases in food, and clothing and 
footwear prices. Core inflation was 1.3% in October. The inflation rate is projected to be around 2% in 
2002.  
Increasing economic growth rates observed in the third quarter can be attributed to the sustained high 
level of domestic demand and new orders from external markets. Strong production indicators in some 
of the sectors, marked growth in the retail trade sector, and increases in non-financial investment and 
lending are all evidence to this.  
With  more  orders  placed  with  the  manufacturing  sector,  its  real  output  rose  in  July  and  August 
(8.1% and  3.1%,  respectively).  The  most  pronounced  growth  of  non-financial  investment  and  loans 
was  observed  in  the  manufacturing  and  construction  sectors,  as  well  as  some areas  of  the  service 
sector, mostly in trade, the financial sector, commercial and other services.  
Retail  trade  turnover  continued  to  increase  at  a  rapid  pace  in  August  (by  22.5%  year-on-year),  as 
population's income and loans granted grew and the size of the shadow economy in the retail trade 
sector declined.  
Although growth in oil product transit by rail accounted for the September increase in cargo traffic by 
rail, oil transportation by oil main to the Ventspils port continued to decline. Thus declining transit of oil 
and  oil  products  restrained  a  more  rapid  economic  growth.  In  September,  cargo  turnover  at  the 
Ventspils port decreased, while the other ports of Latvia performed well.  
Vibrant economic activity allows us to project that GDP growth will be higher in the latter half of 2002 
(5.5%-5.7%) than it was in the first half of the year; and therefore, real GDP is expected to grow by 5% 
in 2002.  
The  year-on-year  growth  of 10.0% in  Latvia's exports that  was observed  in the  first nine months of 
2002 despite weak global economic growth should be noted as a positive development. In the country 
breakdown, exports grew in all groups, with most rapid growth reported in exports to the United States, 
Sweden,  Russia  and  Lithuania.  Exports  to  the  principal  trading  partner,  the  European  Union,  rose 
6.9%.  The  principal  contributors  to  the  growth  were  exports  of  prepared  foodstuffs,  wood,  furniture, 
machinery  and  mechanical  appliances,  electrical  equipment,  and  base  metals  and  articles  of  base 
metals. With domestic demand remaining high, imports were up by 12.6%.  
As Latvia's exports rose more markedly, deficit in the balance of payments current account decreased 
substantially in July and August. In September, the current account deficit increased again, as imports 
of goods rose.  
In the first nine months of 2002, the services surplus was 12.0 million lats higher than the year before. 
The increase in the services surplus resulted from rising exports of travel and other services and lower 
imports of other services. The transportation services surplus declined largely because of a low cargo 
turnover at the Ventspils port. In the first nine months of 2002, the services surplus covered 40.5% of 
the goods deficit.  
BIS Review 69/2002 
 1
 The current account deficit continued to be adequately covered with foreign direct investment (in the 
amount of 75.5% in the first nine months of 2002). If the external and internal economic environment 
does not deteriorate at the end of the year, the current account deficit for 2002 is likely to remain at 
8.5% of GDP.  
The country's fiscal position was still better than the year before. In the first nine months of 2002, fiscal 
deficit in the general government consolidated budget was 19.8 million lats (2.2 times higher than the 
year  before,  when  the  deficit  amounted  to  43.6  million  lats).  The  general  government  consolidated 
budget was affected by an increase in the local government consolidated budget fiscal deficit, which 
amounted to 20.3 million lats. Nevertheless, according to the preliminary data released by the State 
Treasury,  the  fiscal  position  continued  to  improve  also  in  October:  the  central  government  basic 
budget reported the highest monthly revenues this year. As tax and non-tax revenues have exceeded 
projections and expenditures are likely to remain lower than projected until the end of the  year, the 
budget deficit for 2002 is expected to be below 2.0% of GDP.  
Developments in the banking system  
In October, liquidity conditions in the Latvian money market tightened slightly. In the interbank market, 
interest rates on transactions of shorter maturity (up to three months) rose, owing to stricter monetary 
policy  followed  by  the  Bank  of  Latvia  in  the  latter  half  of  the  month  and  the  end  of  the  reserve 
maintenance period. However, the behaviour of interest rates on lats interbank market transactions of 
longer maturity (over six months) – they continue to drop, reaching historical lows – confirm that the 
tightening of liquidity conditions is only temporary.  
At the end of October, the overnight RIGIBOR rose to 4.0%, while the six-month RIGIBOR, to which 
interest rates on lats loans to domestic enterprises and private persons are usually fixed, dropped to 
4.2%, promoting further decreases in interest rates on lats loans.  
Falling money market rates and escalating bank competition fostered a decline in interest rates on lats 
transactions by domestic enterprises and private persons. In September, interest rates on loans in lats 
fell to a record low. The weighted average interest rate of short-term loans in lats dropped to 6.52%, 
below that of short-term loans in the OECD currencies, which was at 7.89%. Likewise, the weighted 
average interest rate of long-term loans in lats fell (to 8.13%), though it still remained higher than that 
of long-term loans in the OECD currencies (6.30%).  
The weighted average interest rates of short-term and long-term deposits made in lats declined, down 
to 2.71% and 4.53%, respectively. The  weighted average interest rate of short-term deposits in the 
OECD currencies decreased to 2.05%, whereas that of such long-term deposits rose to 5.19%.  
The downward trend of lending rates and several sizeable loan projects in the trade, wood processing 
and transport sector promoted lending in September. Higher growth rates, however, have not impaired 
loan quality. The share of non-performing loans in total shrank to 2.2% at end-September.  
In September, loans to domestic enterprises and private persons rose 4.3%, reaching 1 664.2 million 
lats. This was the most rapid monthly increase in loans this year (annual growth was 43.0%). Loans to 
enterprises grew in excess of loans to private persons (increases of 49.7 million lats and 19.5 million 
lats,  respectively).  An  increase  of  73.3  million  lats  was  recorded  in  long-term  loans,  whereas 
short-term loans declined slightly.  
The  increase  of  19.4  million  lats  in  mortgage  loans  was  the  largest  increase  in  loans.  This  can  be 
attributed to the fact that the real estate market deepens and people increasingly start construction of 
housing and repairs of dwelling they own. Commercial and industrial credit, which are related with the 
development of the trade and industrial sectors, increased considerably (by 18.9 million lats and 9.6 
million lats, respectively). The most rapid annual increase was recorded in mortgage loans (95.2%).  
At  the  end  of  September,  loans  granted  by  banks  totalled  1  909.7  million  lats  (a  month-on-month 
increase of 3.7%).  
In September, total deposits decreased by 2.8% (to 2 702.1 million lats), but deposits received from 
domestic enterprises and private persons (1 234.6 million lats) rose 0.5% over August and 23.0% over 
September 2001.  
In  September,  banks'  assets  (excluding  trust  assets)  grew  by  0.6%  (a  year-on-year  increase  of 
26.4%), reaching 3 963.4 million lats.  
2 
 BIS Review 69/2002
 Banks' equity increased by 1.8% in September, totalling 365.9 million lats at the end of September (a 
year-on-year increase of 37.8%). Banks' profit for the first nine months of 2002 was 39.3 million lats (a 
year-on-year increase of 35.8%).  
The most significant event in the Latvian securities market was the new issue of 10-year mortgage 
bonds by the state joint-stock company Latvijas Hipotēku un zemes banka. These securities have the 
longest  maturity  of  all  Latvian  securities.  Mortgage  bonds  were  successfully  auctioned  on  the  Riga 
Stock Exchange and all bonds supplied (3 million lats) were sold at the average yield of 5.98%.  
In  September,  broad  money  M2X  grew  by  0.5%  month-on-month  and  18.8%  year-on-year,  totalling 
1 736.2 million lats.  
As  in  the  past  months  repayments  were  made  under  currency  swap  arrangements,  in  October  the 
Bank  of  Latvia's  net  foreign  assets  declined  by  47.0  million  lats,  while  the  backing  of  the  national 
currency with the Bank's net foreign assets remained high at the end of October, at 110.2%.  
In October, the demand for cash continued to increase, and currency in circulation grew by 7.2 million 
lats (by 6.5 million lats in September), reaching 576.2 million lats. At the same time, no major changes 
were observed in banks' deposits with the Bank of Latvia. Hence, the monetary base rose 7.6 million 
lats over its September level (to 665.5 million lats).  
At the end of October, the exchange rate of the US dollar against the lats, 0.606, was unchanged from 
end-September, while the exchange rate of the euro, 0.595, was up slightly. At the end of October, 
exchange rates of the above currencies as quoted by banks equalled official rates set by the Bank of 
Latvia.  
Bank of Latvia  
The  main  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia,  as  defined  by  the  Law  "On  the  Bank  of  Latvia",  is  to 
implement  monetary  policy  by  controlling  the  amount  of  money  in  circulation  with  the  aim  of 
maintaining price stability.  
The  independence  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia  is  guaranteed  by  the  Law  "On  the  Bank  of  Latvia"  and 
ensured in practice. The Bank also meets all prerequisites, as established by the European Monetary 
Institute,  for  independence  of  the  central  bank.  No  institution  or  person  can  influence  the  Bank's 
decisions.  The  Governor  is  appointed  by  the  Saeima  of  the  Republic  of  Latvia.  Likewise,  upon  the 
Governor's recommendation, it appoints members of the Board of Governors. All the above officials 
are appointed for a six-year term. The Governor, the Deputy Governor and members of the Board of 
Governors may be discharged before their term of office only if they have tendered their resignation, if 
a  court  decision  on  sentencing  any  of  them  for  a  deliberate  crime  has  taken  legal  effect,  or  the 
Governor, the Deputy Governor or a member of the Board of Governors is not able to officiate for a 
period exceeding six successive months because of illness or some other reason.  
The Law prohibits the Bank of Latvia from granting direct credit to the Government for the needs of 
covering  budget  deficit.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  does  not  have  the  right  to  buy  government 
securities on the primary market.  
The  Bank  of  Latvia  has  developed  and  is  using  the  full  set  of  the  same  indirect,  market  based 
monetary policy instruments that are used by the European Central Bank.  
On May 18, 2000, the Bank of Latvia was assigned quality management ISO 9002 certification.  
Movement of capital  
Both current and capital account transactions have been fully liberalised in Latvia. There are virtually 
no  restrictions  on  cash  and  capital  flows  to  and  from  Latvia.  The  Bank  of  Latvia  ensures  the 
convertibility  of  the  lats  by  buying  and  selling  unlimited  amounts  of  the  SDR  basket  currencies  to 
banks at their request.  
In 2000, the Bank of Latvia introduced the interbank automated payment system (SAMS), which is a 
real-time gross settlement system. It conforms to the relevant requirements of the European Central 
Bank and may be joined in the TARGET system.  
BIS Review 69/2002 
 3
 Brief description of the banking sector  
Currently, financial services are provided by 22 banks and one branch of a foreign bank (Riga Branch 
of  Nordea  Bank  Finland  Plc).  A  representative  office  of  Dresdner  Bank  AG  (Germany)  operates  in 
Latvia, but it has no right to render financial services.  
According to the Financial and Capital Market Commission, foreign shareholders owned 67.8% of total 
share capital in Latvian banks at the end of 2001. In 10 banks, foreign shareholders held over 50% of 
share capital.  
The restructuring of the banking sector has been completed: the industry is almost entirely in private 
hands (the state owned only 4.5% of banks' total share capital as at 31 December 2001). The state is 
the  owner  of  only  one  bank,  the  state  joint-stock  company  Latvijas  Hipoteku  un  zemes  banka,  and 
holds 32% of interest in the joint-stock company Latvijas Krajbanka.  
Banking legislation  
General. The legislative framework for banking meets the EU requirements in full, and in some areas 
the requirements are even more rigorous. International Accounting  Standards (IAS) have been fully 
introduced; banks' annual reports are prepared in accordance with IAS and audited by internationally 
recognised auditing firms. Practical supervision is very tight and bank inspections are conducted more 
frequently than in the EU member states.  
Licensing. The required minimum initial capital to establish a bank is 5 million euros. Foreign banks 
that want to establish representative offices or branches in Latvia face no restrictions. The prudential 
requirements that they must meet are the same as for domestic banks.  
Legislation.  The  principal  relevant  law,  the  "Law  on  Credit  Institutions",  has  been  in  force  since 
October 24, 1995, and it has been amended on several occasions. The regulations of the Financial 
and Capital Market Commission and the Bank of Latvia detail the requirements set by the Law. The 
whole set of regulations normally used by a supervisory authority is in place and corresponds with the 
EU standards.  
The  Law  "On  the  Prevention  of  Laundering  of  Proceeds  Derived  from  Criminal  Activity"  came  into 
effect on June 1, 1998. The Law fully conforms with  the relevant  EU directive:  it requires customer 
identification  and  keeping  records  on  all  transactions,  defines  suspicious  transactions  and  obliges 
banks to report them to a special control institution (Disclosures Office).  
The Law "On Natural Person Deposit Guarantees" came into effect on October 1, 1998. From January 
1, 2002 until December 31, 2003, deposits will be guaranteed up to the level of 3 000 lats. This applies 
to  all  deposits  made  with  banks  that  are  subject  to  this  Law,  regardless  of  the  day  a  deposit  was 
made.  The  Law  prescribes  a  schedule  for  increasing  this  amount  to  the  level  required  by  the  EU 
directive (13 000 lats) in six years. As of 2003, the guarantees will also be applied to deposits of legal 
persons.  
As of July 1, 2001, the financial sector is supervised by a single supervisory authority, the Financial 
and Capital Market Commission, the successor, in this area, to the Bank of Latvia. Hence, the financial 
sector will continue to benefit from the supervision framework that is among the strictest in Central and 
Eastern Europe.  
Latvia's integration in the European Union and the introduction of the Euro 
The Bank of Latvia's policy responses are based on this country's strategic goal, which is accession to 
the  EU,  and  the  task  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia  is  to  prepare  the  country  for  joining  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. In light of its commitment to joining the EU, Latvia is aiming towards both nominal 
and  real  convergence  with  the  EU  member  states.  Real  convergence  is  a  long-term  objective,  but 
Latvia is well on its way of achieving it.  
Since  1996 real GDP growth in Latvia has exceeded GDP growth in the EU (except in 1999), thus 
narrowing per capita income differences.  
The structure of Latvian GDP is in line with that of the developed countries: the shares of agriculture 
and manufacturing in total value added declined from 10% in 1995 to 4% in 2001 and from 22% to 
13%, respectively, while the share of services increased from 56% to 63%.  
4 
 BIS Review 69/2002
 Latvia's export structure by trade partner indicates expansion in the share of exports to the EU: 61.2% 
of total exports in 2001 went to the EU member states.  
Although accession countries are not required to meet the Maastricht convergence criteria, we have 
set  fulfilling  the  Maastricht  convergence  criteria  as  a  medium-term  target  in  the  area  of  nominal 
convergence. Already now Latvia complies or is close to complying with most of them.  
– 
– 
–  
In October, consumer price inflation was 1.6%. 
Gross government debt was only 15.0% of GDP at the end of 2001. 
There  was  no  budget  deficit  in  1997  and  1998.  In  2000  and  2001,  the  budget  deficit  was 
below the Maastricht ceiling, i.e., 3% of GDP. 
Yields  on  government  bonds,  while  still  higher  (5.54%  for  5-year  Treasury  bonds  in  July 
2002) than the Maastricht criteria, are on a downward trend and their maturity continues to 
increase. We expect to be able to meet the requirements in the medium term.  
The  lats  has  been  pegged  to  the  SDR  basket  of  currencies  at  a  constant  exchange  rate 
since 1994. Latvia has thereby shown that it is ready and able to meet the currency stability 
criterion.  
  During the pre-accession period, the exchange rate peg of the lats to the SDR will be maintained. This 
peg has served the Bank well and has ensured narrower exchange rate fluctuations than a possible 
peg  to  any  single  currency.  In  addition,  the  composition  of  Latvia's  foreign  trade  by  settlement 
currencies  closely  resembles  the  composition  of  the  SDR  basket,  with  the  US  dollar  and  the  euro 
being the major component in both.  
The  Bank  of  Latvia  will  be  prepared  to  join  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  at  the  time  of 
Latvia's  accession  to  the  EU.  The  structure  and  objectives  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia,  the  degree  of  its 
independence  and  its  set  of monetary  policy  instruments  are  fully  in  line  with  those  defined  for  the 
European System of Central Banks. 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 5
