 Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic and financial review in France 
Presentation of the 2002 Annual Report of the French Banking Commission (Commission Bancaire) 
by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the  French  Banking 
Commission, Paris, 2 June 2003. 
 1. 
2002 showed that French credit institutions were capable of withstanding a less 
favourable economic and financial environment 
Measured on a parent-company basis, the aggregate net income of French credit institutions in 2002 
was similar to 2001’s figure of nearly 18 billion euro. This result is all the more remarkable because it 
was achieved despite  negative cyclical developments. Once again, domestic retail banking  was the 
mainstay of profitability. 
1.1 
Slower economic growth and high equity market volatility formed the backdrop for 
2002 
Although  the  world  economy  picked  up  slightly  in  2002,  expanding  by  3.0 per  cent  compared  with 
2.3 per cent in 2001, it was much more sluggish than in 2000, when growth came in at 4.7 per cent. 
Furthermore, in the euro area, GDP growth continued to slow, decelerating from 3.4 per cent in 2000 
to 1.4 per cent in 2001 and 0.8 per cent in 2002. 
As in 2001, France’s economy grew slightly faster than average, with 1.2 per cent. 
Sector-related problems fostered a climate of uncertainty that affected growth. They resulted chiefly 
from the bursting of the Internet bubble, developments in telecommunications, transport and energy, 
and entrenched geopolitical tensions in Latin America and the Middle East. This naturally impacted the 
financial health of the corporate sector, and business failure rates rose to levels comparable to those 
of the early 1990s. 
These  economic  trends,  combined  with  the  discovery  of  egregious  shortcomings  in  corporate 
governance, fuelled misgivings about stockmarkets. And amid a global bear market, equity  volatility 
soared. Consequently, as in 2001, capital market business in the broad sense of the term - securities, 
mergers and acquisitions, and the fees and commissions charged for these activities - were adversely 
affected. 
1.2 
Despite an unfavourable climate in 2002, French credit institutions reported net 
income on a par with 2001. 
French credit institutions reported net income of 17.7 billion euro in 2002, the same as in 2001. This 
works out to a return on equity of 9.4 per cent for the industry as a whole. As in previous years, these 
results were largely attributable to retail banking business in France. Consumer credit and home loans 
continued  to  grow,  along  with  specialised  financial  services.  In  addition,  falling  interest  rates  had  a 
positive effect on interbank business - which in France has always been significant - and drove down 
the net expense on these transactions. By contrast, capital market activities and asset management 
were  hit  by  financial  market  turbulence,  giving  rise  to  substantial  provisions  in  some  cases. 
Furthermore, for the second year running, fees and commissions contracted as a percentage of net 
banking income, falling to 26 per cent compared with nearly 30 per cent in 2000. 
1.3 
Diversification has helped French credit institutions to offset negative cyclical trends 
As in previous years, conventional retail banking activities cushioned the negative impact of trends in 
investment banking and asset management in 2002. On the international front, too, retail banking was 
a major avenue of development for leading French banks. 
It must be stressed, however, that the consolidated accounts of France’s largest banks were slightly 
less positive in 2002, even though the overall situation was satisfactory. In this regard, the dollar-euro 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 1
 exchange rate had an impact on the foreign activities of these banks, denominated in euros,  which 
were also exposed to the negative earnings momentum of subsidiaries specialising in equity-related 
businesses. 
2. 
French banks must buttress the elements that have allowed them to withstand 
cyclical contingencies for the past few years 
In addition to diversifying their business lines - and I am pleased to note that securities analysts are 
now taking this factor into account when assessing different banking industries - French banks have 
improved their capacity to withstand cyclical contingencies. That ability must naturally be maintained 
and strengthened. 
2.1 
French banks used the healthy profits of the late 1990s to strengthen their capital 
base 
French  credit  institutions  have  entered  the  cyclical  downswing  on  a  sounder  financial  footing.  To 
illustrate  that  point,  a  review  of  the  French  banking  system  since  the  late  1960s  is  included  in  the 
appendixes  to  this  Annual  Report.  Book  capital  is  now  equivalent  to  5.2  per  cent  of  total  assets, 
compared with 4.2 per cent in the mid-1990s. The Commission Bancaire is at pains to ensure that all 
French banks - small and large - build up their capital gradually but steadily until it well exceeds the 
regulatory minimum. Furthermore, provision cover for doubtful loans now stands at 60.4 per cent. The 
industry must pursue this prudential policy. In particular, as we have been urging for several years, it 
must capitalise on the progress made in future risk analysis, based on statistical databases and stress 
testing, to adopt a more forward-looking provisioning policy. This has already been accomplished in 
several  areas  of  sectoral  or  geographical  risk.  That  being  said,  we  firmly  believe  that  international 
accounting standards should move in this direction, fostering the widespread use of forward-looking 
provisions and thereby contributing immensely to financial stability. 
In  a  context  of  economic  crisis,  the  constant  strengthening  of  French  credit  institutions’  financial 
structure gives them an appreciable safety margin, which could also allow them to play a part in the 
consolidation of Europe’s financial industry. 
Priority has rightly been placed on controlling risks and ordinary profitability 
2.2 
The other fundamental elements that contribute to the resilience of French banks’ earnings are risk 
management and control over operating conditions. 
As you know, the Commission Bancaire places a premium on ensuring that French banks, and credit 
institutions in general, generate satisfactory profits at operating level. Gross operating income is the 
first  fall-back  -  before  regulatory  capital  -  for  satisfying  provisioning  requirements,  which  naturally 
become more acute when economic conditions turn down. Accordingly, final operating margins must 
be sufficiently wide. This is also essential so that banks can tap the markets, at optimal cost and with 
sufficient independence, for the financing they need to develop and to secure their future. To that end, 
the Commission Bancaire makes sure that cost-to-income ratios, which measure operating expenses 
as  a  percentage  of  overall  operating  profit,  are  not  excessive.  Spontaneous  action  by  banks 
themselves has naturally been crucial in this respect. 
This trend must continue. The same applies to efforts to improve the selection, monitoring and control 
of  risk.  Thanks  partly  to  those  efforts,  it  has  been  possible  to  confine  loss-risk  and  provisioning 
requirements to securities portfolios and capital market business in general, as well as to some large 
corporate loans, particularly in the USA. Further improvements in internal controls, at the instigation of 
the Commission Bancaire, are naturally of major importance. 
When the economic and financial environment is dominated by uncertainty, the only cogent strategy is 
to reduce the factors that produce risk. Apparently there is room for further improvement in areas such 
as the spreading of credit risk. Furthermore, stricter internal controls could be applied to capital market 
intermediation and to the management of specific factors such as operating risk. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2003
 3. 
With tighter control over processes, information systems, operations and risk, French 
credit institutions should be able to cope with future developments 
Aside from the cyclical aspects I have just mentioned, the short-term outlook is characterised by both 
the increasing interplay between the financial and non-financial spheres, owing to the development of 
new  risk-transfer  instruments,  and  by  closer  harmonisation  of  the  rules  applicable  to  different 
economic agents. 
3.1 
Careful attention must be paid to the characteristics and consequences of risk 
transfer transactions 
Credit derivatives, and products and techniques like securitisation that produce similar results, are a 
means  of  reducing  the  loan-loss  exposure  of  credit  institutions,  which  are  net  risk-sellers.  These 
instruments can be useful for mitigating risk exposure, provided naturally that banks act as protection 
buyers. However, the characteristics and consequences of the development of these products must be 
closely  scrutinised,  both  by  credit  institutions  operating  in  these  markets  and  by  the  authorities 
responsible  for  maintaining  financial  stability.  Institutions  must  pay  particular  attention  to  the  real 
impact  of  risk  transfer.  They  must  also  keep  close  watch  on  the  resulting  counterparty  risk  that 
attaches to the protection  seller. The question of risk transfer is also under scrutiny because of the 
treatment of the special purpose vehicles to which assets are sold. On this point, the accounting rules 
currently  under  review  at  the  international  level  seem  to  focus  quite  rightly  on  the  reality  of  risk 
transfer. 
Credit institutions must therefore analyse this criterion in greater detail. The issue is also of interest to 
the  authorities  responsible  for  financial  stability.  As  standardised  risk-transfer  instruments  develop, 
they  are  likely  to  come  into  wider  use.  So  far,  market  participants  have  not  properly  identified  or 
analysed the likely knock-on effects, whether direct or indirect. For this reason, there is a vital need for 
improvements in the prudential reporting and market transparency of these transactions; there is also 
a  need  for  greater  harmonisation  of  the  rules  and  regulations  applicable  to  institutions  in  different 
countries and to different types of company. The aim should be to record the risk where it is actually 
borne, both economically and financially. In addition, the authorities responsible for different financial 
sectors must coordinate their efforts to jointly identify where risks lie and to measure their extent. The 
Banque de France and the Commission Bancaire are working to that end with their counterparts in the 
insurance industry and the securities markets. 
The future solvency ratio will better reflect the economic realities of banking risk 
3.2 
The finishing touches are being put to the solvency  ratio, due to come into force in 2006. The new 
ratio will cover a broad spectrum of activities and risks, based on an approach tailored to the degree of 
sophistication  of  financial  market  participants,  both  in  the  G10  and  beyond.  From  a  prudential 
standpoint,  the  ratio  will  capitalise  on  the  progress  already  made  in  improving  risk  supervision  and 
control, while making it easier to compare methods at the international level. Accordingly, it is clearly 
important that credit institutions should actively pursue the work they have done so far. In this respect, 
I think it is safe to say that French banks operating in the international arena are making every effort to 
ready themselves for 2006. 
3.3 
New accounting standards should foster international harmonisation and promote 
greater financial transparency 
The introduction of new accounting standards is a major undertaking for companies in general and for 
credit institutions in particular. The aim of this project is highly ambitious, namely to arrive at worldwide 
standards  that  can  improve  financial  security  and  accounting  transparency.  This  is  necessary  to 
restore confidence in financial markets. At the internal level, credit institutions must quickly adapt their 
information systems to these new requirements. However, there are in-depth discussions at present 
about the draft standards applicable to financial instruments. We have taken part in these discussions 
and advocated caution, in particular, in view of the strong temptation to give precedence to the mark-
to-market and mark-to-model approaches, which are more sensitive to calculation parameters than to 
the  actual  situation  of  the  reporting  entity,  with  the  result  that  earnings  and  equity  likely  to  become 
abnormally volatile. I hope that the outcome of these discussions will lead to accounting procedures 
that take into consideration the realities of credit institutions’ operations and business practices. 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 3
 As  you  are  aware,  the  quality  of  the  accounting  rules  applicable  by  banks  is  of  fundamental 
importance  for  supervisors.  Moreover,  the  appendixes  to  this  Annual  Report  include  a  study  of  the 
prudential consequences of the international accounting standards that will apply in Europe from 2005 
onwards. 
 In  sum,  French  credit  institutions  in  2002  amply  displayed  their  ability  to  withstand  cyclical 
contingencies. Improvements can still be made in terms of risk spreading and surveillance. This is one 
of the factors to which the Commission Bancaire will play close attention as banks prepare and phase 
in information systems ahead of the introduction of Basel 2 and new accounting standards. 
In addition to the two studies I have already mentioned, the appendices of the Annual Report include a 
review  of  risk management  in  financial  conglomerates.  Let me  also mention  that  a  summary  of  the 
Commission Bancaire’s judicial decisions is being published at the same time as the Annual Report. 
This first edition will be updated yearly. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2003
