Svein Gjedrem: The monetary policy response to the economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the  Mjłs 
regional business seminar, Hamar, 21 May 2003.  
The  address  is  based  on  previous  speeches  and  on  the  assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank(cid:146)s  press 
conference following the monetary policy meeting on 30 April. Please note that the text below may differ slightly 
from the actual presentation.  
The Charts in pdf can be found on the Norges Bank(cid:146)s website. 
 The  operational  objective  of  monetary  policy  as  defined  by  the  Government  is  inflation  of  close  to 
2‰ per cent over time.  
Norges Bank sets the interest rate so that future inflation will be equal to the inflation target of 2‰ per 
cent.  The  interest  rate  reductions  last  winter  and  this  spring  were  a  response  to  changes  in  the 
inflation  outlook  as  a  result  of  slower  global  economic  growth  and  a  sharp  decline  in  international 
interest rates. In addition, the Norwegian business sector is feeling the effects of the high Norwegian 
cost  level.  Growth  in  domestic  demand  has  also  slowed.  Household  purchasing  power  has  been 
reduced as a result of higher electricity prices. The weak prospects at home and abroad are in turn 
having an impact on the Norwegian labour market and the outlook for wage growth and inflation in the 
years ahead. Even though the krone has depreciated this year, it is still fairly strong, contributing to a 
fall in prices for imported goods and services.  
The inflation target provides economic agents with  an anchor for their decisions concerning saving, 
investment, budgets and wages. Households, businesses, public entities, employees and employers 
can base decisions on the assumption that inflation in Norway will be 2‰ per cent over time.  
The inflation target is a vehicle for allowing monetary policy to stabilise developments in output and 
employment. This intention is also expressed in the Regulation on Monetary Policy. High demand for 
goods and services and labour shortages normally point to higher inflation. When interest rates are 
increased, demand falls and inflation is kept at bay. When demand is low and unemployment rises, 
inflation will tend to slow. Interest rates will then be reduced.  
The mandate implies that the interest rate must be adapted to the outlook for the Norwegian economy. 
If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2‰ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest 
rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2‰ per cent with unchanged interest 
rates, the interest rate will be reduced. This orientation of monetary policy will normally also contribute 
to stabilising output and employment.  
The impact of monetary policy occurs with considerable and variable lags. The current inflation rate 
does not therefore provide sufficient information to determine the level at which interest rates should 
be set now. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will 
occur within two years. Two years is thus a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target.  
The interest rate influences inflation indirectly via domestic demand for goods and services and via its 
effect on the exchange rate. When interest rates rise, it becomes more profitable for households to 
save,  and  consumption  will  therefore  be  postponed.  Similarly,  borrowing  becomes more  expensive, 
and investment will decline as a result. Lower demand then curbs the rise in prices and wages. Higher 
interest  rates  make  it  more  attractive  to  invest  in  NOK  and  borrow  in  foreign  currency.  Therefore, 
higher  interest  rates  normally  lead  to  an  appreciation  of  the  krone.  This  makes  imported  goods 
cheaper.  In  addition,  a  stronger  krone  reduces  activity,  profitability  and  the  ability  to  pay  in  the 
internationally exposed sector.  
Major economies such as the US, Germany and France are struggling with stagnation and fears of 
recession. Sluggish developments have led many countries to set very low interest rates in an attempt 
to stimulate growth.  
The business cycles in Norway and other countries have been desynchronised. While the turnaround 
abroad took place two years ago, the Norwegian economy continued to show a high level of activity. 
Towards the end of the upturn, the economy was facing labour shortages, higher wage growth and a 
sharp increase in  household consumption  and debt. Interest rates had to be kept at a  high  level in 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 1
Norway.  This  led  to  a  widening  of  the  interest  rate  differential  against  other  countries.  The  main 
explanation for the wide interest rate differential is that interest rates abroad are at a historically low 
level.  
Business cycles have also diverged in other ways. The turnaround abroad, which started in the US in 
2000, seems to have been related in particular to overinvestment in the business sector, exaggerated 
expectations  concerning  future  earnings  and  equity  market  bubbles  that  burst.  There  have  been 
examples of this in Norway too, and the Norwegian economy has over time been influenced by weak 
external  developments. However, other factors seem to have  been more instrumental in generating 
the turnaround in the Norwegian economy. The high rate of economic expansion is now beginning to 
ebb  away  as  a  result  of  self-regulating  mechanisms  and  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy  following 
overheating in the labour market. Wages and costs rose sharply in Norway but more moderately in 
other countries, even during the period of strong growth in the second half of the 1990s.  
In the course of the autumn and winter, it became apparent that developments in the global economy 
are weaker than we and many others had expected. Many central banks have responded by reducing 
interest rates further. Interest rates in the US, Europe and Japan are unusually low. Interest rates in 
the US have not been at such a low level since the 1960s.  
In  the  last  half  of  the  1990s,  when  both  Japan  and  Europe  experienced  sluggish  growth,  the  US 
functioned as a global growth engine. This period of strong growth in the US peaked in 2000, and the 
following rapid deterioration in the economy prompted the Federal Reserve to reduce the interest rate 
from 6‰ per cent in May 2000 to today(cid:146)s record low 1… per cent. Weak developments are reflected in 
expectations  of  low  interest  rates  ahead.  Interest  rate  expectations  in  the  US  have  been  lowered 
considerably since summer 2002. In the summer, market participants expected interest rates to rise 
fairly rapidly. In the autumn, there were expectations of a gradual increase in interest rates. Now, the 
federal funds rate is expected to remain below 1… per cent throughout 2003.  
Expectations concerning future interest rates are also considerably lower now in Europe.  
The period of strong economic expansion in the US was driven by strong growth in investment. With 
low interest rates, households had less incentive to save in banks (and they chose instead to invest in 
the equity market). At the same time, costs related to corporate investment were reduced, leading to a 
sharp rise in lending and credit-driven investment growth. This resulted in over-capacity, particularly 
perhaps in the telecommunications and IT sectors. With the absence of accelerating inflation, the level 
of activity  in the economy  remained high, and  low  interest rates at the end of the 1990s may have 
contributed  to  maintaining  a  high  level  of  investment.  When  share  prices  fell  in  autumn  2000  and 
spring 2001, investment came to a halt. Investment as a share of output and demand is now lower 
than the average for the past 20 years, but now appears to be stabilising. It may therefore take some 
time before the turnaround occurs and investment picks up again.  
Strong investment growth has contributed to a build-up of overcapacity in US manufacturing. Capacity 
utilisation in manufacturing is low.1 Low capacity utilisation also reflects the overinvestment that took 
place at the end of the expansionary period.  
The household saving ratio has picked up somewhat since 2000, probably as a result of the decline in 
the equity market - although it is still low. Similarly, the federal government budget deficit - as a result 
of  expenditure  in  connection  with  war  combined  with  substantial  tax  reductions  -  will  increase.  The 
current  account  deficit  in  the  last  quarter  of  2002  was  equivalent  to  5…  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  low 
saving  ratio  and  the  substantial  current  account  deficit  has  contributed  to  a  depreciation  of  the  US 
dollar.  
Conditions in the US today are more conducive to growth than they were six months or a year ago. 
The low interest rate will support an increase in both consumption and investment. Corporate profits 
and financial balances have improved. Companies(cid:146) liquidity is solid. At the same time, however, it is 
uncertain how far shortfalls in corporate pension schemes2 will weaken growth impulses. And with low 
capacity utilisation, it may take time before investment gains momentum.  
                                                      
1   72.9 per cent in March (cid:150) against a 30-year average of 80.2 per cent 1972-2003. 
2 Private defined-benefit pension schemes are estimated at approximately 3 per cent of GDP. Estimate by the Pension Benefit 
Guaranty Corporation, referred to in The Economist, May 2003.  
2 
 BIS Review 23/2003
As mentioned earlier, the driving forces behind the Norwegian business cycle have differed from those 
in  other  countries.  In  Norway,  the  business  cycle  has  followed  a  course  more  similar  to  previous 
fluctuations, with a sharp rise in household demand, labour shortages and strong wage growth.  
Measured in a common currency, labour costs for Norwegian industrial workers have increased by a 
total of 19 per cent more than was the case for our trading partners in the period 1996-2002 (13 per 
cent due to wage growth and 6 per cent due to the appreciation of the krone). In the years around the 
millennium, the depreciation of the krone veiled the underlying deterioration in competitiveness. In May 
2000, the krone exchange rate reached its lowest level in six years. In the subsequent period up to 
end-2002,  the  krone  appreciated,  and  the  effects  of  high  wage  growth  have  gradually  come  into 
evidence in company accounts.  
High labour costs measured in a common currency have weakened profitability in the business sector. 
This  is  the  reason  for  the  current  cost  cuts,  the  decline  in  employment  and  the  increase  in 
unemployment.  
For  a  long  time,  a  stable  exchange  rate  and  the  level  of  cost  inflation  among  our  trading  partners 
provided  an  anchor  for  wage  determination  in  Norway.  In  order  to  maintain  competitiveness,  wage 
growth in Norway had to be on a par with that of trading partners. Over time, growth in real wages 
must  be  consistent  with  growth  in  labour  productivity.  An  inflation  target  of  2‰  per  cent  and  trend 
productivity growth of around 2 per cent, according to updated national accounts figures, imply annual 
nominal  wage  growth  of  about  4‰  per  cent.  These  figures  are  consistent  with  developments  in  the 
1990s, when wage growth averaged 4‰ per cent. This resulted in an inflation rate of 2‰ per cent. The 
krone exchange rate was stable.  
The output gap shows the difference between actual production (GDP) and trend growth - estimated at 
close to 2.5 per cent in Norway. At the beginning of the 1990s, the economy was in a deep recession. 
Production  was  well  below  capacity.  When  growth  in  the  economy  picked  up,  capacity  utilisation 
increased. The output gap closed around 1996. From then on, costs increased and the rise in prices 
for goods and services produced for the Norwegian market accelerated. The upturn peaked in 1997, 
with GDP growth approaching 5 per cent.  The pace of such a strong upturn could not be sustained. In 
1997 and 1998 the economy shifted from an upturn with high growth rates to an expansion with lower 
growth but low unemployment, labour shortages in many sectors and strong growth in labour costs.  
The period of strong expansion has ebbed away in the course of the past year. Winter 2002 marked 
the  turnaround  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Growth  in  the  mainland  economy  is  now  lower. 
Unemployment  is  approaching  the  average  for  the  1990s.  Industrial  leaders  are  pessimistic. 
Companies report a decline in production, employment and orders for both the export and domestic 
markets.  Many  companies  have  relocated  or  have  plans  to  relocate  all  or  some  of  their  production 
operations abroad. In particular, enterprises producing capital goods are experiencing problems.  
The number of bankruptcies has increased sharply. The number of bankruptcy petitions is the highest 
in nine years. If we disregard personal bankruptcies, there has been an increase of 32 per cent from 
the first quarter of 2002 to the first quarter of 2003 - 200 more than a year ago. The largest increase in 
the first quarter is in retail trade and the property management and commercial services sector, while 
manufacturing and the construction sector accounted for the largest increase in the previous quarter. 
The number of bankruptcies increased in all counties compared with 2002, with the sharpest increase 
in Hordaland, Buskerud and Oslo (161, 111 and 18  per cent respectively from 2001 to 2002). Oslo 
accounted for most bankruptcy petitions, with 249 in the first quarter.  
In autumn 2002, Norges Bank established a regional network as a tool to gauge the level of activity in 
the  Norwegian  economy.  The  network  consists  of  companies,  organisations  and  municipalities 
throughout  Norway.  In  the  two  contact  rounds  in  connection  with  Inflation  Report  1/03,  discussions 
were  held  with  440  contacts.  We  will  be  having  six  rounds  of  talks  each  year  with  business  and 
community leaders concerning financial developments in their enterprises and industries, with about 
200  visits  in  each  round.  The  selection  of  contacts  represents  the  production  side  of  the  economy, 
both industry-wise and geographically. In the course of 2003, the number of contacts associated with 
the  network  will  rise  to  about  1000  persons,  who  will  be  contacted  once  or  twice  a  year. 
(cid:216)stlandsforskningen is responsible for the network and conducts contact meetings in Hedmark county.  
Our assessments are based primarily on official statistics, but because of the time lag involved and 
revisions  of  these  statistics,  supplementary  information  from  other  sources  is  useful.  The  regional 
network provides up-to-date information on the state of the Norwegian economy. Regular talks with 
local  business  and  community  leaders  provide  information  that  can  supplement  available  official 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 3
statistics.  Moreover,  we  obtain  supplementary  information  about  areas  not  covered  by  official 
statistical sources. We also learn which issues are of particular concern to enterprises.  
Region Inland seems to have felt the impact of the downturn to a lesser extent than other parts of the 
country.  Developments  in  domestic  manufacturing  are  approximately  in  step  with  domestic 
consumption.  The  construction  industry  is  showing  a  positive  trend  in  the  south-eastern  region, 
primarily due to public building projects, while western Oppland is experiencing weaker activity. On the 
whole,  enterprises  providing  services  to  the  household  sector  are  faring  better  than  those  oriented 
towards the business sector, primarily  due to  weak developments for customers in the construction 
industry,  corporate  customers  that  are  in  competition  with  foreign  companies  or  dependent  on 
customers in these categories. Employment is stable, but many enterprises, particularly in the public 
sector and the construction industry want to downsize in response to higher costs, lower budgets or as 
part  of  general,  planned  workforce  cutbacks.  Developments  in  Raufoss  may  have  a  considerable 
impact on the local community. Pay increases are expected to be considerably lower in 2003 than in 
2002. Wage growth is highest in the public sector.  
There are wide regional variations in unemployment. At end-April, 3.2 per cent of the labour force in 
Hedmark and 2.9 per cent in Oppland had registered as unemployed. This is well below the national 
average of 3.9 per cent.  
The increase in unemployment on a national basis in 2002 primarily occurred in the service industries. 
In  January,  manufacturing  took  over  the  lead  as  the  industry  with  the  highest  increase  in 
unemployment. Manufacturing unemployment is now 3700 higher than a year ago.  
Agriculture and forestry account for a larger share of employment in Hedmark than in other counties. 
Because of the large tracts of forest in this county, forestry is a particularly important sector. The wood 
and wood products industry accounts for about a fourth of manufacturing employment. As in the rest of 
the country, the public sector and parts of the private service sector are important for employment in 
Hedmark. Business and financial services account for a smaller share than the national average.  
In spite of interest rate cuts and a stimulatory government budget, overall economic policy has been 
tight as a result of the strong krone.  
The depreciation of the krone exchange rate since January and the reduction in the interest rate have, 
however,  contributed  to  an  easing  of  monetary  policy.  In  the  Inflation  Report,  we  presented  two 
alternative scenarios for the Norwegian economy. In the baseline scenario, where the interest rate is 
held constant at 5‰ per cent and the krone exchange rate at the average for the past month, mainland 
GDP is projected to increase by 1… per cent this year and 2 per cent next year. This is lower than 
what  is  considered  the  long-term  growth  potential  in  the  economy.  In  2005,  growth  is  projected  at 
2… per cent. An alternative scenario,  which  incorporates monetary policy easing in line  with market 
expectations - as they were then, points to higher growth over time.  
The rise in prices for goods and services produced in Norway is being influenced by markedly higher 
wage growth in Norway relative to trading partners. Wage growth moved up further last year, even in 
industries where profitability had weakened considerably. A more moderate rise since last summer is 
related in part to lower air transport prices (increased competition between airlines) and a slower rise 
in house rents. The rise in prices for imported consumer goods has been pushed down by the strong 
krone exchange rate. The shift in clothing imports from high-cost countries to Asia and Eastern Europe 
has also contributed.  
In  the  near  term,  the  appreciation  of  the  krone  over  the  past  two  years  will  be  reflected  in  the 
underlying rise in prices. Subsequent developments will partly depend on developments in the global 
economy, the effects on the business sector of the high cost level, the krone exchange rate and how 
changes in the exchange rate feed through to consumer prices in Norway.  
In the baseline scenario presented in the Inflation Report, where the interest rate is held constant at 
5‰ per cent and the krone exchange rate at the average for the past month, inflation is projected to 
remain below 2‰ per cent over the forecast horizon. The alternative scenario, incorporating monetary 
policy  easing  in  line  with  market  expectations,  points  to  inflation  above  the  target  at  the  two-year 
horizon.  
Norges Bank has reduced the sight deposit rate from 7 to 5 per cent since 11 December last year. A 
lower interest rate differential has been followed by a weaker krone exchange rate. The lower interest 
rate and weaker krone have both contributed to a more expansionary monetary policy.  
4 
 BIS Review 23/2003
The last interest rate reduction reflected expectations of low inflation as a result of the strong krone 
and  low  international  price  inflation.  Global  economic  developments  are  still  sluggish.  Low  interest 
rates  and  tax  cuts  are  being  used  in  a  number  of  countries  to  sustain  activity.  It  is  uncertain  when 
economic growth will become self-driven. Since the Inflation Report was presented on 5 March, key 
rates have been reduced in the euro area, Sweden, Denmark and New Zealand. Growth is also slow 
in the Norwegian economy. Developments in parts of the business sector are marked by a high cost 
level, low profitability and the global downturn. Investment may be lower than projected in the Inflation 
Report.  
On the whole, developments over the past few weeks point to a more moderate rise in prices in the 
period ahead. Norges Bank reduced its sight deposit rate by ‰ percentage point to 5 per cent on 30 
April.  According  to  Norges  Bank(cid:146)s  overall  assessment,  with  an  interest  rate  of  5.0  per  cent,  the 
probability that inflation two years ahead will be lower than 2‰ per cent is greater than the probability 
that it will be higher.  
BIS Review 23/2003 
 5
