 Otmar Issing: Monetary and financial stability - is there a trade-off? 
Speech by Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  Conference  on  “Monetary  Stability,  Financial  Stability  and  the  Business  Cycle”,  Bank  for 
International Settlements, Basel, 28-29 March 2003. 
The references for the speech can be found on the European Central Bank’s website. 
 The question whether there is a trade-off between monetary and financial stability has been one of the 
most interesting areas of research for central banking since many years. Researchers at the BIS have 
been regular and valuable contributors to this discussion. Thus I am particularly pleased to have the 
opportunity to convey my ideas on this subject here at the BIS in Basle. 
Problems with definitions 
Let  me  start  by  defining  what  I  mean  with  monetary  and  financial  stability.  Monetary  stability  is  a 
synonym for price stability. Price stability refers to a stable price level or a low level of inflation and not 
to stable individual prices. There is no doubt that changing relative prices play a crucial and beneficial 
part in economic adjustment and decision making by individual actors be it companies or households. 
Part of the costs of inflation can be related to the fact that these relative price signals will be blurred 
more and more the higher the rates of inflation.1 Although there are some issues concerning the most 
relevant composition and measurement of the price index and the optimal horizon over which to define 
price stability, in general the concept is widely accepted and relatively straightforward to handle, both 
conceptually and in central banking practice. An example of an explicit definition of price stability is the 
one  chosen  by  the  ECB,  which  refers  to  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of 
Consumer Prices for the euro area of below 2 percent, which is to be maintained over the medium 
term.2 
The same degree of clarity cannot be claimed with regard to financial stability. A generally accepted 
definition has to my knowledge not yet been provided. Besides the fact that most authors find it more 
convenient  to  define  financial  instability  instead  of  its  positive  counterpart,  a  clear  distinction  exists 
between  definitions,  which  are  based  on  a  system  approach  and  those,  which  are  related  to  the 
volatility  of  directly  observable  financial  variables.  An  example  of  the  former  would  be  a  definition 
broadly following Mishkin (1991), which can be adapted to define financial stability as the prevalence 
of  a  financial  system,  which  is  able  to  ensure  in  a  lasting  way,  and  without  major  disruptions,  an 
efficient  allocation  of  savings  to  investment  opportunities.3  How  close  an  economy  is  to  the  break 
point, exceeding which would impair the efficient allocation of savings, could be labelled the degree of 
financial fragility. This definition is very broad and - in my opinion - intellectually convincing. Due to the 
focus on the resilience of the financial system it would not classify each individual bank failure or each 
large swing  in  an  asset price as proof of financial  instability. To the contrary,  large swings in asset 
prices  possibly  leading  to  some  failures  of  monetary  and  financial  institutions  in  the  aftermath  of  a 
large  real  or  financial  shock  could  even  be  a  sign  of  stability  and  of  self-purifying  powers  of  the 
system,4  as  long  as  an  efficient  financial  intermediation  and  financing  process  can  be  maintained. 
However,  this  definition  contains  little  practical  guidance  for  any  institution  trying  to  maintain  or  to 
contribute  to  the  goal  of  financial  stability.  Other,  less  conceptually  convincing,  but  more  directly 
observable definitions (and therefore frequently used in theoretical work) equate financial stability with 
situations  without  banking  crisis  and  with  asset  price  stability,  including  interest  rate  smoothness, 
                                                      
1   See Gaspar and Smets (2002) and Issing (2000). 
2   See ECB (1999). 
3   A similar definition stressing the shock resilience and the payment processing dimension of financial stability can be found in 
Padoa-Schioppa (2002, p. 21). 
In this context one could think of Schumpeter’s creative destruction and the reduction of moral hazard risks. 
4  
BIS Review 16/2003 
 1
 relative  to  some  benchmark.5  But  such  definitions  are  only  apparently  more  tangible,  because  a 
suitable benchmark would still have to be found.   
The difficulties related to the definition of financial stability reveal more than problems with semantics. 
The central bank’s role in contributing to financial stability is at stake. The definition to some degree 
predetermines the role subscribed to monetary policy in contributing to the goal of financial stability 
and  anticipates  the  answer  to  the  trade-off  question.  For  example  the  system-based  definition  of 
financial stability intuitively and reasonably suggests that prudential supervision should play the first 
violin  in  pursuit  of  financial  stability  objectives.  The  reason  is  that  comparing  the  toolboxes  of 
regulators  and  monetary  policy  authorities  (in  a  narrow  sense),  it  is  clear  that  the  former  have  an 
absolute  advantage  in  caring  for  system  wide  stability  of  financial  institutions,  as  they  are  able  to 
define,  monitor  and  enforce  the  rules  of  the  game.  The  central  bank’s  tools  primarily  influence  the 
money supply, which make price stability a natural objective. Furthermore, the definition illustrates that 
the central bank would not attempt to target asset prices as such, but would monitor them obviously 
with regard to their direct inflationary consequences but also in view of the possible systemic effects. 
Focusing on the impact of asset price instability rather than asset prices itself should reduce, although 
not abolish, moral hazard problems. 
If financial stability instead is defined as, for example, interest rate smoothness, a trade-off with price 
stability does immediately follow from Poole’s result in face of aggregate demand shocks. The central 
bank would have to choose to which degree it prefers to stabilise on the one hand interest rates or on 
the other hand output and inflation.  So the question of defining financial stability has non-negligible 
consequences with regard to the trade-off between monetary and financial stability. 
Price stability and financial stability - the conventional view 
Having  briefly  touched  the  substantive  issue  of  definitions,  let  me  turn  straight  away  to  the 
conventional central banker’s view concerning the trade-off between monetary and financial stability. 
The conventional wisdom is rather sceptical concerning the existence of a trade-off. The reason is that 
inflation is regarded as one of the major factors creating financial instability in the first place. This is in 
line  with  the  view  that  inflation  increases  the  likelihood  of  misperceptions  about  future  return 
possibilities. Inflation can worsen the asymmetric information problem between lenders and borrowers. 
High inflation is always related to high inflation volatility, which adds to the problems of predicting real 
returns. A business cycle boom accompanied by high inflation is traditionally considered as the typical 
environment in which real over-investment and asset price bubbles blossom. Excess liquidity provided 
by the central bank is one of the main factors responsible for the development of inappropriately lax 
lending standards. Credit growth, which is excessive in view of realistic return expectations, is often 
the foundation for financial instability. In other words, stable prices and a monetary policy focused on 
that objective play an important role for stable financial markets. 
Strong  protagonists  of  this  view  even  claim  that  price  stability  is  almost  a  sufficient  condition  for 
financial  stability.6  Others  are  more  careful  and  simply  state  that  price  stability  will  tend  to  promote 
financial stability.7 I think it is difficult to argue against the basic notion of the latter. Price stability and 
financial  stability  tend  to  mutually  reinforce  each  other  in  the  long  run.  This  widespread  view  is 
supported by empirical evidence that many financial crises were caused by major shifts in the price 
level.8 Moreover, historically most banking crises occurred during recessions9 often following periods 
of  high  inflation.  This  is  comforting  for  central  bankers  in  the  sense  that  the  likely  policy  stance  to 
maintain price stability will also be appropriate for the state of the financial system. According to the 
conventional view there is no general trade-off between monetary and financial stability. 
On the other hand we also know that the world is not always as straightforward as we might wish it 
were. We know that financial imbalances can build up even in an environment of stable prices - think 
                                                      
5   See e.g. Goodfriend (1987) or Cukierman (1990). 
6   Schwartz (1995). 
7   Bordo and Wheelock (1998). 
8  Bordo, Dueker and Wheelock (2000). 
9   Gorton (1988),  Calomiris and Gorton (1991). 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2003
 for example of the US in the 1920s and 1990s and Japan in the late 1980s. Thus we must be aware 
that price stability is not a sufficient condition for financial stability.  
However, just as the concrete definition of financial stability is important for the precise link of financial 
stability to monetary policy, the choice  of the monetary policy strategy  has implications for financial 
stability. If the central bank has a primary objective to maintain price stability over the medium term, 
simply pursuing an inflation targeting strategy according to an inflation forecast of one or two  years 
horizon  might  not  always  be  the  optimal  policy  strategy.  The  overall  costs  (in  terms  of  a  standard 
central  bank  loss  function  mainly  future  deflation  following  a  financial  crisis)  might  not  receive  the 
appropriate weight in a limited horizon inflation forecast. Truly optimal monetary policy cannot avoid 
that, at times, strains in the financial system might be such that deviations from the desired inflation 
rate during shorter periods of time have to be accepted, in order to preserve price stability over the 
medium to long run.10 The argument here implies, of course, that monetary policy decisions actually 
bear on the state of the financial system and could at the margin even be decisive to prevent the crisis 
and allow the system to recover. 
A second argument leading to the same conclusion stems from risk asymmetries. Given the fact that 
consequences of a systemic financial crisis can be quite substantial, the optimal monetary policy might 
at times chose to err on the side of caution, in order to reduce the probability for a crisis to a very small 
likelihood11. Due to the asymmetries (very low probability of very large loss) involved, actual inflation is 
then likely to exceed expected inflation - and optimally so - for quite some time.  
The  above  argumentation  can  be  used  to  illustrate  why  the  ECB  has  always  stressed  that  its 
stability-oriented monetary policy strategy is more than simple inflation forecast targeting, and it is also 
more robust. The reason is that explicitly focusing on monetary and credit developments in order to 
form a judgement on consumer price inflation  in the  medium to long run, forces the  ECB to take a 
sufficiently forward looking perspective. For example, Borio, English and Filardo (2003, p. 43) explicitly 
recognise  the  pre-emptive  role  of  the  first  pillar  of  the  ECB  monetary  policy  strategy.  This  longer 
perspective highlights risks to price stability stemming from financial imbalances. As an important side 
effect, the optimal price stability-oriented policy reaction based on monetary and credit developments 
is  likely  to  diminish  financial  imbalances.  The  latter  claim  rests  on  the  observation  of  a  positive 
correlation  between  credit  growth  and  bubble  developments.  Policy  would  be  tightened  in  times  of 
rising and loosened in times of unwinding financial imbalances.12 
At  this  point  it  is  worth  stressing  that  according  to  the  previous  arguments  considering  financial 
imbalances  -  from  time  to  time  -  may  lead  to  a  different  monetary  policy  stance  than  fixed-horizon 
inflation targeting, despite the fact that the only objective of the central bank is price stability (defined 
over the appropriate medium term horizon).  
The “new environment” hypothesis 
Interestingly it has recently been suggested that the conventional wisdom that price stability is good for 
financial stability has to be reversed. This  - at least for central bankers of my generation - provocative 
view, has been presented in several very recent BIS research working papers13 but is also spreading 
in the academic world.14 Very first signs of a discussion along these lines can be found in the FOMC 
minutes  of  the  November  13,  1996  meeting,  a  few  weeks  before  Chairman  Greenspan  made  his 
famous “irrational exuberance” speech. During the FOMC meeting Governor Lindsay mentioned being 
preoccupied  by  the  thought  that  the  central  bank’s  success  of keeping  inflation  under  control  could 
trigger a too optimistic outlook on the future course of economic development. Peoples’ false sense of 
security could lead to asset valuations, which could pose problems for the future. Since then additional 
arguments have been forwarded to explain why low and stable inflation can make the financial system 
more vulnerable - and in compliance with language used in BIS research papers I will label this the 
                                                      
10   See Kent and Lowe (1997), Brousseau and Detken (2001). 
11   Bordo and Jeanne (2002) argue one should think of this aspect in terms of an insurance. 
12   See Issing (2002). 
13   See Borio and Lowe (2002) and Borio, English and Filardo (2003). 
14  See Blinder (1999). 
BIS Review 16/2003 
 3
 “new environment” hypothesis in the following.15 The reasons suggested are that for quite some time 
inflationary  pressure  might  not  show  up  in  inflation  itself,  due  to  a)  low  pricing  power  of  firms,  b) 
positive supply side developments and c) well anchored low inflation expectations. It has been argued 
that central banks’ focus on (consumer) price stability  is insufficient  and financial imbalances would 
have to be addressed directly. This direct response could consist of two parts. It would first involve 
trying to avoid (or at least subdue) the building up process of financial imbalances and second - if the 
former was unsuccessful (or insufficient) - to smooth the adverse consequences when imbalances are 
being unwound.  
Policy implications 
I have at previous occasions already stated my doubts that price stability should be added to the list of 
causes triggering financial instability.16 I do not deny the fact that financial fragility can be significant in 
times of low inflation. But the latter statement that low inflation is not a sufficient condition for financial 
stability and the former that low inflation causes financial instability, are worlds apart. Here I would like 
to  focus  on  two  particular  aspects,  which  is  the  trade-off  question  with  respect  to  the  “new 
environment” hypothesis and the related relevance of the problems associated with identifying asset 
price bubbles.17 
In the spirit of Tinbergen if the central bank has one policy instrument, i.e. monetary policy, it can only 
achieve one independent goal, which is price stability. An intuitive division of labour is to assign the 
objective of financial stability to a financial regulatory authority, which sets up a prudential supervisory 
framework. This regulatory authority can but must not be the central bank. In this scenario with two 
authorities following one objective each, none of the authorities would be subject to a policy trade-off, 
as the number of instruments matches the number of objectives. Nevertheless this reasoning cannot 
be used to exclude all conflict situations. In practice central banks’ responsibilities concerning financial 
stability vary a lot. For example, no general financial stability objective can be derived from the Treaty 
or the Statute of the ECB. Nevertheless the ECB has the task to contribute to policies pursued by the 
competent authorities relating to the stability of the financial system [art. 105(5) of the Treaty, art. 3.3 
and 25.1 of the Statute]. In addition it should promote the smooth functioning of payment systems [art. 
105(2) fourth indent of the Treaty, art. 3.1 and 22 of the Statute]. Given the fact that in the long run 
financial stability supports sustainable price stability, it is difficult to deny any central bank’s legitimate 
interest in financial stability. Thus despite no trade-off being possible when financial stability is not a 
primary  objective  of  the  central  bank,  the  separate  allocation  of  objectives  to  institutions  cannot 
exclude situations of short-term conflict, along the lines described in previous paragraphs. 
How does the trade-off discussion relate to the “new environment” hypothesis? Would there exist a 
trade-off between monetary and financial stability? Let us assume for a moment that it is true that low 
and  stable  rates  of  inflation  foster  asset  price  bubbles  for  the  reasons  given  above,  e.g.  due  to 
excessively  optimistic  expectations.  If  we  take  an  extreme  position,  the  existence  of  a  trade-off  will 
imply  that  achieving  less  price  stability  would  generate  more  financial  stability.    Due  to  the  lack  of 
evidence that inflation in general has a beneficial effect on financial stability and quite some evidence 
to the contrary, I regard the existence of such an exploitable trade-off as highly implausible. And to be 
fair,  no  proponent  of  the  ‘new  environment”  view  did  so  far  suggest  that  the  central  bank  should 
purposely increase inflation and inflation volatility. 
The  only  situation  I  can  envisage  where  lower  inflation  could  actually  be  conducive  to  financial 
instability is a period of significant  and  unprecedented disinflation, typically in  times of convergence 
from a state of high to a state of low inflation. Very often simultaneous financial deregulation adds new 
risks as well as opportunities to investment decisions. Although a higher level of debt is sustainable 
with  lower  interest  rates,  unusually  (and  perhaps  only  temporarily)  low  nominal  interest  rates  might 
give rise to the financing of too risky projects, due to the inexperience of both lenders and borrowers in 
a  low-interest-low-inflation  rate  environment  and  due  to  the  fact  that  liquidity  constraints  are 
automatically eased. But the fragility during periods of disinflation is a transitory adjustment problem 
and  would  vanish  as  soon  as  the  economy  gets  accustomed  to  the  new  and  stable  environment.  
                                                      
15  See Borio, English and Filardo (2003). 
16   Issing (2002). 
17   See also Greenspan (2002). 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2003
 Furthermore, in a broader, longer term perspective it is again high inflation which causes the problem. 
Without a preceding period of higher inflation, the economy would not have to go through a potentially 
vulnerable period of disinflation and adaptation to a regime of low inflation in the first place.   
In  general,  though,  a  “new  environment”  economy  would  rather  be  another  example  where  a 
short-term conflict between nearer term price stability and financial stability - rather than an exploitable 
trade-off - could arise. The reason is that an increase in interest rates required to dampen asset price 
inflation,  prevent  over-investment  and  thus  reduce  the  risk  of  a  serious  financial  crisis,  could  come 
along  with  lower  than  desired  near  term  inflation.  Again,  this  short-term  conflict  would  occur  not 
because  financial  stability  should  be  an  independent  general  objective  of  the  central  bank,  but 
because  the  time  horizon,  over  which  the  primary  objective  of  price  stability  should  be  pursued 
includes future - possibly post-crisis - periods. 
The  “new  environment”  short-term  conflict  is  thus  one  where  financial  imbalances  are  considered 
important enough to possibly constitute a long run threat to price stability. To my mind it does not imply 
that the ultimate objective of monetary policy should not be price stability. 
With regard to asset prices any central bank intervention would imply that the  central bank has the 
ability to detect a bubble in real time. I myself have often made the argument that the central bank has 
no comparative advantage over market participants to dare such a judgement.18 It follows that reacting 
to perceived financial imbalances could easily be misleading. It remains true that one can hardly be 
humble enough in judging one’s ability to estimate equilibrium asset prices in general. But in the light 
of the most recent boom and bust phase in equity markets, I would tend to be slightly less pessimistic 
about the possibilities to identify an extreme bubble in real time. There has been ample evidence that 
stock market developments in the late 90s were to a large part unrelated to fundamentals. Of course, 
this information has not been available to central banks alone. But due to the uncertainty related to the 
timing when the bubble will burst, it often is more rewarding for market participants to follow the trend 
than to bet against it. This view is consistent with the recent literature on market efficiency, which finds 
that returns are to some degree predictable, but the horizon, over which this would be exploitable, is 
too long to be sustainable for individual market participants. Thus the central bank might have a role to 
play in providing a noisy but unbiased opinion about equilibrium prices to the public. 
Recently arguments have been forwarded that the uncertainty related to the identification of an asset 
price bubble is not fundamentally different from the uncertainty surrounding other variables, in which 
the central bank bases its policy decisions. In particular, estimates of the output gap rely to a large 
degree  on  very  much  the  same  information  needed  to  identify  a  stock  market  bubble,  which  is 
underlying  productivity  growth  and  the  equilibrium  risk  premium.19  More  provokingly  Cechetti  et  al 
(2003,  p.  440)  recently  claimed  that  “if  you  cannot  estimate  asset  price  misalignments,  you  cannot 
forecast inflation either.” I consider the latter view purposely exaggerated for dramatic effect. But still 
there  is  probably  more  truth  to  it  than  is  commonly  accepted  in  central  banking  circles.  I  would 
therefore  not  completely  disregard  the  possibility  that  situations  of  financial  instability  can  be 
approximately  identified  in  a  relevant  time  horizon  and  that  this  information  should  find  its  way  into 
policy decisions.20  
There  still  remains  the  issue  at  which  level  and  how  strongly  a  central  bank  should  react  to  a 
perceived misalignment of asset prices. The strongest form is to target the asset price level, which is 
considered to be in line with fundamentals. This idea has been rejected - and correctly so -many times 
before.21 Here, I only mention the moral hazard problems and possible indeterminacy of inflation such 
a  policy  would  foster.  A  second  less  interventionist  strategy  would  be  for  the  central  bank  to  lean 
against  the  wind  of  asset  price  changes.  Here  I  must  say  that  I  share  concerns  that  the  monetary 
policy  reaction  necessary  to  prick  a  bubble  in  the  midst  of  an  euphoric  bull  market,  could  create 
immense risks for the real economy, in particular for the more interest sensitive sectors. This is even 
truer, when the central bank suddenly shifts gears, after having been accommodating financial market 
developments  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  A  third  option  would  be  that  the  central  bank  avoids 
accommodating asset price movements, which are deemed to move away from equilibrium. As was 
                                                      
18   See Issing (2002) and Garber (2000). 
19   See Cechetti, Genberg and Wadhwani (2003). 
20   Some first steps in this direction have been provided by Borio and Lowe (2002). 
21   See e.g. Issing (2002). 
BIS Review 16/2003 
 5
 explained  above,  the  ECB  two  pillars  strategy  would  send  a  “warning  signal”  in  cases  when  the 
forecast for consumer price development is benign but monetary and credit aggregates rise strongly. 
In considering monetary policy actions the result of the analysis would at least ask for a more cautious 
approach.  Finally,  as  a  fourth  option,  the  central  bank  could  choose  to  react  mainly  by  means  of 
communication. Communicating its views when asset prices are considered to be out of bound with 
fundamentals could lead market participants to increase their own doubts about the sustainability of 
price developments. 
An example of the latter strategy can be observed during the period of undervaluation of the euro early 
in this millennium.22 ECB representatives issued statements that the euro would have the potential to 
appreciate.  The  Editorials  of  the  Monthly  Bulletins  between  March  2000  and  October  2000  showed 
increasing concern with the divergence of fundamentals and the external value of the euro.23 Although 
the estimation of equilibrium exchange rates is a difficult business as model and parameter uncertainty 
are huge,24 it was evident at the time that such statements were correct. Again also in this case no 
guess on the timing of a trend reversal or on the exact equilibrium level could be made. 
While  exchange  rate  and  asset  price misalignments raise  some  of  the  same  issues,  there  are  also 
some  noteworthy  differences.  In  most  plausible  scenarios,  the  likely  impact  of  exchange  rate 
misalignments  on  economic  developments  of  the  euro  area  is  more  important  than  asset  price 
misalignments.  Our knowledge  concerning  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  changes  is  generally  better 
founded than our understanding of the impact of asset price changes. On the other hand, in extreme 
scenarios the impact of major asset price adjustments could potentially be more harmful for the euro 
area than (even large) exchange rate changes. Thus analysing the likelihood and impact of asset price 
“tail events” remains a major challenge for central bank research.  
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude.  I  started  out  by  discussing  why  defining  financial  stability  is  as  difficult  as  it  is 
important. Namely, it can pre-empt the answer to the trade-off question. A system definition of financial 
stability practically excludes a trade-off between monetary and financial stability. It does so partly by 
promoting a clear assignment of objectives to authorities according to comparative advantages of the 
major instruments in their toolboxes.  
Furthermore, if the central bank employs a medium term horizon for the definition of price stability and 
implies a strategy encompassing a stability-oriented, forward-looking approach, financial imbalances 
will implicitly obtain the attention they deserve.25 This is true even if financial stability is not considered 
a general objective of the central bank and monetary policy aims at maintaining the objective of price 
stability.    This  does  not  rule  out  the  existence  of  a  short-term  conflict.  In  most cases  price  stability 
would  foster  financial  stability.  In  rare  circumstances  though,  a  short-term  conflict  is  possible.  With 
short–term conflict I refer to a situation where it is optimal to deviate from the desired rate of inflation in 
the short-run in order to best maintain price stability over the medium run. Therefore, in the context of 
an appropriate definition of price stability and financial stability and in particular an appropriate concept 
for the horizon to which the policy objective should apply, the conflict disappears. 
The  “new  environment”  view  for  central  banking,  according  to  which  low  inflation  is  detrimental  to 
financial  stability,  in  my  opinion,  does  not  overturn  the  conventional  wisdom  that  in  general  price 
stability fosters financial stability.  
Ironically, there could exist a trade-off between accepting that at times shorter-term deviations from 
the  desired  rate  of  inflation  can  be  optimal  and  acting  accordingly  on  the  one  side  and  the  overall 
credibility of a central bank on the other side. If the previously described optimal policy would lead to a 
prolonged  period  of  deviations  from  the  declared  inflation  objective,  the  long-term  loss  of  inflation 
fighting reputation could outweigh the gains.  Furthermore, any systematic central bank response to 
financial  instability,  which  is  expected  by  financial  market  participants,  will  most  likely  trigger  higher 
                                                      
22   See Gaspar and Issing (2002) concerning the role of the exchange rate for monetary policy  
23   See ECB Monthly Bulletins in March, April, May, September and October 2000. 
24   See Detken et al. (2002), Maeso-Fernandez et al. (2002), ECB (2002).   
25   See also “The Economist, on January 18th, 2003, Economics Focus: Still bubbling, p. 66 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2003
 risk taking. As a consequence the financial system might not become a safer place, and the only result 
would be higher average inflation. Accepting the possibility of a short-term conflict between monetary 
and financial stability must not mean that the moral hazard problem is denied or forgotten.  And finally, 
a  last  reason  for  caution  is  that  temporarily  deviating  from  the  declared  price  stability  objective  for 
financial stability reasons might be difficult to explain to the public. 
In dealing with this latter trade-off, central bankers should be risk-averse with regard to their primary 
objective, as the loss of inflation fighting credibility may weigh heavily. But reputation is also at stake, if 
a  central  bank  is  perceived  as  having  underestimated  or  even  neglected  the  issue  of  financial 
instability. Thus the final conclusion is that there is no easy choice, which is not a surprising result in a 
complex world.  
BIS Review 16/2003 
 7
