 David Dodge: Monetary policy developments in Canada 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Senate  Banking, 
Trade and Commerce Committee, Otttawa, 30 April 2003. 
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee. I would like to start by saying how much 
we  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  meet  with  you  following  the  release  of  the  Bank’s  semi-annual 
Monetary Policy Report. It’s important for us to be able to explain our views on the economy and on 
inflation. 
I’d  like  to  spend  a  few  minutes  summarizing  the  key  points  of  our  most  recent  Report,  which  we 
released last week. But first, I’d like to introduce my colleagues—Deputy Governors Chuck Freedman 
and Pierre Duguay. Chuck will retire in September, after almost 30 years at the Bank. His leadership in 
the areas of monetary policy, financial institutions, and Canada’s clearing and settlement systems has 
been invaluable. We will all miss his expertise, his enthusiasm, and his keen wit and intellect. 
The last time I testified before this committee was in the spring of 2002, because we were unable to 
arrange  our  regular  meeting  last  fall.  You  will  recall  that  following  the  11  September  2001  terrorist 
attacks  in  the  United  States,  we  quickly  and  aggressively  cut  our  policy  interest  rate  to  shore  up 
confidence and support domestic demand. By last spring, evidence had already started to build that 
demand was growing faster than the economy’s production capacity. 
Monetary policy actions must always be forward looking. So, even though demand pressures were not 
yet showing up in prices, we raised our key policy rate three times between April and July 2002. 
By  the  autumn,  inflation  was  on  the  rise.  But  we  refrained  from  raising  interest  rates  because  of 
geopolitical and financial uncertainties, high yield spreads and restricted access to funding for riskier 
corporate borrowers, as well as the expectation of weaker foreign demand for Canadian goods. 
Since then, inflation has been above the 2 per cent target midpoint. The total CPI inflation rate peaked 
at  4.6  per  cent  in  February,  falling  back  somewhat  to  4.3  per  cent  in  March.  The  jump  in  inflation 
reflected  the  sharp  rise  in  oil  and  natural  gas  prices,  increases  in  insurance  premiums,  and  strong 
domestic  demand  that  had  led  to  price  pressures  in  certain  sectors,  such  as  shelter  and  some 
services. 
In  this  environment,  certain  indicators  of  short-term  inflation  expectations  have  edged  up—although 
longer-term expectations remain around 2 per cent. 
Core inflation, which strips out the eight most volatile items in the CPI basket and the effect of changes 
in indirect taxes on the remaining CPI components, is a better indicator of the future trend of inflation. 
It now sits around 3 per cent. But it should fall to about 2 1/2 per cent in the second half of this year, 
and to about 2 per cent by early 2004. 
Total  CPI  inflation  will  continue  to  fluctuate  with  swings  in  crude  oil  prices.  If  these  prices  settle  at 
about  US$25  per  barrel  by  mid-2003—as  futures  prices  suggest—and  if  the  Canadian  dollar  stays 
close to current levels, total CPI inflation will likely fall temporarily below the core rate in the first half of 
2004, before steadying out at a rate close to core. 
In  view  of  the  domestic  inflation  situation  and  the  underlying  momentum  of  domestic  demand,  we 
raised our target overnight rate by 25 basis points on each of our last two policy announcement dates. 
It now stands at 3.25 per cent—still relatively low by historical standards. 
Some of the geopolitical and financial uncertainty we saw last fall has lifted in recent months, and we 
expect  that  it  will  continue  to  recede.  Economic  uncertainty  in  some  regions  of  the  world  is  still  a 
concern. But overall, the risks confronting the world economy now appear to be better balanced than 
last autumn. And business and household confidence should improve by year-end. 
In  Canada,  domestic  demand  has  remained  quite  strong.  But  now  there  is  uncertainty  about  the 
economic impact of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), particularly in the Greater Toronto 
Area.  Second-quarter  economic  growth  will  be  somewhat  weaker  than  we  projected  in  our  latest 
Monetary Policy Report because of SARS. But, while the developments of the past few days suggest 
the worst is behind us, it is still too soon to put a number on the effect of SARS on economic activity. 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 1
 The Canadian economy should strengthen towards the end of 2003, partly thanks to a pickup in U.S. 
economic activity. Average annual growth in Canada is expected to be about 2 1/2 per cent this year. 
During 2004, our economy should expand at a rate above its 3 per cent growth of potential. Therefore, 
most of the small amount of economic slack that is likely to open up this year will have closed by the 
end of 2004. 
For  this  reason,  we  still  believe  that  further  reductions  in  monetary  stimulus  will  be  necessary  over 
time to return inflation to its 2 per cent target and to sustain output levels close to capacity. The timing 
and  pace  of  further  increases  in  the  Bank’s  target  overnight  rate  will  depend  on  the  strength  of 
domestic demand, the evolution of inflation expectations, and the pace of economic expansion in the 
United States and overseas. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2003
