 Hermann Remsperger: Monetary policy - how relevant are other policymakers? 
Welcoming  address  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, to the 5th Bundesbank Spring Conference “Monetary policy: how relevant are 
other policymakers?”, Eltville, 2 May 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I have the pleasure to welcome you to this year’s Bundesbank spring conference on issues concerning 
the relationship and interactions between monetary policy and other policies. 
Regrettably, I have to tell you that the policy lecture to our conference had to be cancelled because 
Ken Rogoff informed us only very recently that he was not able to come. 
The broad spectrum of subjects to be discussed today ranges from theoretical considerations about 
optimal fiscal and monetary policy co-ordination, the role of monetary and fiscal stabilisation policies 
up to empirical evidence on the interaction between monetary and fiscal policies. 
In tomorrow’s sessions we are scheduled to extend our perspective by explicitly taking into account 
the  openness  of  the  economy  and  look  into  the  implication  for  exchange  rates  and  exchange  rate 
regimes in particular. 
With the following remarks I only want to emphasize that the subject of our conference is highly topical 
from the economic policy point of view. However, a part of the subject has been with us for a rather 
long time. 
At any rate it reminds me of my thesis in the 70s. At that time I came to the conclusion that a strictly 
rule-based monetary policy requires discretionary leeway for fiscal policy. 
Meanwhile  many  central  bankers  -  and  I  include  myself  -  plead  for  the  application  of  rules  in  fiscal 
policy.  Such  rules  were  created  by  the  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  the 
European  Union.  I  do  hope  that  there  will  be  sufficient  time  at  our  conference  to  discuss  the 
importance of fiscal rules for monetary policy. 
I have to admit, Ladies and Gentlemen, that when we were planning this conference we did not know 
how much the discussion about the ECB’s monetary strategy would intensify. Now we are right in the 
middle of this discussion, which in my view reflects the first out of three political factors that form the 
background of our conference. 
Why? Well, if you want to talk about the relationship between monetary policy and other policy areas 
not only in an abstract but in a realistic way, then you must have a clear idea of the applied monetary 
policy strategy. 
Price stability 
1. 
You  will  understand  that  I  have  no  intention  to  forecast  the  outcome  of  this  strategy  discussion. 
Nevertheless there are two points on which we can be rather sure. First of all there is no doubt that the 
ECB will stick to its mandate of maintaining price stability. By doing this the ECB contributes towards 
economic  growth.  Monetary  policy  in  the  Euro  area  is  not  in  itself  an  instrument  to  foster  growth. 
Neither is it a means of fine-tuning the economy. 
Due to these limitations of monetary policy other policies must be given a key role as far as economic 
growth and employment are concerned. I will come back to that later again. 
Secondly, I want to emphasize that price stability is at present interpreted symmetrically almost without 
exception. Neither inflationary nor deflationary tendencies are in line with price stability. 
I  am  convinced  that  this  interpretation  is  not  only  important  for  the  isolated  perception  of  monetary 
policy. It also touches the relationship between monetary policy and other policy areas. Therefore, I 
would like to have a closer look at the definition of price stability. 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 1
 The  symmetric  interpretation  calls  for  a  quantification  of  price  stability  with  a  rate  of  inflation  above 
zero,  for  example  a  target  range  between  +1%  and  +2%.  Alternatively,  we  can  also  think  of  not 
quantifying the lower bound explicitly. 
One reason for setting the rate of inflation which is in line with price stability somewhat higher than 
zero is the exaggeration of the “true” inflation rate by the measured change in the price index. I believe 
that the measurement bias in the euro area is not large but positive. 
Irrespective  of  that,  the  risk  of  deflation  -  a  situation  which  is  difficult  to  control  -  requires  a  certain 
safety margin of the “true” inflation rate from the zero line. Such a need for a safety margin results, not 
least, from the fact that nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero. In my view, the interest rate cut 
by the ECB in April 1999 already made it very clear that, in order to prevent deflationary risks, the ECB 
is not targeting a zero inflation rate. 
And I would like to add that the ECB has quite deliberately not centred the definition of price stability 
around zero. Instead, the ECB’s definition of price stability was intended also to take due account of 
the problems that may arise from the measurement bias, from nominal wage rigidities and from the 
zero bound of nominal interest rates. 
But even if the probability of touching the zero bound of nominal interest rates is small for the euro 
area  as  whole,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  deflation  would  have  serious  implications  for  the  real 
economy, the financial system and the economic policy. I take the view that risks of this kind can be 
reduced by preventing a sustained fall of the inflation rate for the euro area as a whole below a safety 
margin of around 1%. 
As regards the upper limit of price stability, I would first of all like to recall that the Governing Council of 
the ECB defined price stability as a medium-term increase in inflation for the euro area of below 2%. 
As the monetary policy of the ECB is geared towards consumer prices for the euro area as a whole, a 
persistent  overshooting  of 
the  participating  countries  requires 
correspondingly lower rates of inflation in the other member states. 
Some experts therefore perceive a risk that an “excessively ambitious” price norm might push some 
countries close to deflation. In their view, the enlargement of monetary union  will tend to make this 
problem even more acute. 
In my view, however, defining price stability by an inflation rate above 2% - as is often suggested on 
account of a lack of convergence within the euro area - would be hardly justifiable. The solution to this 
structural problem has to be found in appropriate measures of adjustment by the countries with higher 
inflation, with the aim of reducing existing differentials. 
That  is,  at  any  rate,  the  objective  to  which  all  the  participants  in  monetary  union  have  committed 
themselves.  There  is  no  reason  to  water  down  that  commitment  at  the  expense  of  the  stability 
objective. 
the  price  norm 
in  some  of 
Economic reforms 
2. 
In my discussion of the ECB’s primary objective I have emphasized that monetary policy in the euro 
area  has  a  narrow  mandate,  which  leads  us  to  the  second  topical  background  factor  of  our 
conference, and by this I mean the urgency for economic policy reforms in Germany. Two are points 
should be considered. 
First, there is no doubt that the efficiency of monetary policy is also dependent on other policy areas. 
In particular I am thinking of fiscal policy, but also of labour market policy. 
And secondly, it seems obvious that the pressure on monetary policy could become very severe, if 
other policy areas do not sufficiently support growth and employment. 
This,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  is  one  of  the  reasons,  why  we  at  the  Bundesbank  keep  calling  for 
reforms in economic policy. 
Seen in that light, it should not have come as a surprise that the current state of the economy and of 
economic policy in Germany prompted us to take the floor in the ongoing debate on how to find “ways 
out  of  the  crisis”.  That  was  precisely  the  title  we  gave  to  a  paper  we  drafted  in  our  Economics 
Department  and  which  we  sent  to  the  government  and  to  parliament  in  February  and  which  we 
published shortly afterwards. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2003
 Our paper does not (and cannot) claim to offer a comprehensive solution for all of Germany’s woes. 
But  it  does  intend  to  go  a  step  beyond  the  somewhat  abstract  calls  for  reforms  and  give  those 
demands more substance. 
An  important  aspect  within  a  comprehensive  approach  to  overcome  Germany’s  problems  is  the 
balance  between  macroeconomic  and  structural  policy  measures.  In  this  respect,  our  message  is 
straightforward.  We  believe  that    traditional  macroeconomic  policies  can  play  only  a  minor  part  in 
solving the problems that lie ahead. 
Therefore, we set out concrete measures, such as cutting subsidies, limiting personnel expenditure, 
along with intensified privatisation and an outsourcing of public tasks to the private sector. 
Another area requiring reform is tax policy. Tax policy must offer a clear and reliable perspective in the 
aftermath  of  the  numerous  measures  and  proposals  which  -  in  some  cases  -  have  produced 
contradictory effects and which have created uncertainty in the past few years. 
The last two steps of the tax reform, which was passed by parliament in 2000, should be implemented 
in 2004 and 2005 as scheduled. If this jeopardises the consolidation course, provision should be made 
for further cuts in spending and tax benefits. 
From a macroeconomic point of view, further cuts in income tax rates would be desirable. However, 
this cannot be envisaged until budget consolidation has been achieved or until there is willingness to 
finance  lower  tax  rates  by  a  further  spending  restraint  or  a  broadening  of  the  tax  base. We  at  the 
Bundesbank proposed specific measures in this respect, such as the abolition of all reduced rates of 
turnover tax. 
In  the  social  security  system  far-reaching  reforms  need  to  be  implemented  in  order  to  reduce 
non-wage labour costs. Social insurance contributions, which are a key element of such costs, are not 
only very high by international standards, but are rising substantially both currently and over the long 
term. 
Besides further steps to liberalise the product markets, to abolish market barriers for new enterprises 
and  to  make  the  education  system  more  effective,  the  most  important  area  concerns  the  labour 
market. 
Shortly  after  our  proposals  were  published,  the  German  chancellor  gave  a  speech  to  parliament 
entitled “Agenda 2010” announcing comprehensive reforms. Of course, I would not dare to claim that 
we initiated the agenda, but some of its key principles are consistent with our paper. 
The reform package contains a number of important measures along these lines. This is particularly 
true with regard to labour market policies. Unemployment assistance will be curtailed, the period for 
claiming unemployment benefits will be shortened, incentives to work in the low-wage sectors will be 
established and dismissal protection rules will be eased. 
We hope that the ongoing reform debate brings about far-reaching results that will strengthen growth 
and employment. I am convinced that many of our reform proposals would also be helpful in achieving 
budgetary consolidation. 
Fiscal consolidation 
3. 
The debate on fiscal consolidation and the Stability and Growth Pact can be viewed as the third part of 
the current backdrop to our conference. 
As you know, the deficit ratio in Germany clearly exceeded the 3% limit last year and is expected to do 
so  again  in  the  current  year.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  seems  quite  obvious  that  scope  for 
discretionary loosening does not exist. 
In  fact,  those  member  states  of  the  EU  with  large  deficits  are  currently  in  a  fiscal  trap;  they  have 
virtually no room for manoeuvre if they do not wish to violate the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability 
and Growth Pact. 
This  state  of  affairs  cannot  be  blamed  on  the  European  treaties,  which  envisage  sufficient  fiscal 
flexibility as long as a balanced budget in underlying terms is achieved. Instead, the main reason for 
this situation is that these countries did not sufficiently consolidate their budgets while their economies 
were performing more favourably. 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 3
 In our view, the relevant European authorities have found an acceptable compromise on this matter. 
Those countries  with budgetary  imbalances  are to reduce their structural  deficits by  at  least  ½%  of 
GDP each year, but otherwise allow the automatic stabilisers to take effect. For Germany, the Ecofin 
Council required a structural consolidation of about 1% this year. 
The main conclusion for Germany is that there is virtually no scope for stimulating fiscal action. The 
government has envisaged a budget “close to balance” in 2006 in line with the Stability and Growth 
Pact. The overall structural deficit ratio stood at almost 3% in 2002. 
Given that a deficit ratio of ½ % of GDP is tolerated and including shortfalls resulting from tax cuts in 
2004  and  2005,  the  structural  consolidation  requirement  stands  at  about  3½  %  of  GDP  within  four 
years. If this is to be achieved solely through the spending side (as it should), nominal spending of 
federal,  regional  and  local  government  has  to  remain  more  or  less  unchanged  between  2003  and 
2006. 
That is an extremely ambitious target - particularly taking into account that the underlying economic 
assumptions are very optimistic. Therefore, additional steps would appear to be necessary in order to 
safeguard the consolidation course. 
Policy mix in Germany 
4. 
Let me now emphasize that some of the issues we are discussing at our conference already have a 
long history. That is especially true of the relationship between monetary policy and fiscal policy. In 
Germany,  there  have  been  widely  differing  combinations  of  the  monetary  policy  regime  on  the  one 
hand and the fiscal policy regime on the other. Allow me to mention a few examples. 
After two major inflations - both of which were driven by excessive public deficits and financed by the 
printing press of the central bank - the main aim of the “Bundesbank Act” in 1957 was to prevent a 
further repetition of inflation. 
The German Parliament agreed on a clear separation between monetary and other economic policy 
areas, which should be safeguarded by the following three principles: first, a clear assignment of the 
policy  goal  of  the  Bundesbank  as  “safeguarding  the  currency”,  second,  formal  independence  from 
Government interventions in monetary policy matters, and third a prohibition of financing the budget by 
means of the central bank. 
However, the historical experience of German monetary and fiscal policy shows that some substantial 
problems remained. Above all there  was a  lack of rules which  prevented excessive  budget  deficits. 
The “golden rule” of public borrowing was not a sufficient protection against the accumulation of debt. 
From the beginning of the 1960s, the welfare state was greatly expanded. 
In  1966,  inflation  rose  to  almost  4%  which  was  very  high  compared  to  previous  years.  The 
Bundesbank tightened monetary policy in order to dampen inflation, while public sector borrowing was 
rising further due to tax reductions and booming Government spending. The need for supportive fiscal 
stabilisation policy was by and large ignored by the Government. 
The economic slowdown in 1966 triggered a budget crisis. The ruling coalition Government could not 
agree on a way to consolidate the budget. In 1967 Germany experienced its first recession. 
At this time German budget rules did not allow for active stabilisation policy which contrasted with the 
increasing demand side-orientation of that period. According to those supporting Keynesian demand 
management, this was a shortcoming which made a reform of budget rules necessary. 
A new article was included into the constitution which laid down that the Federal Government and the 
Governments  of  the  Länder  had  to  take  the  overall  equilibrium  of  the  economy  into  account  when 
setting fiscal policy. 
The so called “Stability and Growth Law” specified that fiscal policy should aim simultaneously at a 
stable price level, a high level of employment and the equilibrium of the balance of payments, while 
enabling a continuous and stable path of economic growth. It was this assignment of goals which led 
to stronger Government activity and an increase in public debt. 
It took only a few years until the key problem with the attempt to fine-tune aggregate demand became 
obvious. It became apparent that fiscal policy programmes tend to lead to a rise in the ratio of public 
spending to GDP over time. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2003
 While at the beginning of the 1960s the public sector share in GDP had amounted to roughly 33%, it 
reached  42%  in  1973.  This  rise  was  mainly  financed  by  additional  borrowing.  The  overheated 
economy reached record levels of inflation, which peaked after the impact of the first oil price shock to 
almost 7% in 1973. 
Crucial for this development was the exchange rate commitment of the Bundesbank under the Bretton 
Woods system and its resulting inability to regain control over monetary and credit expansion. 
After the Bretton Woods system the Bundesbank regained control over domestic monetary expansion. 
Its monetary policy framework was reviewed and adjusted. Eventually this led to a clear assignment of 
policy goals and instruments. 
From a pure monetary perspective the result was encouraging. The Bundesbank got inflation under 
control.  Initially,  however,  fiscal  policy  took  expansionary  measures  in  the  aftermath  of  the  oil  price 
shock. 
At that time it was not generally acknowledged that a high value of public debt could create fears of 
future  tax  increases.  And  such  fears  could  reduce  current  private  spending,  thus  rendering  public 
deficit  spending  ineffective.  A  shift  towards  a  more  sustainable  supply-side-oriented  path  of  public 
finances became necessary. This was realized in the early 1980s. 
The paradigm change in fiscal policy was quite successful: Until the end of the 1980s public spending 
was cut back to a level of 46% of GDP, a major tax reform was implemented and the public sector 
deficit was nearly cut back to balance. 
Before being able to reap the full benefits from these efforts, our economy was confronted with the 
challenge of the German reunification. Mostly due to the huge amounts transferred to the new Länder, 
the public debt ratio rose by 15 percentage points between 1989 and 1995. The tax burden (including 
social security contributions) increased considerably. 
In spite of the budget problems and the expansionary monetary shock resulting from the conversion of 
East German financial assets and  liabilities into D-Mark, monetary  policy successfully defended the 
purchasing power of the currency. 
In summarizing, I  would  like to stress that German monetary  policy  has  been successful in fighting 
inflation  because  politicians  were  wise  enough  to  make  the  Bundesbank  independent.  At  the  same 
time the German experience (along with the experience in many other countries) shows that the lack 
of fiscal rules may lead to ever increasing public debt. 
Hence,  the  institutional  set-up  for  EMU,  which  comprises  not  only  an  independent  ECB  and 
independent national central banks but also the Stability and Growth Pact, can be seen not only as an 
adoption  but  also  as  an  improvement  of  the  German  practice  before  the  introduction  of  the  single 
currency. 
This  approach  should  lead  to  a  more  sustainable  path  of  public  finances  and  will  hopefully  limit 
conflicts  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy.  With  this  hope  I  would  like  to  conclude  my  opening 
remarks. 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 5
