 Y V Reddy: The global economy and financial markets 
Statement  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  Leader  of  the  Indian 
Delegation  to  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee,  at  the  2003  IMF/World  Bank 
Annual Meeting, Dubai, 21 September 2003. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
The global economy and financial markets 
Outlook, risks and policy responses 
There have been several welcome developments in the global environment since we met in last April. 
To our relief, several uncertainties relating to Iraq war, impact of SARS and volatility in oil prices have 
turned  out  to  be  short-term  and  transitory  in  nature.  Hostilities  in  Iraq  have  ended  earlier  than 
expected. Reflecting the cessation of hostilities, oil prices reverted back to lower levels although they 
have  rebounded  somewhat  thereafter.  The  impact  of  SARS  has  also  been  successfully  contained. 
Financial markets, which  were in a state of flux, especially  equity markets, have  also rebounded  in 
many countries. Interest rates in several countries have continued to decline to historically low levels. 
With the receding global risks, financing conditions for the emerging markets have eased considerably 
and spreads for many countries have declined significantly. Despite these favourable developments, 
the  world  economic  outlook  continues  to  be  fragile  and  weighed  down  by  downside  risks.  Labour 
market conditions continue to be soft. Data on industrial production and trade growth indicate marked 
slowdown.  Rise  in  oil  prices  in  the  recent  weeks  is  also  worrisome.  Investment  activity  in  major 
industrial countries is yet to show a decisive turnaround, although it is heartening to note that signs of 
pick-up in growth in the US are discernible, of late. 
During our last meeting in Washington, it was expected that the global recovery could resume in the 
second-half of the year if the war in Iraq was short. While the growth performance of the Asian region, 
the  Middle  East,  CIS  countries,  the  African  countries  and  the  Latin  American  countries  has  shown 
resilience,  in  view  of  the  lack  of  sustained  recovery  in  the  industrialised  countries,  several  new 
uncertainties have arisen. It is not clear as to what extent the US dollar would depreciate and how the 
global economy would adjust to that. It is difficult to say as to how and when global macroeconomic 
imbalances would get corrected. Low inflation combined with weak global recovery has increased the 
risk of deflation in several industrial countries. 
While faster global recovery may be the immediate global concern, there is also a need to address the 
structural  issues  so  as  to  place  the  global  recovery  on  a  sustainable  path.  In  spite  of  large  cross 
currency  movements,  misalignments  continue  to  persist  in  the  face  of  the  continued  global 
imbalances. In  this context, further easing of monetary  policy and stronger structural reforms in the 
euro area have assumed critical importance. Despite the limits set by the Growth and Stability pact on 
the  permissible  extent  of  fiscal  expansion,  cyclical  expansion  may  be  fully  allowed,  at  least,  to 
neutralise the impact of shortfall in revenue realisation in the face of an economic slowdown. If the 
sources of global growth are not diversified across regions and if countries continue to rely on the US 
demand to increase their exports and thereby grow faster, the case for US depreciation would become 
stronger.  Rebalancing  of  growth  dependence,  therefore,  would  be  critical  to  contain  volatility  in  key 
exchange rates. 
Several  emerging  market  economies  have  been  contending  with  the  challenge  arising  from  current 
account surpluses and pressures on the exchange rate to appreciate. Large reserve accumulation by 
some Asian emerging market economies, in a way, reflects their lack of confidence in the international 
financial architecture. The improved reserve position of emerging market economies will surely provide 
(cid:147)self insurance(cid:148), giving the necessary flexibility for exchange rate management. As the duration of the 
global  slowdown  becomes more  prolonged,  fiscal  and  public  debt  problem  of many  countries  could 
intensify further. Fiscal adjustment, though necessary, would have to be weighed carefully and is best 
calibrated with the pace of global recovery. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  several  adverse  developments  including  severe  drought,  uncertain  global 
environment and considerable hardening of oil prices, the Indian economy performed reasonably well 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 during 2002-03. The growth rate of the Indian economy at 4.3 per cent, though lower than expected, 
was  one  of  the  highest  in  the  world.  This  indicates  the  growing  resilience  acquired  by  the  Indian 
economy over the years. With a good monsoon so far this year, a strong recovery in agricultural output 
is  expected.  The  output  for  the  industrial  sector  is  expected  to  be  reinforced  by  the  renewal  of 
agricultural  activity,  the  abiding  strength  of  export  growth  and  the  improved  environment  for  new 
investments as indicated by a surge in the production of capital goods and non-oil imports. Overall, the 
economy  is  expected  to  perform  much  better  in  the  current  year.  The  growth  process  would  be 
facilitated  by  benign  inflationary  conditions,  adequate  liquidity  coupled  with  soft  interest  rates  and 
strong  external  sector.  As  a  result  of  various  structural  reforms,  the  Indian  financial  system  is 
increasingly becoming more sound, stable and efficient. The overall policy environment has fostered 
macroeconomic stability, and generated optimism regarding the medium-term. The main challenge in 
macroeconomic  management  today  is  reducing  the  high  fiscal  deficit  and  an  improvement  in  the 
quality  of  fiscal  adjustment.  The  recent  enactment  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management (FRBM) Act is a step in this direction, which will put in place the institutional structure for 
greater  transparency  in  fiscal  operations  as  well  as  a  phased  decline  in  the  Central  Government(cid:146)s 
borrowings.  This  will  (cid:147)crowd  in(cid:148)  private  sector  investments  for  the  achievement  of  self-sustaining, 
accelerated growth. 
Sri Lanka has entered into a new phase of social and economic revival with the return of peace and a 
wave  of  new  economic  reforms.  Progress  is  being  made  towards  consolidation  of macro  economic 
stability  and  acceleration  of  economic  growth.  Such  policies  are  being  complemented  under  the 
Fund/Bank  supported  PRGF/EFF  and  PRSC  programs.  The  economy  of  Sri  Lanka  is  expected  to 
grow by 6 per cent this year and inflation is on a declining trend. External reserve position has also 
improved. Economic prospects having improved significantly, investor confidence has been growing. 
The approval of the PRGF for SDR 347 million for Bangladesh in June 2003 is a satisfying event this 
year.  The  country  is  expected  to  improve  upon  its  already  better  economic  performance,  continue 
strengthening  of  external  sector  and  make  further  progress  towards  structural  reforms  particularly 
addressed  to  poverty  alleviation.  The  country  has  developed  a  competent  and  laudable  economic 
management. The Fund guidance on reforms in a number of areas has been extremely valuable. 
It is refreshing to see increasing recognition being paid to the non-quantifiable but a critical factor to 
the  Bhutanese  development  goals  viz.,  Gross  National  Happiness  (GNH).  Factoring  GNH,  at  least 
implicitly, as an objective of IFIs, could be explored. 
Importance of the Doha Development Agenda 
As  one  of  the  founding  members  of  the  GATT  (1947)  and  the  WTO  (1995),  India  remains  firmly 
committed towards the multilateral approach to trade relations. India is committed to ensure that the 
sectors in which developing countries enjoy a comparative advantage are adequately opened up to 
international  trade.  The  November 2001  declaration  of  the  Fourth  Ministerial  Conference  in  Doha, 
Qatar, provides the mandate for negotiations on a range of subjects. The progress so far has been 
reviewed  at  the  recently  concluded  fifth  Ministerial  Conference  in  Cancun,  Mexico.  The  conference 
reflected the diversity of views and positions, particularly in relation to agricultural subsidies and the 
Singapore issues. 
We  believe  that  once  the  concerns  of  the  developing  countries  are  adequately  reflected  in  the 
discussions,  it  will  pave  the  way  for  rapid  development  in  multilateral  trading  environment.  In  the 
context of developed countries there is a need for reduction of high tariff and subsidies to agriculture, 
providing effective market access, facilitating trade in services, and, whenever necessary, giving effect 
to  the  clauses  extending  (cid:147)Special  and  Differential  treatment(cid:148)  to  developing  countries  in  the 
implementation  of  these  WTO  Agreements.  There  is  little  doubt  that  potential  gains  from  free  and 
equitable multilateral trading system far outweighs the costs, and, therefore, it is of utmost importance 
that  the  international  community  endeavour  to  reach  a  mutually  agreed  agenda  within  the  WTO 
framework. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
 Strengthening IMF surveillance and promoting international financial stability 
Enhancing economic performance, resilience to crises and financial stability through IMF 
surveillance 
A major initiative towards preventing crisis has been enhancing the effectiveness of surveillance, and 
incorporation of a fresh perspective to the Fund(cid:146)s analysis and policy recommendations. Considerable 
work has already  been done  with a  view  to preventing crisis, including the emphasis on  public and 
external  debt  sustainability  assessment,  analyses  based  on  financial  soundness  indicators  (also 
known  as  Macro-Prudential  Indicators)  and  balance-sheet  weaknesses,  preparation  of  ROSCs  and 
reporting of political economic issues in the staff report. However, several more steps are required to 
improve the efficacy of the surveillance mechanism. First, the vulnerability assessment exercise for the 
emerging market economies needs to be improved. Secondly, early warning system models today are 
far from perfect and suffer from high false-to-signal ratios. 
As  regards  strengthening  of  surveillance,  we  have  come  to  a  stage  when  we  have  all  the  tools 
available,  but  there  are  still  doubts  about  their  effectiveness  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  We  should 
recognize that origins of crises in the past were also in the industrial countries and advanced financial 
centers leading to sudden capital flow reversals. While markets have started to learn to discriminate 
among countries, there is still a long way to go. Therefore, in surveillance, the Fund has a significant 
role  in  building  confidence  of  both  borrowers  and  lenders,  which  is  important  for  an  orderly  market 
behavior. We are indeed happy to note that the Management has proposed an even handed approach 
to  the  Fund(cid:146)s  surveillance  in  this  regard.  Secondly,  the  fundamental  question  relating  to  Fund(cid:146)s 
surveillance is what purpose it serves and to whom it is meant for. The objective is no doubt to identify 
vulnerabilities  and  pre-empt  crises  from  occurring  or  minimizing  severity  of  such  crises,  when  they 
occur.  Some  clarity  and  transparency  about  the  target  of  surveillance  would  be  in  order.  In  this 
respect,  the  Fund  has  to  take  a  view  on  whether  the  Fund(cid:146)s  assessment  is  meant  for  national 
governments in its role as a confidential advisor, or for the market players who in any case rely on 
alternative  avenues  for  assessing  publicly  available  information.  It  needs  to  be  mentioned  that 
immediate  market  reactions  to  sensitive  information  may  have  serious  implications  on  members(cid:146) 
efforts to address a problem in hand or their plans for addressing an impending crisis. Our view is that 
the Fund should preserve its role as a confidential adviser and the Fund(cid:146)s assessment should be to 
help national authorities in reducing the recognition lag and recommending measures that could help 
in  containing  vulnerability.  However,  we  are  not  opposing  the  dissemination  of  relevant  information 
giving due consideration to the specific circumstances that members and the Fund are dealing with. 
The role of the CCL and precautionary arrangements in crisis prevention 
The Contingent Credit Line (CCL) was expected to play a critical role to serve as a precautionary line 
of  defense,  reducing  vulnerability  and  bolstering  investor  confidence  in  eligible  emerging  market 
economies. Unlike other existing Fund facilities, the  objective behind  CCL  was to prevent crises by 
making available adequate liquidity upfront to a member with sound fundamentals so as to deal with 
the  pressure  of  contagion.  CCL,  however,  has  not  been  used  by  any  member  so  far  because  of  a 
number  of  concerns,  including:  (a)  the  entry  problem  -  i.e.  the  fear  that  access  under  CCL  would 
convey a negative signal to the market, (b) the exit problem - i.e. the uncertainty about the withdrawal 
of eligibility, (c) insufficient automaticity, and (d) stringent pre-qualifying norms. The very fact that no 
country  has  so  far  requested  the  Fund  for  using  CCL  resources  suggest  that  it  did  not  serve  the 
intended purpose and it should be allowed to expire in November 2003. While we support the option of 
allowing the facility to expire, however, if there is a distinct possibility of evolving workable strategies in 
the near future, we are willing to go along with a consensus for further review. 
The existing precautionary arrangements could be suitably modified so as to enhance the capacity of 
the members to prevent capital account crises. We suggest that since the objective behind a modified 
precautionary  arrangement  is  to  prevent  a  capital  account  crisis,  the  access  limit  under  the  first 
purchase  must  be  large  (i.e.  a  top-down  staircase  pattern  of  disbursement  rather  than  the  present 
bottom-up  staircase  pattern)  and  the  performance  criteria  must  be  relevant  to  deal  with  a  capital 
account crisis (implying less emphasis on conventional performance targets and complete avoidance 
of  the  saw-tooth  problem).  Since  the  IMF  would  endorse  the  policy  framework  of  a  country  before 
entering into a precautionary arrangement, repeated programme interruption and subsequent granting 
of waivers would need be avoided. Overemphasis on (cid:147)safeguarding Fund resources(cid:148) would reduce the 
effectiveness  of  a  precautionary  arrangement  by  subjecting  the  programme  to  performance  criteria 
that would not be critical to deal with the capital account crisis. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 3
 Progress with crisis resolution initiatives 
Efforts  are  also  underway  to  develop  Collective  Action  Clauses  (CACs)  to  augment  a  market-led 
process  for  restructuring  of  sovereign  bonds.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that  rapid  progress  has  been 
made in promoting the inclusion of CACs in international sovereign bond issuances. 
We welcome the positive developments relating to the development of a voluntary Code of Conduct to 
deal  with  debt  restructuring.  We  urge  that  the  Code  should  be  developed  in  full  and  voluntary 
agreement  of  creditors  and  debtors  and  neither  a  mechanistic  nor  a  prescriptive  or  standardized 
approach should be followed. 
In recent years, increasing attention has been accorded towards development and implementation of 
standards  and  codes  to  strengthen  the  international  financial  architecture.  The  IMF  and  the  World 
Bank have taken the initiative to monitor and assess member countries(cid:146) financial sectors as also their 
observance  of  standards  and  codes  through  Reports  on  the  Observance  of  Standards  and  Codes 
(ROSCs).  In  future,  ROSCs  will  help  national  authorities  develop  their  own  reform  plans,  assess 
compliance  with  international  standards  and  codes,  and  serve,  if  published,  as  a  signal  of  their 
policies(cid:146)  enhanced  transparency.  They  will  also  provide  helpful  inputs  for  IMF  surveillance  and 
technical assistance. 
Accelerating poverty reduction and strengthening sustainable economic growth in low income 
countries 
Millennium Development Goals, the Monterrey Consensus, and progress with the PRSP 
approach: the role of the IMF 
Monterrey has generated consensus on the issues that need to be addressed to effectively alleviate 
poverty. This consensus needs to be transformed into concrete action urgently. A comprehensive and 
transparent system to monitor progress towards fulfilling the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
of  poverty  reduction,  sustained  economic  growth,  and  promotion  of  sustainable  development  would 
need to be developed. The IMF has attempted to achieve this through two programmes - the PRSP 
and the HIPC initiative. The PRSP has been instrumental in addressing medium term policy reforms to 
promote  broad-based  growth  and  reduce  poverty.  The  initial  experience  with  PRSP  approach 
underlined  the  need  for  (i)  improving  public  expenditure  management  (PEM)  systems,  (ii)  building 
capacities  for  monitoring  and  evaluation,  and  (iii)  strengthening  and  institutionalising  participatory 
processes.  There  is  a  need  for  working  with  other  donors  for  improving  the  effectiveness  of  aid  in 
these  countries.  A  strengthened  PRSP  approach  will  certainly  emerge  as  the  crucial  link  between 
national  public  accounts,  donor  support,  development  outcomes  needed  to  meet  the  MDGs,  the 
operational  basis  for  Fund  concessional  lending  and  for  debt  relief  under  the  Enhanced  Heavily 
Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative. 
While an important constraint in improving  low-income countries(cid:146) economic growth is inadequacy of 
finance,  this  problem  could  be  mitigated  by  ensuring  their  access  to  the  private  capital  also. 
Institutional change along with appropriate economic policies are most critical. Strong institutions could 
provide  necessary  support  that  cuts  across  level  of  economic  development,  country  grouping,  and 
geographical and historical endowments. However, there are genuine uncertainties surrounding as to 
what  constitute  an  appropriate  institutional  reform  agenda.  Keeping  in  view  the  country-specific 
imperatives, it is felt that case-by-case study could be the preferred approach to initiate institutional 
reforms. This would allow appropriate innovation and adaptation to suit the local conditions. 
Minimising vulnerability to exogenous shocks 
The role of Fund Assistance for countries facing exogenous shocks can hardly be overemphasised, 
given  the  fact  that  these  shocks  can  have  negative  impact  on  developing  countries(cid:146)  growth, 
macroeconomic  stability,  debt  sustainability  and  poverty  ratios.  The  impressive  gains  made  by 
developing  countries  in  recent  years  can  be  considerably  eroded  when  they  face  such  exogenous 
shocks. It is a welcome step on part of the Fund to include a systematic focus in Surveillance and fund 
assistance  programmes  towards  tackling  the  adverse  effects  of  exogenous  shocks,  with  a  view  to 
reducing  response  delays.  Also  welcome  is  the  recent  initiatives  to  strengthen  existing  instruments 
with the Fund, e.g., Emergency Natural Disaster Assistance, Compensatory Financing Facility (CFF), 
Stand by credit tranches, and augmentation of PRGF programmes. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2003
 We  believe  that  there  is  a  clear  need  to  establish  a  broad  menu  of  instruments,  and  apply  the 
appropriate instrument depending on the nature of the shock, based on country-specific requirements. 
Sufficient  flexibility  is  needed  on  part  of multilateral  agencies  to  meet  the  financing  and  adjustment 
needs of low income countries affected by exogenous shocks. Enhanced financing may be warranted 
depending on the intensity of shocks. 
Progress with the HIPC initiative 
The HIPC initiative has existed for some time, with the prime motive of alleviating the unsustainable 
external  debt  burden  of  low  income  countries.  Despite  a  commendable  coordinated  programme  of 
various multilateral/bilateral creditors, HIPC initiatives faced difficulties due to inadequacy of resource, 
global economic slowdown, delay in implementation of policy reforms in highly indebted countries, and 
litigations by non-participating creditors for recovery of dues. There is a critical need for recognising 
country specific constraints and work out an agenda for reducing the debt burden of HIPC countries. 
However, debt restructuring in these countries must look beyond outright write-off of debt and explore 
innovative measures such as debt-equity swaps, use of export proceeds to donor countries to retire 
debt, and stepping up investment opportunities in these countries. 
Progress reports 
IMF quotas and governance 
Recent measures to increase administrative  and technical support to the Executive Directors of the 
developing and transition countries are welcome. However, the present quota formulas do not reflect a 
position  that  is  truly  representative  of  a  country(cid:146)s  profile  in  the  world  economy.  Despite  increasing 
recognition of this fact, the consensus to bring about the required reform continues to elude us. We, 
therefore,  believe  that  the  responsibility  rests  primarily  with  the  developed  countries  who,  as  the 
majority  shareholders,  must  demonstrate  the  will  to  reform  the  international  financial  architecture  in 
line with the changed realities. 
The quota review exercise in future should ensure adequate, equitable and appropriate representation 
of developing countries. Such a broader representation of the developing countries would enhance the 
acceptability, ownership and effectiveness of the IMF(cid:146)s programs and policies.  While arriving at the 
quotas,  the  GDP  must  be  computed  on  a  PPP  basis,  as  this  is  a  more  representative  measure  to 
define the relative position of a country in the world economy. Lack of data availability has often been 
cited as one of the significant hurdles to the adoption of the PPP based approach. We suggest that the 
Fund should work on how this deficiency could be satisfactorily addressed. 
Combating money laundering and financing of terrorism 
The Indian government vehemently opposes all forms of terrorism and all activities abetting it. We fully 
endorse  the  UN  Security  Council(cid:146)s  Resolutions  on  combating  the  financing  of  terrorism  (CFT).  We 
restate our commitment to fight against the abuses of the financial system, including money laundering 
and  terrorism  financing.  In  India,  we  have  already  enacted  a  comprehensive  Prevention  of  Money 
Laundering  Act and there  exists adequate  legal  and  institutional framework to address ML&FT. We 
commend the Fund, the Bank, as well as all member countries, for the adoption of a comprehensive 
single assessment methodology for AML/CFT. Cooperation among FATF, IMF, World Bank and other 
multilateral institutions will ultimately lead to more efficient use of resources and a better co-ordination 
of the policies, taking into account country-specific problems for combating this menace. 
While we would like to await the full report of the pilot program for detailed evaluation and discussion 
of the future road map, we have noted the observations made in the MD(cid:146)s report that the assessments 
completed  or  underway  reveal  not  only  a  great  deal  of  priority  attached  to  meeting  international 
standards by authorities but also a wide range of compliance levels. 
In the countries in my constituency, adequate legal and institutional frameworks to address the money 
laundering  and  financing  of  terrorism  are  in  place.  In  India,  this  has  been  further  strengthened  by 
enacting a comprehensive Prevention of Money Laundering Act. This Act had factored in the relevant 
portions  of  the  FATF-40  recommendations.  India,  an  active  member  of  the  APG  (a  FATF-style 
Regional  Body),  has completed and sent  in FATF(cid:146)s Self-Assessment Exercise  on the  Eight  Special 
Recommendations.  Membership  of  FATF  is  in  an  advanced  stage  of  processing  with  the  FATF 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 5
 Secretariat.  In  order  to  strengthen  international  cooperation,  exchange  of  information  and  outreach, 
India is also in the process of upgrading its Economic Intelligence Bureau into a full-fledged FIU. We 
had attended the last two plenary sessions of the Egmont Group with Observer status. 
Independent Evaluation Office 
The  establishment  of  an  Independent  Evaluation  Office  (IEO)  in  July  2001  by  the  IMF  marks  an 
important step towards enhancing the transparency of activities and economic policy formulations. IEO 
has produced extremely insightful reports on the IMF(cid:146)s role in the recent capital account crises and 
fiscal adjustment in Fund supported programs, providing objective assessments of arguably some of 
the  most  controversial  and  contentious  issues  related  to  the  functioning  of  the  Fund.  We  are 
impressed by the iterative process by which the IEO continues to improve upon the quality of its work, 
and  the  Fund,  particularly  the  Managing  Director  is  responding  to  suggestions  and  benefiting  from 
them. 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2003
