 Ernst Welteke: A European perspective on the world economy 
Address by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 13th Annual Hyman P 
Minsky  conference  on  the  state  of  the  US  and  world  economies  “Economic  Policy  for  Sustainable 
Growth”, New York, 15 April 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen! 
At times like these, where transatlantic ties are under strain, I regard it as both an exceptional honour 
and a welcome opportunity to be able to present my European view of the world economy here at the 
13th  Annual  Hyman  P  Minsky  conference  on  the  State  of  the  US  and  World  Economies.  Our 
transatlantic dialogue must not be interrupted, even when our views differ in important respects. 
I  am  a member  of  the  German-American  friendship  organisation  “Atlantik-Brücke”.  In  February,  our 
organisation ran an ad in the New York Times entitled “A Message from Germany”. Its essence reads: 
“For the overwhelming majority  of Germans, the relationship  with the United  States remains of vital 
importance. Current differences of opinion between governments over the question of Iraq must not be 
allowed to sever that bond”. I would like to confirm that view today here in midtown Manhattan. 
In the following, I will first comment on the present state of the world economy, which is characterised 
by  unusually  high  uncertainty.  Afterwards  I  would  like  to  give  you  some  facts  about  the  German 
economy. Finally, I will try to spell out the European view of how the fundamentals must be set for 
sustainable growth to take place. 
1. 
The present state of the world economy 
Uncertainty abounds 
1.1 
The world economy has not been in exactly very good shape these past few months. The ongoing war 
in Iraq is weighing on the world economy. Financial markets are fickle; confidence among businesses 
and consumers remains subdued. 
We must, however, not be fooled into regarding the war in Iraq as the sole source of uncertainty or the 
predominant issue for the world economy. Uncertainty was around before that war was on the horizon, 
and uncertainty will stay on for a while even after a - hopefully fast - end to the war. 
What  is  more,  uncertainty  stemming  from  geopolitical  strife  seems  to  be  deflecting  our  focus  from 
some  fundamental  imbalances.  Redressing  these  imbalances  is  a  precondition  for  a  return  to 
sustainable  growth.  Overinvestment  incurred  during  the  millennium  boom  is  being  unwound  only 
slowly. Vast spare capacity forms the backdrop for weak capital spending. The economy is bound to 
recover, but recovery is not necessarily just around the corner. 
The IMF expects the US economy to grow at a rate of 2.2% in 2003. According to this es-timate, the 
euro area can expect GDP growth of 1.1%, while Germany should brace for a third year in a row with 
significantly sub-par growth of 0.5%. 
In 2002, North America and non-Japan Asia were the main contributors to world output growth, with 
the euro area and Japan lagging behind significantly. Two implications are worth consideration: 
1. 
First, the world economy is depending far too heavily on the US taking the driver’s seat. The 
euro  area  and  Japan  must  work  on  improving  their  ability  to  produce  self-sustained 
economic growth. 
Second,  the  world  economy  is  even  more  fragile  than  this  tilted  growth  performance 
suggests at first sight, for the growth path of the US economy itself is somewhat unbalanced. 
Its macroeconomic imbalances deserve careful addressing. 
2. 
The expectation that the world economy will return to a healthy and stable growth path once the dust 
of war in the Middle East has settled is unrealistic to begin with. Obviously, the workload for the world 
economy to return to healthy growth will be high on both sides of the Atlantic. 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 1
 In the euro area structural weaknesses have been building up for more than a decade. They are well 
known, as is the adequate therapy. Labour market inflexibility is the core European weakness. In a 
currency  union,  market  flexibility  is  all  the  more  crucial  as  exchange  rates  can  no  longer  cushion 
asymmetric shocks. The euro-area countries now need to seize the opportunity to embark on serious 
reforms during times of crisis, where the reform zeal is more pronounced than at more quiet times. 
The key message the present situation of the world economy conveys for Europe is that Europe would 
be well-advised to improve its ability to grow on its own. A tripolar economic and financial world cannot 
afford to rely on one pole only. Europe, especially now that European Union enlargement is just a year 
away,  has  a  responsibility  to  assume  in  at  least  three  areas:  the  political,  the  financial  and  the 
economic field. We are prepared. 
We have strengths we can build on. The framework for economic and monetary union is sound and 
strong.  You  probably  know  that  a  European  Convention  is  working  on  drafting  a  European 
constitution. For over four years we have had a single currency, the euro. First, outsiders said EMU 
would never happen. It happened. Next they said it would not work. It works. Now they say it will not 
last. Well, guess what? I think it will last. 
The  euro  area  economy  can  rely  on  a  strong  industrial  core.  European  products  are  highly 
competitive, even after accounting for the massive appreciation of the euro against the dollar by as 
much as around one-third since hitting its trough in the fall of 2000. The export performance of the 
euro area economy speaks for itself. 
Weaknesses of the US economy are of a more recent origin. They stem mainly from the late nineties’ 
bubble economy. The balance sheets of businesses and consumers are debt-laden, while the public 
sector  also  has  returned  to  dissaving.  In  the  environment  of  weak  capital  spending,  the  current 
account deficit of 5% of GDP is no longer investment-driven. Therefore, it is more of a concern for me 
now than it was during the last couple of years. More recently, the equity markets’ boom-bust scenario 
has left pension liabilities underfunded on a grand scale. To catch up on old-age provision is a key 
task for our ageing societies; saving needs to be expanded. Recently, the Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome (SARS) has begun to add to the un-certainty. With its negative impact on transportation and 
tourism,  it  seems  capable  of  inflicting  serious  economic  damage  at  least  in  Asia,  where  up  to  now 
most of the cases have been observed. Some forecasters even cut their growth forecasts. 
A thorough look at the German economy 
1.2 
Let me now comment on the situation in Germany. Germany-bashing has become a bit of a fashion 
recently. Some even suspect that we will become another Japan. I take that sort of criticism seriously, 
and I do see the parallels that lead to such comparisons. However, I am not the least convinced it is 
accurate; there are some decisive differences. My country is strong, and so is its economy. Let me 
explain.  
Our modern infrastructure excels. Our economy is highly productive. Our industry therefore is highly 
competitive, as can be seen from the rising volume of exports we ship - a fact worth mentioning since, 
first, world trade growth is down sharply and, second, the euro is appreciating. 
Yet I would be the last person to deny the structural weaknesses that the sluggish world economy is 
bringing to light. At the Bundesbank, we tend to regard the current confidence crisis not only as highly 
serious, but also as a window of opportunity for reform. In March, the Bundesbank’s Executive Board 
took the unprecedented step of publishing a staff paper entitled “Ways out of the crisis”. The paper - 
which is posted on our website - contains analyses of the key areas of reform: public finances, social 
security systems and labour market issues. It spells out which reforms need to be enacted. 
We stress the need for a consistent overall reform package. The key is to strengthen the willingness 
among individuals to take risks, to perform and to develop initiative. Only then will the fundamentally 
strong German economy regain momentum. 
We  must  not  forget  that  German  reunification  in  1990  was  a  once-in-a-lifetime  opportunity. 
Reunification  is  a  boon  for  us.  But  Germany  is  still  suffering  from  economic  policy  mistakes  made 
during the unification process. For example, a considerable portion of the recent weak German growth 
performance is due to the boom-bust scenario that was triggered in the construction sector. Early in 
the  reunification  process,  building  activity  was  boosted  by  overly  generous  tax  incentives;  now  this 
sector needs to shrink back to normalcy. For seven years in a row this trend has shaved our growth 
rate. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 Insolvencies have been on the rise, not only in the construction sector. The economy at large is also 
affected, as overall demand is weak in the low-confidence environment. As companies go bust and 
loans turn sour, is the German banking sector now in crisis? 
German banks are well capitalised (overall capital ratio of 12.6%; large banks 14.6%), and German 
banking supervision is highly efficient. There has been only one single bank collapse in the post-war 
era (Herstatt) - many other industrialised countries have since seen outright banking crises. In Japan, 
as you may recall, financial supervision in the early stages of the banking crisis tolerated the banks’ 
procrastination,  eroding  capital  bases  and  misclassification  of  bad  loans  and  therefore  laying  the 
foundation for deep trouble. 
The second important difference between the German and the Japanese banking sector is the real 
estate  bubble  that  still  plagues  Japanese  banks,  but  never  existed  in  Germany  in  the  first  place.  A 
major portion of Japanese collateral diminished to virtual non-existence and thus accounts for the bulk 
of bad loans in Japan, but not in Germany. 
During the strong financial market stretch in the late nineties, German banks were able to generate 
returns  to  match  the  high  costs  of  maintaining  their  extensive  branch  networks.  Now  that  financial 
market activity is less profitable and loan provisioning is on the rise, German banks have embarked on 
deep cost-cutting measures. The cost-income ratio has been falling for months. 
The German banking sector is in dire straits, this is true, but there is no lurking systemic risk by any 
means. The case for Germany turning into another Japan is utterly unconvincing. There is, however, 
one  thing  Germany  -  and  not  only  Germany  -  can  learn  from  the  Japanese  example:  postponing 
structural reforms is downright unhelpful. 
Policy mix for sustainable growth - a European perspective 
2. 
What  are  the  foundations  for  sustainable  growth?  From  my  European  perspective,  I  would  like  to 
mention the following three foundations for sustainable growth: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
A macroeconomic policy geared towards stability, 
a structural policy geared towards growth, and 
a sound financial sector. 
Macroeconomic policy: stability orientation 
2.1 
Let me start with my core business as a central banker: price stability. Price stability is the best way a 
central bank can contribute to steady growth. 
Any market economy relies on prices to signal relative scarcity or abundance to market participants. 
That way, resources are channelled to their most productive uses. A well-functioning price mechanism 
therefore is a precondition for efficiency and thus for a high standard of living. 
Frequent and large movements in the price level tend to disguise movements in relative prices; they 
tend  to  block  information.  It  becomes  more  difficult  for  market  participants  to  tell  the  difference 
between  overall  price  rises  and  changes  in  relative  prices.  Stability  in  the  general  price  level  is  a 
necessity for a market economy to function properly and for investors to make the right decisions. To 
sum it up, price level stability is invaluable for growth. 
A  crisp  and  clear  stability  orientation  of  monetary  policy  therefore  is  the  No  1  foundation  for 
sustainable growth. 
Price  stability  is  a  good  only  central  banks  can  deliver.  The  Maastricht  Treaty,  which  established 
European monetary union, reflects this insight in setting up a framework for the European System of 
Central  Banks  (ESCB)  that  prioritises  price  stability  as  the  single  most  important  goal  of  monetary 
policy. The Eurosystem shall support the overall economic policies of the European Union only to the 
extent that this does not threaten price stability. All EU central banks must be free of – and are free of 
– political interference. 
The Governing Council of the ESCB has defined price stability as an annual increase in the general 
price level of 2% or less. During the run-up to EMU, countries notorious for their inflationary bias have 
experienced  marked  disinflation.  No  longer  do  people  in  those  countries  tolerate  price  rises.  When 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 3
 some retailers tried to raise prices of some products after euro notes and coins came into circulation 
(in January 2002), people were in a rage. This is a good indication of how deep the newly-won stability 
consensus in Europe already runs. Never before has there been so much price stability in Europe as 
during the last decade. 
However,  price  stability  is  not  unique  to  Europe.  Disinflation  occurred  on  a  global  scale,  as  price 
stability  has  been  recognised  as  the  superior  concept  of  monetary  policy.  No  major  economy  or 
economic bloc is willing to go back to inflationary habits. In this respect, the prospects for the world 
economy are highly favourable. 
The European stability consensus aims at underpinning price stability with an equally stability-oriented 
fiscal policy. EU governments therefore agreed on the European Stability and Growth Pact. The idea 
of  the  Pact  is  to  not  only  to  promote  stability  by  preventing  the  emergence  of  conflicts  between 
monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policies.  Sound  public  finances  as  envisioned  by  the  Pact  contribute  to 
sustainable growth, for they foster confidence. 
The  pact  provides  a  credible  framework  designed  to  automatically  stabilise  the  economy  over  the 
business cycle. The budget should be balanced over the course of the cycle, allowing for deficits if 
necessary, but also calling for surpluses if growth is high. The overall debt level of the public sector 
must be sustainable. 
We  regard  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  framework  as  a  major  improvement  compared  with 
discretionary  stimulus  packages  that  in  the  past  have  all-too-often  proved  to  be  ill-timed  and 
debt-propelling. The much-chided euro-area social security systems are the main tools of automatic 
stabilisation. 
Calls  to  revise  the  pact  to  counter  its  alleged  procyclicality  lead  astray.  Counter  to  conventional 
wisdom, the pact is flexible. It even allows for large macroeconomic stimulus. The only problem with 
the pact is that some governments wish to apply it asymmetrically: they are willing to run deficits in a 
weak  growth  environment,  but  wish  to  dodge  consolidation  in  times  of  budgetary  abundance.  This 
deficit bias is the very reason for the 3%-of-GDP deficit limit. The ongoing debate is the best evidence 
of how important the 3% ceiling deficit is. 
I am well  aware that in the field of fiscal policy, the  US and  the euro area have recently started to 
pursue diverging approaches. One might even be tempted to speak of a “global experiment”. Policies 
on both sides of the Atlantic aim at rebuilding confidence, though the paths vary. While you in the US 
trust fiscal stimulus to actively rouse the economy from its current stupor, euro-area governments are 
basically trying to stick to the planned fiscal consolidation paths in order not to undermine hard-won 
confidence in their stability-oriented fiscal policies. 
Structural policy: growth orientation 
2.2 
So, if macroeconomic policies need to be geared towards stability, then who is responsible for growth? 
It’s economic policy makers’ business to design a framework conducive to growth in which enterprises 
can thrive. Pro-growth policies are multi-faceted, but at the end of the day you must get the incentives 
right: incentives to invest and incentives to work. 
The dissatisfying  growth  performance of Europe owes much to its inflexible labour markets. Labour 
market  policy  in  the  EU  is  a  responsibility  of  the  national  governments.  Some  countries  like  the 
Netherlands have successfully improved the framework for their labour markets and already brought 
down unemployment. 
Other countries like my own are still in the middle of an extensive debate as to how best to address 
the labour market issue. The Chancellor has recently laid out his ideas, and they seem to be going in 
the right direction. However, the crucial details for most measures still have to be worked out. So what 
I can tell you today is a bit tentative, but it is nevertheless encouraging. 
In  Germany,  the  combination  of  high  labour  costs  and  generous  welfare  benefits  had,  over  time, 
crowded  out  an  entire  segment  of  the  labour  market:  low-wage  jobs  for  the  low-skill  group.  Like  in 
other countries, this is the group with the highest unemployment rate. We are now pondering to adjust 
the incentive structure on the supply side by revamping the schemes of unemployment benefits and 
welfare assistance. A new type of “mini-jobs” with lower-than-usual payroll taxes is intended to help 
reinvigorate that labour market segment. Like other countries in Europe, Germany will need to tolerate 
a higher degree of wage differentiation. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 Wage negotiations, centralised up to now, will in the future become more open to company-specific 
deals. This increase  in  differentiation is  a crucial feature of pro-growth policies. Labour contracts in 
general will have to become more diverse. More extensive use of fixed-term contracts will be allowed 
for expanding small businesses, thus abolishing a major impediment to small business growth. 
Another  core  task  in  growth-spurring  labour  market  reform  will  be  to  bring  down  non-wage  labour 
costs,  which  are  a  major  barrier  to  employment  growth.  That  is  equivalent  to  further  reforming  the 
social security systems. We have already added a small but fully-funded pillar to our pay-as-you-go 
pension system. However, pension reform is still unfinished business. Employees will need to resort to 
more private provisioning. 
In terms of growth orientation, Europe has been a bit of a laggard, although we have 
sound economic fundamentals. The time for more structural adjustments has undoubtedly come. They 
should help to both exploit and raise the growth potential. In general, economic policymakers need to 
provide a viable framework for giving enterprises and house-holds certainty of planning. 
Pro-growth policies are not restricted to domestic issues. A coherent approach to pro-growth policies 
must encompass liberal trade policy. Lowering barriers to trade and granting market access must be 
part of any credible set of pro-growth policies. There are really few things economists are willing to 
agree on, but the benefits of free trade are among them. Therefore, the Doha round of international 
trade negotiations is another great opportunity for the world economy to foster growth. 
A sound financial system 
2.3 
The  third  factor  in  policies  for  sustainable  growth  is  a  sound  financial  system.  It  is  a  necessary 
precondition for the exploitation of the growth potential. There can be no investment without financing, 
and there can be no proper financing without a sound financial sector. 
It is not a question of whether a financial system is a capital market system or relies more on banks for 
the  allocation  of  funds.  By  tradition,  continental  Europe  tends  to  be  more  bank-centred  than  the 
English-speaking  countries.  This  tradition  is  now  under  change.  Not  even  the  setback  for  financial 
markets which followed the bursting of the millennium bubble brought this process to a halt. 
Under the new single currency, capital markets in the euro area have begun to play a larger role in 
financing. Financial integration is - aside from price stability - one of the hopes we had for the euro. It 
materialised  quickly.  More  liquid  and  more  thoroughly  integrated  euro-area  capital  markets  are 
providing businesses with better and more diverse financing options. Ever more companies are going 
straight to the market, implying a changing role for banks. The euro-area financial system is becoming 
more balanced. Finance in Europe -  which has  not been bad  before the  euro  arrived! - achieved a 
structural improvement. The foundations for economic growth in the euro area have improved in step.  
To  safeguard  the  soundness  of  a  financial  system  is  a  rather  complicated  task.  Effective  financial 
regulation and financial supervision are key to financial stability.  As financial products become ever 
more  complex,  financial  regulators  and  supervisors  need  to  keep  pace  with  developments  in  the 
capital  markets.  They  have  to  strike  a  fine  balance.  Their  core  task  is  to  make  sure  that  financial 
institutions are capitalised commensurate to their respective risk profiles, not least in order to contain 
systemic  risk.  On  the  other  hand,  they  do  not  want  to  hinder  the  development  and  the  use  of  new 
instruments and will therefore try to permit as much room as possible so as not to hinder growth. 
In the aftermath of the late nineties’ financial market boom, new questions arose. The role of market 
integrity has been highlighted by a series of financial scandals. Cases of insider trading, of investment 
banks recommending clients’ stocks against their better judgement, and even some spectacular cases 
of outright accounting fraud have shaken financial markets to the core. Trust has been lost on a grand 
scale. It needs to be rebuilt by improving the framework of the markets. Financial markets must be 
trustworthy; only then will investors be willing to provide finance. 
Let me cite one last aspect of sound financial systems. It is also a matter of trust. The infrastructure of 
the markets needs to be stable and able to withstand shocks. 9/11 was a shock not least to the world 
financial system. It put payment systems to the test. With a little help from the central banks - we stood 
ready to provide liquidity - the international financial system proved resilient. Disruptions in the world 
financial net might easily have a severe negative impact on the world economy. Hence the robustness 
of the market infra-structure is a major factor in steady and sustainable growth. 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 5
 Concluding remarks 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Uncertainty currently weighs on all debates on economic issues. We cannot abolish uncertainty. It is a 
feature we will have to live with for some more time, as its causes are many. We can and we should, 
however,  work  to  improve  the  resilience  of  the  world  economy.  World  economic  growth  needs  to 
become  better  balanced.  For  this  to  happen,  each  of  the  world’s  major  economic  zones  has  some 
homework to do. 
Let me again point out how happy I am to be able to be here with you this afternoon to discuss some 
important issues of the world economy. Trans-Atlantic debate has traditionally been intense – and it is 
a  tradition  I  hold  in  high  esteem.  Our countries  do  have  differences  on  vital  political  questions. We 
must not let these differences spoil our long-term relationship. The world needs a strong United States 
of America and a strong Europe to work together with confidence for the benefit of mankind. 
6 
 BIS Review 19/2003
