 Roger W Ferguson, Jr: Basel II 
Testimony by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy, Trade and 
Technology,  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of  Representatives,  Washington,  D.C., 
27 February 2003.  
 Chairman  King,  Congresswoman  Maloney,  members  of  the  Subcommittee  on  Domestic  and 
International  Monetary  Policy,  Trade  and  Technology:  It  is  a  pleasure  to  appear  before  you  this 
morning on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to discuss Basel II, the 
evolving  new  capital  standard  for  internationally  active  banks  and  bank  holding  companies.  At  this 
time,  bank  supervisors  in  this  country  and  abroad  are  evaluating  the  results  of  a  recent  survey  to 
assess  the  potential  quantitative  impact  of  the  current  proposals  on  the  world's  large  banks.  In 
addition, the supervisors in the United States are still incorporating feedback from our discussions with 
bankers,  an  ongoing  process  that  will  continue  even  after  final  rules  are  adopted.  From  the  U.S. 
perspective, a hallmark of the Basel II process has been the effort to tailor the capital framework to the 
evolving industry best practices. We intend for these dynamic efforts to continue.  
That having been said, after almost five years of discussion and revision, Basel II is about ready for 
the  last  rounds  of  comment  -  which  we  anticipate  this  spring  and  summer.  We  expect  the  Basel 
Committee to approve its package by late this year, the corresponding U.S. rulemaking process to be 
completed  next  year,  and  implementation  to  begin  in  late  2006.  Banks  need  some  certainty  for 
planning, but this is not inconsistent with further changes between 2004 and 2006, and thereafter, as 
we learn more and as practices evolve.  
Why is a new capital standard necessary? 
The supervisors in  this country  have determined that Basel I, the current capital regime adopted in 
1988, must be replaced for the most complex banks for three major reasons: defects in Basel I as it 
applies to these large entities, evolution in the art of risk management, and increased heterogeneity 
and concentration in the banking system.  
Defects in Basel I 
Basel I was a major step forward in capital regulation. Indeed, for most banks in this country, Basel I is 
now  -  and  for  the  foreseeable  future  will  be  -  more  than  adequate  as  a  capital  framework.  Most 
banking institutions in this country engage in businesses with risks that counterparties and supervisors 
can evaluate relatively  easily. Moreover, because of their lack of geographical diversification and/or 
limited alternative funding sources, the market continues to force most banks to carry capital positions 
considerably in excess of regulatory minimums under Basel I. For these reasons, U.S. supervisors do 
not believe the benefits would exceed the costs of requiring most banks to shift to Basel II. However, 
for  the  small  number  of  large,  complex,  internationally  active  banking  organizations,  Basel  I  has 
serious  shortcomings,  which  are  becoming  more  evident  with  time.  Developing  a  replacement  to 
supply to these banking organizations is imperative.  
First,  Basel  I  is  too  simplistic  to  adequately  address  the  activities  of  our  most  complex  banking 
institutions.  Basel  I  categorizes  each  bank's  assets  into  one  of  only  four  categories,  each  of  which 
represents a certain risk class. Each risk class has its own risk weight that is multiplied by 8 percent to 
get  the  minimum  capital  charge:  zero  for  most  sovereign  debt,  20  percent  of  8  percent  for  most 
intra-bank exposures and for agency securities, 50 percent of 8 percent for residential mortgages, and 
100  percent  of  8  percent  for  all  other  exposures.  These  "all  other"  credits  include  essentially  all 
corporate and consumer loans, meaning that the whole spectrum of credit quality over which banks do 
much of their lending - from Aaa to the most speculative credits - receives the same regulatory capital 
charge. The lack of differentiation among the degrees of risk means that the resultant capital ratios are 
too often uninformative and might well provide misleading information for banks with risky or problem 
credits or, for that matter, with portfolios dominated by very safe loans.  
BIS Review 10/2003 
 1
 Moreover, the limited number of risk classes not only limits the value of the capital requirement but 
also  creates  a  regulatory  loophole  that  creates  incentives  for  banks  to  game  the  system  by  capital 
arbitrage. Capital arbitrage, in this case, is the avoidance of certain minimum capital charges through 
sale or securitization of those assets for which the capital requirement that the market would impose is 
less than the regulatory capital charge. Clearly, the market believes that the 4 percent capital charge 
on  most  residential  mortgages  (50  percent  of  8  percent)  and  the  8  percent  on  most  credit  cards 
(100 percent of 8 percent) is higher than the real risk, facilitating the securitization and sale of a large 
volume of such loans to other holders. This behavior is perfectly understandable, even desirable in an 
economic efficiency sense. But it means that banks that engage in such arbitrage retain the higher-risk 
assets for which the regulatory capital charge - calibrated to average quality assets - is on average too 
low.  
Supervisors,  through  the  examination  process,  are,  to  be  sure,  still  able  to  evaluate  the  true  risk 
position of the bank, but the capital ratios of the larger banks are becoming less and less meaningful, 
a  trend  that  will  only  accelerate.  Not  only  are  creditors,  counterparties,  and  investors  less  able  to 
evaluate  the  capital  strength  of  individual  banks  from  what  are  supposed  to  be  risk-based  capital 
ratios, but regulations and statutory requirements tied to capital ratios have less meaning as well.  
The evolving state of the art 
At the same time, risk management and appropriate capital determination have evolved significantly 
beyond the state of the art at the time Basel I was developed. Banks themselves have developed and 
adopted some of the new techniques to improve their risk management and internal economic capital 
measures. But clearly banks can go considerably further. Basel II would speed adoption of these new 
techniques and promote the future evolution of risk management by establishing a framework that is 
more risk-sensitive.  
Increased heterogeneity and concentration in banking 
Finally,  market  pressures  have  led  to  consolidation  in  banking  around  the  world.  Our  own  banking 
system has not been immune; it, too, has become increasingly concentrated with a small number of 
very large banks operating across a wide range of product and geographic markets. Their operations 
are  tremendously  complex  and  sophisticated,  and  their  significantly  different  strategies  add  a  high 
degree of heterogeneity to their operations. At the same time, significant weakness in one of these 
entities,  let  alone  failure,  has  the  potential  for  severely  adverse  macroeconomic  consequences.  It 
seems clear that the regulatory framework should encourage these banks to adopt the best possible 
risk measurement and management techniques while allowing for the considerable differences in their 
business strategies. Basel II presents an opportunity for supervisors to encourage these banks to push 
their management frontier forward. Of course, change is always difficult, and these new mechanisms 
are  expensive.  But  a  more  risk-sensitive  regulatory  and  capital  system  would  provide  stronger 
incentives to adopt best practice internal risk management.  
Let  me  be  clear.  If  we  do  not  apply  more  risk-sensitive  capital  requirements  to  these  very  large 
institutions, the usefulness of capital adequacy regulation in constraining excessive risk-taking at these 
entities  will  continue  to  erode.  Such  an  erosion  would  present  U.S.  bank  supervisors  with  a  highly 
undesirable  choice.  Either  we  would  have  to  accept  the  increased  risk  of  instability  in  the  banking 
system,  or  we  would  be  forced  to  adopt  alternative  -  and  more  intrusive  -  approaches  to  the 
supervision and regulation of these institutions.  
Basel II 
I  want  to  stress  that  the  U.S.  supervisory  authorities  intend  to  apply  only  the  so-called  Advanced 
Internal Ratings Based (A-IRB) version of Basel II. We will not be adopting the two other variants of 
Basel  II  -  the  Standardized  and  Foundation  Internal  Ratings  Based  Approaches  -  that  have  been 
developed  by  the  Basel  Committee. We  expect  to  require  about  ten  large  U.S.  banks  to  adopt  the 
A-IRB approach, but we anticipate that a small number of other large entities will choose to adopt it as 
well after making the necessary investment to support their participation.  
All other banks in this country will remain on the current Basel I capital standard when the new Accord 
is implemented. For these thousands of banks, the shortfalls of the current rules, as noted, are not 
sufficiently large to warrant a mandatory shift to the Basel II regime. However, any of these institutions 
  will have the option to adopt the A-IRB requirement, as we expect some large  entities to do at the 
outset.  If  they  seek  to  do  so,  however,  they  will  have  to  meet  the  same  high  standards  of  internal 
infrastructure and controls that will be required of the core group.  
The  Federal  Reserve  Board  believes  that  the  A-IRB  approach  of  Basel  II  will  address  the  material 
defects of Basel I for these entities. By requiring strong internal standards as an entry criterion, the 
Basel II approach will ensure that these banks adopt structured, formal, empirically based methods of 
managing credit risk, which will lead to significantly improved risk-management capabilities at the very 
largest banks and other adopters. Capital requirements themselves  will  become more risk sensitive 
and less prone to artificial distortions. The poor incentive structure of Basel I will be removed for A-IRB 
banks.  Supervisory  practices  will  also  become  more  consistent  with  evolving  risk-management 
practices. Risk-based capital ratios will become more reliable as an indicator of financial strength.  
I  turn  now  to  another  aspect  of  Basel  II:  its  three  pillars.  At  the  outset  of  the  Basel  II  process,  the 
supervisors  on  the  Basel  Committee  determined  that  a  robust  capital  adequacy  framework  should 
include  three  important  elements  or  pillars.  Pillar  I  consists  of  the  minimum  capital  requirements 
themselves - that is, the rules by which a bank calculates its capital ratio and by which its supervisor 
assesses  whether  it  is  in  compliance  with  the  minimum  capital  threshold.  Pillar  II,  the  supervisory 
oversight pillar, encompasses the concept that well-managed banks should seek to go beyond simple 
compliance  with  minimum  standards  and  perform  for  themselves  a  comprehensive  assessment  of 
whether  they  have  sufficient  capital  to  support  their  risks.  In  addition,  supervisors  should  be  in  a 
position  to  provide  constructive  feedback  to  bank  management  on  these  internal  assessments,  or 
"economic capital", based on their knowledge of industry practices at a range of institutions. Finally, 
Pillar  III  seeks  to  complement  these  activities  with  market  discipline  by  requiring  banks  publicly  to 
disclose key measures related to their risk and capital positions. The concept of these three mutually 
reinforcing pillars has been key to the Basel II effort.  
Pillar I: Minimum regulatory capital requirements 
The minimum capital requirements for credit risk under the A-IRB approach are built around the same 
concepts  that  underlie  all  modern  portfolio-based  methods  for  systematically  measuring  credit  risk. 
The  first,  and  perhaps  most  important,  input  to  this  approach  is  an  estimate  of  the  likelihood  or 
probability that  a borrower will  default. Second, lenders need a sense of the size  of the  loss in the 
event  of  a  default  because  they  are  often  able  to  recover  something  from  a  defaulted  borrower's 
assets or from collateral or a guarantee. Third, the lender,  who often has an undrawn credit line or 
loan commitment to a borrower, needs to estimate what the amount borrowed is likely to be at the time 
a default occurs. These key inputs - probability of default (PD), loss given default (LGD), and exposure 
at default (EAD) - are the building blocks of the A-IRB approach to estimating capital requirements. 
Many banks are currently  working to improve their ability to estimate these quantities, using a wide 
variety of techniques from expert judgment methodologies to quantitative statistical models.  
A-IRB permits banks to use any or all of these, requiring only that the procedure for estimating these 
three key parameters be based on empirical information, that it be rigorous, that it be reproducible by 
third parties, that the process be subject to strong internal controls, and that the results be shown to 
measure  risk  accurately.  The  supervisor  must,  in  fact,  validate  the  estimation  procedures  and  the 
controls  that  support  them  before  a  bank can  use  A-IRB.  As  part  of  the  validation  process,  a  bank 
must demonstrate that these risk measures are in fact used in credit-granting decisions, as well as for 
other management purposes such as reserving and pricing. The intention is for the supervisor and the 
manager to focus on the same issues.  
These  estimated  risk  variables  are  inputs  to  regulatory  formulas  that  will  determine  the  minimum 
required capital for a given portfolio of exposures. Just as the methods of determining the inputs can 
change as the state of the art changes, the formulas that translate the inputs into capital requirements 
can be modified as well by the regulators. Basel II can improve as knowledge improves.  
The rules surrounding Pillar I are clearly more complicated than I have just described, and the volume 
of comment letters and the number of pages that have been and will be published for comment will 
attest to that. One reason for that complexity is that the large, complex banking organizations, to which 
the rules are addressed are, in a word, complex. Simple rules just cannot address their issues and the 
nature  of  their  business.  These  rules  have  been  adjusted  and  modified  significantly  as  a  result  of 
comments from bankers and other interested parties. Sometimes those comments have led to simpler 
rules.  But,  more  often,  they  have  led  to  even  more  complex  rules  because  each  complex  bank  to 
which they apply operates somewhat differently from other banks. Thus the rules have been modified 
  to address important and meaningful differences in risk. Simple rules too often become straightjackets; 
flexibility requires more complex rules.  
Pillar II: Supervisory oversight 
Indeed, because even complex rules cannot adequately capture the risks and desirable procedures 
for  each  bank,  the  A-IRB  establishes  with  Pillar  II  a  mechanism  for  dialogue  on  risk  and  capital 
between bank managers and bank supervisors. I have already noted that supervisors will verify the 
process  for  determining  credit-risk  measurement,  for  ensuring  ongoing  control  over  the  process  of 
determining these risk-measure inputs, and for ensuring that the risk inputs are used for more than 
calculation of regulatory capital. In addition, Pillar II requires that the bank maintain its own internal 
assessment of its risk relative to its capital - both currently and over the cycle as well as in periods of 
stress - and that the supervisor review and respond to that assessment. The focus is on ensuring that 
the bank has strong risk-assessment capabilities and that the supervisor and the bank jointly assess 
and evaluate that capability.  
This kind of dialogue cannot be captured by any set of rules. It will focus on a frank discussion of loss 
potential and of any unusual capital needs associated with unbundled risks not captured in Pillar I. It 
addresses  the  individual  bank's  special  risk  profile,  its  special  business  strategy  -  which  might,  for 
example,  imply  geographic  or  borrower  concentrations  -  or  its  unique  cyclical  sensitivities.  Such 
discussion,  review,  and  analysis  are  focused  on  the  individual  bank's  possible  unique  need  for  a 
capital buffer - an amount in excess of its Pillar I minimum. Such buffers are designed to minimize the 
risk that losses and capital erosion could trigger undesired responses under prompt corrective action 
and the associated reactions that could affect financial and real macroeconomic stability.  
Pillar II, we should be clear, has some drawbacks. It is inherently less transparent than Pillar I because 
outsiders will not know which portion of a bank's excess capital is deemed "necessary" to address a 
particular risk specific to the bank and which portion is truly an "extra" cushion. It is also more difficult - 
although not impossible - for supervisors to require an uncooperative bank to hold Pillar II capital than 
rule-imposed Pillar I capital.  
Pillar III: Market disclosure 
Basel  II  seeks  to  minimize  the  public  difficulty  of  interpreting  capital  ratios  by  requiring  public 
disclosure of considerable quantitative and qualitative information, including, in effect, the risk inputs I 
described earlier. Such disclosures also provide incentives for banks - the disclosers - to adopt better 
risk-management  techniques  and  to  link  their  capital  requirements  to  their  risk  profiles.  All  these 
results  will  enable  the  public to make comparisons among banks more easily. Indeed, the ability to 
compare will be an important constraint on any supervisor, foreign or U.S., who might not diligently 
apply the rules to its banks; outliers will appear unusual and, with insufficient explanation, be subject to 
market discipline.  
Indeed, a key reason for Pillar III is to seek to harness market discipline to bring pressure on banks to 
adopt safe and sound practices. Public disclosure increases market discipline in two ways. First, by 
providing more information, it enables the market to impose differential funding costs and availability 
on  banks,  related  to  the  risks  they  take;  additional  risk  requires  additional  Pillar  I  capital,  but  the 
disclosure  of  that  risk  and  the  size  of  the  capital  buffer  also  affects  the  minimum  price  that 
counterparties require to provide funding. Second, as noted, it facilitates comparisons across banks. 
Because  outliers  will  be  subject  to  particularly  close  review  by  the  market  and  other  national 
regulators,  banks  and  their  regulators  will  have  more  difficulty  evading  their  minimum  capital 
requirements.  
Key issues 
Not surprisingly with such a significant proposal, some are concerned about certain aspects of Basel 
II. It might be useful to the subcommittee if, in the remainder of my comments, I focus on a number of 
issues that have been raised. Before I do, however, I want to reiterate to the subcommittee that the 
process of developing the Basel II proposals has involved a truly unprecedented dialogue with banks 
on a wide variety of issues. That dialogue is still going on, especially with regard to technical issues 
involving retail credit, risk-mitigation techniques, securitization, and other matters, including some that 
should be called to your attention.  
  Operational risk 
One of the early  decisions by the participants  in the  Basel  II process  was to focus more clearly  on 
credit risk in the capital determination process. Doing so required that all the other risks that had been 
combined with credit risk in Basel I be unbundled. Several years ago, the first necessary step in the 
unbundling of these risks was taken when the market risk of trading activities was separated for its 
own treatment. The Basel II effort has focused very carefully on the credit risks that banks take and 
has  sought  to  ensure  that  the  framework  appropriately  measures  the  marginal  contribution  of  such 
risks to a bank's total risk profile. But this focus implies the need to consider the way to address other 
important  banking  risks.  Some  of  these  risks  are  sufficiently  modest  that  they  can  be  addressed 
through  the  supervisory  process  -  Pillar  II.  But  one  risk,  operational  risk,  has  been  historically  so 
important in the depletion of capital and the failure of banks that it should be subject to specific Pillar I 
minimum capital requirements.  
Operational risk is defined as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, 
people, and systems or from external events, and it includes legal and compliance-related risks. These 
risks and their associated losses are often in the news: rogue traders, fraud and forgery, settlement 
failures,  inappropriate  sales  practices,  poor  accounting  and  lapses  of  control,  troubles  in  acting  as 
custodians  and  managing  assets,  and  legal  settlements  involving  significant  payments  for  losses 
alleged to have been caused by banks. All of these costs have been substantial both here and abroad.  
Indeed, many banks, in their internal economic calculations, already allocate a significant portion of 
their capital for operational risk - averaging 17 percent in the subset of large banks we sampled. A 
couple of banks even make the amount public, and increasingly the market is sensitive to the fact that 
not all excess regulatory capital is held just as a general buffer, that is, that excess regulatory capital is 
not necessarily  excess economic capital.  But the public  is unable  in most cases to differentiate the 
excess regulatory capital held for specific purposes from that held for general purposes. This inability 
is a particular problem under Basel I for those entities with modest credit risk and dominant operating 
risk. Under Basel I, the regulatory capital is driven solely by credit risk, and therefore the requirement 
tends  to  be  too  low  for  activities  that  do  not  entail  much  credit  risk  but  do  expose  the  bank  to 
operational  risk.  The  A-IRB  banks  under  Basel  II  that  specialize  in  such  activities  -  for  example, 
processing  securities  and  payments  and  acting  as  custodians  -  will  experience  increases  in  their 
regulatory  capital  requirements  on  those  activities.  Every  day  these  entities  transfer  very  large 
amounts  of  federal  funds,  act  as  custodians  for  massive  quantities  of  securities,  and  dominate 
payments  and  securities  transfer  systems.  Disruptions  in  their  operations  can  cause,  and  have 
caused, serious difficulties in world financial markets.  
U.S. supervisors will propose that those banks that are required, or that choose, to adopt the A-IRB 
approach  to  Basel  II  will  also  be  required  to  hold  capital  for  operational  risk,  using  a  procedure  to 
develop the size of that charge known as the advanced measurement approach (AMA). Because of 
earlier comments by U.S. bankers, the amount of required operational risk capital will not be subject to 
a  minimum  floor  nor  will  the  charge  be  based  on  revenue.  Rather,  under  the  AMA,  A-IRB  banks 
themselves  will  have  the  primary  responsibility  for  assessing  their  own  operational  risk  capital 
requirement.  This  requirement  will  be  a  Pillar  I  charge  and  will  be  disclosed  to  market  participants 
under Pillar III. The banks that remain under Basel I will not be subject to an operational risk capital 
charge in the United States.  
The advanced measurement approach gives banks the flexibility to develop their own methodology for 
calculating the operational, or "op", risk capital charge. The supervisor, to be sure, will require that the 
procedure  be  comprehensive,  systematic,  and  consistent  with  certain  broad  guidelines.  These 
guidelines specify such factors as the necessity for independent risk management, board and senior 
management oversight, audits, the use of historical internal and external loss data, scenario analysis, 
and so forth. The supervisor must review and validate each bank's process, but again considerable 
flexibility exists for individual bank application. The op risk capital charge is expected to reflect banks' 
own environment and control mechanisms and can be reduced by insurance and other risk mitigants. 
For example, if a bank invests in improved contingency procedures and approaches, we would expect 
such  an  investment  to  be  reflected  in  a  reduction  in  the  need  for  operational  risk  capital  under  the 
AMA.  
Several  U.S.  banks  that  are  developing  an  op  risk  capital  requirement  under  the  advanced 
measurement approach have told us that they are very comfortable with the results so far. Importantly, 
they say that the procedures have allowed them to better identify business activities and practices that 
pose operational risks and that they have taken steps to minimize the risks. That result is critical to 
  supervisors  who  believe  that  the  AMA  methodology  will  produce  a  lasting  discipline  for  banks, 
encouraging  them  to  think  carefully  about  and  minimize  the  risks  associated  with  their  business 
activities. Supervisors expect the advanced measurement approach to provide the incentives to invest 
in new systems and practices that will reduce the potential for serious losses from operational risk.  
Operational  risk  and  the  AMA  are  issues  that  I  call  to  the  subcommittee's  attention  because  I  am 
aware of a very few banks that aggressively oppose this aspect of Basel II. Accordingly, I have held a 
number  of  discussions  with  bankers  on  this  subject  over  the  last  year,  including  many  direct 
conversations with the senior bankers who have expressed the most concern about the issue. As I 
indicated earlier, I believe this sort of dialogue has been essential to the appropriate development of 
the Basel II framework and is something that we will continue to emphasize. But as a bank supervisor 
and as a central banker, I have to say that we have not found the arguments of the operational risk 
skeptics to be convincing.  
The skeptics argue that the cost of developing and using the advanced measurement approach and 
the associated capital charges divert resources away from actual investment in risk-reducing systems 
and better backup systems. As I will discuss more fully, Basel II, without doubt, is costly; but the final 
judgment for any expenditure must rest on the balance between costs and benefits. We and, as noted, 
many  banks  believe  that  the  AMA  is  critical  for  the  kind  of  formal  analysis  that  focuses  banks' 
attentions  on  the  operational  risks  they  face. We  are  also  convinced  that  the  explicit  Pillar  I  capital 
charge  creates  incentives  for  them  to  reduce  these  risks  while  ensuring  that  minimum  capital  is 
allocated to absorb the remaining risk.  
Critics  also  argue  that  an  explicit  Pillar  I  capital  charge  would  upset  the  competitive  balance  with 
nonbank and foreign bank competitors. Foreign regulators, it is argued, will be less aggressive in their 
rule enforcement than U.S. regulators. As I earlier suggested, Pillar III - disclosure - will highlight any 
significant differences across banks, in the expectation that counterparties will penalize  inconsistent 
risk measures. In addition, the Basel Supervisors Committee has set up an implementation group of 
senior supervisors to coordinate the application of the rules across countries.  
As for nonbanks, the argument ignores the significant edge banks will continue to have from access to 
the  discount  window  and  the  Federal  Reserve's  payments  system.  This  competitive  edge  attracts 
customers  and  lowers  funding  costs  relative  to  nonbanks.  In  addition,  most  of  the  banks  that  have 
expressed  concern  about  the  operational  risk  capital  charge  are  already  carrying  large  excess 
regulatory capital positions, supplementing their quite small current regulatory capital. Indeed, we do 
not  believe  that  these  entities  would  have  to  raise  any  new  capital  to  meet  the  proposed  op  risk 
charges, but rather would simply shift excess to required capital. "Excess" regulatory capital may be 
reduced for some banks under Basel II, but we believe that such reductions because of op risk are 
perfectly consistent with making capital requirements both more risk sensitive and more transparent, 
not to mention more accurate.  
The effort not to raise regulatory capital requirements is underlined by the critics' preference that op 
risk capital needs be addressed in Pillar II - that is, it should be part of the undisclosed capital buffer 
developed as part of the supervisory oversight of banks on a case-by-case basis. We again disagree. 
Excess regulatory capital would appear larger than it should, and the transparency of the proposed 
procedure would be lost. Inevitably, such an approach would treat banks with similar risks differently. 
Supervisors would also have less leverage over a bank's capital allocation for op risk and third parties 
would have more difficulty comparing capital among banks than they would under a Pillar I rule.  
In short, we have not been convinced by the arguments we have heard, and we still believe that op 
risk is every bit as real a risk as credit risk and should be treated in the same way - with an explicit 
Pillar I capital charge.  
Commercial real estate 
Some banks - mostly those that would not be subject to the A-IRB capital requirements unless they 
chose to become so - oppose the higher capital charges that A-IRB banks would generally face on 
their commercial real estate loans. These banks argue that bank lenders have learned from the losses 
of  the  1980s  and  early  1990s  and  now  do  much  better  underwriting  by  insisting  on  more  borrower 
equity and better appraisal procedures for commercial real estate. These improvements, critics argue, 
have  reduced  default  rates  and  losses  and,  if  anything,  argue  for  lower,  not  higher,  capital 
requirements or at least the same capital charge that is applied to business loans under A-IRB.  
  Setting aside that the system has not been tested by a true real estate cycle since the early1990s, the 
supervisors  agree  that  commercial  real  estate  underwriting  has  significantly  improved.  These 
improvements have been incorporated into the empirical analysis that our staff has used in developing 
the Basel II proposals. In the view of the Federal Reserve, however, capital requirements should be 
based on more than just the chance that an individual loan will default: They should also be based on 
the  tendency  of  defaults  to  occur  at  the  same  time,  in  "clumps"  -  what  economists  refer  to  as  high 
asset  correlation.  Defaults  and  losses  occurring  in  clumps  require  higher  capital  than  such  losses 
spread  out  over  time.  According  to  our  analysis,  this  clumping  tendency  is  much  stronger  for 
commercial  real  estate  credits  than  for  business  loans.  Moreover,  though  improvements  in 
underwriting  have  made  individual  loans  safer,  the  asset  correlations  among  such  loans  in  a  given 
portfolio - the "clumping" tendency - has not changed as a result of improved underwriting.  
The  staff  of  the  Federal  Reserve  has  discussed  this  issue  with  bankers  and  has  shown  them  an 
analysis - based on several data sets and using different methodologies - requesting their evidence of 
any  errors  or  new  data  sets  that  challenge  the  staff's  conclusion.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  in  the 
process  of making  this  analysis  widely  available  and  is  again  asking  for  critical  evaluation  and  any 
contradictory  information.  We  are,  in  short,  willing  to  listen.  If  banks  can  provide  evidence  that  this 
proposal embodies erroneous assumptions or is otherwise analytically faulty, we will change it.  
Cost. Implementing A-IRB in this country is going to be expensive for the small number of banks for 
which  it  will  be  required,  for  those  banks  choosing  it,  and  for  the  supervisors.  For  the  banks,  the 
greatest expense is in establishing the mechanisms necessary for a bank to evaluate and control their 
risk  exposures  more  formally.  Nonetheless,  such  costs  are  modest  relative  to  the  size  of  recent 
charge-offs. The A-IRB approach will not eliminate losses: Banks are in the business of taking risk and 
where  there  are  risks,  there  will  be  losses.  But  we  believe  that  the  better  risk-management  that  is 
required for the A-IRB will reduce losses and provide benefits to bank stakeholders and the economy. 
The cost-benefit ratio looks right.  
Furthermore,  attributing  all  the  costs  associated  with  adopting  modern,  formal  risk-management 
systems  to  Basel  II  is  a  logical  fallacy.  The  large  banks  required  to  adopt  A-IRB  -  banks  that must 
compete for funding in a global marketplace - would ultimately have to undertake such measures with 
or without Basel II. Basel II may well speed up the adoption process, but many of the costs attributed 
to  Basel  II  actually  just  reflect  the  costs  of  doing  business  in  an  increasingly  complex  financial 
environment.  
Competitive equity 
Some regional banks have told us that they are concerned that regional, and perhaps smaller, banks 
will be competitively  disadvantaged by  Basel II, even if they are not required to adopt  A-IRB. Their 
concern has two parts.  
First, some regional banks feel that market pressure and the rating agencies will force them to adopt 
A-IRB and, as a result, to incur significant costs. Our discussions with rating agencies do not support 
the regional banks' fears. Indeed, our sense is that the rating agencies feel that adoption of A-IRB by 
regional banks at this time would not be cost effective. In our opinion, any regional bank interested in 
adopting the A-IRB approach at its inception should carefully assess the costs and benefits of doing 
so.  
That  said,  we  expect  the  art  and  science  and,  indeed,  the  very  language,  of  risk  management  to 
migrate toward that used for A-IRB. Over the years ahead, as the new risk-management techniques 
become more cost effective for them, regional banks, we suspect,  will adopt these techniques and, 
thereafter,  probably  adopt  the  A-IRB  at  the  regulatory  level.  But  adopting  them  now  would  be 
premature,  and  we  believe  that  regional  banks  will  not  be  pressured  to  do  so  by  either  the  rating 
agencies or the regulators.  
The second part of the competitive equity concern is the belief by some regional and community banks 
that they will be placed at a competitive disadvantage with A-IRB banks because of the larger banks' 
lower  regulatory  capital  charges  on  residential  mortgages,  loans  to  smaller  businesses,  and  certain 
retail loans.  
The direct competitive impact on Basel II and Basel I banks is important. Of course, the rulemaking 
process in the United States will probe the issue fully. However, a number of factors suggest that the 
concern about competitive impact is not well founded.  
  In terms of overall capital, A-IRB banks will likely face lower capital charges for some types of lending, 
but they will also face higher charges on other loan categories, such as commercial real estate finance 
and higher costs of developing the risk-management infrastructure to be an A-IRB bank. They will also 
be subject to an explicit capital charge for operational risk and the cyclical buffer in Pillar II that will not 
be imposed on non-IRB banks.  
In the individual loan markets for which Basel II lowers A-IRB capital charges, we also have reason to 
believe that competitive balance will not be disrupted. In the business loan market, for example, the 
smallest  banks  do  not  directly  compete  with  the  banks  that  will  be  required  to  adopt  A-IRB.  Small 
banks'  close  ties  to  local  communities  afford  them  substantial  information  advantages  over  larger 
banks.  As  a  result,  they  tend  to  focus  on  relationship  lending  to  small  businesses  and  individuals. 
A-IRB banks, in contrast, tend to make such retail loans by using automated underwriting tools. Larger 
regional  banks  are  more  likely  to  compete  directly  with  A-IRB  banks,  but  for  two  good  reasons  we 
believe that Basel II will not affect these banks significantly.  
First, today not regulatory capital but economic capital - the individual bank's management judgment 
about  internal  capital  allocations  for  its  own  decisionmaking  -  drives  loan  pricing  and  origination 
decisions.  Nothing  in  Basel  II  will  change  for  the  capital  charges  implied  by  economic  capital. 
Moreover,  for  some  years,  as  I  discussed  earlier,  when  there  has  been  a  difference  between 
regulatory and economic capital, sophisticated banks have used capital arbitrage techniques to reduce 
their  effective  regulatory  minimums.  Asset  securitization  deals,  in  particular,  have  allowed  banks  to 
dramatically reduce the amount of capital they currently hold for residential mortgages and many retail 
loans.  Regulatory  capital  arbitrage  -  market  reality  -  thus  has  already  reduced  the  effective  capital 
charge  for  the  loans  for  which  A-IRB  banks  will  receive  lower  on-balance  capital  charges.  Basel  II 
increases transparency by bringing regulatory minimums more in line with reality, but it will not change 
the status quo competitive environment very much, if at all. In short, Basel II will bring A-IRB banks' 
regulatory capital charges more in line with the capital charges they have, through arbitrage, already 
obtained.  
The  second  reason  minimum  regulatory  capital  requirements  are  unlikely  to  significantly  affect 
competitive behavior is that most well managed  banks carry sizable excess capital buffers. Smaller 
banks in particular, operating with less leverage than larger banks, hold substantial excess regulatory 
capital, which reflects their lack of diversification and more limited access to funding. Basel II will not 
change that fact. Under Basel II, small banks will continue to hold more capital than A-IRB banks, but 
A-IRB banks' true risk-based capital positions will be measured more accurately.  
Conclusion 
The Basel II effort reflects the collective judgment of the supervisors of the world's largest and most 
complex banking organizations, including those of the United States, that the activities and practices of 
such firms have been outgrowing our existing supervisory approaches. At the same time, the role of 
these banks in our financial systems continues to grow. In my judgment, we have no alternative but to 
adopt, as soon as practical, approaches that are appropriately suited to the task of bank supervision of 
our larger banks in the twenty-first century.  
The  Basel  II  framework  is  the  product  of  extensive  multiyear  dialogues  with  the  banking  industry 
regarding  state-of-the-art  risk-management  practices  in  every  significant  area  of  banking  activity. 
Accordingly,  it  provides  a  roadmap  for  the  improved  regulation  and  supervision  of  global  banking. 
Basel II will provide strong incentives for banks to continue improving their internal risk-management 
capabilities as well as the tools for supervisors to focus on emerging problems and issues more rapidly 
than ever before.  
I  am  pleased  to  appear  before  you  today  to  report  on  this  effort  as  it  nears  completion.  Open 
discussion  of  complex  issues  has  been  at  the  heart  of  the  Basel  II  development  process  from  the 
outset and no doubt will continue to characterize it as Basel II evolves further.  
 