 Nout Wellink: The position of women in the financial sector 
Address  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, at the Conference on “Women at the Decision Making Positions”, organised 
by the Russian Association of Regional Banks, Amsterdam, 24 February 2003. 
 I rarely have the privilege of addressing an audience largely made up of women. That in itself is telling 
- and is not a good sign. But the fact of the matter is that the financial world is still dominated by men. 
That applies to both commercial and central banks, and the Netherlands is no exception. So, in the 
run-up to International Women’s Day, you have every reason to hold this conference to focus on the 
role of women at senior management levels in the financial sector.  
The position of women in the labour market can and must be improved, notably in the financial sector. 
That’s not just because I think women deserve a better deal but also, if not mainly, because it would 
be good for companies and for society as a whole to see an improvement in women’s labour market 
participation and their chances to advance to the top. The world would be a bleaker place if it only 
consisted  of  men,  and  the  same  applies  to  organisations.  An  organisation  with  a  mix  of  men  and 
women on all levels has a more pleasant atmosphere, which possibly makes for a better performance. 
Moreover,  the  economy  as  a  whole  will  benefit  from  higher  women  participation  rates,  for  the 
participation rate among women in the euro area is one of the reasons why the growth of income per 
capita here lags behind that in the United States. 
And  women  should  be  appropriately  rewarded,  of  course.  Which  reminds  me  of  what  was  written 
about Alan Greenspan in a recent biography. When still running his own financial consultancy, some 
40 years ago, Greenspan chose to recruit women rather than men. His motivation was purely rational. 
He was convinced that women were just as qualified as men, but since the labour market did not fully 
appreciate  the  quality  of  women  they  were  undervalued  and  hence  cheaper.  Greenspan  used  his 
sharp insight to benefit from this arbitrage opportunity. 
Back to the present day. The good news is that in the euro area the labour market participation for 
women aged between 24 and 45 is far higher than that for those of 45 and over. This indicates an 
improvement  over  time  and  is  a  promising  development.  The  bad  news  is  that  women  still  lag  far 
behind in terms of qualitative participation. Let me keep to the Netherlands on this point. According to 
a report by our Social and Cultural Planning Office a few years ago, not a single woman sat on the 
Managing Boards of the top 25 Dutch companies. In the top 100, there was only one woman to over 
400 men, and women made up no more than 2.5% in the top 5000. The situation on the Supervisory 
Boards was better, but with an average of one woman to 12 men, still not exactly positive. And as far 
as  our  banking  sector  is  concerned,  I  am  not  sure  whether  we  would  have  sufficient  women  top 
managers to create a delegation like yours. 
As  regards  the  position  of  women  in  senior  management,  I  must  unfortunately  share  some  of  the 
blame. The Nederlandsche Bank has one women among the 12 members of its Supervisory Board. 
Prince  Claus,  the  late  husband  of  our  Queen  Beatrix,  was  instrumental  in  getting  her  on  our 
Supervisory  Board by stressing time and again that  the successor to him should be a  woman. Our 
Governing  Board  is  made  up  entirely  of  men,  so  in  that  respect  we  have  a  lot  to  learn  from  your 
country. Two of our eight deputy executive directors are women. While this is an improvement on the 
past, we still have a long way to go. We are hence actively working on a plan for a larger number of 
women at the Nederlandsche Bank, with more advancement to the top. Before I tell you how we intend 
to do this, let me first go into the reasons why women lag behind.  
Both demand and supply factors play a role.  As regards demand, all too often,  women are passed 
over as potential candidates for recruitment or promotion. Whereas some feel that this is done with 
intent, I am inclined to think that it is an unconscious process, arising from a stereotyped view of men 
and women. In fact, research indicates that men are inclined to appoint men, and women are inclined 
to appoint women. Since management traditionally consists of men, it is easy to see where the glass 
ceiling comes from, and that it will not disappear unless we make a conscious effort.  
Turning  to  supply,  and  women  themselves  have  a  role  to  play  here,  several  causes  present 
themselves. Women are less self-confident than men, are not as quick to think that they’re suitable or 
to push themselves forward. That is not just my impression, it has been confirmed by psychological 
BIS Review 12/2003 
 1
 research.  Another  factor  is  that  women  sometimes  have  other  preferences  in  respect  of  combining 
their career and family. That is  only  to  be respected  and means that,  wherever  we can,  we should 
create the conditions for combining work and childcare. Not every job can be done part-time but there 
are  plenty  of  positions,  even  at  senior  levels,  that  offer  the  flexibility  that  women  prefer  because  of 
personal circumstances.  
That brings me to the Nederlandsche Bank’s policy in this area. Let me begin with the plus-es. Our 
general terms of employment are well-disposed towards women. We have a standard 36-hour working 
week, opportunities for all, including senior staff, to work part-time, flexible working hours and good 
financial arrangements for childcare. Our recruitment policy is geared to attracting women employees, 
and  in  fact  over  time  more  women,  especially  the  higher  educated  who  are  the  high  potentials  for 
advancing  to  the  top,  have  joined  the  Bank.  To  give  you  some  figures,  whereas  our  percentage  of 
female employees increased merely from 30 to 34 percent over the last 6  years, the percentage of 
women in the higher salaried positions has doubled in that period.  
But,  and  that  is  a  minus,  we  apparently  don’t  do  enough  to  allow  women  to  advance  to  the  top. 
Whereas 25% of our female employees has an academic background, only 11% reaches the level of 
senior management. So we still have a long way to go.  
One initiative in the Netherlands to promote the advancement of women in the boardroom has been 
the creation of a network of ambassadors, comprising top male executives in larger organisations who 
are willing to push for more opportunities for women. I was recently asked to join this network. As one 
of the ambassadors, I am obliged to draw up three personal points for action and to stick to them.  
Your conference gives me a wonderful opportunity to announce my three personal points for action or, 
to  use  words  that  I  feel  more  confortable  with,  policy  targets.  If  it’s  up  to  me,  what  will  the 
Nederlandsche Bank do in the near future to stimulate women’s advancement to the top?  
   My first personal point of action is to make it more visible, both to the outside world and to 
everyone working at the Nederlandsche Bank, that I am committed to promoting the career 
possibilities of women in our organisation. Research has shown that explicit commitment by 
board  members  makes  women  more  confident  to  apply  for  senior  positions.  Moreover,  it 
makes managers more aware that they are expected to pay attention to women candidates 
when it comes to promotion, and to be flexible when it comes to the demands of those who 
have the ambition to combine a career with the care of a family. This conference is one way 
to create this visibility, for which I thank you. Giving interviews on the subject is another and I 
promise  that  in  the  course  of  this  year  I  will  actively  look  for  possibilities  to  get  press 
coverage of my views on the subject.  
My second point  of action  is to invite high potential  women working at the Nederlandsche 
Bank for a discussion about the problems they encounter in their job fulfilment and career 
planning.  If  I  want  to  promote  opportunities  for  women  in  my  organisation,  I  must  have  a 
clear picture of how they perceive the glass ceiling. I intend to discuss the outcome of these 
conversations with our management. I expect that from this exchange of information we will 
be able to draw lessons that may be translated in specific measures for improvement of the 
career possibilities for women.  
For my third point of action I would like to draw upon that information. I intend to establish a 
(moving) target figure for the participation of women candidates in our management trainee 
programme. Not all high potential women may be interested in a career to the top, for the 
reasons  I  mentioned  earlier.  But,  depending  on  the  number  of  women  that  are,  I  will 
establish  a  target  rate  of  participation  of  women  in  our  management  development 
programme. Moreover,  when it comes to promotions I want every shortlist to contain as a 
rule at least one woman.  
Sticking to these three personal points of action, or policy targets, is a question of commitment. Being 
a  central  banker,  I  am  well  aware  of  the  importance  for  my  reputation  of  holding  on  to  this 
commitment. But not only my reputation is at stake. Promoting opportunities for women in the financial 
sector is very important, as we are responsible for bringing out the best in our human capital, male and 
female. I hope that this conference, and the other activities being organised for International Women’s 
Day,  will  contribute  to  more  equal  and  fair  representation  in  management  in  general  and  in  the 
financial sector in particular. 
 