 David Dodge: Recent economic developments and the conduct of monetary 
policy 
Speech by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Metropolitan Halifax Chamber of 
Commerce, Halifax, 18 June 2003. 
 Good  afternoon,  and  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  with  you  today.  It(cid:146)s  great  to  be  back  in 
Halifax, one of Canada(cid:146)s most colourful port cities. It is the wonderful juxtaposition of the new with the 
old - Halifax(cid:146)s modern focus with its rich maritime traditions - that makes this city special. 
It(cid:146)s been a year since I last spoke in Halifax, and a lot has changed since then. We(cid:146)ve witnessed some 
extraordinary  events,  both  in Canada and around the world. On the  whole, Canada(cid:146)s economy has 
withstood the turmoil quite well. The impact of some more recent events is not yet clear. Still, I will try 
today to outline how our economy has evolved over the past year and to lay out the issues that we(cid:146)ll 
be assessing as we prepare our July Monetary Policy Report Update. 
Watching conditions and demand pressures 
As  we at  the  Bank of Canada set monetary policy,  we  watch  all the events affecting our economy, 
including  global  geopolitical,  economic,  and  financial  conditions. We  do  this  with  a  view  to  keeping 
domestic inflation near the 2 per cent midpoint of Canada(cid:146)s inflation target range of 1 to 3 per cent. As 
we  have  often  said,  delivering  an  environment  of  low,  stable,  and  predictable  inflation  is  the  best 
contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  a  strong,  sustainable  economy  and  rising  living 
standards  for  Canadians.  Such  a  low-inflation  environment  also  helps  keep  our  economy  near  its 
production potential over time. 
To  achieve  those  goals,  we  keep  a  close  eye  on  the  factors  influencing  demand  and  production 
capacity - factors that will, in turn, influence inflation over the medium term. And we adjust monetary 
policy to keep the future trend of inflation near the 2 per cent target midpoint. 
Where we(cid:146)ve been 
As I(cid:146)ve said, it(cid:146)s been a year since I last spoke in Halifax. But to place our recent experience in some 
context, I should go back a bit further than that - to  the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the 
United States. In the wake of that terrible event, the Bank of Canada quickly and aggressively cut its 
policy interest rate to shore up confidence and support domestic demand. This action, together with 
earlier reductions in our policy interest rate, meant that the Bank had injected considerable stimulus 
into the economy. 
By the spring of 2002, evidence had already started to build that demand was recovering more quickly 
than had been anticipated. So, even though demand pressures were not yet showing up in prices, we 
began to remove some of that monetary stimulus. We raised our key policy interest rate three times 
between April and July 2002, by a total of three-quarters of a percentage point. 
By last autumn, inflation in Canada was on the rise. But we refrained from raising interest rates any 
further  at  the  time,  because  we  judged  that  the  pickup  in  inflation  was  mainly  the  result  of  one-off 
factors and would be reversed over the next year or so. As well, there was considerable geopolitical 
and financial uncertainty, which, combined with global economic weakness, pointed to restrained total 
demand for Canadian goods and services. 
Through the first quarter of this year, CPI inflation climbed well above the 2 per cent target. Much of 
the rise was the result of higher energy prices. We also saw a marked increase in our measure of core 
inflation, which strips out the eight most volatile items - including gasoline, heating oil, and natural gas 
-  from  the  CPI  basket,  as  well  as  the  effect  of  changes  in  indirect  taxes  on  the  remaining  CPI 
components. The rise in core inflation was exacerbated by further increases in automobile insurance 
premiums.  But  even  allowing  for  the  unusual  and  extraordinarily  large  increases  in  insurance 
premiums, inflation was well above target. This suggested that strong domestic demand was putting 
pressure  on  production  capacity.  In  this  environment,  some  indicators  of  short-term  inflation 
expectations edged up, although longer-term expectations remained around 2 per cent. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 1
 In view of these inflation developments, the momentum of domestic demand, the narrowing of interest 
rate spreads in credit markets, and diminishing geopolitical uncertainty, we raised our target overnight 
rate by 25 basis points in March and again in mid-April - bringing it to 3.25 per cent. 
In our April Monetary Policy Report, we stated that the risks confronting the world economy appeared 
to be more evenly balanced than they had been in the autumn. The Canadian economy was projected 
to  strengthen  appreciably  towards  the  end  of  2003  and  to  grow  somewhat  above  its  production 
potential  during  2004,  thanks  to  a  pickup  in  economic  activity  in  the  United  States  and  further 
improvements in business and consumer confidence. 
We concluded in April that although growth would likely remain somewhat below potential in Canada 
for the first three quarters of this year, most of the small amount of economic slack that would open up 
this year would have closed by the end of 2004. 
We projected that core inflation would likely fall to about 2 1/2 per cent in the second half of this year 
and  to  about  2 per cent  by  early  2004  as  some  of  the  special  factors  pushing  up  inflation  ran  their 
course. We also pointed out that total CPI inflation would continue to be importantly affected by swings 
in crude oil prices and that it would likely fall temporarily below the core rate in the first half of 2004 
before steadying out at a rate close to core inflation. 
Factors influencing monetary policy 
In the April Monetary Policy Report, we listed a number of factors that we intended to watch closely as 
we set monetary policy. These factors are the pace of economic expansion in the United States and 
overseas, the strength of domestic demand, financial market conditions, and the evolution of inflation 
and inflation expectations. 
So, let me review how we have seen these factors evolving. I(cid:146)ll start with the external environment. In 
Europe, domestic demand and economic growth have continued to disappoint. Japan(cid:146)s economy has 
also remained weak. While demand growth in the rest of Asia has been strong, the outbreak of Severe 
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) is clearly going to slow growth in some countries. 
In the United States, domestic demand has not been recovering as quickly as expected, which has 
negative implications for Canadian exports, at least over the short term. Consumer spending continues 
to underpin economic activity in that country. However, business fixed investment has not yet picked 
up. Expectations as to when the U.S. recovery will occur have been pushed back until late this year 
when  confidence  levels  should  improve,  and  when  the  impact  of  very  expansionary  monetary  and 
fiscal policies should begin to be fully felt. 
Now,  let(cid:146)s  turn  to  the  second  factor  -  domestic  demand  in  Canada.  On  the  whole,  demand  has 
remained quite strong, supported by a healthy employment market, low interest rates, and a recovery 
in corporate profits. While growth in consumer spending slowed slightly in the first quarter, it was still 
quite strong, especially on housing. Governments and businesses both increased their spending. As a 
result  of  strong  domestic  demand,  gross  domestic  product  grew  at  an  annual  rate  of  almost 
2 1/2 per cent in the first quarter, up from about 1 1/2 per cent in the final quarter of 2002. 
In  Nova  Scotia,  we  are  seeing  some  fall-off  in  consumer  spending.  Business  investment  prospects 
have also been dampened by the postponement of natural gas projects. Still, most forecasters predict 
Nova Scotia(cid:146)s economy will continue to grow at the Canadian average rate this year. 
A  third  factor  on  our  watch  list  is  the  evolution  of  conditions  in  financial  markets.  Last  autumn,  we 
witnessed  sharp  increases  in  risk  premiums  because  of  uncertainty  in  financial  markets.  In  recent 
months, these risk premiums have declined, and conditions in both debt and equity markets continue 
to improve. This reflects reduced uncertainty and bodes well for business spending going forward. 
Before moving on to the fourth factor, I(cid:146)d like to mention several developments since April that have 
implications  for  the  economic  outlook.  Together,  these  developments  point  to  near-term  growth  in 
Canada that will be lower than we expected at the time of our April Monetary Policy Report. 
SARS  is  having  a  significant  impact  on  the  hospitality  industry,  not  just  in  Toronto,  but  across  the 
country - including here in Atlantic Canada. More recently, the closure of export markets because of 
the discovery in Alberta of an isolated case of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) is having an 
impact on the beef and beef-processing industry. And, of course, problems in several important East 
Coast fisheries are affecting employment and production in this region. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 As you well know, since mid-April there has also been a further sharp adjustment in the value of the 
U.S.  dollar  against  major  currencies,  including  ours.  The  magnitude  and  speed  of  the  Canadian 
dollar(cid:146)s rise has been greater than anyone had anticipated and will have a dampening influence on 
aggregate demand later this year and next. We are working to understand all the factors behind these 
exchange  rate  movements.  In  setting  monetary  policy,  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  effects  on 
aggregate demand of these factors, as well as the effect of the exchange rate movements themselves. 
Exchange rate movements also have a direct effect on the prices of traded goods and services and, 
therefore, on inflation. However, our research has shown that, in economies such as Canada(cid:146)s, the 
effect of exchange rate movements on consumer prices has been less pronounced in recent years, 
when inflation was relatively low, than was the case in earlier years when inflation was high. 
The inflation picture 
This leads me to the fourth factor that we watch closely in setting monetary policy(cid:151)the evolution of 
inflation and inflation expectations. Let me start with inflation. 
In  the  3  June  press  release  that  announced  our  latest  interest  rate  decision,  we  pointed  out  that 
inflation  has  declined  more  than  expected.  Some  of  this  decline  is  due  to  transitory  factors,  most 
notably, the rebate on electricity prices in Ontario. Thus, we expect some temporary rebound in core 
inflation in the coming months, as these factors unwind. Nevertheless, it now appears that both core 
and  total  CPI  inflation  will  return  to  the  2  per  cent  target  somewhat  earlier  than  the  Bank  had 
anticipated  in  April.  This  is,  in  part,  because  of  some  near-term  softness  in  demand.  Also,  the 
appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  will  somewhat  dampen  the  rise  in  total  CPI,  although  it  is  not 
expected to have as large a direct effect on core CPI. 
Now, a word on inflation expectations. As I mentioned, we were concerned in April that the sharp rise 
in  CPI  inflation  last  winter  was  starting  to  push  up  Canadians(cid:146)  expectations  of  inflation.  The  recent 
easing in inflation is likely to act as a moderating influence on those expectations. We will be seeking 
evidence of this in our regular survey of businesses prior to our next fixed announcement date. 
 Let  me  sum  up.  Today,  I  have  outlined  some  of  the  recent  developments  that  will  influence  the 
demand for Canadian goods and services. They include continuing weakness in the U.S. and global 
economies, and concerns about the economic impact of SARS and BSE. These developments likely 
mean a very weak second quarter and point to some continuing softness in the Canadian economy in 
the third quarter. 
Looking  forward,  it  remains  our  view  that  growth  in  Canada(cid:146)s  economy  will  be  underpinned  by  the 
strength  of  domestic  demand  and  a  rebound  in  the  U.S.  economy  towards  the  end  of  2003  and 
through 2004. However, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar against the U.S. dollar, which is an 
outcome of various  influences at  work in both  the Canadian and global  economies, will be a factor 
influencing  aggregate  demand.  We  will  provide  Canadians  with  a  more  considered  and  complete 
picture  of  our  views  on  the  economy  in  our  next  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  which  will  be 
published on 17 July. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  Halifax  is  a  city  that  has  withstood  some  extraordinary  events  in  its  long 
history. The Canadian economy, too, has been buffeted by some remarkable winds this year - some 
fair and some foul. But we have weathered them well, and I believe we will continue to do so. I can 
assure  you  that  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  provide  monetary  policy  that  contributes  to  a 
strong, stable, and sustainable economy. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 3
