 Lars Heikensten: Monetary policy and wage formation 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance, Stockholm, 13 February 2003. 
 Firstly,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  to  the  Riksdag  and  discuss  wage 
formation together  with  Anders Lindström from the National Mediation Office and Ingemar Hansson 
from the National Institute of Economic Research.  
I  shall  begin  by  describing  how  we  take  wage  formation  into  account  when  making  decisions  on 
interest  rate  changes.  Then  I  shall  comment  on  the  assessment  made  in  our  most  recent  Inflation 
Report (published in December), which we did not find reason to alter significantly at our last monetary 
policy  meeting  on  6  February.  I  shall  continue  by  discussing  how  wage  formation  may  develop  in 
future. In conclusion, I shall summarise and mention some of the challenges facing wage formation.  
Just over a decade ago, there was a comprehensive realignment in economic policy. The budgetary 
process was tightened up. At around the same time, monetary policy changed direction, the exchange 
rate  was  allowed  to  float  and  the  new  target  was  to  limit  inflation  to  2  per  cent,  with  a  tolerated 
deviation of plus/minus 1 percentage point. The economic policy realignment can only be described as 
a success. On average, the inflation rate amounted to just under 2 per cent a year during the period 
1993-2002, and the budget balance was turned around from a deficit of 12 per cent of GDP in 1993 to 
a surplus of 4 per cent in 2001. Real wages increased on average by 2 per cent a year, which can be 
compared with the stagnant or even declining real wages in the 1970s and 1980s.  At the same time, 
unemployment was halved from 8 per cent in 1993 to the current figure of 4 per cent. 
Thus, the Swedish economy is currently in a much better condition than it was 10 years ago. However, 
there are many indications that it may become more difficult to combine a good growth rate with a low 
inflation rate in future. At present there is no unutilised capacity in the economy as there was directly 
following the crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. It also appears as though the labour supply will grow 
at a slow rate in the near future as a result both of demographic reasons and of a high rate of absence 
due to sickness. This impairs the opportunities for growth in the Swedish economy. It could also mean 
that, when the economy shows an upswing, the Riksbank will be forced to conduct a tighter monetary 
policy to prevent tension arising between supply and demand on the labour market. 
Wage costs have great significance 
As  total  wage  costs  comprise  almost  70  per  cent  of  the  total  value  added  in  the  economy, 
developments  in  wage  costs  have  decisive  significance  for  the  development  of  costs  and  prices. 
Making  an  assessment  of  future  developments  in  wage  costs  is  therefore  a  natural  and  central 
element in the Riksbank's analysis of inflation prospects. If there is an overly rapid increase in wage 
costs,  companies  may  be  forced  to  raise  their  prices  significantly  and  this  would  result  in  inflation 
exceeding  the  target  level.  This  would  require  tightening  monetary  policy,  i.e.  raising  the  repo  rate. 
Although this would bring inflation back to the target level, it would be at the cost of an increase in 
unemployment. In the long term, however, developments in unemployment are essentially dependent 
on how well the labour market and wage formation function.  
Monetary  policy  has  affected  the  wage  formation  process;  the  uncertainty  over  future  price 
developments has declined thanks to inflation targeting. Wage-earners no longer need worry that their 
pay rises will be eaten up by overly rapid price increases. At the same time, employers find it easier to 
determine the size of the scope for wage increases. It also appears as though what is usually termed 
"monetary illusion" may have disappeared. The labour market organisations appear today to focus to a 
greater extent on real wage cost increases. The strong confidence in the inflation target has meant 
that these organisations' inflation expectations have been at a level of around 2 per cent since 1996.  
The  changed  conditions  for  wage  formation  have  probably  also  contributed  to  the  two  most  recent 
bargaining  rounds  being  characterised  by  a  high  degree  of  cooperation  between  the  labour  market 
organisations. At the same time, there appears to be support among wage-earner organisations for 
the manufacturing industry to lead the way in collective wage agreement through what is known as the 
Industrial  Agreement.  Altogether  these  changes  have  entailed  an  increase  in  nominal  wages  of  an 
BIS Review 7/2003 
 1
 average of 4 per cent a year over the past decade, which can be compared with an average figure of 8 
per cent a year during the 1980s.  
Developments in wage costs over the coming years 
When we make our wage forecasts at the Riksbank, we base them on a total assessment of collective 
wage  agreements,  demand  pressure  in  the  labour  market,  productivity,  profit  margins,  inflation 
expectations  and  taxes,  to  mention  just  a  few  factors.  This  autumn  will  see  the  beginning  of  wage 
bargaining rounds for more than 2 million employees and the outcome will have crucial importance for 
the  development  of  inflation  and  thus  monetary  policy.  The  assessment  in  the  December  Inflation 
Report was that the Swedish economy would show a recovery towards the end of the year, following a 
relatively  mild  downturn  in  economic  activity.  We  envisioned  a  still  relatively  strong  labour  market. 
However,  employment  was  expected  to  fall  slightly  to  begin  with,  before  slowly  showing  an  upturn 
once again. The strained economic situation among a number of municipalities and county councils 
meant  that  we  assessed  it  to  be  difficult  for  the  Swedish  Municipal Workers'  Union  to  achieve  any 
further  far-reaching  wage  increases  for  its  members.  It  was  estimated  that,  all  in  all,  the  demand 
situation would have a subduing effect on wage demands and we thus did not expect to see any major 
contagion  effects  in  the  2004  wage  bargaining  rounds  from  the  early  termination  of  the  Municipal 
Workers' Union's wage agreement. We did not find reason to make any fundamental changes to these 
assessments at the beginning of February, when we had our most recent monetary policy meeting. 
Wages comprise only part of the total costs for labour among companies; on top of these come costs 
for  negotiated  and  legislated  employer  contributions,  various  types  of  fringe  benefits  and  shorter 
working hours. As it is the total wage cost that is important to inflationary pressure, it is also necessary 
to make an estimate of all of these factors. The assessment in the Inflation Report was that the wage 
costs for the economy as a whole would increase by just under 5 per cent this year and just over 4 per 
cent  next  year.  It  was  also  assumed  in  the  forecast  that  productivity  growth  would  recover  after  a 
decline in 2001 and approach the more normal, trend level. 
However, it was also observed in the report that there was a risk that wage cost increases in coming 
years could be higher than this figure of 4-5 per cent. At our meeting in February we saw no reason to 
make any appreciable change to this assessment. The newly-received statistics on wages and prices 
have  not  reinforced  the  upside  risk.  The  National  Accounts  for  the  third  quarter  of  2002  and  the 
revisions for earlier quarters made by Statistics Sweden indicate that productivity growth last year may 
have  been  slightly  higher  than  we  anticipated.  In  addition,  the  outcome  in  the  short-term  wage 
statistics showed lower increases than expected in the central government sector. However, the local 
bargaining  rounds  are  not  yet  complete  and  retrospective  revisions  will  be  made,  so  the  statistics 
should still be interpreted with caution. Other factors here are price rises on electricity and oil, which 
could contribute to higher wage demands if they influence the view of future inflation. 
The long-term scope for wage increases 
The  Riksbank  has  the  task  of  ensuring  that  the  inflation  target  is  achieved,  broadly  speaking 
regardless of how wage costs develop. Developments in wage costs play an important role, as they 
influence inflation, but we do not really need to decide whether one particular development in wage 
costs  is  more  favourable  than  another.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  evidently  good  to  have  a  wage 
development that makes it easier for the Riksbank to conduct its monetary policy and safeguard low 
inflation  without  overly  high  real  costs.  It  is  not  sustainable  in  the  long  term  to  have  a  wage 
development that entails the cost of labour increasing more than the value of the goods and services 
produced. This means that real wage costs can only increase at the same rate as productivity growth. 
The stronger the growth in productivity, the higher the wage costs can be without triggering inflation, 
as long as they take into account any reduction in working hours and other secondary wage costs.  
The basis for this reasoning is that the economy is in balance, which is characterised by, for instance, 
stable wage shares and profit shares. Profit shares - profits as a percentage of value added - have 
fluctuated around 30 per cent for the entire economy. Since 1995, real wage costs have risen more 
quickly  than  productivity  growth  and  wage  shares.  This  is  not  sustainable  in  the  long  run.  It  is 
necessary, in the long term, for wage shares and profit shares to be at a level where profitability in 
Sweden is on a par with our competitors to safeguard a level of capital formation and employment that 
will best promote the development of our welfare. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2003
 A couple of different approaches/rules of thumb are used in the wage formation debate to evaluate the 
scope for wage increases in the long term, or to estimate a "wage cost norm". These are all based on 
a  reliable  monetary  policy  with  an  average  inflation  rate  of  2  per  cent,  but  the  assessments  of 
productivity growth can differ. One problem in this context is that it is not self-evident which sectors 
should be used for measuring productivity growth. The public sector is particularly difficult to measure 
and productivity growth here is therefore often assumed to be zero. This means that a rule of thumb 
based on productivity growth in the economy as a whole is "conservative" in the sense that it gives a 
slightly  lower  scope  for  wage  costs  than  other  approaches.  Despite  the  problems,  the  different 
approaches tend to give rather similar results in an interval of 3.5-4 per cent.  
Of course, there is reason to be cautious when making this type of assessment. Past experiences of 
wage  formation  in  Sweden  are  that  a  wage  cost  norm  can  easily  be  perceived  as  a  floor  for 
negotiation. Another factor advocating caution is that Sweden could be a member of the Eurosystem 
in the not too distant future. In recent years, wage costs in trade and industry have risen by just over 
one  percentage  point  more  in  Sweden  than  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  not  sustainable  unless 
productivity also rises at a more rapid rate in Sweden. A further factor calling for restraint is that the 
favourable productivity growth prevailing during the greater part of the 1990s was partly explained by 
growth in the telecom sector. If the telecom industry is excluded from the figures for trade and industry, 
productivity increased by only 1.9 per cent during the period 1995-2000, compared with a growth of 
2.8 per cent if it is included. This sector has now greatly declined in importance and there is apparent 
confusion  over  its  future  development.  Given  this,  the  average  rate  of  wage  increase  should  not 
exceed 3.5 per cent over the coming years. 
In conclusion, it may be  worth pointing out that if Sweden joins the Eurosystem, there will be other 
factors affecting the nominal wage cost scope. This is because the ECB's inflation target may be even 
more  ambitious  than  the  Riksbank's.  In  this  case,  and  if  productivity  growth  remains  unchanged,  a 
lower rate of increase will be needed for nominal wage costs.  
Summary 
I shall conclude with a summary. The realignment of stability policy has contributed to wage formation 
functioning better than previously in the two most recent wage bargaining rounds. The rate of increase 
in  nominal  wages  has  approached  reasonable  levels,  while  wage  earners  have  experienced  large 
increases in real wages.  This development is underpinned by a good development in productivity. 
When we look ahead, the picture is more worrying. Profits are under greater pressure. It is not certain 
that productivity growth can remain as high as it was during the latter part of the 1990s. Given these 
factors, and taking into account international developments, there is a need to bring the average rate 
of wage increase down to, or even below, 3.5 per cent. This is no easy task in the present situation. 
The labour market is quite different today than it was 5-10 years ago. Unemployment is relatively low 
and  there  is  a  labour  shortage  in  some  parts  of  the  economy,  despite  the  slowdown  in  economic 
activity.  Moreover,  there  are  tendencies  towards  demands  for  compensation,  which,  if  they  were  to 
spread, could provide further complications for wage formation. 
The trends with regard to labour supply are also worrying. Demographical developments, such as an 
increasing  number  of  elderly  people  over  the  coming  decade,  will  create  a  demand  for  more 
employees to work in geriatric care, for instance. At the same time, the number of persons available 
on  the  labour  market  is  declining.  An  addition  problem  is  the  high  frequency  of  absence  due  to 
sickness. 
It is evident that a central target for economic policy should be to get more people in work. This would 
facilitate wage formation and create greater scope for economic growth in future. This is perhaps just 
as  important  a  theme  for  a  hearing  in  the  Committee  on  Finance  as  wage  formation  in  itself.  It 
concerns measures that are largely in the hands of the Riksdag. 
Thank you! 
 