 R Basant Roi: Treasury and risk management 
Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Financial Markets Association 
of Mauritius workshop on treasury and risk management, 10 September 2003. 
 President and Members of the Financial Markets Association of Mauritius 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good morning. 
Thank you Chairman for the invitation to briefly address this gathering of financial market participants 
this morning at the opening ceremony of the Treasury and Risk Management Workshop. As far as I 
recall, this is the first time that such a Workshop is being organized by your Association for the benefit 
of its members and for professionals involved in Treasury and Risk Management. 
Since  the  breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  the  early  1970s  treasury  management  has 
assumed an increasingly greater importance in our economic life. With the globalisation of financial 
markets  treasury  management  has  become  more  demanding  than  before.  Until  five  years  ago 
Treasury  management  was  not  assigned  the  same  importance  that  ought  to  have  been  given  by 
corporate  bodies  in  Mauritius.  It  is  absolutely  essential  that  in  today(cid:146)s  world  efficient  treasury 
management  occupies  a  seat  of  importance  in  the  management  of  enterprises.  I  congratulate  your 
Association for having taken the initiative to hold this workshop. I strongly believe that we should keep 
ourselves  abreast  of  the  latest  developments  in  asset  and  liability  management,  risk  management 
techniques and derivative instruments. This workshop is positively a first step forward. 
I would first and foremost like to make an observation. Treasury management is not specific to banks 
and other financial institutions. It does concern all of us who are in the business of managing financial 
resources  in  a  globalised  financial  market.  Enterprises  producing  goods  and  services,  exporters, 
importers  or  any  other  economic  agent  that  has  got  to  manage  its  finance  necessarily  requires 
expertise in treasury management. In 1999, I was surprised to learn that an exporter with a turnover of 
over Rs2  billion  did not  have any  expertise  at all  in  managing  its own finance. In a  world economy 
characterized by stiff competition, every enterprise needs to be good in treasury management. In the 
last  few  years  I  have  stressed  a  lot  on  good  corporate  governance  as  the  basis  for  best  business 
practices  and  highlighted  the  urgency  for  restructuring  and  consolidation  of  individual  firm  so  as  to 
enhance micro-economic efficiency. 
Traditionally much of the knowledge and skills of professionals in the wholesale financial markets has 
been learned on the jobs. This approach has varied from the simple (cid:147)Sit, watch and learn(cid:148) approach to 
the  sophisticated  mentoring  system  used  by  some  large  financial  Institutions.  Today  treasury 
operations have grown into one of the key administrative areas of financial institutions, responsible for 
the processing of all financial market transactions, including a crucial role in the control of risk. 
Professionals constantly have to re-tool, re-equip and fully update themselves to meet the exigencies 
of the marketplace. With so much of innovation and technological progress taking place in the world of 
finance, there is no place for players having limited skills and knowledge in treasury management. The 
market  punishes  those  who  lag  behind.  One  of  the  challenges  in  treasury  management  is  to  keep 
abreast  of  latest  techniques  and  trends  in  the  marketplace  and  make  the  most  out  of  them.  The 
biggest challenge for most of our market participants remains the interpretation of economic indicators, 
changes in policy signals and predicting the course of economic events that affect financial markets. 
It(cid:146)s tantamount to becoming good crystal ball readers in the money and foreign exchange markets. 
Treasury Management is also the Management of Risks. With the globalization of financial markets, 
financial institutions around the world are exposed to a multiplicity of risks. Movements in the rates of 
interests  and  volatility  of  exchange  rates  in  an  increasingly  complex  environment  have  made  the 
process  of  managing  risks  a  critical  aspect  of  treasury  management.  May  I  however  state  that  my 
recent experience in the domestic financial market tends to suggest that our treasury managers seem 
to  be  acquiring  expertise  in  predicting  changes  in  the  interest  rate  policy  stance  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius.  But  a  very  limited  number  of  treasury  managers  seem  to  be  able  to  foresee  at  times 
movements in exchange rates. This is quite understandable; it is not in the realm of mortals like us to 
accurately predict exchange rate movements. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 Credit risks, market risks, exchange risks, payment and settlement risks and so on and so forth are all 
risks that textbooks teach  us how to mathematically  measure. Textbooks also teach  us the  various 
ways and means of protecting against risks. Operational risk however is a type of risk that no financial 
institution has ever been able to guard itself against. No financial institution or any other enterprises, in 
particular  treasury  management  units  in  any  of  these  organizations,  should  ever  dare  to  overlook 
operational risks. It is worth stating that many of the lessons learned from those headlines cases cited 
violations  of  the  fundamental  tenets  of  internal  control,  particularly  those  pertaining  to  operational 
risks. Lately we have observed that some institutions have been reviewing their treasury operations. 
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  views  these  undertakings  as  positive  moves  towards  improving  efficiency  in 
management. 
In any treasury management unit it is essential to have a modularly flexible treasury system, which can 
adapt to the conditions of a fast moving market. One of the basic tenets for the treasury unit in a bank 
is  the  strict  segregation  of  duties  and  location  between  the  front,  middle  and  back  office,  the  latter 
controlling confirmation and settlement transactions. You can trust neither your subordinates nor your 
superiors. Errors can be expensive. Correct your errors. If you do not do so, your errors become fatal 
mistakes in treasury management. 
The events of the past two years demonstrate how quickly a corporation(cid:146)s reputation can be tainted by 
accusations  of  inappropriate  activities  or  lack  of  attention  to  regulations.  Success  in  banking  still  is 
heavily dependent on winning and keeping the trust of customers, employees, and the public at large. 
When  corporate  reputations  are  tainted,  it  does  take  time  to  rebuild  customer  and  community 
relationships. 
Last year I met with one of the foreign exchange dealers at a reception. I told him that he was taking 
too much time to become a market maker in our money and foreign exchange markets. Pat came the 
reply from your friend that Rome was not built in a day. It took time to build Rome. I listened and did 
not utter any single word. This is an appropriate time for me to respond to that statement. Yes, it did 
take  time  to  build  Rome  because  they  did  not  have  the  technology.  You  have  the  technology.  Go 
ahead and develop skills in market making. It will serve all of us to have good market makers in our 
financial system. 
I am aware that the experts from the Republic of South Africa are competent persons and I trust they 
will do an excellent job. I wish all my good friends from the Financial Markets Association of Mauritius 
here the very best of success in their endeavours. 
Thank you 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
