 Seung Park: Phases of the Bank of Korea(cid:146)s 50-year history and the future 
course of change 
Contribution  by  Mr  Seung  Park,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  to  the  Korea  Herald  for  its 
50th anniversary, 15 August 2003. 
 From its foundation in June 1950, the Bank of Korea has, as the country(cid:146)s central bank, devoted great 
efforts for more than 50 years to the growth and development of the national economy. No sooner had 
it been established in 1950 than the Korean War broke out, causing it to throw its energies into the 
efficient  financing  of  the  war  and  to  the  subsequent  post  war  reconstruction  and  the  building  of  a 
modern  financial  system.  It  played  a  great  part  in  facilitating  Korea(cid:146)s  successful  economic 
development  within  a  short  space  of  time  through  its  positive  role  in  the  carrying-out  of  a  series  of 
economic development plans from the early 1960s. Then, from the 1980s, the central bank sought the 
construction of a stable foundation for the economy and committed itself wholeheartedly to equipping 
the country with a new financial system, including the interest rate liberalization, which would befit the 
new financial environments brought about by liberalization and globalization. 
In the period of economic modernization, the Bank of Korea(cid:146)s efforts were aimed at underpinning the 
government(cid:146)s  economic  policies  in  terms  of  finance.  In  this  process,  the  Bank  could  not  give  full 
attention to the orthodox central bank role of maintaining the soundness of the financial system and 
the stability of the value of money. 
Following the currency crisis in 1997, as the Korean economy began to lay more weight on the market 
principle and autonomy of economic agents, the central banking system was also required to be more 
advanced. In this context, the recent passage by the National Assembly (July 23, 2003; Finance and 
Economy  Committee)  of  the  draft  revision  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  Act,  whose  main  purposes  are  to 
heighten  the  independence  and  efficiency  of  monetary  and  credit  policies  and  strengthen  it  in  the 
exercise of its functions, takes on great significance. 
Provided  the  bill  is  accepted  and  brought  into  force,  it  will  above  all  affect  the  composition  of  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  by  empowering  the  central  bank(cid:146)s  Deputy  Governor,  as  is  the  case  in 
advanced countries, to sit as an ex officio member, thereby heightening both the independence of the 
central bank and the linkages between policy decision-making and execution. Furthermore, in view of 
the length of time required before changes in monetary policy are transmitted to prices, the efficiency 
of  monetary  policy  will  be  strengthened  by  the  shift  from  the  current  establishment  of  an  annual 
inflation target to a system of selecting an intermediate (2~3 years) inflation target. Thirdly, the safety 
and  efficiency  of  payments  and  settlement  system,  which  are  crucial  to  financial  stability,  will  be 
augmented by assigning the responsibility for their oversight and overall management to the Bank of 
Korea. 
All  in  all,  the  revised  legislation  will  bring  the  Korean  central  banking  system  much  closer  to 
convergence  with  the  global  standards  demanded  by  the  OECD,  IMF  and  other  international 
organizations. It is also forecast to contribute to raising the country(cid:146)s international credibility. 
In the years ahead, the Bank of Korea will re-double its efforts to ensuring the stable development of 
the national economy through the even more efficient conduct of monetary and credit policy from a 
position of neutrality. 
At  the  same  time  it  will  do  its  utmost  to  strengthen  the  policy  capacity  and  to  augment  the 
transparency  and  accountability  of  the  policy  decision-making  process  so  as  to  react  in  a  highly 
effective manner to the rapid changes and the mounting uncertainties of the financial and economic 
environment.  In  doing  so,  it  will  win  the  reputation  of  being  a  central  bank  that  enjoys  the  firm 
confidence of the general public. 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 1
