 Alan Greenspan: Follow-up to the semiannual monetary policy report to the 
Congress 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, 30 April 2003.  
 Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am pleased to have this opportunity to update you on 
developments  in  the  US  economy  since  mid-February,  when  I  presented  the  Federal  Reserve's 
semiannual monetary policy report.  
At that time, I noted that the economic expansion over the preceding year had been modest. Spending 
by  households  had  contributed  importantly  to  the  gains  in  economic  activity.  The  nation's  strong 
underlying productivity performance was providing ongoing support for household income. That rise in 
income,  combined  with  low  interest  rates,  reduced  taxes,  and  the  availability  of  substantial  home 
equity,  had  spurred  solid  gains  in  consumer  spending  and  a  robust  advance  in  residential 
construction.  
In contrast, although the contraction in capital spending appeared to have slowed, we had yet to see 
any  convincing  signs  that  a  sustained  pickup  in  business  spending  was  emerging.  Moreover, 
heightened  geopolitical  tensions  were  adding  to  the  already  considerable  uncertainties  that  had 
clouded the business outlook over the preceding three  years. The general climate of caution in the 
business sector was manifest in a number of ways, including restrained hiring, a reluctance to invest in 
new capacity, and aggressive actions to maintain low levels of inventories.  
In  late  February  and  early  March,  the  risks  and  uncertainties  surrounding  the  economic  outlook 
intensified  as  the  range  of  possibilities  for  the  timing,  duration,  and  economic consequences  of  the 
pending  war  in  Iraq  appeared  to  widen.  In  financial  markets,  a  greater  sense  of  caution  among 
investors seemed to bolster the demand for Treasury and other fixed-income securities at the expense 
of equities; the price of crude oil moved up, as did the prices of gasoline and home heating oil; and 
consumer  confidence  sagged  further.  After  picking  up  in  January,  payroll  employment  and 
manufacturing production turned down again in February and March.  
When  the  onset  of  the  war  became  imminent,  financial  markets  rallied,  and  the  price  of  crude  oil 
dropped back. Market participants seemed buoyed simply by the elimination of uncertainty about the 
timing  of  the  start,  and  hence  the  end  of  hostilities,  although  a  still-significant  amount  of  unease 
inevitably  remained  about  the  way  the  war  might  progress  and  how  severely  it  might  disrupt  oil 
production and economic activity.  
In such  an environment,  we had  little ability  to  distinguish temporary changes from more persistent 
shifts  in  underlying  economic  trends.  For  that  reason,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  at  its 
March 18 meeting, refrained from making a determination about the balance of risks with respect to its 
long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth. At the same time, we stepped up 
our surveillance of economic developments.  
As part of that surveillance, we receive virtually continuous information from commodity and financial 
markets. The price of crude oil is now well below its peak of early March, as the potential for serious 
supply disruptions in world oil markets has diminished. Broad equity indexes remain well above their 
lows  of  mid-March  and  have  been  boosted  most  recently  by  incoming  information  on  first-quarter 
earnings that market participants appear to view as generally positive.  
In  contrast,  six  weeks  after  the  beginning  of  the  war,  we  have  only  limited  readings  on  broader 
economic  conditions,  and  that  information  has  been  mixed.  Households  appear  to  have  become 
somewhat  less  apprehensive  about  the  economic  outlook  in  recent  weeks,  though  reports  from 
businesses have not exhibited a similar improvement in tone. Consistent with this, the persistent high 
level of new claims for unemployment insurance suggests that firms may still be finding it possible to 
meet their customers' tepid increases in demand with a leaner workforce.  
Going forward, some further unwinding of the economic tensions that have been associated with the 
situation in Iraq seems likely. As that occurs, the fundamental trends shaping the economic outlook 
should emerge more clearly. As I indicated when I met with you earlier this year, I continue to believe 
the  economy  is  positioned  to  expand  at  a  noticeably  better  pace  than  it  has  during  the  past  year, 
BIS Review 20/2003 
 1
 though the timing and the extent of that improvement remains uncertain. Fundamentally, the long-run 
growth  potential  of  the  economy  remains  solid.  And  the  enhanced  flexibility  inherent  in  that  trend 
imparts resilience against shocks of the kinds that we have experienced in the past few years.  
Unfortunately, the future path of the economy is likely to come into sharper focus only gradually. In the 
interim,  we  need  to  remain  mindful  of  the  possibility  that  lingering  business  caution  could  be  an 
impediment to improved economic performance.  
As  you  may  know,  the  consensus  of  economic  forecasters  is  that  a  material  rebound  in  economic 
activity  will  develop  in  the  second  half  of  this  year,  and  certainly  a  number  of  elements  should  be 
working  in  that  direction.  The  recent  improvements  in  financial  markets  that  I  noted  earlier,  if 
maintained,  would  seem  to  suggest  a  turnaround  in  capital  spending.  In  this  regard,  the  ongoing 
decline in risk spreads in corporate bond markets so far this year is an encouraging development. To 
be sure, spreads remain high  by  historical standards, but the constraint imposed by last fall's huge 
run-up in risk premiums now appears to have been put largely behind us.  
In addition, businesses should see some relief from the pressure on profit margins that had developed 
in  recent  months  as  energy  prices  rose  sharply,  and  improvement  on  this  front  could  be  a  positive 
development for capital spending. A modestly encouraging sign is provided by the backlog of orders 
for  nondefense  capital  goods  excluding  aircraft,  which  has  been  moving  up  in  recent  months. 
Households, too, are likely to welcome lower energy bills and a continuation of favorable conditions in 
mortgage and credit markets.  
As  you  know,  core  prices  by  many  measures  have  increased  very  slowly  over  the  last  six  months. 
With  price  inflation  already  at  a  low  level,  substantial  further  disinflation  would  be  an  unwelcome 
development,  especially  to  the  extent  it  put  pressure  on  profit  margins  and  impeded  the  revival  of 
business spending.  
The balance of influences on inflation and economic activity will be among the subjects of discussion 
by the Federal Open Market Committee when it meets in six days.  
2 
 BIS Review 20/2003
