 Toshihiko Fukui: Challenges for monetary policy in Japan 
Speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Spring Meeting of the Japan 
Society of Monetary Economics, on the occasion of its 60th anniversary, Tokyo, 1 June 2003. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to have this opportunity today to address such a distinguished audience. Members of 
this esteemed society are generous enough to provide us at the Bank with their opinions and the fruits 
of  their  researches,  which  we  in  our  turn  take  into  consideration  when  we  examine  our  policy 
measures from all angles. I should like, therefore, at the outset of this speech, to express my sincere 
gratitude to all of you for continuing to stimulate the intellectual debate in this way. 
The society and the Bank have a long history of good communication, as indeed is recorded in our 
Archive, and the first example of this was a speech given by Keizo Shibusawa, then Deputy Governor 
of the Bank, at the inaugural meeting of the society in June 1943. The meeting was held incidentally a 
year after the Bank of Japan Law of 1942, modeled on the law governing the Reichsbank, the then 
central bank of Germany, became effective under wartime legislation. In his speech, Deputy Governor 
Shibusawa  emphasized  the  principle  of  maintaining  the  value  of  the  currency  when  formulating 
monetary policy, stating that, although the demands on policy of a given time or situation may exert 
some influence, the fundamentals of this principle do not change. While I can only guess what was 
actually  in  Deputy  Governor  Shibusawa(cid:146)s  mind  at  the  time  he  made  this  statement,  my  own 
understanding is that, at a time when the war was producing upheaval in both the economic and the 
financial environment, he wished to remind his listeners of the importance of orthodox central banking. 
At the same time, I believe he wished to convey his sincere hope that the society(cid:146)s members would 
continue to analyze the fundamentals of the currency system, making full use of their expertise. 
Another example may be found in a speech given at the 40th anniversary meeting of the society in 
1983, when the Japanese economy was at the peak of its postwar prosperity. Discussing the mandate 
of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  Governor  Haruo  Mayekawa  stated  that,  in  conducting  monetary  policy,  the 
highest  priority  should  naturally  be  placed  upon  the  stability  of  prices.  He  concluded  his  speech  by 
observing that the formulation and execution of successful policy could only be achieved if the policy 
measures employed had a solid theoretical foundation. 
Ten years ago in June, I was, as an Executive Director of the Bank, invited to the 50th anniversary 
meeting of the society and presented a speech titled (cid:147)Missions and Responsibilities of a Central Bank 
in a Contemporary Context.(cid:148) At that time, the economy was deteriorating following the bursting of the 
asset  price  bubble,  and  looking  back,  as  I  prepared  my  speech  for  today(cid:146)s  occasion,  at  the  path 
trodden by Japan(cid:146)s economy over the last decade, I was impressed by the fact that the surrounding 
environment  has  become  much  more  severe,  although  the  basic  mandate  of  the  central  bank,  to 
maintain the stability of prices, has not changed in the least. 
Even if we restrict our attention to the area of monetary policy, there have undoubtedly been a number 
of changes worthy of note. 
The first and most important of these is the change that has taken place in the financial environment, 
and here the substantial decline in interest rates is most notable. 
In  fact,  the  level  of  interest  rates  was  already  low  a  decade  ago,  as  the  economy  continued  to 
deteriorate  following  the  bursting  of  the  asset  price  bubble,  and  weak  balance  sheets  in  both  the 
corporate  and  financial  sectors  suggested  that  deep  adjustments  were  inevitable.  In  these 
circumstances, the Bank took a series of monetary easing measures, and the official discount rate had 
declined to the then unprecedented level of 1.75 percent by the end of 1993. The same period saw a 
moderate decline in the overnight call rate to the range of 2.0-2.5 percent from 3.5-4.0 percent. 
At that time an official discount rate of 1.75 percent was considered extremely low and was indeed the 
lowest level of this rate since the Bank began operation in 1882, a period that included the financial 
crisis of 1927 and the fiscal expansion policy adopted by Finance Minister Korekiyo Takahashi in the 
1930s. In retrospect, however, there was an enviable amount of room left for interest rate reductions, 
and hence interest rates were useful as policy tools. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 1
 Recently, in contrast, not only the overnight call rate but almost all money market rates have declined 
to  a  level  close  to  zero  percent.  Moreover,  since  spring  2001,  the  Bank  has  moved  into  territory 
unexplored  by  any  central  bank  in  history  by  implementing  quantitative  easing  with  interest  rates 
already at the zero bound. 
I stated at my inaugural press conference that a central bank conducting monetary  policy  with  very 
little room left for interest rate reductions is like a boxer fighting with his hands tied behind his back. 
Even with our hands tied, we at the Bank have not given up fighting and are indeed doing the best we 
can. It was, however, beyond anyone(cid:146)s imagination in 1993 that the Bank would be fighting against 
deflation under such a constraint. 
The second major change concerns the revision of the Bank of Japan Law. 
A  sense  that  the  previous  Bank  of  Japan  Law  was  not  quite  in  tune  with  the  current  of  change 
characterizing the world(cid:146)s central banking systems and financial markets would no doubt have already 
existed in 1993, but this had not yet advanced to the stage of making specific proposals for revisions 
to the Law. The situation changed rapidly, and four years later, in 1997, the revised Bank of Japan 
Law was enacted, and has been in effect since April 1998. 
The  focus  of  the  revision  has  been  greater  independence  for  the  Bank  in  conducting  its  monetary 
policy and calls for improved transparency. This in its turn has led to a significant reorganization of the 
Policy Board, through which the Bank makes monetary policy decisions independently, and the Bank 
marked a new start with a completely new governing structure. 
The transparency of the Bank(cid:146)s policy conduct was also improved by the publication of the minutes of 
every Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) of the Bank(cid:146)s Policy Board. Any visitor to the Bank(cid:146)s Web site 
can see that, in addition to the minutes, a significant amount of information is being released including 
reports  of  the  Governor(cid:146)s  press  conferences,  texts  of  speeches  given  by  senior  officials,  and  an 
abundance of research materials detailing the background to policy decisions. 
The third and the most recent change concerns the increasing global interest in monetary policy within 
economies suffering from deflationary trends. 
In  1993,  in  spite  of  the  similar  background  situation,  that  is,  strong  downside  risks  to  the  world 
economy and consistently falling inflation rates, there seemed to be no particular concern anywhere in 
the  world  about  the  decline  in  inflation  rates  per  se.  A  quick  check  of  the  keywords  appearing  in 
articles in major newspapers at that time reveals that people(cid:146)s attention was overwhelmingly focused 
on inflation rather than deflation. 
Recently,  however,  as  disinflation  has  progressed,  interest  rates  have  fallen  across  the  world.  An 
international comparison of the levels of money market rates reveals several countries whose current 
rates  lie  within  the  0-1.0  percent  bracket,  in  particular  Switzerland  at  0.2  percent  and  Singapore  at 
0.5-0.6 percent. In the United States, the policy interest rate currently stands at 1.25 percent, which, if 
we  make  a  direct  comparison,  is  the  level  seen  in  Japan  at  the  beginning  of  1995.  An  increasing 
number of people are now interested in deflation. 
Looking  back  at  developments  over  the  last  decade,  I  have  been  struck  anew  by  how  immensely 
important it  is for the central  bank to gain reliable insights into  the outlook for the  economy.  At the 
same time, we clearly cannot be too surprised at the fact that, with the passage of time, changes have 
taken place in the debate surrounding monetary policy. 
We at the central bank must continue to make efforts to gain new insights and learn from new ideas, 
while  not  allowing  ourselves  to  fall  captive  to  whatever  mindset  is  dominant  at  a  particular  point  in 
time. I feel acutely the importance of further interaction with the academic world, because cutting-edge 
research on financial and economic theory is fundamental to our efforts. 
Since  I  assumed  the  office  of  Governor  in  March  this  year,  and  indeed  before,  I  have  had  the 
opportunity to listen to a wide range of advice, and have learnt much from opinions voiced about the 
Bank and forwarded to me not only from members of the society but also from other academics both 
at home and abroad. At the same time, I am afraid that I must admit to feeling a certain degree of 
frustration, in the light of my long years of experience as a central banker, as I listen to some of the 
opinions.  I  cannot  help  but  feel  that  there  is  still  significant  progress  to  be  made  in  establishing  a 
creative  process  whereby  the  Bank  first  provides  academics  with  sufficient  information  about  the 
issues it is facing, and then works together with them based on the same information in its search for 
fresh policy solutions. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 We are fortunate to have among the current nine members of the Policy Board three members who 
have  spent  a  number  of  years  in  senior  academic  positions.  In  addition,  there  are  an  increasing 
number  of  former  Bank  staff  currently  working  at  academic  institutions  and  devoting  their  efforts  to 
bridging the gap between theory and practical policy. With their help, we expect to be able to extend 
our  links  with  the  academic  world,  thus  not  only  gaining  the  benefit  of  academics(cid:146)  advice  but  also 
contributing to their research by sharing our practical experiences. 
This has been a somewhat protracted introduction. My aim today, however, is to share with you, as 
frankly as  possible, my  own current thinking  with regard to the conduct of monetary  policy,  which I 
hope will be of interest to you. I hope also that my remarks will play a part in further strengthening the 
constructive relationship that already exists between academics and the central bank. 
Functions of the quantitative easing framework 
I. 
First,  I  would  like  to  briefly  explain  the  basic  framework  underlying  current  monetary  policy  and  to 
describe how monetary policy measures have been implemented within this framework. 
The current framework we are adopting is called quantitative easing and was introduced on March 19, 
2001.  It  has  three  main  features.  I  will  explain  the  implications  of  each  point  in  as  contemporary  a 
context as possible. 
Adoption of quantitative indicators in money market operations 
A. 
The first feature of the quantitative easing framework is the change in the operating target for money 
market operations from the uncollateralized overnight call rate to the outstanding balance of current 
account deposits at the Bank. Whether it is possible to enhance monetary easing effects even after 
short-term interest rates reach the zero bound is a major issue that continues to attract debate. Still, it 
was quite natural for a central bank to pay attention to the amount of liquidity  provision and expect 
effects from a further increase in liquidity provision even when short-term interest rates had fallen to 
zero percent, or rather for the very reason that they had reached this zero bound. 
When the quantitative easing framework was introduced in March 2001, the target for the outstanding 
balance of current account deposits at the Bank was 5 trillion yen, which exceeded the total reserve 
requirement at the time by slightly less than 1 trillion yen. When I took office as Governor, the target 
range for the outstanding balance had already been set at (cid:147)around 17 to 22 trillion yen,(cid:148) and the Bank 
has  since  steadily  raised  it.  At  the  MPM  on  April  30,  the  Bank  raised  the  range  by  5  trillion  yen  to 
(cid:147)around 22 to 27 trillion yen,(cid:148) and then again to (cid:147)around 27 to 30 trillion yen(cid:148) at the MPM on May 20. 
As a result, the outstanding balance has increased sixfold over the course of the last two years. The 
Bank(cid:146)s repeated raising of the target for the outstanding balance was decided in view of the economic 
outlook and the financial market situation. As mentioned in the Bank(cid:146)s (cid:147)Outlook and Risk Assessment 
of the Economy and Prices,(cid:148) released in April, monetary easing measures have effectively blocked the 
channels through which various shocks induce liquidity concerns, and have thereby secured financial 
market stability, helping to prevent the economy from falling into a deflationary spiral. 
On the other hand, it should also be pointed out that, even though the outstanding balance of current 
account  deposits  has  increased  considerably  since  the  introduction  of  the  quantitative  easing 
framework, the Bank(cid:146)s drastic quantitative easing has not been quite strong enough by itself to boost 
the economy and prices. Why is this so? 
It may have been because the adjustment pressure  on the  economy  was, and is, still quite strong. 
However, one of the effects expected from the introduction of quantitative easing was the so-called 
(cid:147)portfolio rebalancing effect.(cid:148) The Bank thought that, even when the marginal value of liquidity services 
became  zero,  people  would  start  to  rebalance  their  portfolios  by  investing  in  assets  with  higher 
marginal values whether these were real or financial assets, if the Bank increased further its provision 
of liquidity. The aim of this process  was thus to generate  positive economic momentum, acting, for 
example, to push up asset prices. So far, however, the effect has not been widely observed. 
It  might  also  be  fair  to  touch  upon  the  issue  of  the  decline  in  the  functioning  of  financial  markets, 
especially the money market, since the introduction of the quantitative easing framework. With zero 
interest rates, money market participants  have  been  less willing to  invest their funds  in the market, 
because returns from such transactions have not been sufficient to cover their trading costs. Due to 
the  Bank(cid:146)s  ample  provision  of  liquidity,  there  has  been  a  sharp  decrease  in  trading  volume  among 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 3
 market participants, with the exception of trading carried out with the Bank. As a result, more market 
participants  have  become  concerned  about  whether  they  will  be  able  to  raise  funds  in  the  market 
smoothly in the future even if they offer higher interest rates. 
Ironically, the decline in the functioning of the money market has increased the precautionary demand 
of  financial  institutions  for  increased  current  account  deposits  at  the  Bank.  At  the  time  of  the 
introduction of the quantitative easing framework, there were doubts about whether the Bank would be 
able to provide sufficient liquidity to achieve its target for the outstanding balance. In fact there were 
frequent cases of undersubscription,  where  bids fall  short of the Bank(cid:146)s offers, in the  Bank(cid:146)s funds-
supplying operations. However, such undersubscription has not occurred recently, and the Bank has 
been  able  to  push  through  substantial  increases  in  its  target  for  the  outstanding  balance  of  current 
account  deposits.  The  more  the  Bank  proceeds  with  monetary  easing  to  secure  financial  market 
stability, the more demand for current account deposits increases due to the impaired functioning of 
the market. As a result, the Bank will have to meet this increased liquidity demand in order to secure 
market stability. This is the dilemma the Bank currently faces. 
All  drastic  policy  measures  have  negative  side  effects.  The  fundamental  issue,  therefore,  is  not 
whether  such  side  effects  exist;  rather,  it  is  how  to  make  effective  use  of  the  stimulative  effects  of 
quantitative  easing  measures  on  the  economy  and  prices,  while  giving  due  consideration  to  the 
possible  emergence  of  excessive  side  effects.  Before  we  move  on  to  deal  with  this  point  in  more 
depth, I would like to comment on the remaining two features of the quantitative easing framework. 
Increasing the Bank(cid:146)s outright purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) 
B. 
The second feature of the quantitative easing framework is the decision to increase the Bank(cid:146)s outright 
purchases  of  JGBs  when  this  is  deemed  necessary  for  the  smooth  provision  of  funds  to  meet  the 
target  balance  of  current  account  deposits  at  the  Bank.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  ceiling  on  the 
Bank(cid:146)s  outright  purchases  of  JGBs  which  prevents  the  amount  of  JGBs  held  by  the  Bank  from 
exceeding the outstanding amount of banknotes issued. 
With  interest  rates  on  financing  bills  (FBs)  and  treasury  bills  (TBs)  close  to  zero,  there  emerged  a 
situation  for  holders  of  FBs  and  TBs  similar  to  holding  the  equivalent  amount  of  current  account 
deposits at the Bank. For this reason, it is likely that the demand for holding current account deposits 
by  selling  FBs  and  TBs  will  become  saturated.  Realizing  this,  the  Bank  decided  to  secure  smooth 
provision of liquidity by purchasing JGBs. The effect of these increased purchases of JGBs has been 
to raise total purchases by the Bank to 1.2 trillion yen per month, up from 400 billion yen until March 
2001. As a result, the outstanding amount of JGBs purchased by the Bank is at present equivalent to 
roughly 60 percent of the monetary base. 
The Bank(cid:146)s purchases of JGBs have indeed contributed to the smooth implementation of quantitative 
easing. However, as long-term interest rates have been declining, even JGBs have almost become 
substitutes for current account deposits at the Bank. At present, ten-year JGBs have fallen to slightly 
above  0.5  percent  and  even  30-year  JGBs  are  below  1.0  percent.  The  average  maturity  of  newly 
issued JGBs in Japan is currently about five years. The fact that yields on five-year JGBs are in the 
range of 0.1 to 0.2 percent indicates that the government has already been raising funds at an interest 
rate  of  virtually  zero  percent.  Thus,  the  Bank(cid:146)s  execution  of  a  market  operation  that  involves 
exchanging JGBs for current account deposits at the Bank is becoming equivalent to exchanging ten 
1,000 yen notes for one 10,000 yen note. 
In opposition to this view, there is an argument that, as long as long-term interest rates are not in fact 
zero percent, there is still a difference between current account deposits at the Bank and JGBs. The 
corollary is that market operations involving the exchange of JGBs for current account deposits are 
indeed  meaningful,  and  a  massive  large-scale  purchase  of  JGBs  by  the  Bank  would  be  effective. 
There is also an argument that it is inappropriate to allow long-term interest rates to decline any closer 
to zero percent. According to this view, the Bank should enhance the effects of quantitative easing not 
merely by  increasing quantity  but  also  by  introducing qualitative  improvement of quantitative  easing 
measures through the purchase of other types of assets. 
Policy commitment based on the consumer price index (CPI) 
C. 
The third feature of the quantitative easing framework is the Bank(cid:146)s explicit commitment based on the 
year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  CPI:  namely  that  the  Bank  will  maintain  the  current  framework  for 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 money market operations until the CPI (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) records a year-
on-year increase of zero percent or more on a sustainable basis. 
The idea of the first feature, as I have already explained, is to achieve further increases in the Bank(cid:146)s 
provision of liquidity even after short-term interest rates have reached the zero bound. The idea of the 
third feature is to achieve an easing effect by the Bank(cid:146)s commitment to keep short-term rates at low 
levels well into the future. In this way, even if short-term rates come up against the lower bound, the 
Bank can still (cid:147)borrow(cid:148) from the effect of the future low rates. Thus, the fundamental aim of the third 
feature is to lower longer-term interest rates across the board by (cid:147)borrowing(cid:148) future monetary easing 
through the commitment. 
This  policy  commitment  shows  the  Bank(cid:146)s  determination  to  put  a  stop  to  price  declines  by  binding 
future  monetary  policy  to  the  actual  inflation  rate.  However,  this  should  not  be  misunderstood  as 
inflation targeting. I am fully aware of views that the Bank should adopt inflation targeting instead of 
the current commitment. However, it should be noted that, in a sense, this commitment has significant 
implications that go beyond those of standard inflation targeting. 
In  a  standard  inflation  targeting  regime,  a  central  bank  raises  the  policy  interest  rate  when  the 
expected  inflation  rate  rises  above  the  target  inflation  rate,  even  if  the  actual  inflation  rate  is 
considerably  below  the  target  inflation  rate.  Given  that  people(cid:146)s  expectations  regarding  the  inflation 
rate vary greatly, it may be inevitable that even a slight change in prices triggers speculations at a very 
early stage about future monetary policy. 
In  contrast,  the  Bank(cid:146)s  policy  commitment  states  that  the  Bank  will  continue  to  implement  drastic 
quantitative  easing  until  the  year-on-year  change  in  the  CPI,  that  is,  the  change  in  actual  prices, 
becomes positive. In other words, this policy commitment means that, unless year-on-year changes in 
the CPI become positive on a sustainable basis, the Bank will continue to implement drastic monetary 
easing  measures  even  after  the  economy  has  started  to  improve  and  inflationary  expectations  are 
emerging.  This  is  thus  an  extremely  strong  policy  commitment  through  which  the  Bank  is  implicitly 
(cid:147)borrowing(cid:148) from the effects of future monetary easing. 
The Bank(cid:146)s strong policy commitment, which has (cid:147)borrowed(cid:148) the effects of low future interest rates and 
kept  long-term  interest  rates  stable  at  low  levels,  can  be  said  to  have  succeeded  in  keeping  real 
interest rates low enough to prevent the economy, which has been suffering from deflation, from falling 
into  a  deflationary  spiral.  However,  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  economy  and  the  marginal 
productivity  of  capital  have  declined,  causing  firms  to  revise  downward  their  forecasts  for  the  GDP 
growth rate and remain cautious in investing. In accordance with the relationship between the natural 
and market interest rates defined by Knut Wicksell, while the natural interest rate has been quite low, 
the market interest rate has continued to be high relative to the natural interest rate, and thus seems to 
have failed to boost economic activity. 
Thus, there still remain many issues that must be resolved for the current framework of quantitative 
easing  to  become  more  effective.  It  is  also  true,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  that  monetary  easing 
measures  have  effectively  blocked  the  channels  through  which  various  shocks  induce  liquidity 
concerns, and have thereby secured financial market stability, contributing to preventing the economy 
from falling into a deflationary spiral. The effects of quantitative easing measures should therefore not 
be  underestimated.  In  1997-98,  the  financial  crisis  in  Asia  and  the  failure  of  a  few  large  Japanese 
financial  institutions  triggered  concerns  among financial  institutions  about  the  availability  of  liquidity, 
and as a result, there was a sharp credit contraction and the economy deteriorated rapidly. In contrast, 
although there have been factors causing uncertainty about the Japanese financial system, such as 
the terrorist attacks in the United States, the military action against Iraq, and the decline in Japanese 
stock  prices,  credit  contraction  stemming  from  liquidity  concerns  has  not  occurred  since  the 
introduction  of  the  quantitative  easing  framework.  And  thus,  any  deterioration  of  the  economy  that 
such a contraction might have caused has been avoided. 
As described above, even after short-term interest rates had reached the zero bound, the Bank did not 
throw  up  its  hands  in  defeat  but  rather  continued  to  make  efforts  by  providing  ample  liquidity  and 
(cid:147)borrowing(cid:148) from the effects of future monetary easing. 
At present, Japanese financial institutions are still in the process of improving their soundness, and 
with  the  globalization  of  the  economy,  progress  in  IT,  an  extremely  rapidly  aging  society,  and  an 
equally  rapidly  declining  birthrate,  the  economy  faces  major  structural  changes.  The  people  of  the 
entire country are struggling to find ways to overcome the difficulties in this unprecedented process of 
transition.  In  such  a  situation,  it  is  natural  for  the  public  to  have  high  expectations  of  the  country(cid:146)s 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 5
 central  bank.  In  order  to  meet  these  expectations,  I  am  adamant  in  my  determination  to  duck  no 
challenges, but to put all my knowledge and experience into overcoming these difficulties. 
Issues on further improvements in monetary policy 
II. 
In order to further improve monetary policy, I think it is important to address various issues related to 
monetary policy and to discuss them thoroughly. Some of these issues may fall within the scope of 
conventional  economic  analysis  and  may  thus  be  dealt  with  using  the  appropriate  analytical  tools. 
Other  issues,  such  as  defining  the  purview  of  the  central  bank  and  addressing  its  position  within  a 
democratic society, may however fall outside the scope of conventional economic analysis. 
Keeping these points in mind, I would like to elaborate in what follows on some issues which need to 
be clarified with regard to the Bank(cid:146)s efforts to improve the current quantitative easing framework. 
Currently, a variety of views are held by people outside the Bank requesting further monetary easing 
measures. Some of these views are as follows. One view holds that, if the effect of the quantitative 
easing  on  the  economy  and  prices  is  not  fairly  strong,  the  Bank  should  increase  the  provision  of 
liquidity  significantly.  This  view  recommends  that,  in  doing  so,  the  Bank  consider  the  option  of 
purchasing  financial  assets  whose  risk  profiles  differ  from  JGBs,  and  which  are  not,  under  normal 
circumstances,  the  object  of  central  bank  purchases.  Another  view  proposes  that  the  Bank  seek  to 
exert stronger pressure on public expectations by fundamentally changing the structure of its current 
policy commitments. 
Changes in the structure of policy commitments 
A. 
I would like to start this section by discussing possible changes in the structure of the Bank(cid:146)s policy 
commitments. Here, clearly, the focus of attention must be whether to adopt inflation targeting. 
As I have already mentioned, by comparison with current policy commitments, one of the problems of 
adopting inflation targeting is as follows. Assuming that a target has been established (for example, at 
2 percent), if the expected inflation rate rises above the target and the Bank does not start tightening 
at that early stage, the actual inflation rate is likely to go beyond the target. Since the Bank(cid:146)s current 
policy commitments do not assume such a tightening at an early stage, they actually run a risk in the 
direction of greater inflation than  in the case of standard inflation targeting. Therefore, the following 
issues become very important: whether it is truly desirable at this particular juncture to exchange the 
current  policy  commitment  for  one  that  might  require  an  earlier  and  more  forceful  tightening  of 
monetary policy by setting a target; or whether the Bank should allow a temporary overshooting of the 
inflation rate; and in either situation, how the Bank would be able to restabilize the expected inflation 
rate. 
When  setting  an  inflation  target,  either  as  a  certain  range  or  a  level  of  the  inflation  rate,  the  Bank 
would aim to achieve this target within a specified period, although there would be allowance for some 
slippage. Clearly a prerequisite for such a policy to be convincing to the public is that the Bank is at 
least reasonably, if not  absolutely, confident that  it  has at  its  disposal  the policy  tools necessary  to 
achieve its goal. In this regard, there are those who maintain that the Bank need only boldly commit 
itself to taking any unconventional policy measures necessary to achieve the inflation target. Indeed, 
some economists seem to have formed a critical view that it is the Bank(cid:146)s own skepticism about the 
effectiveness  of  its  monetary  policy  which  is  preventing  it  from  hammering  out  a  more  forceful 
commitment and from having a more potent influence on the public(cid:146)s expectations. 
However, having had their expectations that the economy would return to a sustainable growth path 
left unfulfilled so often since the bursting of the asset price bubble, people in Japan are not so naive as 
to trust unconditionally the mere announcement of an inflation targeting policy by the Bank; nor indeed 
would  the  rest  of  the  economy  respond  by  taking  an  immediate  turn  for  the  better.  Unless  Japan(cid:146)s 
economy  benefits  from  positive  external  factors  such  as  a  surge  in  foreign  demand,  a  policy 
announcement by the Bank aimed at influencing public expectations will become effective only after 
the Bank has successfully demonstrated that an effective transmission mechanism exists between the 
Bank(cid:146)s policy and an actual stimulative effect on economic growth. Therefore, it is important for the 
Bank not only to pursue further monetary easing, but also to devise and implement a variety of policy 
measures which contribute directly to improving the transmission mechanism. 
The Bank is fully aware that inflation targeting enjoys relatively wide support among academics, and 
that many central banks have adopted inflation targets of one kind or another. It has become one of 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 the important policy tools for central banks to enhance transparency. In that sense, I have no intention 
of flatly denying the concept behind the policy measures related to inflation targeting. I would like to 
examine, in the process of reviewing how to make full use of the monetary easing policy in the future, 
whether we can reorganize the policy framework of the Bank, and whether there will be any room for 
introducing  such  a  tool  as  inflation  targeting  within  that  framework.  I  cannot  predict  honestly  what 
results will be produced by this wide-ranging discussion, or when. 
B. 
Additional measures to encourage the effects of monetary easing to permeate 
through the economy 
The fundamental policy issue confronting the  Bank is what exactly it can and should do  in order to 
encourage the effects of monetary easing to permeate through the economy. 
The Bank(cid:146)s quantitative easing policy, by providing ample liquidity in the form of the current account 
balance at the Bank, aims at improving the overall financial environment for firms and households, and 
thus at stimulating the economy. If the current quantitative easing does not have a strong effect on the 
economy, this can be interpreted as follows. The transmission mechanism between the Bank(cid:146)s ample 
provision of liquidity and the stimulative effect on firms and households is not functioning properly. To 
put it another way, the liquidity provided by the Bank is circulating within the financial sector and not 
flowing  out  of  it,  or  the  stimulative  effect  of  low  interest  rates  is  not  working  in  such  a  way  as  to 
permeate through the economy. 
This phenomenon of a choked or blocked channel in financing is closely related to the fact that the 
financial  institutions(cid:146)  credit  intermediary  function  is  deteriorating  due  to  the  nonperforming-loan 
problem. The most important issue in making the effects of the monetary easing permeate through the 
economy is to actively support financial institutions(cid:146) efforts to reestablish their soundness. At the same 
time, the Bank believes it is necessary also to apply itself on a second, parallel policy front, exercising 
its  ingenuity  in  devising  its  own  measures  in  the  area  of  money  market  operations  and  corporate 
financing. 
As you are all aware, at the MPM held in early April 2003 the Bank decided to start examining a new 
scheme  to  promote  smooth  corporate  financing  by  nurturing  the  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs) 
market. The  Bank(cid:146)s  initiative  in  this  regard  is  unprecedented  in  the  sense  that  it  will  be  purchasing 
ABSs, which are private debts, outright and thus stepping into the realm of credit risk. ABSs possess a 
number of advantageous characteristics. By pooling risks, they act to reduce the overall level of credit 
risk, relative to the sum of the individual risks. In addition, by restructuring the overall risk into multiple 
layers  representing  different  degrees  of  risk,  they  can  also  attract  investors  who  have  a  variety  of 
different risk preferences. 
Indeed,  the  rationale  behind  the  Bank(cid:146)s  decision  to  examine  the  feasibility  of  ABS  purchases  is  as 
follows.  Given  the  current  situation  in  which  financial  institutions  are  performing  their  credit 
intermediation  function  only  imperfectly,  if  the  Bank  can  succeed  in  making  use  of  these  features 
produced  by  the  process  of  financial  innovation,  it  will  be  able  to  promote  the  interaction  between 
market-based financing and bank lending. And thus it will contribute to establishing a new channel for 
smooth corporate financing for firms, especially small and medium-sized firms. 
Some  people  argue  that  the  Bank  should  not  restrict  its  purchases  to  ABSs  but  should  also  boldly 
purchase a wide range of assets such as those related to stocks and real estate, breaking with the 
traditional  framework.  The  Bank,  of  course,  is  always  ready  to  give  serious  consideration  to  any 
measure  that  might  help  bring  the  economy  back  to  a  sustainable  growth  path.  Having  said  this,  I 
would  therefore  like  now  to  discuss  some  of  the  possible  perspectives  and  criteria  important  in 
considering what kind of assets the Bank should and should not purchase. 
The first criterion,  which may  overlap somewhat  with what I have mentioned earlier, is  whether the 
Bank(cid:146)s  purchases  of  a  particular  type  of  asset  will  help  the  monetary  easing  effects  to  permeate 
through  the  real  economy;  and  whether  such  a  purchase  offers  any  actual  improvement  over  the 
existing transmission mechanism. 
The second criterion is related to whether the Bank(cid:146)s purchases might distort the market mechanism. 
If the Bank(cid:146)s decision to take on credit risk, as described above, ends up distorting market evaluations 
of prices and weakening the reflection of risk contained in credit spreads, the supply of credit will not 
increase and the effectiveness of monetary easing will suffer as a result. If the Bank dares to take on 
risk  by  purchasing  new  types  of  assets,  it  is  most  desirable  that  the  Bank(cid:146)s  initiative  becomes  a 
catalyst in enhancing the development of the market. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 7
 The background of seeking public comment in examining possible purchases of ABSs by the Bank is 
that we felt it was important to find a way of participating in this market so that the Bank(cid:146)s initiative 
does not distort the price-discovery function of the market and also enhances the development of the 
market.  Now  that  we  have  received  many  valuable  comments  from  market  participants,  we  are 
working on the concrete plan of the scheme, referring to those comments. 
Role of capital for the central bank 
C. 
I have been discussing how the Bank may be about to expose itself to credit risk by implementing a 
new measure in starting ABS purchases. The corollary of such a step is the possibility that the Bank 
might incur a capital loss. 
Given the current severe economic and financial situation, when the Bank started to purchase stocks 
held  by  banks,  it  was  determined  to  take  any  measures,  even  highly  risky  ones  unthinkable  under 
conventional conditions, if and when they were absolutely necessary to fulfil its mandate. At the same 
time, we set a principle of limiting the Bank(cid:146)s risk exposure to the level at which it does not impair the 
Bank(cid:146)s  financial  soundness.  The  Bank  gave  due  consideration  to  the  principle  when  it  decided  the 
stock-purchasing plan, and will also apply the principle in drawing concrete plans of the framework for 
ABS purchases, particularly in assessing risks. 
I would like to consider in more detail the subject of a central bank(cid:146)s financial soundness, particularly 
the role of its capital. I am aware that there are those who do not fully understand, from an economic 
perspective, why the central bank should be concerned about the soundness of its capital base. It is, 
after  all,  reasonable  to  assume  that,  unlike  ordinary  commercial  banks,  central  banks  can  continue 
their operations and avoid bankruptcy, even in the face of insolvency, since they have the authority to 
issue banknotes. 
So how can we explain this observation consistently with the fact that most central banks are exerting 
themselves to maintain substantial capital holdings? 
Also, how can we explain cases in developing countries where a country(cid:146)s central bank has fallen into 
excessive  debt  on  a  grand  scale,  and  until  its  capital  position  was  properly  restored,  its  ability  to 
conduct  monetary  policy  was  greatly  damaged  in  practice,  even  though  this  phenomenon  is  not 
predicted in theory? 
The above cases of actual behavior of some central banks indicate that central banks(cid:146) concern with 
the  soundness  of  their  capital  base  might  not  be  grounded  purely  in  economic  theory  but  may  be 
motivated  rather  by  the  political  economic  instincts  of  central  bankers.  In  other  words,  once  the 
restriction  that  (cid:147)the  central  bank  should  only  take  risks  consistent  with  the  level  of  its  self-imposed 
capital  base(cid:148)  is  violated,  the  boundary  between  the  functions  of  the  central  bank  and  those  of  the 
government may become difficult to discern. 
Consider a case where, for whatever reason, a central bank(cid:146)s capital becomes depleted, and the bank 
requires financial support from the government. The  central  bank might either run into  difficulties in 
conducting its policy and other business operations or might cause the view to spread that it will, and 
eventually it will become difficult to maintain public confidence in the currency. 
This  argument  brings  us  to  the  fundamental  issue  of  how  the  central  bank  should  function  in  a 
democratic society. There are two problems pertaining to a central bank(cid:146)s significant risk-taking activity 
of purchasing risk-bearing assets. The first is that it might potentially incur losses, and the burden of 
this  would  effectively  be  transferred  to  the  public  through  reductions  in  payments  to  the  national 
treasury, or, in the worst-case scenario, through injections of public funds to restore the balance sheet 
of  the  central  bank.  The  second  problem  is  that  such  purchases,  depending  on  the  central  bank(cid:146)s 
selection of assets, would inevitably affect the allocation of resources at the microeconomic level. Both 
problems lead us to the question of the role of a central bank, whether it should approach the territory 
of fiscal policy. The basic principle underlying the determination of how tax revenue should be spent in 
a  democratic  nation  is  as  follows:  expenditure  should  be  carried  out  through  fiscal  policy,  following 
formal approval of the government budget by the Parliament. If resources are to be allocated outside 
the market mechanism as part of economic policy, it is the government that should take the initiative, 
not the central bank. The purchase of risk-bearing assets by the central bank should therefore be very 
carefully planned and conducted with discipline. 
Drawing a clear line on such issues is a difficult task. In practice, monetary policy cannot be conducted 
with any great degree of flexibility and the central bank can only purchase FBs and TBs when there is 
8 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 a strict rule  preventing  it from taking on any risk, because to  do so  would involve stepping  into  the 
territory of fiscal policy. 
This  is  the  reason  why  a  more  feasible  practice  has  been  adopted  in  many  countries  whereby  the 
central bank reserves the ability to act flexibly within the level of the risk consistent with maintaining an 
adequate level of capital in the relatively long term. 
If  the  public  allows  the  central  bank  to  take  on  a  certain  level  of  risk  within  the  context  of  flexible 
monetary policy, then it would be appropriate for the public to support the risk-taking behavior of the 
central bank by restoring its capital base should the latter be damaged as a result of taking risks. In 
such a way, the balance between democracy and a central bank(cid:146)s flexibility in conducting its monetary 
policy could be maintained. 
Concluding remarks 
When  I  attended  the  society(cid:146)s  meeting  ten  years  ago,  I  concluded  my  remarks  by  citing  a  famous 
statement by John Maynard Keynes which runs as follows: (cid:147)There is no subtler, no surer means of 
overturning the existing basis of society than to debauch the currency.(cid:148) I commented on the quotation 
that (cid:147)these words have often been used to describe the evils of inflation and have come to find general 
acceptance. Yet, I believe that the statement should also be understood to connote the stability of the 
financial  system.  I  believe  that  money  is  truly  capable  of  functioning  as  the  social  and  economic 
lifeblood of a country when its value is properly maintained through monetary policy, and also when 
smooth functioning of the payment and settlement systems is fully ensured.(cid:148) I still believe in the truth 
of what I said. 
I  must  add  here  that  there  is  another  aspect  to  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  that  requires 
particular attention today. That is the necessity of confronting deflation, the new enemy with whom we 
at the central bank must now engage, and I believe that this should be of equal importance to fighting 
inflation. 
Neither macroeconomics nor finance textbooks have yet managed to provide a practical solution to the 
problems related to the deflation with which we are now faced. On the other hand, the latest research 
in the United States has started to produce useful theoretical analyses of the fundamental effects of 
monetary and fiscal policies under the zero interest rate constraint, one of the issues the Bank has 
been tackling in the last few years. This is an area of study in which we are eagerly awaiting progress. 
I  also  believe  that  the  Bank(cid:146)s  deflation-fighting  experiences  will  add  important  chapters  to  finance 
textbooks in the 21st century. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 9
