 David Dodge: Canada(cid:146)s experiences of the past few decades 
Speech by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Spruce Meadows Roundtable, 
Spruce Meadows, Alberta, 5 September 2003. 
 Thanks to my colleagues from around the world for giving such a comprehensive review of the vital 
issues facing the global economy. One of the hazards of speaking last in these kinds of sessions is 
that those who speak before you may cover all the interesting territory, leaving you with the unenviable 
task of trying to tie everything together.  
In  this  case,  however,  going  last  is  not  so  bad.  That(cid:146)s  because,  in  order  to  tie  together  the  issues 
discussed so far, we need to take a global view of the economy. And as far as Canada is concerned, 
taking a global view has always been important. Of course, every country is affected to some extent by 
what happens in the world economy. But Canada, with its very open economy, has a particular need 
to keep an eye on the changing fortunes of the international scene.  
Canada(cid:146)s reliance on foreign trade has required us to be  active internationalists for decades. Louis 
Rasminsky, who went on to become Governor of the Bank of Canada, was one of Canada(cid:146)s delegates 
at the Bretton Woods Conference that led to the creation of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and 
the World Bank. Rasminsky played an important role, formal and informal, at the talks. Not only was 
he the Chair of the drafting committee, he was also the peacemaker between the British delegation, 
led by John Maynard Keynes, and the U.S. delegation, led by Treasury Secretary Harry Dexter White. 
In  the  months  leading  up  to  Bretton  Woods,  it  was  Rasminsky  who  kept  the  two  key  delegations 
talking. Without his work, both as a skilled drafter and as a go-between, it(cid:146)s entirely possible that the 
talks at Bretton Woods could have ended in failure.  
Canada was also present at the 1947 Havana Conference, where we pushed for the establishment of 
an  international  trade  organization.  This  was  meant  to  be  a  body  parallel  to  the  IMF,  designed  to 
establish and monitor a set of global trade rules. We didn(cid:146)t get quite what we wanted, but the result 
was still certainly positive: the birth of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). In 1995, 
nearly five decades later, we were more successful, as we pushed the effort to turn the GATT into the 
World Trade Organization (WTO). So Canada(cid:146)s credentials as a supporter of institutions designed to 
promote free trade and a sound international financial system are well established. 
Of course, much has changed in the global economy during the more than half-century since those 
institutions were founded. Of profound significance, transportation and communications have become 
very much cheaper and faster today than they were after World War II. Because of this, the potential 
economic  gains  from  increased  international  trade  and  finance  are  now  much  greater  than  ever 
before. At the same time, individual countries are more vulnerable to economic and financial shocks 
originating outside their borders. So the need for a coherent international financial system is also much 
greater today. And our international institutions must evolve to take all of this into account.  
To  help  us  maximize  the  potential  gains  from  increased  trade,  and  to  minimize  the  risks  stemming 
from greater interdependence, we need to encourage trust, domestically and internationally. Let me 
explain what I mean. When I use the word trust, I am talking about the understanding that can develop 
when people recognize that everyone benefits when everyone plays by the rules. In this atmosphere, 
the rules that govern behaviour reinforce people(cid:146)s actions and help them choose to (cid:147)do the right thing.(cid:148) 
This kind  of  trust  allows  for  what  game  theorists  call  (cid:147)positive-sum  outcomes,(cid:148) where  progress  can 
come through (cid:147)win-win(cid:148) situations. It also allows national economies, as well as the global economy, to 
be strengthened.  
This kind of trust begins at home. What all of us as national public policy-makers must do, and must 
be  seen  to  be  doing,  is  work  to  maintain  and  increase  trust.  We  need  to  put  in  place  the  right 
incentives so that, in general, people will do the right thing. To be sure, the need to enforce sanctions 
when people do the wrong thing is critical. But when people can operate in an atmosphere of trust, 
they  can  spend  less  energy  keeping  tabs  on  others,  and  can  concentrate  on  more  productive 
activities.  
We have seen over the past decades that trust is important to a well-functioning financial system. And 
a well-functioning financial system is necessary if we are to have an appropriate allocation of savings, 
which is a fundamental element of solid economic growth.  
BIS Review 40/2003 
 1
 I  would  argue  that  five  lessons  can  be  drawn  from  our  experiences  since  the  time  of  the  Bretton 
Woods and Havana agreements. All of them underscore the importance of trust.  
The first lesson we have learned is the critical importance of having a robust legal framework. When a 
country has the appropriate legal structures, it creates a sense of certainty. Citizens, investors, and 
corporations have the security of knowing that contracts will be honoured, and that those who break 
the rules will be caught and punished. The protection of property rights and a tradition of contract law 
are prime examples of these structures.  
Certainly, in recent years, we have all recognized the importance of a robust legal framework as we 
have watched countries in Eastern Europe, Latin America, and Asia struggle to make the transition to 
a market economy. But we in North America have also learned over the past two years, in a rather 
painful way, that issues of corporate governance are extremely important as well. So when we think of 
legal  structures,  we  should  now  also  think  about  high  standards  for  accounting,  transparency  in 
corporate reporting, and adequate enforcement of the rules.  
The  second  lesson  we  have  learned  is  that  our  fiscal  policies  must  always  be  based  on  prudence. 
When  public  debts  are  allowed  to  mount  unabated,  the  trust  of  investors  and  citizens  can  vanish 
quickly. In its place comes fear that the debt will either be inflated away, or that a future government 
may default. Since the late 1990s, Canada has seen the benefits that can come from fiscal prudence. 
Putting our fiscal house in order has helped to establish credibility for our macroeconomic framework. 
And  once  fiscal  credibility  is  established  and  a  country  has  a  low  public  debt-to-GDP  ratio,  the 
(cid:147)automatic  stabilizers(cid:148)  -  which  kick  in  to  increase  government  spending  to  cushion  the  impact  of 
difficult economic times - can operate without undermining the trust of citizens and investors. 
The third lesson we have all learned is the importance of being open to trade. When a country opens 
its industries and markets to international trade, this may force painful short-term adjustments in some 
sectors. But at the same time, the country gains from ongoing competitive pressures which act to spur 
productivity improvements and raise living standards. In the end, the country as a whole is better off. 
But what is equally important is that those countries that have opened up to international trade play by 
the rules. Otherwise, we run the risk of falling into destructive (cid:147)lose-lose(cid:148) situations, where countries 
don(cid:146)t trust each other and resort to unilateral actions that escalate trade disputes.  
Fourth, we have learned the importance of a central bank that promotes trust in the value of money, 
free  from  political  interference.  When  a  central  bank  delivers  an  environment  of  low,  stable,  and 
predictable  inflation,  the  public,  and  especially  middle-  and  lower-income  groups,  can  feel  more 
confident  that  their  savings  and  purchasing  power  will  not  be  eroded  by  high  inflation.  And  all 
borrowers can be more confident that the burden of their debt will not be increased through deflation. 
Low  inflation also helps to  win the public(cid:146)s trust in the functioning of a market economy. As former 
Bank  of  Canada  Governor  Gerald  Bouey  put  it,  (cid:147)inflation  melts  the  glue  that  holds  free  societies 
together.(cid:148) In Canada, we focus on inflation in a symmetric way. In doing so, we aim to avoid inflation 
while also minimizing the risks of deflation. Such an approach brings important economic benefits. But 
it  also  assures  creditors  that  the  value  of  their  investment  will  not  be  eaten  away  over  time.  And  it 
assures debtors that the burden of their debt will not increase in the future because of deflation.  
The fifth lesson has to do with capital flows and exchange rates. Open markets and the free flow of 
capital can greatly accelerate development. But, as I noted before, open markets and capital flows can 
make  individual  countries  vulnerable  to  shocks  that  originate  elsewhere.  So  there  is  a  need  for 
countries  to  have  a  mechanism  in  place  that  helps  their  economies  adjust  to  shocks.  Recent 
experience has taught us how important it is to have this kind of adjustment mechanism in place and, 
in particular, how a floating exchange rate can play this role.  
I  know  that  not  everyone  here  would  agree  that  the  floating  exchange  rate  is  the  best  adjustment 
mechanism  for  every  country.  Based  on  Canada(cid:146)s  long  experience  with  a  floating  currency,  I  can 
certainly say that it has served us well. But I(cid:146)m sure that we can all at least agree that there will always 
be  shocks,  that  such  shocks  will  have  different  effects  on  national  economies,  and  that  flexible 
exchange  rates  can  help  to  facilitate  the  necessary  adjustments.  This  lesson  was  clearly  brought 
home during the Asian crisis of 1997-98. Many Asian countries, but also countries like Canada that are 
particularly vulnerable to sharp fluctuations in commodity prices, made relatively quick adjustments to 
a difficult situation through the floating exchange rate mechanism.  
How does this relate to trust? Through the need to trust in market forces, I would say. When exchange 
rates float and capital moves freely, investors can trust that market forces are being allowed to do their 
job. There is an assurance that when shocks arise, countries will not be shielding their economy from 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2003
 market forces through restrictive trade practices, arbitrary controls on capital flows, or fixed exchange 
rates.  
So those are some of the key lessons we can draw from our experiences of the past few decades. In 
Canada, we have tried to apply these lessons to our own economic situation. And I would argue that 
doing so has helped us handle economic shocks better recently than in the past. Now, if we apply the 
principle of trust that is behind those lessons to our international financial institutions, we can get some 
idea of how these institutions might evolve to better work for the global economy. Game theorists will 
tell you that the best results come when the players see each other(cid:146)s behaviour and learn from it. Put 
simply, actions speak louder than words.  
We  have  already  seen  the  GATT  evolve  into  the  WTO,  which  establishes  the  ground  rules  for 
international  trade  and  calls  to  account  those  countries  that  are  not  playing  by  the  rules.  Such  an 
institution  is  essential  if  we  are  to  reduce  the  frequency  of  (cid:147)lose-lose(cid:148)  trade  disputes  I  mentioned 
earlier. But for the WTO to go further, as it should, it is clear that progress needs to be made in the 
areas of greatest interest to the poorer nations. After all, the current round of talks is supposed to be 
the (cid:147)Development Round.(cid:148) So it is incumbent on us in the developed world to (cid:147)do the right thing,(cid:148) and 
overcome domestic political difficulties to open our markets in areas such as agriculture and textiles.  
Recently, we have seen the IMF take steps to strengthen its surveillance function. These steps should 
be supported. Countries should strive to meet the highest standards for data dissemination and should 
welcome  assessments  of  their  economies  and  financial  systems.  Only  when  all  the  players  have 
complete  trust  in  the  numbers  -  whether  they  are  part  of  a  nation(cid:146)s  economic  statistics  or  a  firm(cid:146)s 
balance sheet - will investments be made most efficiently and effectively.  
The IMF(cid:146)s other role, for which it is perhaps better known, is as provider of emergency liquidity. By the 
end of the 1990s, the Fund had increasingly found itself providing financial assistance many times in 
excess of a country(cid:146)s quota, in situations where sustainability, not a lack of liquidity, appeared to be 
the real issue. This is problematic, for a number of reasons. Perhaps most importantly, when debtors 
or creditors presume that there will be large official bailouts, there is the possibility of (cid:147)moral hazard.(cid:148) 
This is a case where policy-makers have not provided the incentives for debtors and creditors to do 
the right thing.  
In  recent  years,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Bank  of  England  worked  together  to  develop  a 
(cid:147)middle-ground(cid:148)  approach  to  crisis  resolution.  This  approach,  which  was  detailed  in  a  joint  paper 
published in 2001, was designed to provide the right incentives for debtors and creditors. It contained 
three  basic  elements.  First,  (cid:147)presumptive  limits(cid:148)  to  official  assistance,  which  would  be  known  in 
advance. Secondly, the possibility of exceptional official lending, but only in the unlikely event that a 
crisis threatened global financial stability. Third, orderly standstills or temporary suspensions of debt-
service payments to give distressed debtors some time to take steps, including debt rescheduling, to 
address their problems.  
Since  that  time,  the  G-7  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  have  adopted  much  of  this 
approach in the context of their Action Plan for crisis prevention and resolution. What is important now 
is that we support that Plan and enforce the rules that have been put in place. If we ignore the rules 
that have been established, we risk losing the trust that we are trying so hard to build. 
To conclude, I hope that I have been able to illustrate the importance of trust. By strengthening this 
trust,  we can make the global financial system work better. And  by  doing so,  we can  deal  with the 
changing fortunes of the world economy and find a more efficient means of financing world growth.  
BIS Review 40/2003 
 3
