 Alan Bollard: Corporate governance in the financial sector 
Address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to The Annual Meeting of 
the Institute of Directors in New Zealand, Christchurch, 7 April 2003. 
 Corporate governance is now a topic of considerable interest to a large and expanding cross-section 
of the community. It is obviously of fundamental importance to this audience, given that most of you 
are company directors. It is also of interest to the Reserve Bank, in its capacity as supervisor of the 
banking system. In this speech, I will discuss a number of themes relating to corporate governance, 
with particular emphasis on the important role it plays in promoting a sound financial system. 
Until fairly recently, corporate governance was not a topic that attracted much public attention. It was a 
topic reserved for discussion in the Board room or in academic environments. However, recent events, 
such as the Enron scandal and other corporate governance failures, have put corporate governance 
on  the  front  pages  of  our  main  newspapers.  Although  none  of  us  welcomes  this  kind  of  adverse 
publicity, it has nonetheless had beneficial effects. In particular, it has highlighted the important role 
that corporate governance plays in a modern economy and the consequences of getting it wrong. And 
it  has  strengthened  the  incentives  for  directors  and  policy-makers  alike  to  reassess  the  structures 
needed to produce high quality corporate governance. 
In  this  address,  I  present  a  central  banker's  perspectives  on  a  number  of  corporate  governance 
issues. In particular, I will: 
• 
comment  on  the  role  that  corporate  governance  plays  in  the  financial  system  and  wider 
economy, and why it is important for economic growth and financial stability;  
highlight what I would regard as the key elements of sound corporate governance; and  
discuss the role that corporate governance plays in the Reserve Bank's approach to banking 
supervision. 
 Before  traversing  these  subjects,  I  think  it  would  be  useful  to  begin  by  defining  what  I  mean  by 
corporate governance. In this address, I am deliberately using the term quite broadly to encompass 
the systems and structures that a corporate entity has in place to oversee its affairs. This involves a 
number  of  elements,  including  a  clear  understanding  by  directors  of  their  company's  strategic 
objectives,  structures  to  ensure  that  the  objectives  are  being  met,  systems  to  ensure  the  effective 
management of risks, and the mechanisms to ensure that the company's obligations are identified and 
discharged. Although corporate governance involves many systems and structures, the heart of it lies 
in the boardroom - a point I hardly need to stress with this audience.  
It  is  self  evident  that  sound  corporate  governance  is  essential  to  the  wellbeing  of  an  individual 
company  and  its  stakeholders,  particularly  its  shareholders  and  creditors.  We  need  only  remind 
ourselves of the many companies, both at home and abroad, whose financial difficulties and, in some 
cases, ultimate demise have been substantially attributable to weak corporate governance. But sound 
corporate  governance  is  not  just  a  vital  factor  at  the  level  of  the  individual  corporation.  It  is  also  a 
critical  ingredient  in  maintaining  a  sound  financial  system  and  a  robust  economy.  And  that  is  why 
governments have taken such an interest in recent examples of corporate governance failures. It is 
also why banking supervisors are placing greater emphasis on the role that corporate governance can 
play in promoting financial stability. 
In the financial system, corporate governance is one of the key factors that determine the health of the 
system and its ability to survive economic shocks. The health of the financial system much depends 
on the underlying soundness of its individual components and the connections between them - such 
as the banks, the non-bank financial institutions and the payment systems. In turn, their soundness 
largely depends on their capacity to identify, measure, monitor and control their risks.  
In New Zealand, the two core components of the financial system are the registered banks - which 
represent the vast bulk of financial system assets - and the payment system - which processes billions 
of dollars of transactions each day.  
Banks  face  a  wide  range  of  complex  risks  in  their  day-to-day  business,  including  risks  relating  to 
credit,  liquidity,  exposure  concentration,  interest  rates,  exchange  rates,  settlement,  and  internal 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 1
 operations. The nature of banks' business - particularly the maturity mismatch between their assets 
and liabilities, their relatively high gearing and their reliance on creditor confidence - creates particular 
vulnerabilities. The consequences of mismanaging their risks can be severe indeed - not only for the 
individual bank, but also for the system as a whole. This reflects the fact that the failure of one bank 
can  rapidly  affect  another  through  inter-institutional  exposures  and  confidence  effects.  And  any 
prolonged and significant disruption to the financial system can have potentially severe effects on the 
wider economy. 
The payment system is also a critical component of the financial system. It contains the pipelines that 
connect  the  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries.  And  it  provides  the  means  by  which  vast 
numbers of transactions - personal and corporate, domestic and overseas - are made each day. The 
payment system involves many different components, including systems for settling large, inter-bank 
and inter-corporate payment transactions, and systems for handling myriads of smaller transactions, 
such as cheques, credit cards, direct debits and  EFTPOS. Each system is managed by a payment 
operator. Some are private companies owned by the banks, while others are under the management 
of the Reserve Bank. Although these operators do not face risks of the nature that banks face - such 
as credit risk, for example - they do have major operational risks. In particular, they need to ensure 
that  the  systems for  processing  payments,  the  back-up  arrangements,  and  the  internal  governance 
structures are robust.  A major operational failure  in  the payment system has the potential to cause 
severe disruption to the financial system and wider economy. At its worst, a major payment system 
failure  would  bring  countless  commercial  transactions  to  an  abrupt  halt,  impede  the  operation  of 
business  in  virtually  all  parts  of  the  economy  and  fundamentally  undermine  investor  and  business 
confidence. 
The stakes are indeed high - hence the need for banks, other financial institutions and the payment 
system operators to maintain systems to enable them to identify, monitor and control their risks. And 
sound corporate governance is the foundation for effective risk management. 
Of course, corporate governance is not just an essential ingredient for financial stability. It is also a 
critical  feature  in  the  longer  term  performance  of  the  economy.  One  could  be  forgiven  for  thinking 
otherwise, given the emphasis placed in the news media and elsewhere on the role of government in 
determining a country's economic performance. We frequently read and hear commentary suggesting 
that  the  key  to  better  economic  performance  lies  in  better  government  policy  -  be  it  fiscal  policy, 
monetary  policy  or  structural  reforms.  To  be  sure,  these  are  all  important  ingredients  in  shaping 
economic  performance.  But  I  believe  one  of  the  key  drivers  of  how  well  or  poorly  our  economy 
performs  is  where  we  invest  our  resources  and  how  well  we  use  them.  By  and  large,  the  way  we 
allocate  and  use  our  resources  is  not  determined  by  policy-makers  in  Wellington.  It  is  largely 
determined  by  the  investment  and  management  decisions  of  hundreds  of  companies.  In  turn,  the 
quality  of  these  investment  and  management  decisions  substantially  depends  on  the  quality  of 
corporate governance in each company. 
Therefore,  corporate  governance  is  clearly  of  fundamental  importance,  both  at  the  level  of  the 
individual  company  and  for  the  financial  system  and  economy  as  a  whole.  Unfortunately,  to  the 
detriment  of  both  financial  stability  and  economic  growth,  we  have  seen  too  many  examples  of 
corporate  governance  failures  over  the  years,  both  in  New  Zealand  and  in  many  other  countries. 
Indeed,  it  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  assert  that  many  of  the  financial  crises  seen  in  recent  years, 
including  in  Asia,  Russia  and  Latin  America,  can  be  attributed,  in  no  small  way,  to  fundamental 
weaknesses in corporate governance and risk management.  
In particular, we know that financial distress episodes in a number of emerging economies have been 
caused, in part, by excessive exposure concentration, directed lending, lending to connected parties, 
poor credit policy and inadequate management of foreign exchange risk. To a large extent, such basic 
risk  management  failures  reflect  a  breakdown 
in  corporate  governance.  They  reflect  poor 
management of conflicts of interest, inadequate understanding in the boardroom of key banking risks, 
and poor oversight by boards of the mechanisms for managing their banks, such as risk management 
systems and internal audit arrangements. In some cases, a lack of truly independent directors on the 
boards of banks was also a significant factor in weakening the effectiveness of boards. And we know 
that these problems were  compounded by poor quality financial disclosures and ineffective external 
audit. In some cases, the rigour of the external audit process has been impaired by a lack of auditor 
independence, not least as a result of some audit firms performing a range of non-audit services for 
their clients.  
2 
 BIS Review 18/2003
      Of  course,  these  kinds  of  corporate  governance  failures  are  by  no  means  unique  to  the  financial 
systems of emerging economies. We have seen similar examples of corporate governance and risk 
management failures  contributing  to  financial  system  distress  in  a  number  of  advanced  economies, 
including  much  of  Scandinavia  in  the  1980s  and,  of  course,  New  Zealand  and  Australia  in  the  late 
1980s and early 1990s. And I hardly need to draw your attention to the much more recent high profile 
corporate governance failures in the United States, United Kingdom and elsewhere. 
In order to address these  kinds of problems, and to reduce the risk of future corporate governance 
failures,  much  activity  has  been  underway,  globally  and  at  the  domestic  level.  The  OECD  has 
produced a set of corporate governance principles that have become the core template for assessing 
countries'  corporate  governance  arrangements.  Similarly, 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision - the international standard-setting body responsible for establishing international banking 
supervision principles - has distilled principles for corporate governance in banks. More recently, we 
have  had  the  benefit  of  corporate  governance  reviews  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  many  are  now 
reflecting on the implications of the recently enacted Sarbanes-Oxley legislation in the United States. 
Closer  to  home,  in  Australia,  there  has  also  been  considerable  interest  in  corporate  governance 
issues, including the role of non-executive directors. And, of course, many countries have their own 
national  codes  of  good  corporate  governance,  either  developed  by  government  or  by  the  private 
sector. New Zealand is no exception, with the Institute of Directors having issued a raft of very useful 
guidance material to directors. 
There  are  few  absolute  "rights"  and  "wrongs"  in  the  field  of  corporate  governance,  but  some  key 
principles stand out. In particular, let me highlight a few basic principles to which we in the Reserve 
Bank attach considerable importance in a banking sector context.  
• 
First, I would particularly stress the importance of directors having a sound understanding of 
their company's business, the nature of its risks and its strategic direction. This provides the 
foundation for the sound management of any company. It is absolutely crucial in a bank.  
Second, we firmly believe that the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that a company's risks 
are being properly identified, monitored and controlled lies in the boardroom.  
Third,  we  place  considerable  emphasis  on  the  importance  of  having  an  adequate 
representation  of  non-executive  and  independent  directors  on  the  board,  and  a  clear 
separation of the position of board chairman and chief executive officer.  
Fourth, it goes without saying - but I will say it anyway - that there is a fundamental need for 
directors to be scrupulous in ensuring that, individually and collectively, potential conflicts of 
interest are avoided or at least managed in ways that do not compromise the interests of the 
company.  
We also stress the importance of rigorous internal and external audit arrangements - where 
the external auditor has a strong measure of independence and is not conflicted by having 
other significant financial interests in the company.  
Finally, as the Governor of a central bank that has placed strong emphasis on disclosure by 
registered banks, and which sets high standards on its own financial disclosures, it will not 
surprise  you  to  know  that  we  stress  the  importance  of  regular,  timely,  comprehensive, 
meaningful and reliable financial disclosures of a company's affairs. 
These kinds of principles feature strongly in the Reserve Bank's approach to the supervision of banks 
in New Zealand. Before going on to explain our approach, and the central role that banks' corporate 
governance plays in our framework, it may be useful to set the scene by highlighting the key features 
of  the  New  Zealand  financial  system.  Some  of  them  have  particularly  interesting  implications  for 
corporate governance. 
The  New  Zealand  banking  system  is  relatively  unusual  by  international  standards  in  a  number  of 
respects. First, unlike the financial systems of many countries, in New Zealand the banks form a very 
dominant part of the financial sector. Registered banks, of which there are currently 18, represent the 
lion's  share  of  the  total  financial  system,  both  in  terms  of  total  financial  system  assets  and  deposit 
liabilities. In terms of financial system stability, registered banks are by far the most important players 
in  the  financial  system.  And  of  the  18  registered  banks,  only  about  5  banks  could  be  regarded  as 
systemically important, together holding more than 80% of total registered bank assets.  
BIS Review 18/2003 
 3
 The New Zealand banking system is also unusual in another way - the nature of its ownership. All but 
two of the registered banks are foreign owned,  with  the two New Zealand-owned banks being  very 
small relative to the system as a whole. The foreign-owned banks operate either as subsidiaries or as 
branches  of  foreign  banks,  with  most  of  the  largest  banks  being  wholly-owned  subsidiaries  of 
Australian and British banks. As I will note later in this speech, this raises particular complications for 
the  nature  of  the  corporate  governance  arrangements  in  these  banks  and  raises  interesting  policy 
questions for the Reserve Bank as guardian of the financial system. 
As  I  have  indicated,  a  fundamental  component  of  New  Zealand's  approach  to  the  promotion  of 
financial stability is the emphasis it places on the importance of corporate governance as a means of 
encouraging  banks  to  effectively  identify,  monitor  and  manage  their  business  risks.  This  approach 
recognises the critical role which directors have in overseeing the stewardship of their bank. Indeed, it 
is  worth  noting  that  the  New  Zealand  banking  supervision  framework,  with  its  heavy  emphasis  on 
encouraging  sound  risk  management  through  strong  corporate  governance  arrangements,  is 
somewhat  unusual  by  international  standards.  In  most  countries,  the  standard  approach  to  banking 
supervision  involves  reliance  on  prudential  regulation  of  banks,  where  a  bank's  risk  positions  are 
substantially  constrained  by  regulatory  limits  imposed  by  the  supervisory  authority.  It  also  typically 
involves some form of on-site examination of banks by the supervisors.  
In  contrast,  the  New  Zealand  supervisory  framework  quite  deliberately  avoids  the  use  of  prudential 
regulation - except  in limited areas, such as minimum capital ratios and limits on lending to related 
parties.  And  the  Reserve  Bank  does  not  conduct  on-site  examinations  of  banks.  Our  supervisory 
framework is deliberately light-handed in nature, in the sense that we minimise our intrusion into the 
management of banks' risks and the structure of their operations. Instead, we try to foster robust "self 
discipline"  in  banks  through  the  corporate  governance  and  disclosure  frameworks  we  have 
established.  That  said,  I  should  make  it  clear  that,  although  the  Reserve  Bank  does  not  conduct 
on-site  examinations  of  banks'  loans  and  risk management  systems,  we  do  meet  annually  with  the 
senior management teams of the banks. These meetings provide an important opportunity to discuss 
recent  developments  in  the  respective  banks,  risk  management,  banking  industry  issues  and  other 
relevant  matters.  The  meetings  keep  us  well  informed  about  each  of  the  banks  and  the  banking 
industry as a whole, but fall well short of the more intrusive bank examination process typical in other 
countries. 
We  also  differ  from  many  other  countries  by  not  having  deposit  insurance  or  an  explicit  depositor 
protection objective. The statutory objectives of banking supervision in New Zealand are to promote a 
sound and efficient financial system and to avoid damage to the financial system resulting from a bank 
failure. We are not charged with protecting depositors or other bank creditors per se. 
We believe the New Zealand approach is an effective way of promoting a sound financial system. We 
also believe it reduces the moral hazard risks associated with conventional banking supervision, and 
strengthens the effectiveness of market discipline on banks. The fact that the New Zealand banking 
system is currently one of the healthiest in the world - with high asset quality, sound risk management 
practices and good capitalisation - bears testimony to this. However, we are certainly not complacent, 
and  we  remain  ever-watchful  to  detect  incipient  signs  of  financial  distress,  and  we  stand  ready  to 
intervene  if  necessary.  Moreover,  we  regularly  review  our  supervisory  framework  to  ensure  that  it 
continues to be an effective means of promoting a sound and efficient financial system. In that context, 
we are currently reviewing a number of our supervision policies, with a view to further improving the 
existing arrangements. 
Although  some  of  you  will  already  be  au  fait  with  the  mechanisms  that  the  Reserve  Bank  uses  to 
promote strong corporate governance and risk management in banks, it is probably useful for me to 
briefly summarise the main features. These policies include comprehensive disclosure requirements 
for banks, a requirement for bank directors to attest to the veracity of their bank's disclosures and to 
make attestations on the management of risks, and requirements in relation to the composition of the 
board of directors. Let me elaborate briefly on these features: 
All banks in New Zealand are required to publish comprehensive financial and risk-related disclosures 
on a quarterly basis, including information on a bank's and banking group's: 
• 
• 
• 
capital position;  
concentration of credit exposures to individual counterparties;  
related party exposures;  
4 
 BIS Review 18/2003
 asset quality and provisioning; and  
interest rate, exchange rate and equity risks. 
• 
• 
Each  disclosure statement is required to contain  a number of attestations, signed by  each director. 
These are intended to encourage directors to focus their attention on key risks within their bank and to 
be satisfied that these risks are being effectively managed.  
Directors of each registered bank are required to attest that the bank has systems in place to monitor 
and  control  adequately  the  banking  group's  material  risks  and  whether  those  systems  are  being 
properly applied at all times. The directors are also required to attest that all prudential requirements 
applicable to the bank in question are being complied with, such as requirements relating to minimum 
capital  adequacy  and  exposures  to  related  parties.  And  the  directors  are  required  to  confirm  that 
exposures to related parties are in the best interests of the banking group. 
Each bank director is required to sign their bank's disclosure statement and to certify that disclosures 
made are not false or misleading. If a disclosure statement is found to be false or misleading, directors 
are  subject  to  potentially  severe  legal  penalties,  including  substantial  fines  and  imprisonment.  In 
addition, directors may face unlimited personal liability for creditors' losses where creditors relied on a 
bank's disclosure statement that was false or misleading. 
Banks  incorporated  in  New  Zealand  are  required  to  have  a  minimum  of  two  independent  directors, 
who must also be independent of any parent company or other related parties, and a non-executive 
chairperson. These requirements are intended to increase the board's capacity to exercise appropriate 
scrutiny  over  the  performance  of  the  management  team.  In  addition,  independent  directors  provide 
some assurance that the bank's dealings with its parent or other related parties are not in conflict with 
the interests of the bank in New Zealand. 
Complementing these requirements, New Zealand's approach to financial sector regulation seeks to 
create an environment conducive to robust market disciplines. This is achieved through a number of 
measures,  including  the  promotion  of  a  relatively  open,  contestable  banking  sector,  a  competitively 
neutral approach to regulation - enabling banks and non-banks to compete on largely equal terms - 
and the absence of deposit insurance. In addition, the Reserve Bank's approach to responding to a 
bank failure stresses the importance of being able to manage a bank failure in ways that avoid the 
need for a government-funded bail-out, and seeks to ensure that shareholders, subordinated creditors 
and  senior  creditors,  including  depositors,  bear  their  fair  share  of  losses.  All  of  these  features  are 
intended  to  strengthen  the  incentives  for  market  scrutiny  of  banks  and  to  further  encourage  the 
directors and managers of banks to ensure that their banks' risks - especially credit risk, market risks, 
exposure concentration, operational risk and liquidity - are being prudently managed. 
We  are  confident  that  these  measures  have  been  successful  in  contributing  to  a  sound  banking 
system.  But  we  have  recently  sent  a  comprehensive  questionnaire  to  the  boards  of  all  banks  to 
develop a greater understanding of the means by which directors satisfy themselves that their banks' 
disclosures are not false or misleading and that their systems for controlling risks are robust. We will 
be  very  interested  to  see  the  results  of  that  survey  and  then  to  assess  whether  the  existing 
arrangements  are  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  a  sound  financial  system.  We  are  also 
surveying auditors to enhance our understanding of the audit processes in relation to banks and to 
assess the adequacy of existing audit requirements for banks. 
In addition to our own assessments of these matters, we will also benefit from an external assessment 
of banking supervision arrangements and other elements of financial sector regulation later this year. 
That  assessment  will  be  conducted  by  a  team  of  international  experts  led  by  the  International 
Monetary Fund, as part of the joint IMF/World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Programme - FSAP 
for  short.  The  FSAP  was  initiated  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  crisis,  in  1999,  and  is  designed  to 
evaluate  a  country's  financial  system.  It  includes  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  regulatory 
arrangements,  including  banking  supervision  and  securities  market  regulation,  using  international 
standards and codes as benchmarks. It also involves stress testing the financial system to assess the 
system's  capacity  to  withstand  economic  shocks.  New  Zealand  will  undergo  an  FSAP  assessment 
later  this  year,  and  I  am  sure  that  the  assessors  will  take  a  particular  interest  in  the  banking 
supervision framework and the emphasis we place on corporate governance and market disciplines. 
We await the results of the FSAP assessment with considerable interest. 
Although our policies are designed to strengthen the corporate governance of banks operating in New 
Zealand, the foreign ownership of most of our banks introduces complications as well as advantages. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  all  but  two  of  the  registered  banks  in  New  Zealand  are  foreign  owned, 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 5
 operating in New Zealand either as branches or subsidiaries of overseas banks. This raises interesting 
issues relating to corporate governance and risk management - issues to which the Bank is currently 
giving further thought.  
For example, in the case of banks operating as branches in New Zealand, how much reliance should 
we, as the supervisor of banks, or the public more generally, place on the directors of the bank in a 
foreign country for looking after the interests of creditors and other clients of the bank branch in New 
Zealand? Under existing policy, foreign banks are able to operate as branches in New Zealand unless 
they have substantial retail deposits or are deemed by the Reserve Bank to be systemically important. 
In such cases, they must operate as locally incorporated entities. Where they do operate as branches, 
we impose certain prudential requirements on them and require disclosure of the New Zealand branch 
operations, but we place considerable reliance on the directors of the foreign bank to ensure that the 
affairs of the bank as a whole are being prudently managed.  
We recognise of course, that this approach has its limitations. In particular, we know that the directors 
of  a  bank,  and  the  corporate  governance  and  risk  management  structures  within  a  bank,  do  not 
generally draw distinctions between the foreign branch of the bank and the rest of its operations. We 
are also mindful that the foreign branch of a bank is legally indistinguishable from the rest of the bank, 
and that assets and liabilities can move quite readily, sometimes at the push of a button, between the 
branch  and  the  rest  of  the  bank.  In  fair  weather,  that  is  fine.  But  in  times  of  crisis,  the  distinction 
between the branch and the rest of the bank, and the legal location of assets and liabilities, may well 
become very important indeed. 
You  might  think  that  the  problem  associated  with  branch  banks  could  easily  be  solved  by  simply 
requiring  banks  to  operate  in  New  Zealand  as  locally  incorporated  subsidiaries.  Many  of  the  banks 
currently  in  New  Zealand  do  just  that.  But  even  here  there  are  corporate  governance  and  related 
complications.  Increasingly,  both  in  New  Zealand  and  elsewhere,  international  banks  are managing 
their  affairs  as  a  global  business,  regardless  of  whether  they  operate  in  foreign  jurisdictions  as 
branches or subsidiaries. Core functionality, such as information technology, financial accounting and 
risk management, is being increasingly managed on a global level. In some cases, this is being done 
in  a  banking  group's  head  office.  In  other  cases,  core  functionality  is  being  located  in  developing 
countries  to  take  advantage  of  lower  cost  structures.  In  both  cases,  the  legal  boundaries  between 
different parts of a banking group are becoming less relevant.  
And all of that is probably just fine when things are going well. But when things do not go well - such 
as  in  a  bank  failure  situation  -  the  legal  divisions  within  a  banking  group  and  the  location  of  core 
functionality become very important indeed. And it is precisely this issue that we in the Reserve Bank 
are considering at present. In a banking system where, increasingly, the core functions of banks are 
being run from outside of New Zealand, we as supervisor of the banking system need to be satisfied 
that there are mechanisms to ensure that the interests of New Zealanders are well served - in good 
times  and,  especially,  in  bad.  We  are  therefore  currently  assessing  the  feasibility  and  efficacy  of 
different options for ensuring that the New Zealand operations of foreign banks are structured in ways 
that meet the needs of the New Zealand financial system. 
Of course, this is not just an issue for the Reserve Bank. It is also an important issue for the directors 
of  banks  in  New  Zealand.  The  directors  need  to  be  satisfied  that  they  are  fulfilling  their  statutory 
responsibilities, and ensuring that sound corporate governance structures are in place, in the context 
of a bank whose core functions are, increasingly, being performed overseas. This involves a careful 
balancing  act.  On  the  one  hand,  directors  need  to  ensure  that  the  bank  in  New  Zealand  -  as  a 
separate legal entity - is meeting, and will continue to meet, its statutory and financial obligations, and 
is soundly managed  and structured. On the  other hand, they  will  inevitably  and appropriately make 
those  kinds  of  assessments  in  the  context  of  the  bank  being  part  of  a  global  banking  group.  The 
critical  issue  for  the  directors  -  and  for  the  Reserve  Bank  -  is  just  how  much  reliance  should  be 
properly placed on the parent bank and other components of the banking group when assessing the 
adequacy of the governance arrangements and prudential and operational soundness of the bank in 
New Zealand.  
For example, when the directors of the New Zealand subsidiary of a foreign bank form a view on the 
adequacy of that bank's risk profile and management systems, how much reliance should they place 
on the support of the parent entity? When assessing whether the bank is adequately capitalised, how 
much weight should be placed on parent support? When core functionality is being moved out of the 
bank  to  other  parts  of  the  group  -  including  IT,  financial  accounting,  and,  importantly,  intellectual 
capital - how far should local directors go in requiring arm's length service contracts for those services, 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2003
 and adequate back-up arrangements in the event of parent bank failure? When assessing the nature 
of the local bank's exposures to other parts of the group, how far should directors go in ensuring that 
the exposures are in the interests of the local bank? And, in all of these matters, and many more, what 
is the particular role of independent directors, how many should there be on the board, and how can 
one be assured that they are truly independent in their thinking and their approach to their job?  
These are issues that increasingly occupy our minds in the Reserve Bank. And we are considering the 
possible  policy  solutions  to  them.  Increasingly,  these  kinds  of  questions  will  also  be  posed  and 
answered by supervisors - and by bank directors themselves - in many countries, as banks become 
more  global  in  nature.  I  expect  that,  within  the  next  year  or  two,  we  will  have  made  substantial 
progress in seeking to resolve some of these issues. 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 7
