 Simon Topping: Basel II - implications for Hong Kong 
Speech  by  Mr  Simon  Topping,  Executive  Director  (Banking  Policy)  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  City  University  of  Hong  Kong/Oracle  Systems  Hong  Kong  Limited  (cid:147)Basel  II: 
Implications for Hong Kong(cid:148) Seminar, 5 July, Hong Kong. 
 I(cid:146)d like to start by thanking the City University and Oracle Systems for organising today(cid:146)s Seminar and 
for giving me this opportunity to share with  you some thoughts on Basel II, and in particular on the 
implications for Hong Kong.  
The process of devising a New Capital Accord has now been going on for more than four years and it 
is still another three and a half years until countries start implementing it. It(cid:146)s clear from this timescale 
that  what  we  are  talking  about  here  is  a  very  major  project  indeed,  and  one  which  has  important 
implications for the banking industry. It(cid:146)s very welcome, therefore, to have occasions like this to help 
spread the word on what it(cid:146)s all about.  
But why such a big deal? What(cid:146)s so wrong with the existing Capital Accord? The answer is simply that, 
in the 15 years since it was introduced, things have moved on. The nature of banks(cid:146) business and the 
risks  they  are  running  have  changed  dramatically,  and  the  existing  Accord  no  longer  comes  up  to 
scratch - it no longer functions as a mechanism for ensuring that banks hold an amount of capital that 
is broadly commensurate with the risks they run. In  particular, the current  broad-brush treatment of 
credit  risk  means  that  the  capital  requirement  in  respect  of  credits  of  widely  varying  quality  is  the 
same.  And  though  the  existing  Accord  was  modified  a  number  of  years  ago  to  incorporate  capital 
requirements in respect of market risk, it doesn(cid:146)t require banks to hold capital against many other risks 
they run - for example, operational risk, interest rate risk in the banking book, and business cycle risk.  
So there are many good reasons why there should be a Basel II to address these weaknesses in the 
current  Capital  Accord.  But  while  this  objective  of  better  matching  capital  requirements  to  the  risk 
taken  is  certainly  very  worthwhile,  it(cid:146)s  really  only  part  of  the  story.  For  the  aims  of  Basel  II  are 
somewhat  broader  than  this.  Basel  II  is  not  about  creating  some  wonderful  all-singing  all-dancing 
system of capital requirements to keep the banking supervisors happy. It(cid:146)s not a case of supervisors 
trying to dictate how banks should manage their business.  
On  the  contrary,  it(cid:146)s  quite  the  opposite.  For  Basel  II  is  an  attempt  to  mould  supervisory  capital 
requirements to the ways in which banks actually manage their business. Moreover - and this is the 
crucial point - it aims to relate the capital requirement not only to the amount of risk they undertake, 
but also to how well they manage that risk. So, in other words, not only will banks get lower capital 
requirements in respect of lower risk credits; but they(cid:146)ll also get lower capital requirements if they can 
demonstrate that they manage risk well.  
It is for this reason that Basel II might perhaps be better thought of not as the second (cid:147)Capital Accord(cid:148) 
but  rather  the  first  (cid:147)Risk  Management  Accord(cid:148).  Because  it  focuses  attention  not  only  on  the  more 
accurate measurement of risk, but on the management of risk. Banks looking to reduce their capital 
charge will have two choices: either reduce the risk, for example by substituting better risk credits for 
lower risk credits, or by reducing positions; or simply manage the risk better. And this will apply not 
only  to  credit  risk.  Again,  to  take  the  example  of  operational  risk,  banks  will  have  the  option  of 
investing in more advanced approaches which will translate into lower capital charges.  
You may have noticed that I just mentioned banks having options, having choices. This is another key 
feature  of  Basel  II.  No  longer  will  there  be  a  (cid:147)one  size  fits  all(cid:148)  approach  whereby  banks  of  varying 
shapes and sizes are shoehorned into one inflexible system of capital charges. Instead, banks will be 
able to choose what approach they take; for example, whether they adopt the standardised approach 
or IRB approach for credit risk, and which of the various approaches to operational risk they adopt.  
Having said that, the HKMA will of course have its own views on what levels of sophistication of risk 
management we would expect to see in different types of banks. While we won(cid:146)t mandate particular 
approaches, we will expect to see levels of risk management that are commensurate with the types 
and  levels  of  risk  being  run.  So,  for  example,  we  won(cid:146)t  necessarily  expect  even  a  large  bank  with 
significant credit risk to implement advanced IRB. But we would expect a bank of such a type to have 
a fairly advanced internal credit rating system. As another example, we would generally expect banks 
with a significant level of market risk to implement a models based approach to measuring the risk.  
BIS Review 31/2003 
 1
 This flexible approach - in contrast to the approach being adopted by some other supervisors, who are 
mandating that particular approaches be adopted by particular types of banks - is, we feel, the most 
appropriate  approach  for  Hong  Kong.  In  Hong  Kong  we  have  a  wide  variety  of  banks,  RLBs  and 
DTCs. We have different nationalities. We have different sizes. We have banks that focus on the retail 
market,  and  ones  that  focus  on  the  wholesale  market. We  have  banks  that  specialise  in  mortgage 
lending,  ones  that  specialise  in  SME  lending,  and  ones  that  are  jacks  of  all  trades.  It(cid:146)s  perfectly 
appropriate, therefore, that with such a wide variety of banks there should be a wide variety of credit 
risk management and other risk management practices. The real point is whether, given the bank(cid:146)s 
particular circumstances, the risk management practices they adopt are adequate. And that, primarily, 
is a matter for the bank(cid:146)s management to determine, although we will of course, given our statutory 
responsibilities, also have an interest in this.  
I stress these points for three particular reasons. First, because I don(cid:146)t want anyone to think that we 
are against banks taking risk. We(cid:146)re not. That(cid:146)s the business they(cid:146)re in. We simply want to make sure 
they recognise and manage the risk effectively. Second, because I want to make clear that we are not 
hell bent on driving banks to invest in unnecessarily sophisticated risk management systems. What(cid:146)s 
appropriate will clearly vary from bank to bank, depending on the nature and scale of their business 
and the risks they run. Third, because I want to be perfectly clear that Basel II is not some underhand 
means of making life difficult for smaller banks by raising the hurdle too high in terms of what they 
need to spend on risk management and on regulatory compliance. Indeed, on the contrary, the whole 
thing is carefully designed so as to accommodate banks of all shapes and sizes.  
So, how will Basel II change banking in Hong Kong? The answer, I would suggest, is that we won(cid:146)t 
see  any  dramatic  changes  overnight,  but  we  will  over  time  see  some  re-focusing  of  how  the  risks 
within banks are addressed, both by banks themselves and by the supervisors. This will be more in 
the nature of a gradual evolution than a (cid:147)big bang(cid:148). There are really two main strands. The first will be 
a more systematic identification of risk, and covering a wider range of risks. The second will be the 
increased use of quantitative techniques, including modelling and stress-testing.  
Let me talk a little bit about each of these in turn.  
First is the more systematic identification of risk, covering a wider range of risks. This is something on 
which I would say that Hong Kong is already in many respects quite well advanced. For several years 
now  the  HKMA  has  adopted  what  we  term  a  (cid:147)risk-based  supervisory  approach(cid:148).  This  involves  a 
number of steps. First, the inherent risks being run by an institution in each of its business lines are 
identified. Eight inherent risks are focused on - credit risk, market risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk, 
operational risk, legal risk, reputation risk and strategic risk. These risks are then classified as either 
(cid:147)high(cid:148), (cid:147)moderate(cid:148) or (cid:147)low(cid:148), taking into account the current position and likely future developments. The 
risk control practices to manage these  inherent risks are then evaluated, and classified as (cid:147)strong(cid:148), 
(cid:147)acceptable(cid:148)  or  (cid:147)weak(cid:148).  This  evaluation  takes  account  of  such  factors  as  management  oversight, 
policies  and  procedures,  risk  measurement  and  internal  controls.  The  final  step  is  to  combine  the 
assessments so as to determine whether, for each business line, the risk controls are adequate given 
the  level  and  direction  of  risk.  This  helps  identify  areas  where  there  is  an  apparent  mismatch  -  for 
example where a particular business line is assessed as (cid:147)high(cid:148) risk but the risk control is assessed as 
(cid:147)weak(cid:148). Appropriate follow-up action would then be conducted.  
I(cid:146)ve gone into quite a lot of detail on this to make the point that the dialogue between the banks and 
supervisor in Hong Kong already currently focuses on the full range of risks, even though only a small 
sub-set of these risks are  currently addressed in the capital framework. So, as I said  before,  Hong 
Kong is quite well advanced in this area.  
As time goes on, however, we would expect to see the banks themselves doing more of this analysis 
and the supervisors less. Indeed, in time we would expect at least the larger banks to have a fairly 
well-developed  process  for  assessing  all  the  risks  inherent  in  their  business,  the  quality  of  the 
management  of  these  risks,  and  ultimately  how  much  capital  they  need  to  hold  in  respect  of  these 
risks.  
The  second  area  I  mentioned  in  which  we  can  expect  to  see  some  developments  is  the  increased 
used of quantitative techniques, including modelling and stress-testing. Again, this is something that is 
already happening, but is something to which Basel II will give added impetus. The most obvious area 
for  this,  of  course,  is  credit  risk,  where  we  can  expect  to  see  banks  making  greater  use  of  credit 
scoring models, and in particular models to estimate probability of default. It seems likely that only a 
very small number of banks in Hong Kong will decide, on the basis of their assessment of the costs 
and  benefits,  to  invest  immediately  in  a  fully-fledged  IRB-compliant  system.  However,  very  many 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 more,  I  am  sure,  will  want  to  test  the  water  by  starting  to  make  greater  use  in  their  credit  risk 
management  process  of  models  to  assess  PD,  and  this  is  something  that  we  in  the  HKMA  will 
welcome and, indeed, encourage. Rather than build an elaborate in-house model, many banks may 
start by purchasing and adapting a system from an external vendor. Or they may join together with 
other banks to share the cost of building models and databases, or establish a relationship with the 
academic fraternity. With so many banks, we will probably see a variety of approaches, but I think the 
direction is clear. Models are here to stay.  
The second important area in which the use of quantitative techniques will, I believe, increase, is the 
area of stress-testing. One lesson we have all learned from the Asian Financial Crisis is that the level 
of  economic  activity,  asset  prices  and  currency  values  can  fluctuate  quite  widely,  and  this  can 
obviously  have  a  big  affect  on  banks(cid:146)  profitability,  capital  position,  and,  ultimately,  ongoing  viability. 
One way of trying to ensure that banks can stand up to such stresses is to conduct regular stress-
testing, in other words to assess how they would be affected in hypothetical stress scenarios. Such 
testing is becoming an increasingly integral part of the risk management process within banks and, for 
that matter, the supervisory process. For example, if you have a good understanding of the extent to 
which  your  asset  quality  might  be  affected  by  an  economic  downturn,  or  how  the  value  of  your 
holdings  of  securities  might  be  affected  by  changes  in  interest  rates,  this  is  valuable  information  in 
helping you manage your risks. So this is a technique that can be very useful indeed, and which I am 
sure many banks will want to explore further.  
All this talk of greater use of modelling and of quantitative techniques raises, of course, the question of 
whether there is sufficient availability within Hong Kong of the necessary expertise and skills. This, I 
would  suggest,  offers  many  opportunities  -  not  the  least,  I  would  add,  for  our  hosts  and  sponsors 
today,  as  both  the  academic  fraternity  and  specialist  service  providers  can  potentially  play  an 
important role here.  
I  hope  that  these  thoughts  on  Basel  II  have  been  of  interest,  and  possibly  have  brought  out  some 
aspects that may not have been picked up on before. From what I have said it should be clear, at the 
very  least,  that  Basel  II  is  not  some  abstract  regulatory  compliance  issue  of  no  real  value  to  the 
banking  industry.  On  the  contrary,  it(cid:146)s  based  very  much  on  emerging  best  practices  in  the  risk 
management arena globally, and the objective is to try to encourage the wider spread of these best 
practices  around  the  banking  community  worldwide.  As  regards  Hong  Kong,  embracing  the  New 
Accord  can  only  further  strengthen  our  position  as  one  of  the  world(cid:146)s  leading  international  financial 
centres.  
BIS Review 31/2003 
 3
