Glenn Stevens: Structural change and the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, 30 August 2003. 
 Thank you to the organisers for the invitation to take part in this symposium. 
I(cid:146)d  like  to  arrange  my  remarks  around  three  types  of  structural  change.  The  first  is  change  in  the 
underlying structure of the real economy. The second is change in the inflation process. The third is 
change in the financial structure. I will argue that the last is probably the most difficult for central banks 
to deal with. 
Structural change in the real economy 
Changes in industries(cid:146) relative shares of production or employment, or changes in the extent to which 
foreign  competitors  penetrate  national  markets,  have  always  been  a  feature  of  market  economies. 
This kind of structural change reflects shifting tastes, the opening of new markets, the advent of new 
competitors and the introduction of new technologies and so on, which periodically disrupt established 
patterns of production, distribution and consumption. 
What(cid:146)s monetary policy(cid:146)s job in the face of such changes? Generally speaking, it is simply to let them 
occur, and to resist any temptation to use monetary policy to address the adjustment issues. Monetary 
policy  cannot,  for  example,  cure  an  unemployment  problem  that  is  the  result  of  the  collision  of 
changing  industrial  patterns  with  rigid  labour  market practices.  Nor  can  it  address  the  inter-regional 
differences in an economy caused by concentration of declining sectors in one area and of growing 
sectors in another. Other policies must come to the fore in dealing with these sorts of problems. (That 
said, an improvement in structural policies which enhances the economy(cid:146)s supply side should ideally 
be complemented by more accommodating demand management, all other things equal.) 
That  is  not  to  say  that  these  sorts  of  structural  change  may  not  raise  some  technical  issues  for 
monetary  policy.  They  may  well  affect  our  judgement  as  to  what  setting  of  the  instrument  will 
contribute to the long run goals of policy, which themselves are invariant to the changed structure. If 
structural  changes  are,  for  example,  affecting  the  relationships  between  conventional  measures  of 
economic slack and prices, or the economy(cid:146)s medium-term potential output path, or the relevance of 
particular economic indicators, then that should be taken into account in setting the instrument. 
How does one go about that? There is no simple device available for this purpose. It is essentially a 
matter of trying to be quick learners - continually being on the look out for things which are different to 
the past, and not being too wedded to particular empirical representations of the economy. We have to 
develop some notion of the economy(cid:146)s behaviour - it(cid:146)s not good enough to say we know nothing. But 
(cid:145)models(cid:146)  of  the  economy  -  whether  of  the  formal  or  informal  kind  -  need  to  be  viewed  as  working 
hypotheses, continually open to amendment in the light of new experience.1 
This holds as well for analytical constructs we commonly use, like output gaps, NAIRUs, natural real 
interest rates and so on. It(cid:146)s important to keep these devices in the realm of useful ways of organising 
our thinking, and to take care not to elevate numerical estimates of them to central status, lest a shift 
in  relationships  take  policy-makers  off  course.  The  RBA(cid:146)s  approach  has  been  to  do  our  best  with 
various  pieces  of  empirical  research  in  these  and  other  areas,  and  to  allow  them  to  inform  our 
judgement about the outlook and policy, but not in any sense to be a substitute for that judgment. I(cid:146)m 
sure that the same occurs in other central banks. 
Provided we are mindful of these broad principles, and I think most central banks are, we should be 
able to cope with shifting economic structure acceptably well. And there is little to suggest that this sort 
                                                      
1 
It could be added that taking on board some of these sorts of change may involve being prepared on occasion to give some 
weight to judgement before all the empirical evidence is crystal clear - while recognising that you might be wrong and trying 
to weigh the costs of being wrong. A case in point would be the way US policy makers backed their judgement about higher 
trend productivity growth before it was all that clear in the official data. 
BIS Review 37/2003 
 1
of ongoing evolution of economic structure poses greater problems for policy makers today that it has 
in the past. 
A  different  type  of  structural  change  has  to  do  with  the  time  series  properties  of  the  economy  -  in 
particular, the degree of variation from quarter to quarter. As we have heard at this conference, there 
seems to be reasonably clear evidence that, for many of the major countries, this variation diminished 
during  the  1990s.  This  was  also  true  in  Australia(cid:146)s  case,  where  the  standard  deviation  of  quarterly 
GDP growth in the 1990s was about one third lower than in the 1980s, and two thirds lower than in the 
1970s.  Better  policies,  more  flexible  economies,  and  smaller  shocks  -  that  is,  better  luck  -  are  all 
(complementary) explanations for this phenomenon. That is a very favourable environment for central 
bankers. To some extent, we(cid:146)ve been given an easier hand to play than some of our predecessors. I 
for one would very much like to see it continue! 
Of course, it may not continue. Shocks could be bigger in future. Or structural policy improvements 
might be partly reversed (e.g. if there were an increase in protectionism). Perhaps the relatively stable 
geopolitical  environment  which  must  have  helped  growth  in  the  1990s  will  not  be  present  in  the 
decade  ahead.  In  such  a  world,  monetary  policy  makers  would  face  a  tougher  time.  Even  optimal 
policy adjustments would most likely be associated with more volatile overall performance. Whether 
financial  market  prices  currently  embody  any  significant  probability  of  such  an  outcome  is  an 
interesting question to ponder - my guess is they do not. In a scenario like this, expectations about 
what monetary policy might be able to deliver in terms of smoothing the business cycle and year to 
year  inflation  rates  could  turn  out  to  be  disappointed,  and  we  would  all  have  a  more  difficult  time 
explaining this to our respective citizens. But apart from sharpening our communication skills, there is 
not much we can do about these possibilities other than to wait to see if they occur. 
Structural change in the inflation process 
The second type of structural change about which I want to talk is change in the inflation process. In 
the post-world war II era, we have witnessed two structural changes in the properties of the aggregate 
price level. First, there was a tendency for persistent inflation, to an extent not seen before, which had 
become quite noticeable by the late 1960s. (cid:145)The Great Inflation(cid:146) accelerated in the 1970s, and for most 
industrial  countries,  the  peak  inflation  rate  was  reached  some  time  between  about  1974  and  1982. 
Since  then,  we  have  seen  a  second  phase,  during  which  the  continual  rise  in  the  price  level  has 
slowed down, and in many places we today see, more or less, price stability. 
A few factors made a contribution to these swings, including adverse supply shocks in the 1970s, and 
favourable ones for much for the 1990s. These sorts of things can make monetary policy(cid:146)s job harder 
or  easier,  though  of  course  monetary  policy  ultimately  has  to  take  responsibility  for  price  level 
outcomes in the long run. 
One  of  the  central  lessons  drawn  from  that  experience  was  the  importance  of  expectations  in  the 
inflation  process.  The  more  ambitious  expansionary  policies  could  only  deliver  the  intended  gains 
while expectations remained stable. Once expectations started to move up, policies were less effective 
in  boosting  output,  because  people  behave  differently  when  inflation  is  thought  to  be  a  part  of  the 
economic furniture. Moreover expectations of continuing inflation, once they had developed, proved to 
be  fairly  stubborn,  which  tended  to  constrain  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  support  the  economy 
when demand was weak. 
But  by  the  same  token,  something  we  observe  today  is  that  when  expectations  are  anchored  at 
appropriately low levels, monetary policy has more flexibility. Policy makers have room to be a little 
more tolerant, for example, of a decline in the exchange rate. Our own experience in the aftermath of 
the Asian financial crisis from 1997 was that in the face of a pronounced weakening in the exchange 
rate, inflation expectations remained quite well anchored. While inflation did increase temporarily as a 
result  of  the  fall  in  the  exchange  rate,  the  likelihood  of  a  persistent  problem  with  inflation  was  low. 
Hence monetary policy was able to follow a fairly accommodative stance, in the face of a very weak 
international  environment,  rather  than  needing  to  tighten  to  safe-guard  medium-term  price  stability. 
This  would  not  have  been  possible  in  earlier  times,  and  the  extra  flexibility  made  a  considerable 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2003
difference to economic performance.2 So expectations matter, and it is not unreasonable to think that 
the efforts of policy makers to be clear about their goal of controlling inflation, and to act consistently 
with that goal, made a difference to the characteristics of the inflation process. That in turn has allowed 
policy some additional short-run flexibility. 
The question many have recently debated is whether there is now another sea change occurring in 
the inflation process every bit as profound as that which took place during the 1960s, but in the other 
direction. That is, is the prevailing problem in future going to be not inflation, but deflation? 
For my own country the answer is clearly (cid:145)no(cid:146), for the foreseeable future. Others are more qualified to 
answer for other countries. But either way, here again expectations will be important. While they are 
strongly  held  above  zero,  it  will  be  easier  for  monetary  policy  to  help  get  an  economy  out  of  an 
incipient  deflation. Were  expectations  of  deflation  to  become  entrenched,  on  the  other  hand,  policy 
would  face  a  much  more  difficult  task  to  remedy  the  situation.  This  highlights  the  importance  of 
articulating  the  goals  of  policy  as  clearly  as  possible,  so  as  to  give  expectations  an  anchor.  For 
inflation targeting countries such as Australia, stressing the symmetry of the target is quite important in 
this  context.  Countries  such  as  the  US  without  a  formal  target  have  also  indicated  that  there  is  an 
inflation  rate  so  low  as  to  be  undesirable.  Mere  announcements  are  not  in  themselves  enough,  of 
course, and have to be backed up by credible policy actions, and in countries where chronically weak 
demand is already accompanied by flat or falling prices, not all of these actions will necessarily be in 
the realm of monetary policy. But to be clear that policy is seeking to maintain, or to return to, low but 
above zero inflation is probably a necessary, even if not sufficient, condition for adequate outcomes. 
Experience of previous periods of deflation in our own countries (admittedly not first hand for most of 
us  here)  and  observation  of  Japan(cid:146)s  travails  in  the  past  decade,  also  points  to  the  importance  of 
financial structure. This leads naturally into my third topic. 
Changes in financial structure 
There  has  rightly  been  much  emphasis  on  corporate  sector  finances,  and  government  finances,  in 
most of the industrial countries for many years. One or both of these areas have created big problems 
in just about every country at one time or another, and in a number of countries the struggle to get 
public finances in order is set to continue for some time ahead. 
But  one  of  the  most  striking  areas  of  financial  change  in  recent  times  has  been  the  increased 
opportunity  for  households  to  adjust  their  financial  positions,  certainly  in  the  English  speaking 
countries. Access to credit has expanded remarkably over the past couple of decades. The structural 
decline  in  inflation  has  produced  much  lower  nominal  interest  rates,  and  it  is  nominal  rates  which 
matter for households looking to borrow to finance a housing investment. At the same time, lenders 
find households less risky borrowers than companies. Both these factors are encouraging households 
to  take  on  more  leverage.  Financial  innovation  also  means  there  is  much  greater  opportunity  to 
collateralise assets. With the big run up in house prices which has occurred, there is a very large pool 
of potential collateral which has not as yet been tapped. And a fairly long period of relative economic 
stability - in Australia(cid:146)s case, a quite long expansion, now in its thirteenth year - has meant that people 
feel more comfortable with more leverage. 
In Australia(cid:146)s case, household gross assets are now about 8‰ times current income, compared with 
about 5 times in 1980, and about 6 times as recently as the mid 1990s. Financial assets have grown, 
but much of the increased wealth has been in the form of dwellings. Since 1997, the Australia-wide 
median price for an established house has doubled. At the same time Australian households are more 
indebted.  The  ratio  of  debt  to  income  has  risen,  from  a  point  well  below  that  seen  in  comparable 
countries  in  the mid 1990s to now being towards the top  of the range seen  in  like countries today. 
Leverage - the ratio of debt to assets - has not increased as fast as the ratio of debt to income (which 
implies that net worth has increased substantially) and it remains lower than in some other comparable 
countries,  but  even  so  it  has  increased  noticeably.  These  trends  show  few  signs,  at  present,  of 
imminent change. 
                                                      
2 
It(cid:146)s true that generally lower pass through of exchange rate changes to inflation has also helped in instances like the one I 
mention  here  -  though  I  can(cid:146)t  help  feeling  that  the  low  inflation  environment  generally,  and  the  associated  set  of 
expectations, have been important in driving that result. 
BIS Review 37/2003 
 3
We are yet to see the full ramifications of this structural change in household behaviour and balance 
sheets. The fact that balance sheets are so much bigger presumably means that changes in wealth 
are  likely  to  matter  more,  relative  to  changes  in  things  like  current  income,  than  they  used  to  in 
determining  the  course  of  household  spending  over  the  business  cycle.  Secondly,  higher  leverage 
means that negative shocks to income are more likely to be amplified as they work their way through 
the  economic  system.  Moreover,  leverage  may  yet  increase  a  good  deal  further,  since  the  as-yet-
untapped equity in the housing stock is still very large, and the capacity to access it is growing. And 
thirdly, of course, higher leverage means that monetary policy(cid:146)s impact via its effect on the behaviour 
of borrowers will be bigger than in the past - especially in a country like Australia where the majority of 
household debt is at floating rates. The asset price channel of policy might also end up being bigger. 
We have watched these developments with rather mixed feelings. For some years, the most plausible 
explanation for the trends I have just described was that there were good fundamental reasons for a 
change  in  households(cid:146)  balance  sheets.  Households  had  for  various  reasons  been  constrained  to  a 
position  of  relatively  low  borrowing,  but  when  the  various  constraints  were  lifted,  it  was  inevitable, 
perhaps even desirable, that there  would be a  period of strong  growth  in  lending to households  as 
they  moved  towards  a  new  balance  sheet  equilibrium.  From  the  mid  1990s  until  about  2001,  this 
seemed the best story. But over the past year or two, we have become less confident that a sensible 
one-time balance sheet adjustment should still be continuing, and more concerned that an increasing 
number of households may be putting themselves in a position of vulnerability. 
This is, of course, our particular experience of the thorny question of monetary policy, debt and asset 
prices. Like other central banks we have grappled with the question of what, if any, response monetary 
policy ought to make to this situation and, like others, we have not found that question amenable to a 
straightforward  answer.  On  the  one  hand,  these  developments  are  exerting  some  expansionary 
impetus to the economy at a time when global demand conditions are weak. To that extent, they are 
helpful  in  avoiding  undue  weakness  in  the  Australian  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  the  household 
sector(cid:146)s  ability  to  cope  with  some  future  contractionary  shock  is  probably  being  impaired,  at  the 
margin, as leverage continues to increase. While we do not think that there would be any significant 
financial sector fragility as a direct result of this increased debt even if house prices were to fall in the 
near  term,  we  fear  that  there  could  still  be  significant  general  economic  fall  out  if  the  economy  is 
subject to some other shock, mainly because household consumption could retreat quite quickly. 
Dealing with all this is still very much a work in progress, but as I reflect on our own experience to date 
and that of others, a few observations come to mind. 
First, it is not very helpful to couch the discussion in terms of whether monetary policy should try to 
prick  (cid:145)bubbles(cid:146).  This  tends  to  side-track  discussion  on  to  questions  like  whether  we  can  confidently 
identify, indeed even define, (cid:145)bubbles(cid:146), and whether or not aggressive policy action is appropriate if we 
can. A more helpful way to set it out it is to think about the balance of risks facing the economy: is 
there something occurring which is increasingly likely to be a misalignment, a subsequent reversal of 
which  could  prove  to  be  disruptive?  And  if  so,  is  there  some  monetary  policy  course  which,  while 
possibly  involving  some  short-run  cost  to  economic  activity,  would  reduce  the  risk  of  bigger  loss  of 
economic activity later? Can we, to use the popular metaphor, buy some insurance and at what price? 
Second, any response by monetary policy is bound to be relatively moderate, because the uncertainty 
about  the  effect  of  policy  on  the  dynamics  of  asset  prices  is  considerable.  That  means  that  asset 
prices are still likely to move quite a bit in these episodes. Policy(cid:146)s ability to smooth things out is limited 
(which is something we already know as a general proposition anyway). 
Third, I am inclined to agree with recent work in the Bank of England that suggests that it is possible, 
at least in principle, to embed this discussion within a medium-term inflation targeting framework. For 
inflation  targeting  countries,  it  would  certainly  be  a  retrograde  step  in  my  view  to  be  perceived  as 
walking  away  from  a  framework  which  has  for  a  decade  delivered  good  results,  in  favour  of  some 
explicit pursuit of asset prices per se. 
Fourthly, even if we do bring asset prices and debt within the existing framework, we have a difficult 
problem  in  practice.  Our  approach  to  monetary  policy,  and  our  presentation  of  the  objectives  of 
monetary policy, are usually geared to horizons of a year or two. This holds for most explicit inflation 
targeters and also, I think, for those with more implicit goals. But asset price events and the balance 
sheet changes which accompany them usually do not occur neatly on that frequency. The really big 
ones can be once-in-a-generation developments. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2003
If it were to be decided that monetary policy should be more responsive to asset price events, such an 
approach would have to be motivated by a broader and rather more long-term notion of financial and 
monetary stability than is in common use today. For those of us who use explicit inflation targets, for 
example,  there  would  be  a  need  to  focus  on  a  longer  time  horizon  and  perhaps  somewhat  greater 
toleration of short run deviations from the medium-term target. The presentational difficulties of this, 
while not necessarily insurmountable, are certainly not trivial. If we do need to move in the direction of 
giving asset price and debt developments more weight in the conduct of monetary policy than hitherto, 
we  need  to  educate  our  respective  communities  about  these  issues.  That  education  process  is 
probably a good thing anyway, regardless of policy intentions. 
Conclusion 
Discussion about these matters is doubtless set to continue. It is pretty certain that structural change 
will always  be  with us.  Central  banks have routinely  to be on the  look out for the sorts of changes 
which, while leaving ultimate objectives unchanged, might alter the short term tactics of policy settings. 
But I think that financial structure changes, which often occur over longish periods, will probably be for 
central banks the most difficult ones to handle. 
BIS Review 37/2003 
 5
