 Vladu(cid:154)ić Ljubi(cid:154)a: Recent developments in the Central Bank of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina  
Speech by Mr Vladu(cid:154)ić Ljubi(cid:154)a, Vice Governor of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at the 
9th Meeting of the Governors’ Club in the Region of Black Sea, Balkans and Central Asia, Bucharest, 
23 May 2003. 
 Thank you Mr. Chairman, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I wish to pay my respect to you all on behalf of the CBBH. 
I will speak about several key development components which have represented current issues in the 
CBBH since the last meeting. 
Currency Board Arrangement 
In  the  period  since  its  establishment  to  date,  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  has 
developed  according  to  the  Basic  Principle  of  Monetary  Policy,  this  being  the  Currency  Board 
Arrangement. 
The Currency Board in BiH has been set up on very clear principles: 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
By conducting such monetary policy, we have achieved the following results: 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
stability of the local currency and its issue and withdrawal from circulation; 
fixed exchange rate with full coverage in free convertible foreign exchange funds; 
management of foreign exchange reserves in a safe and profitable way; 
setting up and maintaining payment and settlement systems; 
coordination of activities of banking supervision agencies; 
provision of the required reserve maintenance. 
confidence in the local currency; 
stable exchange rate; 
growth of foreign exchange reserves which have now stabilized at around EURO 1,1 billion, 
which is a four-month imports coverage; 
price stability; 
decrease of inflation, which is now slightly above zero; 
improvement of the country(cid:146)s payment foreign exchange position; 
stability of public sector. 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
During the previous months, there has been a discussion in BiH whether we should keep such strict 
Currency  Board  rules.  The  International  Conference  was  organized  in  April  on  the  Role  of  the 
Currency  Board  in  Monetary  Policy  -  History  and  Practice.  Some  of  the  participants  were 
representatives  of  East  European  countries  which  have  their  monetary  policy  based  on  Currency 
Board. The basic opinion expressed during this Conference was that Currency Board was successful 
in all these countries, but also that Currency Board in those countries was more flexible. 
As  a  result,  the  opinion  expressed  at  this  conference,  and  also  that  of  the  Central  Bank  and  BiH 
authorities is that BiH should keep the Currency Board set up as presently, with the aim to provide 
global  financial  stability,  searching  additional  possibilities  to  make  the  Currency  Board  serve 
development and to enable the Central Bank to participate more actively in the financial sector and to 
issue short-term securities. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 1
 The additional reason is that the Currency Board Arrangement is important for BiH economy and it is a 
base for continuation of maintaining and improving financial stability, through which the development 
of other sectors of economy is influenced. 
Required reserves 
The required reserve is the only instrument of monetary policy available in BiH, within the Currency 
Board  Arrangement.  The  purpose  of  the  required  reserve  is  to  provide  appropriate  liquidity  of  the 
banking sector and accomplish the global financial stability in the country. 
One of the most significant changes in monetary policy which is related to required reserve will start as 
of 01 June. 
The goals to be achieved by the suggested measures are the following: 
(cid:150) 
efficiency and stability of monetary policy within the Currency Board arrangement. The aim is 
to give more flexibility to the CBBH so that it can react to prompt changes in the surrounding; 
harmonization aimed at  adjusting the regulations on the required reserve to  the European 
standards; and 
financial  stability,  meaning  that  global  financial  stability  should  be  increased  by  means  of 
banks’ required reserves. 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
In order to achieve the mentioned goals, the CBBH has made four changes in the implementation of 
banks’ required reserves: 
1. 
The  base  for  required  reserve  is  expanded  to  include  also  foreign  exchange  deposits,  in 
addition to KM deposits. 
The defined required reserve in the previous period (10% on deposits and borrowed funds in 
KM) fulfilled its function and did not endanger the liquidity. However, as only local currency 
KM was included in the base for required reserve settlement, it resulted in unequal position 
of the local currency compared to deposits in foreign currency. 
Cash  held  by  banks  in  their  vaults  will  no  longer  be  eligible  for  maintenance  of  required 
reserves. It will be possible to meet the requirement only with deposits held by banks in the 
reserve accounts with the CBBH. 
Now, the CBBH can determine the rate at any level within the scope of 0-20%. This change 
will provide more flexibility to our Governing Board. 
The  required  reserve  rate  has  already  been  defined.  From  01  June,  it  will  be  5%  on  the 
expanded base, instead of the previous 10% on KM deposits. 
The  Central  Bank  has  more  flexibility  to  determine  compensation  to  be  paid  to  banks  on 
reserve deposits. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Results of monetary policy 
The successful monetary policy has influenced the improvement of situation in the banking sector. The 
consolidation of the global banking sector has taken place, as it follows: 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
(cid:150) 
privatization of banks has been completed; 
minimum capital requirement was increased to KM 15 million; 
merger of banks; 
considerable increase of assets and capital; 
increase of credit potential; 
introduction of new products and services; 
deposit insurance; 
increase of the volume of payment transactions. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 The privatization of the banking sector is in its final stage. The share of the state capital in the banking 
sector is around 10%. 
Consolidation of banking sector is obvious. Out of 55 banks in 2000, 40 banks are currently operating 
in BiH. Share capital in 2002 amounted to KM 745 million and was higher by 19% compared to 2001. 
The balance sheet assets of banks reached KM 5.535 million in the end of 2002, and compared to the 
end of 2001, they were higher by 22% or by KM 995 million. Within the structure of assets, the most 
important is the share of loans amounting to 55%. 
In the total liabilities, deposits take 75%, and capital takes 15%. 
Financial sector in BiH is estimated to have accomplished satisfactory results and that the situation in 
this sector is much healthier than in the previous period. 
New initiatives 
Initiative has been started in BiH for the establishment of capital market, as one of the segments of the 
total  financial  system.  In  this  respect,  guidelines  for  work  have  been  set  up.  Accordingly,  Capital 
Market Council has been recently established and its work scope defined. The Council will have an 
advisory  role  and  discuss  the  issues  related  to  securities  and  capital  market,  guided  by  the 
international standards and principles in this field. 
Finally,  the  independent  monetary  policy  in  BiH,  legislation  and  supervision  of  the  banking  sector 
represent a good base for further improvements in this field and the base for preparations for joining 
the European Union. Adherence to the international standards, principles of the Basle Committee and 
the  norms  of  the  European  Union  are  necessary  for  further  progress  and  strengthening  of  financial 
stability. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 3
