 David Carse: The Hong Kong banking sector - performance and outlook 
Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Asia 
Pacific Loan Markets Association, Hong Kong, 9 July 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I have had the privilege  of speaking  to  the Association on two  previous occasions, beginning at its 
inaugural lunch five years ago. I am pleased to have the opportunity to do so again, particularly since 
the fifth anniversary of the Association marks another milestone in its presence in Hong Kong. During 
this time, the Association has done much to promote the development of the syndicated loan market in 
Hong Kong and in the region more generally. As I noted in my speech to the Association last year, its 
work in establishing common standards for documentation has been particularly commendable. 
I want to use this occasion to talk about the current state of the Hong Kong banking sector and about 
its prospects. This is something  whose significance  extends beyond  the  interests of those, such as 
yourselves,  who  are  directly  involved  with  the  industry.  The  banking  sector  plays  a  vital  role  in  the 
service-based economy of Hong Kong, and its profitability is something in which all of us have a stake. 
A profitable banking sector is better able to withstand negative shocks, and this helps to preserve the 
stability of the financial system. 
The last few years have been challenging times for Hong Kong and for the banks that operate within it. 
So far 2003 has shown no signs of being an exception to this. Indeed, the environment in the first half 
of the year has been more than usually turbulent. Attention at the beginning of the year was focussed 
on geopolitical uncertainties, and in particular on the implications of the war in Iraq for both the global 
and the local economy. No sooner had concerns eased on this score - for the time being at least - than 
we were confronted with the escalating impact of the SARS epidemic. 
Hong Kong banks are used to dealing with unexpected shocks, but the threat of disease is something 
new  in  modern  times.  The  immediate  need  for  the  banks  was  to  keep  their  business  going  and  to 
protect  the  health  of  their  customers  and  staff.  Business  continuity  plans  were  therefore  activated, 
including the setting up of command centres to monitor the situation and the formation of plans to deal 
with confirmed or suspected cases of infection among staff. Critical to this process was the creation of 
back-up teams of staff who could man key operations in an emergency from separate offices or even 
from  home.  Face-to-face  meetings  among  staff  and  with  customers  or  clients  had  to  be  curtailed. 
Teleconferencing helped to keep things going, including in the syndicated loan market. 
The need for such arrangements demonstrated that banks must be able to react quickly and flexibly to 
unexpected situations. While they were able to cope with the impact of SARS without major disruption, 
a  certain  amount  of  improvisation  had  to  take  place,  and  lessons  were  learned  that  should  be 
incorporated into business continuity plans for the future. But the main point is that the banks did meet 
the immediate test posed by SARS, and for that management and staff deserve our congratulations. 
The banks have now been able to wind down their emergency arrangements, but the effects of SARS 
on their financial performance in 2003 will linger for a bit longer, albeit the impact is now much more 
muted than at the height of the outbreak. 
Despite  the  underlying  economic  difficulties,  the  banks  actually  managed  to  turn  in  quite  a  good 
performance in the first quarter of the year. Profits of the retail banks in aggregate rose compared with 
the same period of 2002, helped by increased fee income, higher treasury profits, reduced operating 
costs and a lower bad debt charge. Towards the end of the quarter, and going into April, SARS began 
to  have  an  impact  of  increasing  intensity.  The  demand  for  bank  loans,  which  was  already  not  very 
buoyant, slumped even further; credit card spending plummeted as consumers cut back on shopping 
and entertainment and tourists disappeared; and branch traffic dried up, hampering the efforts of the 
banks to market their products. Asset quality also began to show initial signs of deterioration as would 
be expected given the fall in property prices and the increased strain put upon the cash flow of the 
affected companies and their employees. 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 1
 From  mid-May  however  the  operating  environment  of  the  banks  improved  as  SARS  was  brought 
under control. It would be premature to say that the SARS effect has dissipated entirely. In particular, 
the full effects on asset quality may take some time to show through. But most of the banks that we 
have talked to are now saying that the impact of the specific factor of SARS on their results for 2003 is 
expected to be relatively mild. 
However, the underlying problems in the economy, which SARS helped to magnify, are still with us. 
Thus,  while  the  balance  sheets  of  the  banks  remain  strong,  the  earnings  outlook for  2003  remains 
uncertain; and the banks continue to face a number of challenges. 
One of these is the state of the property market. The heavy reliance of the banks on property lending 
is well known: residential mortgage lending, in particular, accounts for 35% of the total domestic loans 
of the retail banks. Property prices have fallen sharply since the Asian Crisis, and the effect of SARS 
was to produce a further downward spiral. In the three months from March to May, property prices are 
estimated  to  have  fallen  by  8%.  It  is  not  surprising  therefore  that  the  figures  for  negative  equity 
reported  to  the  HKMA  by  the  banks  have  shown  a  significant  increase  from  the  83,000  cases 
(representing $135 billion of loans) recorded at the end of March. 
The negative equity problem affects the banks in various ways. Most obviously, it poses an increased 
credit risk since loans in negative equity have a greater tendency to go into default; and if they do, the 
banks will suffer a loss since the loans are no longer fully covered by the value of collateral. Negative 
equity  also  has  a  deterrent  effect  on  the  demand  for  new  loans  since  it  makes  property  a  less 
attractive  asset  to  hold,  and  by  locking  in  existing  homeowners  reduces  market  turnover.  More 
generally, it has a pervasively depressing impact on consumer confidence and is thus a drag on the 
economy and on loan demand as a whole. 
What  is  encouraging  however  is  that  despite  the  current  difficulties  faced  by  homeowners  most  of 
them  have  made  every  effort  to  continue  to  service  their  loans.  Although  the  overall  mortgage 
delinquency  ratio  has  edged  up  in  recent  months,  it  remained  at  a  relatively  comfortable  1.16%  at 
end-May. The arrears for loans in negative equity are higher, as you would expect, but even so the 
delinquency ratio of around 2.5% is reasonable under the circumstances. 
Nonetheless banks need to keep a watchful eye on the situation, and adopt a proactive and helpful 
approach to restructuring mortgage loans when borrowers start to exhibit signs of financial distress. 
What  they  should  be  trying  to  avoid  is  a  repeat  of  the  problems  with  credit  cards,  where  many 
borrowers chose bankruptcy as a way out of their problems. The dynamics of the two products are 
different, but the warning signs are there. 
As might have been expected, credit card charge-offs did increase during the SARS crisis as rising 
unemployment prompted a renewed increase in bankruptcy petitions. But the latest news on this front 
is somewhat more encouraging. The number of petitions continued to rise going into the first week of 
June, but has since fallen back and the daily average for June as a whole was back to around the 
levels that we saw before the SARS outbreak. If this improvement can be sustained, it would have a 
positive impact on profitability in 2003. 
Asset quality is an important factor in explaining changes in profitability across banks and over time. 
But  it  is  certainly  not  the  only  factor  and  not  necessarily  the  most  important  in  the  long  term.  To 
generalise, changes in bank profitability depend on both macroeconomic influences and a variety of 
bank-specific determinants. The Research Department of the HKMA has recently  been doing some 
work in this area based on published data of 14 banks that account for about half the market in Hong 
Kong. I would like to share with you some of the preliminary findings of the research since it casts an 
interesting light on how the performance of the industry might evolve over the next few years. 
If we look at the performance of the banking industry over the last decade, the Asian financial crisis 
clearly marks a watershed. Between 1992 and 1996 our research indicates that the profitability of the 
average  bank  in  our  sample,  measured  by  return  on  assets,  improved  by  around  0.7  percentage 
points.  It  appears  that  this  performance  owed  little  to  the  macroeconomic  environment  of  the  time. 
Rather,  it  was  due  to  improved  performance  at  the  individual  bank  level,  driven  by  bank-specific 
factors such as more efficient operations and improving asset quality. 
In  contrast,  between  1997  and  2002  the  average  return  on  assets  declined  by  more  than 
0.7 percentage  points.  This  deterioration  was  largely  driven  by  macroeconomic  variables,  with 
deflation  contributing  most  to  the  worsening  profitability.  Bank-specific  factors  were  less  significant 
during  this  period  in  explaining  both  average  performance  and  variations  in  performance  across 
banks. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2003
 It may seem somewhat obvious to say that the lower profitability of the banks over the last few years 
has been largely due to the poor economic environment. Certainly, as participants in the syndicated 
loan market, you will be well aware of the impact of the current sluggish state of the economy on loan 
demand and margins. But the conclusion does have important implications if we look to the future. If 
the  profitability  of  the  banks  has  gone  down  with  the  economy,  equally  it  should  go  up  with  the 
economy as it improves. And this would benefit the banks in general, not just the select few with a 
large market share. 
In fact, our research indicates that  with reasonably  conservative assumptions  regarding growth  and 
inflation over the three years from 2003 to 2005, the profitability for the average bank in our sample 
would get back to the average return on assets over the past ten years by around 2005. Obviously, 
the improvement in the economy would need to materialise for this to happen - and I cannot predict 
whether it  will or not. But  at least the banks can take comfort from the fact that the current difficult 
operating  environment  may  to  a  large  extent  be  due  to  cyclical  factors,  which  should  eventually 
reverse. 
I would stress that this does not mean that banks should simply sit back and wait for the rising tide of 
the economy to lift them up, or that they should ignore the opportunities that may arise from merger 
and acquisition. Bank-specific factors will still matter in terms of explaining variations in performance 
across banks, even if their relative importance was less pronounced after the Asian crisis. 
Among  these  bank-specific  factors,  operational  efficiency,  as  measured  by  the  ratio  of  non-interest 
expense to total assets plays the most significant role in determining profitability, at least for the banks 
in our sample. Surprisingly, the effect of credit quality seems to have diminished over time, perhaps 
reflecting  improvements  in  the  banks’  ability  to  manage  credit  risk.  But  income  diversification  has 
become more important, with banks increasingly having to develop their fee-generating businesses to 
be  more  profitable.  We  are  seeing  this  particularly  in  the  move  by  a  number  of  banks  into  wealth 
management, such as securities, unit trusts, insurance, pensions and private banking. 
A further opportunity for business diversification for the medium-size banks will come from the ability to 
branch into Mainland following the relaxation of the asset size criterion under CEPA. The eight banks 
that will benefit from this would, according to our calculations, have the scope to open a total of as 
many as 20 branches in the Mainland over the next three years. This would be a significant addition to 
the 40 or so branches that banks from Hong Kong already have on the Mainland. We should certainly 
not regard Mainland access as a panacea, and the benefits will take time to come through. But the 
important point is that the medium-size banks now have an alternative avenue to grow their business 
outside the Hong Kong market. 
Indeed, more generally, banks in Hong Kong will benefit from the increasing financial and economic 
integration  with  the  Mainland.  In  the  syndicated  loan  market,  we  can  see  this  in  the  growing  trend 
towards  Mainland-linked  borrowers.  One  development  of  this  trend  is  likely  to  be  the  growth  of  the 
syndicated loan market in RMB. This should create opportunities for foreign as well as domestic banks 
within the Mainland. 
Let  me  summarise  the  argument  I  have  been  making.  Banks  of  all  shapes  and  sizes  have  the 
opportunity to benefit from the recovery in the Hong Kong economy when it comes. Some banks will 
however  do  better  than  others,  and  our  research  indicates  that  a  more  efficiently  operated  and 
diversified bank will achieve higher profits. I hope that all the banks sitting here today will be among 
those that fall into this category. 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 3
