 Ishrat Husain: Pakistan’s economic horizons, 2003 and beyond 
Closing  remarks  by  Dr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  The  Daily  Times 
Seminar on Pakistan Economic Horizons, 2003 and beyond, held at Karachi, 31 January 2003. 
 I would like to emphasize that we are now entering the next phase of our economic revival strategy 
aimed at reaching a trajectory of 6 percent growth rate by 2004-05. This country had witnessed growth 
rates  of  6  percent  over  a  long  period  of  time  and  as  a  consequence  poverty  was  reduced  from 
40 percent  to  18  percent  in  1988-89.  Thus  it  is  imperative  that  we  go  back  to  that  growth  path  of 
6 percent to be able to make a dent in unemployment and poverty. Why do we feel that we can attain 
this target rate within the next two years and why has the growth record been so poor during the last 
three years. Let me address the second question first. 
The period 1999-2000 was devoted to get the country out of the debt trap and move towards a path of 
economic self reliance and economic sovereignty. In 1999, Pakistani economy was already under the 
shell  shock  of  the  May  1998  events,  the  freezing  of  foreign  currency  accounts,  nuclear  sanctions, 
suspension of bilateral and multilateral assistance. The take over of the Government by the Military in 
October 1999 further made the problems worse as additional sanctions were imposed for suspension 
of democracy. The attitudes of the main donors and multilateral institutions, who used to fill in the gap 
between  our  external  resource  requirements  and  the  availability  of  external  finances  from  our  own 
resources, became much hardened and harsher. The country’s unencumbered liquid foreign reserves 
were hardly sufficient to meet the imports of next two to three weeks and we didn’t know as to how we 
will meet our oil payments or debt servicing tranches. This was a totally unsatisfactory situation and 
we had to find a durable and long lasting solution for our external debt. 
The first order of business was therefore to get out of the debt trap. For this to happen, fiscal deficit 
had to brought down from the level of 7 percent of GDP to 4 or 3 percent by raising revenues and 
reducing expenditures. The Government’s focus thus was on stabilization. When you have a situation 
where  a  patient  has  heart  disease,  liver  disease  and  pains,  you  first  have  to  get  things  in  working 
order. In 1999-2000, the country’s debt servicing obligations amounted to $ 7.8 billion and there was 
no  way  we  could  repay  such  huge  amount  of  money  out  of  our  foreign  exchange  earnings.  This 
amounted to 60 to 70 percent of foreign exchange earnings including the SBP purchases from kerb 
market. 
We  made  all  possible  efforts  to  ensure  that  no  payments  to  foreign  portfolio  investors  or  foreign 
companies such as Hubco were stopped so that the country’s credibility  which  was very  low  at the 
time could be restored. Credibility had to improve as we were engaged in public dispute with IPPs and 
foreign  Investors  were  shying  away  for  this  and  other  reasons.  Our  worst  critics  also  admit  that 
Pakistan’s  standing  in  international  financial  markets  has  improved  quite  significantly  and  our 
sovereign ratings are gradually moving upwards.  
To improve debt sustainability the following actual cash payments were made by SBP on account of 
external debt servicing during the last three years.  
 
 
1999-2000 
2000-2001 
2001-2002 
 
Rs. billion 
3.756 
5.101 
6.327 
15.184 
 These amounts include retirement of $ 4.5 billion of commercial and short term debt and other foreign 
currency  liabilities.  These  payments  were  possible  because  of  purchases  of  workers  remittances 
through the kerb market in the first two years and heavy inflow since September 11, 2001. We were 
able  to  manage  debt  servicing  in  an  orderly  manner  because  the  following  amounts  due  on  debt 
servicing to Paris Club and other creditors of Rs.9.1 billion were rescheduled. 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 1
  
1999-2000 
2000-2001 
2001-2002 
 
Rs. billion 
4.081 
2.795 
2.243 
9.119 
 This  strategy  of  debt  reprofiling  of  Paris  Club  debt  over  a  period  of  next  38  years,  early  and 
pre-payments of commercial and short term debt and substitution of soft term loans by international 
financial institutions for hard term loans has gradually led to lowering of our external debt indicators. 
We  are committed  to  retiring  non-concessional  loans  of World  Bank,  Asian  Development  Bank  and 
IMF before time. The new loans from these institutions are all concessional in nature – zero interest 
rate,  10  year  grace  period  and  30  years  repayment.  If  the  current  trends  persist  we  expect  that 
external  debt  servicing  ratio  which  has  already  come  down  to  40  percent  will  further  decline  to 
25 percent of our foreign exchange earnings. This is a level where we will feel comfortable, as we will 
be able to meet these obligations from the country’s own resources without recourse to exceptional 
balance of payments financing from international financial institutions. 
I must also submit that the period of stabilization has taken longer than we had originally envisaged. 
But this is how the real world works. Man proposes and God disposes. If the country did not have to 
face four different shocks the stabilization would have been completed in two years instead of three. 
The prolonged drought for last three  years dwindled irrigation water supplies and affected our main 
economic  sector  i.e.  agriculture.  September  11,  2001  made  Pakistan  the  front  line  state  in  the  war 
against terrorism and inflicted a lot of damage to the economy including cancellation of export orders. 
Border  tensions  with  India  and  mobilization  of  troops  raised  our  defence  expenditure  which  the 
Government had frozen in nominal terms since 1999-2000. Domestic violence against the foreigners 
such  as  bomb  blasts  in  Karachi  and  Islamabad  did  deter  the  foreign  businessmen  from  visiting 
Pakistan  and  intensifying  economic  relations.  Had  these  events  not  taken  place  the  first  phase  of 
stabilization could have been completed at least a year earlier. 
We are now entering the second phase of economic revival i.e. stimulating growth and employment in 
the country. All indicators so far suggest that there is a strong likelihood that GDP growth this  year 
(2002-03) will be 4.5 percent. We believe that if all things remain constant and no unforeseen adverse 
event takes place the growth rate in 2003-04 will range between 5 and 5.5 percent and hit the target of 
6 percent in 2004-05. What are the underlying assumptions, parameters and factors that lie behind 
these projections? 
First, we think that the effects of drought will whither away and irrigation water supplies for both rabi 
and kharif seasons will resume to their normal levels. Water conservation techniques adopted by the 
farmers in the hard times will increase overall agricultural productivity and agriculture value added will 
increase at the historical rate of 4.5 percent. Livestock will continue to expand its share within sectoral 
value added. 
Second, barring a fierce and prolonged war in Iraq, global recession will begin to dissipate and all the 
three main blocks – US, Euro area and Japan – will show buoyancy. Increased demand for goods and 
services from these blocks will induce further exports from Pakistan. 
Third, as a result of lower debt servicing costs and higher tax revenue collections the size of public 
sector  development  expenditure  will  rise  from  Rs.130  billion  to  Rs.150  billion  in  2003-04  and 
Rs.180 billion in 2004-05. This will help give a spur to private sector investment also. Tax revenues 
are projected to increase from Rs.460 billion this year to Rs.560 billion in 2004-05. You may recall that 
tax  revenues  have  already  risen  by  Rs.100  billion  or  33  percent  in  last  three  years.  The  projected 
increase of 21 percent in the next two years is therefore very much in line with the past performance. 
Fourth, as all of you know the large investment in balancing, modernization and replacement in textile 
industry  during  last  few  years  will  start  paying  dividends  in  form  of  better  quality  and  higher  value 
added  exports.  The  share  of  value  added  items  in  total  textile  exports  has  already  exceeded 
60 percent and it is postulated that this share will be almost 70 percent by 2004-05. 
Fifth,  monetary  and  credit  policies  and  banking  sector  reforms  implemented  so  far  will  show  some 
results  in  form  of  expansion  in  credit  to  housing,  consumer  financing,  SME,  agriculture  sectors.  As 
  these sectors have strong backward and forward linkages the multiplier effects of aggregate demand 
expansion will reinforce growth impulses in the economy and induce supply and production response. 
Sixth,  the  devolution  of  powers  to  local  governments  to  deliver  essential  services  at  the  grass  root 
level will improve the effectiveness of development spending. As most projects will be driven by the 
demands  of  the  community  rather  than  imposed  unilaterally  by  central  planners,  it  is  expected  that 
waste and leakages will be kept at a minimum level. 
Seventh, one of the major drivers of cost in the economy is electricity tariffs. Both the households as 
well  as  industrial  units  are  facing  unviable  power  tariffs.  With  the  commissioning  of  Ghazi-Brotha 
project,  the  thermal-hydel  mix  will  change.  As  more  thermal  power  is  switched  to  natural  gas  from 
furnace oil, losses in transmission and distribution are curtailed and financial charges of IPPs are cut 
down by prepayment of expensive debt power tariffs should come down and benefit the consumers. 
Finally, the standards of governance set by the government in last three years should be sustained 
and  further  steps  are  taken  to  minimize  corruption  and  leakages  in  financial  transactions.  Merit 
remains the basis for recruitment and promotion in public service and nepotism and favoritism are no 
longer the norms. 
As you can see from the above that in this scenario we haven’t still relied on private sector investment 
as the engine of growth. Public sector investment will go up fro 4.7 percent of GDP to 6.2 percent in 
2004-05  while  private  sector  investment  will  remain  at  9.4  percent  –  not  much  different  from  the 
current level of 9.2 percent. 
Let me conclude by saying that if the existing policies continue, standards of good governance are not 
weakened, institutional reforms and restructuring are implemented and the country does not face any 
setbacks  in  the  future,  Pakistan  would  be  able  to  attain  a  6  percent  growth  path  and  thus  reduce 
poverty  and  unemployment.  There  is  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  this  is  a  realistic  goal  to  achieve  – 
something  we  have  done  in  the  past  for  four  decades.  But  this  requires  hard  work,  dedication  and 
honest dealings by every Pakistani whether in the private or public sector. 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 3
