 Lucas Papademos: Presentation of the European Central Bank’s Annual Report 
for 2002 
Introductory statement by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, to the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 29 April 2003.  
 It is my pleasure to appear before the Committee to present the ECB's Annual Report 2002. In my 
view, last year was marked by two milestones in the process of European integration. The first was the 
euro  cash  changeover.  The  successful  and  remarkably  smooth  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and 
coins on 1 January 2002 has created a new symbol of European identity that has been fully embraced 
by the 300 million citizens of the euro area. On this occasion, I would like, on behalf of the ECB, to 
thank again the citizens of Europe and all the parties involved for their contribution to the success of 
this unique and complex undertaking. 
The second historic event was the decision of the EU Heads of State or Government in December last 
year to invite ten countries to join the European Union in 2004, thereby marking the end to the post-
war rifts within Europe. Even though major challenges remain to be tackled, as many of the acceding 
countries  are  still  in  the  process  of  transition  to  fully-fledged  market  economies,  I  believe  that  the 
signing  of  the  Accession  Treaty  at  the  Athens  summit  meeting  on  16  April  bore  witness  to  our 
commitment to European integration. I would like to briefly elaborate on some of the consequences of 
EU  enlargement  for  the  ESCB  and  the  ECB,  before  turning  to  the  monetary  and  economic 
developments in 2002. 
Preparations for EU enlargement 
1. 
It goes without saying that an enlarged European Union will require a number of adaptations in the 
working procedures and the internal functioning of European institutions and bodies. Upon accession, 
the new Member States will join Economic and Monetary Union with the status of "countries with a 
derogation"  and  their  central  banks  will  become  part  of  the  ESCB.  At  a  later  stage,  the  acceding 
countries'  central  banks  will  become  part  of  the  Eurosystem,  after  these  countries  have  fulfilled  the 
convergence criteria for adopting the euro. A key priority of the ECB is to have in place the necessary 
technical and institutional infrastructure which  will  ensure an orderly enlargement of the ESCB  and, 
later on, of the Eurosystem. 
To  this  end,  and  in  line  with  the  provisions  of  the  Nice  Treaty,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB 
issued  a  recommendation  on  the  adjustment  of  its  voting  modalities,  which  was  the  basis  for  the 
decision adopted by the EU Council, in the composition of Heads of State or Government, in March 
2003. Although the new voting system – like any rotation system – is characterised by a degree of 
complexity and was criticised for that reason by the European Parliament, in our judgement it will help 
to ensure that the Governing Council will maintain its capacity for timely and efficient decision-making 
in a substantially enlarged euro area. Another amendment to the Statute of the ESCB was introduced 
at  the  initiative  of  the  ECB,  when  the  ECOFIN  Council  recommended  in  October  2002  that  the 
Accession  Treaty  provide  for  an  increase,  upon  accession  by  new  Member  States,  of  the  ECB's 
subscribed capital and of the ceiling on the transfers of foreign reserve assets by NCBs.  
In  addition  to  these  statutory  changes,  the  Eurosystem  is  involved  in  an  intense  and  manifold 
dialogue,  concerning  both  policy  and  technical  issues,  with  the  central  banks  of  the  accession 
countries  to  assist  them  in  their  preparations  for  a  smooth  integration  into  the  ESCB  and  the 
Eurosystem. The numerous internal preparations within the ESCB are guided by an Accession Master 
Plan, which comprehensively reviews the ECB's functions and infrastructures so as to ensure that all 
relevant issues are dealt with in a timely and effective manner. 
Economic and monetary developments 
2. 
The review of economic and monetary developments in 2002 clearly reveals that the environment in 
which  monetary  policy  was  conducted  in  2002  was  one  of  considerable  uncertainty.  In  particular, 
signals  regarding  medium-term  inflation  prospects  and  risks  were  at  times  mixed  and  subject  to 
change.  
BIS Review 20/2003 
 1
 Following the slowdown in economic activity throughout 2001,  which  was further aggravated by the 
negative  shocks  to  confidence  in  connection  with  the  terrorist  attacks  in  the  United  States  in 
September of that year, a moderate recovery of real GDP growth in the euro area was recorded at the 
beginning  of  2002.  Indeed,  at  that  time,  projections  prepared  by  the  Eurosystem's  staff  as  well  as 
forecasts by international organisations and private institutions agreed that euro area real GDP growth 
would again be in line with trend potential growth later in the year. However, as the year progressed, 
the recovery lost momentum, affected by the renewed turbulence in financial markets and geopolitical 
tensions, which had consequences for oil prices and confidence. Overall, annual real GDP growth in 
the  euro  area  is  estimated  to  have  been  a  disappointing  0.8%  in  2002,  after  amounting  to  1.4%  in 
2001. 
Despite the subdued pace of economic recovery, HICP inflation remained at 2.3% on average in 2002, 
unchanged from 2001. Inflation in 2002 was thus slightly above the upper limit of the ECB's definition 
of price stability and it turned out to be higher than expected at the end of 2001. In part, this was due 
to the fact that prices were pushed up in 2002 by a number of temporary or one-off factors, including 
higher oil prices, increases in indirect taxes and adverse weather conditions. On top of this, there have 
been some effects from the cash changeover, even though I should stress that the perceived impact of 
the euro cash changeover on inflation was much greater than the actual impact. Of greater concern 
than the effects of these short-term factors on the medium-term outlook for price stability was that real 
wage  growth  remained  relatively  strong  despite  the  weakening  of  economic  activity  and  a  rise  in 
unemployment. This development pointed to persistent structural rigidities in the labour markets of the 
euro area. 
The  assessment  of  the  implications  for  price  stability  of  monetary  developments  was  less 
straightforward, particularly in the second half of 2002. The average annual growth rate of the broad 
monetary  aggregate  M3  increased  to  above  7%  in  2002,  from  around  5½%  in  2001,  considerably 
exceeding  the reference  value of 4½%. This development was in part the result  of high  volatility  in 
financial  markets,  and  largely  reflected  investors'  preferences  for  short-term  liquid  and  less  risky 
financial assets. It also reflected the relatively low interest rates in the euro area in 2002. The strong 
monetary growth in the euro area has resulted in the creation of more liquidity than may be needed to 
finance sustainable non-inflationary growth over the long term. Overall, however, in an environment of 
subdued  economic  activity  and  moderate  credit  growth,  monetary  developments  in  2002  were  not 
seen as pointing to risks to price stability.  
I should also like to recall that our assessment of risks to price stability changed gradually over the 
year.  In  the  first  few  months,  when  economic  activity  accelerated,  we  regarded  monetary 
developments, wage trends and the high persistence of service price inflation as possibly indicating 
upward risks to price stability in the medium term. Later on, the appreciation of the euro, beginning in 
late  spring  started  to  dampen  inflationary  pressures.  Furthermore,  an  important  factor  shaping  the 
monetary policy assessment at that time was that the economic outlook was still subject to uncertainty. 
In this environment, the Governing Council was of the view, in the first half of 2002, that the available 
information  provided  inconclusive  signals  as  regards  the  balance  of  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium term. 
As from the autumn onwards, however, the significant worsening of the outlook for economic activity 
and  the  sizeable  and  protracted  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  were  increasingly 
pointing  towards  lower  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  term.  Against  this  background,  the 
Governing Council decided to reduce the key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points in December 2002 
and by a further 25 basis points in March 2003. The decisions to reduce the key ECB interest rates 
were consistent with the preservation of price stability  over the medium term and  were expected to 
provide some counterweight to the various factors having an adverse effect on economic activity. With 
these decisions, the minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations reached 2.50% in  March 
2003, which is a very low level by historical standards, both in nominal and real terms. 
In  recent  weeks,  financial  market  developments  and  economic  indicators  have  been  affected 
significantly by the geopolitical tensions related to the conflict in Iraq. It has therefore been difficult to 
assess  the  incoming  information,  given  the  pronounced  volatility  of  most  indicators.  At  the  current 
stage,  we  continue  to  expect  a  rather  moderate  pace  of  economic  growth  in  the  first  half  of  2003, 
followed by a gradual acceleration of economic activity, associated with diminishing uncertainty, later 
in the year. The low level of interest rates prevailing and the recent decline in oil prices support this 
expectation.  
2 
 BIS Review 20/2003
 As  regards  the  outlook  for  price  stability,  the  fall  in  energy  prices,  the  effects  of  the  sustained 
appreciation of the euro over the past 12 months and the environment of subdued economic growth 
are factors which should contribute to lower inflationary pressures in the euro area. It is expected that 
inflation will gradually fall below 2% and remain in line with price stability. However, short-term inflation 
prospects significantly depend on future oil price developments. Moreover, the maintenance of price 
stability  over  the  medium  term  is  conditional  on  moderate  wage  developments,  which  would  also 
contribute to improving the labour market situation in the euro area.  
In view of this outlook, the Governing Council concluded at its meeting on 3 April of this year that the 
prevailing monetary policy stance is consistent with the preservation of price stability over the medium 
term  and  it  maintains  a  monetary  environment  that  is  in  itself  favourable  to  economic  growth.  The 
Governing Council will continue to monitor developments carefully and evaluate them in the light of its 
mandate. 
Policy orientation 
3. 
The uncertainties surrounding the euro area economy in 2002 emphasised the importance of having a 
medium-term  and  stability-oriented  framework  in  all  policy  areas.  Within  the  stability-oriented 
framework  of  monetary  policy,  the  ECB  is  committed  to  its  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price 
stability  over  the  medium  term.  In  the  area  of  fiscal  policies,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  aims  at 
securing sound public finances and anchoring the expectations of economic agents to this objective. It 
provides  a  robust  and  flexible  framework  which  promotes  budgetary  discipline  while  allowing 
automatic stabilisers to operate. 
Fiscal developments in the euro area were generally not satisfactory in 2002. Most countries failed to 
comply with the fiscal targets set in their stability programmes. However, countries that did adhere to 
the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact as from the late 1990s have experienced fewer budgetary 
difficulties recently and have been able to benefit from the smooth operation of automatic stabilisers in 
this phase of economic weakness. By contrast, countries which did not achieve a fiscal position close 
to balance or in surplus in previous years when economic conditions were favourable are having to 
struggle hard to put their fiscal house in order. 
Looking ahead, it remains essential that the Stability and Growth Pact is effectively implemented and 
adhered to. At the current juncture, those countries with a deficit close to or exceeding 3% of GDP 
should embark on growth-fostering fiscal consolidation measures. This will help to build confidence in 
the  fiscal  framework  and  anchor  expectations  about  the  future  macroeconomic  environment.  A 
credible medium-term oriented fiscal consolidation strategy, by strengthening confidence, will support 
economic growth also in the short term. 
One  of  the  main messages  of  2002  has  been  that  the  euro  area  economy  needs  to  become more 
flexible and that, to this end, structural reforms need to be stepped up, notably in labour and product 
markets. While there appears to be a broad consensus among policy-makers and the public that such 
reforms  are  crucial  to  ultimately  raising  the  euro  area's  production  potential,  the  effective  pace  of 
reform has so far remained disappointingly slow in several countries. In our assessment, this lack of 
initiative has clearly contributed to the weakness in economic activity and confidence last year.  
Only  decisive  action  to  implement  structural  reforms  can  make  the  euro  area  a  more  dynamic 
economy  and  raise  the  welfare  of  its  citizens.  Furthermore,  better  functioning  markets  should  also 
foster  capital  and  labour  mobility  as  well  as  price  adjustments  in  reaction  to  changing  economic 
circumstances, thereby dampening economic fluctuations and reducing regional differences within the 
euro  area.  Progress  towards  structural  reforms  would  increase  confidence  in  the  medium-term 
production  capacity  of  the  euro  area  and  thus  help  to  counteract  the  current  high  degree  of 
uncertainty. 
BIS Review 20/2003 
 3
