 Nicholas C Garganas: International role of the euro 
Address  by  Mr  Nicholas  C  Garganas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Conference  of  the 
European Commission “Europe, The Mediterranean and the euro”, Athens, 4 February 2003. 
 Introduction 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  it  is  a  pleasure  to  participate  in  an  event  organised  by  the  European 
Commission.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Commission  for  inviting  me  to  address  some  of  the  basic 
considerations that confront the euro in its emergence as an international currency.  
Let  me  begin  by  asking  the  question:  “How  does  a  currency  acquire  the  status  of  an  international 
currency?”  This  question  is  being  asked  more  and  more  often  as  the  euro  takes  on  increasing 
importance in the global financial system.  
The interwar period was dominated by two currencies - the US dollar and the pound sterling - while the 
postwar  world  has  been  dominated  by  the  US  dollar.  Unlike  the  situation  in  national  economies  or 
monetary unions, where the currency used is determined by government decree, currencies are used 
internationally  because  of  neither  an  Act  of  Parliament  nor  an  Act  of  God.  Rather  the  choice  of 
currencies  used  for  international  transactions  is  mainly  the  result  of  invisible  hand  processes. 
Currencies  attain  international  status  because  they  meet  the  various  needs  of  foreign  official 
institutions and foreign private parties more effectively than do other financial assets. 
What  factors  contribute  to  the  use  of  a  specific  money  as  an  international  currency?  Why  was  the 
Dutch guilder the dominant international currency in the 17th and 18th centuries, the British pound in 
the  19th  and  early  20th  centuries,  and  the  dollar  since  the  end  of  the  second  world  war?  Several 
factors are essential if a currency is to be used internationally.  
First and foremost, an international currency must be perceived as sound. To be acceptable, market 
participants must be willing to hold it as a store of value. This circumstance means that inflation in the 
country  or  monetary  union  issuing  the  currency  must  be  low  and  stable  relative  to  those  of  other 
currencies. Inflation reduces the purchasing power of a currency, discouraging its use internationally. It 
also leads to exchange-rate depreciation and uncertainty. A necessary condition for the international 
use of a currency, therefore, is that a currency’s future value in terms of goods and services has to be 
perceived as predictable and stable. 
Clearly, many currencies meet this test; yet few emerge as international currencies. Therefore, there 
must be - and there are - additional factors that help determine the internationalisation of a currency. 
One such factor has to do with size. The size factor relates to the relative economic and demographic 
area for which the currency serves as  legal tender - in other  words the “habitat” of the currency. A 
strong,  competitive  economy,  open  to,  and  active  in,  international  trade  and  finance  will  naturally 
generate a large quantity of foreign exchange transactions with at least one leg in the home economy 
to support its wide-ranging business activity. 
Another  factor  underlying  the  international  use  of  a  currency  is  the  presence  of  an  open,  well-
developed  financial  system.  This  factor  is  a  necessary  part  of  a  strong,  competitive,  and  open 
economy. Just as relatively low levels of inflation and inflation variability contribute to the international 
demand  for  a  currency,  well-developed  financial  markets  supply  assets  appropriate  for  international 
use, and strengthen the demand for additional assets as well. Well-developed financial markets in the 
currency’s issuing jurisdiction contribute to the international use of that currency. Central banks and 
other  investors  have  preferences  for  safe,  liquid  financial  instruments;  deep  and  liquid  financial 
markets that offer a full array of instruments and services will attract business from abroad that might 
otherwise have stayed at home.  
Money as a conveyer of information 
History has shown that the forgoing three factors - a stable currency, a strong, competitive economy, 
and deep, broad and liquid financial markets - are necessary for the international use of a currency. 
History has also shown, however, that only a single currency, or at most a few currencies, emerge as 
major international currencies at any one time. To understand why this is so, we need to consider a 
BIS Review 6/2003 
 1
 key  function  of  money.  Money  conveys  information  about  prices.  When  you  are  in  Greece,  for 
example, and you want to compare the prices of two hotel rooms, you compare them in euros. The 
euro, in other words, conveys essential information which allows you to make price comparisons so 
that you can reach a decision.  
Money,  in  its  capacity  as  a  transmitter  of  information,  performs  a  function  similar  to  that  of  an 
international  language.  The  greater  the  number  of  people  who  speak  a  language,  the  more  it  can 
facilitate communication. The same is true with money. A currency would hardly do you any good if 
you are the only person who uses it. The utility of money depends, in part, on how many others use it. 
When a Saudi Arabian exporter, who does not speak Italian, sells crude oil to an Italian importer who 
does not speak Arabic, the transaction may well be conducted using the English language and it may 
will  be  denominated  and  settled  in  US  dollars.  The  US  dollar,  in  this  case,  is  used  as  a  “vehicle” 
currency, that is, it is used to denominate and execute foreign trade transactions that do not involve 
direct transactions  with the issuing economy. This use leads, as  does the  use  of English, to easier 
communication  in  transmitting  information.  As  is  the  case  with  a  language,  the  more  popular  is  a 
currency  the  more  useful  it  is  to  those  who  use  it.  Because  the  attractiveness  of  any  international 
currency grows as its use increases, an international currency has a tendency to become a natural 
monopoly.  This  circumstance  explains  why  only  a  single  money,  or  a  few  moneys,  are  used  as 
international currencies at a particular time. 
Benefits and costs 
An international currency provides several major benefits to the issuing economy. First, the economy 
derives  seigniorage,  because  the  non  interest-bearing  claims  on  it  are  denominated  in  its  own 
currency. When Argentina, for example, imports autos from Japan, it must pay for them with foreign 
exchange it earned through its exports; it is highly unlikely that the Japanese importer would be willing 
to accept the Argentina currency, the peso. When the US, however, imports Japanese autos, it can 
pay for them with Federal Reserve notes, which are just a paper claim on the US government. The 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System  estimates  that  seigniorage  revenue  for  the 
United States amounts to between $11 billion and $15 billion per year.  
Second, as the international use of a currency expands, loans, investments, and purchases of goods 
and  services  -  both  foreign  and  domestic  -  will  increasingly  be  executed  through  the  financial 
institutions of the issuing economy. Thus, the earnings of its financial sector are likely to increase.  
Third,  the  tendency  of  world  trade  to  be  denominated  in  the  international  currency  means  that  the 
issuing  economy  will  be  less  vulnerable  to  changes  in  the  value  of  its  currency  than  are  other 
economies. If the US dollar, for example, depreciates sharply against other currencies, this will have a 
smaller effect on US inflation than is the case in other economies. This is because most US imports 
are denominated in dollars. Therefore, when the dollar declines on the foreign exchange market, the 
price of US imports - in dollars - need not change. 
The main cost of having an international currency is that it can complicate the conduct of monetary 
policy.  Because  foreigners  hold  a  substantial  share  of  the  currency,  a  portfolio  shift  away  from  the 
currency, for example, can lead to large capital outflows and/or large declines in the exchange rate. 
Concerns  about  the  effects  of  changes  in  portfolio  preferences  caused  both  the  German  and  the 
Japanese governments to take measures to restrict the international uses of the deutsche mark and 
yen,  respectively,  during  the  1970s  and  early  1980s.  Concerns  that  the  imbalances  in  the  US 
economy, including the large current account deficit, could lead to a massive sell-off by foreigners of 
their holdings of US dollar balances have underpinned concerns of a possible hard landing for the US 
currency.  
The international role of the euro 
Let me now turn to the specific focus of this session - the international role of the euro. It is important 
to note that the ECB has adopted a neutral stance concerning the internationalization of its currency, 
implying that it neither fosters nor hinders the process. It accepts the view that the international role of 
the  euro  is  primarily  determined  by  the  decisions  of  market  participants.  How,  then,  does  the  euro 
stack up in terms of the conditions that determine an international currency?  
The  first  factor  I  mentioned  that  determines  international  currency  use  is  a  stable  currency.  The 
mandate of the ECB is to maintain the purchasing power of its currency. Since its inception, therefore, 
  the  ECB  has  sought,  and  it  has  attained,  stability  of  its  currency.  This  stability  is  proof  that  the 
institution is performing well. 
Yet, in the quest for stability, monetary policy cannot go it alone. It needs to be complimented by a 
consistent fiscal-policy stance. Indeed, the academic literature has coined a name for the connection 
between monetary and fiscal policies, calling it “fiscal dominance”. The implication of this connection 
for the international role of the euro is that, to ensure the future stability of the euro, member states will 
need to adhere to the Stability and Growth Pact. 
The second factor determining international currency-status is size. Measured in terms of population, 
the euro area is one of the largest economies in the world, with more than 300 million inhabitants. By 
comparison, the  populations of the United  States and Japan are  about 270 million and  125 million, 
respectively. The euro area is the largest trading partner of the world economy, accounting for almost 
20% of world exports, compared with about 15% for the United States and 9% for Japan. The GDP of 
the euro area is equivalent to some 16% of world GDP, about 6 percentage points less than the share 
of the United States but more than twice the share of Japan. However, even more important than the 
current figures is the potential for the future development of the euro area, in terms of population and 
GDP,  if  and  when  the  so-called  “pre-ins”  (Denmark,  Sweden  and  the  United  Kingdom)  join  the 
Eurosystem.  The  entry  of  these  countries  would  result  in  a  monetary  union  of  some  376  million 
inhabitants, about 40% larger than the United States and almost triple the size of Japan, with a GDP 
only slightly less than that of the United States and 2¼ times that of Japan. All these facts and figures, 
which demonstrate the demographic and economic importance of the European Union, will be further 
strengthened by EU enlargement.  
Let me now turn to financial markets in the euro area. The introduction of the euro and the successful 
implementation of the TARGET payment system have contributed to the potential for highly integrated 
financial markets within the euro area. 
With  regard  to  capital  markets,  the  euro  has  seen  a  strong  development  in  the  bond  market.  The 
launch of the euro seems to have acted as a catalyst for the development of a bond market in which 
corporations can issue debt securities of unprecedented size. As a result, the introduction of the euro 
has  created  the  second  largest  bond  market  in  the  world.  This  circumstance  has  led  to  declining 
transactions  costs,  as  bid-ask  spreads  have  narrowed,  and  increased  diversity,  as  new  types  of 
issuers participated in the market. 
The integration of the euro area bond market, and the associated reduction of borrowing costs in euro, 
have meant that the euro has been playing an increasingly significant role as a financing currency. in 
the international debt securities market, recent data indicate that the share in outstanding amounts of 
euro-denominated  instruments  issued  by  non-residents  totals  29%,  compared  with  44%  for  the  US 
dollar and 13% for the Japanese yen.  
In contrast to borrowers, investors are interested in income prospects and they demand high efficiency 
and liquidity of the financial markets in which they invest. These market characteristics exist only if the 
financial  markets  are  deep  and  wide.  Such  is  not  yet  the  case  in  euro-area  equity  markets.  These 
markets tend to be smaller, on average, than their counterparts in many other industrialised countries 
and they account for a commensurately smaller share of trading activity. This situation is very much a 
result  of  the  segmentation  of  national  markets,  which  have  been  built  around  national  securities 
depositories and settlement systems intimately connected to the national payment infrastructures 
The  challenge  is  to  remove  institutional  and  economic  factors  that  raise  the  cost  of  cross-border 
operations. In particular, further integration will require harmonization of accounting rules, tax regimes, 
and legal frameworks, and the acquisition of the necessary technical infrastructure for handling cross-
border  holdings  and settling securities. The costs  of these regulatory  obstacles are  identified  in the 
Financial Services Action Plan, issued by the European Commission. The Action Plan lists priorities 
and time-scales for legislative and other measure to tackle three strategic objectives: (1) completing a 
single wholesale market; (2) developing open and secure markets for retail services; and (3) ensuring 
the  continued  stability  of  EU  financial  markets.  It  also  addresses  the  importance  of  eliminating  tax 
obstacles  and  distortions  for  the  creation  of  an  optimal  single  financial  market.  To  date,  30  of  42 
measures  contained  in  the  Action  Plan  have  been  completed.  I  hope  the  remaining  obstacles 
identified in the Action Plan will be removed within the scheduled deadlines. 
As I mentioned, the relatively narrow euro-area financial markets have meant that the euro area has 
not approached its full potential as an international asset. As of the end of 2001, 13% of the identified 
official holdings foreign reserves were in euro, compared with about 68% for the US dollar and about 
  5%  for  the  Japanese  yen.  As  a  medium-of-exchange  and  asset  vehicle  in  the  foreign  exchange 
markets, the US dollar remains the dominant global vehicle; the  euro’s share  in global spot trading 
amounts to about 20%.  
Concluding remarks 
The other speakers on this panel will provide specific information about the current state of play of the 
euro  as  an  international  currency.  The  evidence  they  will  present  will  confirm  that  the  euro  has 
emerged  as  the  world’s  second  most  important  international  currency.  Yet,  the  evidence  will  also 
confirm that the dollar is still far ahead of the euro. Before I turn the lectern over, let me make a few 
remarks about future prospects.  
Two essential, inter-related elements will help the euro attain equal status with the U.S dollar. First, 
improved productivity and competitiveness of the euro area will raise the rate of return on euro area 
assets,  boosting  the  role  of  the  euro  as  in  investment  currency.  This  prediction  is  predicated  on 
profound  changes  in  areas  such  as  product  and  labour  market  regulations,  public  debt  and  fiscal 
deficits,  and  social  security  systems.  Second,  continued  financial  market  integration,  a  necessary 
condition  for  further  investments  in  euro  assets,  will  require  changes  in,  and  harmonisation  of, 
legislations, regulations, market practices, and infrastructures.  
The  euro  has  made  an  impressive  debut  on  the  global  stage.  To  a  significant  extent,  this  situation 
reflects  the  credibility  credentials  earned  by  the  ECB  in  its  first  several  years  of  existence.  It  also 
reflects  the  perceptions  of  market  participants  of  the  euro  area  as  an  economy  with  strong  growth 
potential. Determined efforts in the remaining areas I have discussed would fulfil these perce3ptions 
and add to the attractiveness of the euro in the international arena, allowing it to seriously challenge 
the hegemonic role now played by the US dollar.  
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention.  
 