Joseph Yam: The link - 20 years on 
Graduate talk by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority; at the Alumni 
Link Launching Ceremony, at the Open University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 14 October 2003. 
 Professor Tam, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  attend  Open  University  events.  It  is  a  particular  pleasure  to  be  here  to 
participate in the launch of Alumni Link in the presence of so many fellow graduates. Alumni Link will 
provide information, organise events, and help nurture a sense of community among graduates of the 
Open University of Hong Kong. It will also, I note, play its part in stimulating the Hong Kong economy 
by arranging discounts and other privileges. So Alumni Link is very obviously a good thing. This new 
facility  underlines  two  fundamental  principles  behind  the  work  of  the  Open  University:  first,  that 
education is a lifelong process, which does not end with final examinations or the award of degrees; 
and  secondly,  that  education  is  a  matter  of  teamwork  and  fellowship,  and  not  a  solitary  pursuit.  I 
congratulate all those involved on having established this useful and imaginative resource. 
I should also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the work of Professor Tam Sheung-wai, who 
will,  I  understand,  be  retiring  as  President  next  month.  Professor  Tam  has  made  enormous 
contributions  to  the  development  of  open  and  distance  education  within  Hong  Kong  and  beyond.  I 
think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  Open  University  has  reached  its  maturity  as  an  institution  under  his 
presidency. Yet, remarkably, the momentum that has characterised the University's early years seems 
now to be gaining rather than slackening, with the recently announced plans for expanded services 
not just in Hong Kong but also on the Mainland. Professor Tam will retire with the knowledge that the 
Open University is in a flourishing condition and has an excellent reputation, internationally as well as 
locally.  I  join  you  all  in  wishing  him  health  and  happiness  in  his  retirement  and  in  wishing  his 
successor, Professor John Leong, every success.  
The Linked Exchange Rate system 
I  had  originally  planned  to  talk  generally  this  evening  about  challenges  in  central  banking.  I  shall 
certainly address this topic later on. But it occurred to me as I was preparing the talk that this week, in 
addition to launching Alumni Link, we also mark the anniversary of the launch of another Link, which I 
also  participated  in  twenty  years  ago.  Since  that  Link  has  again  become  quite  topical  over  recent 
weeks, I thought you might be more interested if the focus of this talk was on the Link. 
Twenty years ago, almost to the day, the Hong Kong Government announced and then implemented a 
new policy to stabilise the Hong Kong dollar. This was at a time when the dollar had been falling in 
value so fast that the monetary and banking systems were in a state of crisis. Many of you here will 
remember the run on rice and toilet paper at the supermarkets and the real sense of anxiety about our 
currency. Those days are as clear in my own memory as if they were last week. The policy announced 
on Saturday 15  October 1983 and formally introduced on Monday 17 October 1983 was to link the 
Hong Kong dollar and the US dollar at the fixed rate of 7.8  Hong Kong dollars to the US dollar under 
a currency board system. This policy has become known as the Linked Exchange Rate system, and it 
is now such an established and familiar part of Hong Kong life that it is difficult to imagine quite what 
Hong Kong would have been like these last two decades without it. It is certainly, as far as I am aware, 
one of the longest lasting of the handful of currency board systems now in existence. 
More recently, events have shown that monetary affairs are never predictable, even with a system as 
simple and transparent as the Link. For many months, market sentiment towards the Hong Kong dollar 
had been quite bearish. The general view was that deflation, unemployment, the budget deficit, and 
general  economic  difficulty  were  all  prompting  serious  questions about  the  long-term  viability  of  the 
Link. And, from time to time, suggestions were made that the Hong Kong dollar should be allowed to 
float  -  or  at  least  be  re-pegged  -  so  that  monetary  policy  could  contribute  more  effectively  to  the 
resolution of current economic difficulties. The general wisdom was that the inevitable direction of the 
Hong Kong dollar under a freer exchange rate would be to depreciate. The result would be an end to 
deflation, a boost to economic growth, a reduction in unemployment, and the elimination of the budget 
deficit. In fact, all of our problems would be cured - and rapidly - by this single panacea. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
If only things could be so simple! But, of course, they are not. I have spoken and written at length on 
other occasions about the huge risks to financial and social stability that we would expose ourselves to 
in following such a course. Financial markets have a habit of overshooting and precipitating financial 
crises that are very costly to the community. And it seems, from recent events, that the very premise 
on which this panacea of exchange rate depreciation is based may be seriously flawed. For the market 
exchange  rate  of  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  has  strengthened  over  the  past  two  or  three  weeks  to  the 
extent that it has been necessary for the HKMA to inject liquidity into the system in order to dampen 
excessive  volatility.  The  market  has,  all  of  a  sudden,  chosen  to  ignore  the  continuing  problems  of 
deflation, unemployment and budget deficit, and the possible implications of these for the exchange 
rate. The clear message from the market now is that, were the Hong Kong dollar to be allowed to float, 
its exchange rate would rise rather than fall. Before you reach for your telephones, let me stress that 
we have no intention of trying this out. Monetary affairs are, as I have said, unpredictable, and the 
direction and magnitude in the movement of the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate, if it were allowed to 
float, is anyone's guess and may not have any bearing on the underlying economic fundamentals. We 
have no wish to find out. And, in answer to the many dramatic statements made over the past couple 
of weeks or so, our somewhat relaxed attitude towards small deviations in the exchange rate on the 
strong  side  of  7.80  does  not  mean  that  we  are  any  less  committed  to  maintaining  the  Link.  Minor 
fluctuations in the market exchange rate on the strong side of the Link are a feature of our monetary 
system, and they are nothing to get too excited about. And there is an effective mechanism for us to 
ensure that these fluctuations are not so large as to undermine credibility and confidence in the Link. 
It is, however, worth putting into perspective some of the reasons for the sudden strengthening of the 
Hong Kong dollar, because they have a significance that goes beyond short-term fluctuations in the 
market. The trigger, you may recall, was the political pressure from outside for a revaluation of the 
renminbi. The read-across to the Hong Kong dollar, combined with a realisation that the Hong Kong 
economy  was  not  doing  so  badly  after  all,  led  to  a  scramble  to  cover  short  positions.  This  came 
against the background of quite volatile movements in the global currency markets, which included, 
most notably, a sustained weakening of the US dollar against other currencies. At the risk of stating 
the  obvious, an  orderly  depreciation of the  US  against  other  currencies  is  in Hong  Kong's  interests 
because  it  means  that,  because  Hong  Kong's  currency  is  linked  to  the  US  dollar,  Hong  Kong  also 
becomes more competitive. This larger point may have been overlooked in all of the fuss about the 
somewhat less significant strengthening of the Hong Kong dollar against the US dollar. 
With regard to the Mainland's currency, the political pressures from outside for an appreciation of the 
renminbi exchange rate have been prompted by the considerable attention that is being given in the 
US to the bilateral trade imbalance between the Mainland and the United States. The arguments for 
appreciation  are  that,  from  the  US  perspective,  Chinese  exports  are  undervalued  and  therefore 
unfairly competitive, and, from the Chinese perspective, the substantial capital inflow into the Mainland 
might carry long-term risks. Leaving aside the arguments about trade, let us look a little more closely 
at the question of capital inflow and how to manage it. First, to put things in perspective, it should be 
noted  that  the  Mainland's  current  account  surplus  is  really  very  small  by  international  standards  - 
perhaps something around one per cent of GDP in the first half of 2003. This is much lower than the 
corresponding  figures  for  many  other  economies.  Nevertheless,  it  is  true  that  there  has  been 
substantial capital inflow into the Mainland, leading to a very rapid accumulation of foreign reserves. 
The Mainland authorities are well aware of the risks of this, in terms, for example, of an asset price 
bubble that could be quite destabilising to the financial system when it burst. They have, in fact, made 
quite intense efforts to deal with the inflow through a number of strategies. 
Under the Mainland's present exchange rate system, the accumulation of foreign reserves is matched 
by  an  increase  in  the  renminbi  monetary  base,  which  needs  to  be  sterilised  if  the  undesirable 
consequences of credit expansion are to be contained. The People's Bank of China has been carrying 
out sterilisation quite actively both through the recently introduced programme of issuing central bank 
bills  and  through  reducing  lending  to  government  and  financial  institutions.  There  is  scope  for 
securitisation  of  these  loans  to  produce  more  financial  instruments  for  money  market  operations. 
Another tool available to the authorities is to change the reserve requirement for banks, and indeed 
this  requirement  was  raised  in  August  from  six  per  cent  to  seven  per  cent.  Further  options  include 
making changes to interest rates to discourage further capital inflow (though obviously this may have 
undesirable effects on the asset markets) and opening up relief valves in the capital account. 
The  observations  to  make  here  are  that,  first,  the  Mainland  authorities  have  many  options  for 
managing the risks created by substantial capital inflow, and they are making very active use of some 
of  these  options;  and,  secondly,  that  there  is  no  need  to  take  risks  by  playing  around  with  the 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2003
exchange rate, which should be the absolute final resort. The Mainland authorities have made it clear 
that they have no intention of taking such risks, and have stressed the importance of gradualism in the 
reform of the exchange rate system. They have said that keeping the renminbi stable is conducive to 
the economic stability and development not only of China but also of the region and the world at large. 
I  believe  that  this  approach  is  right,  and  that,  in  particular,  a  stable  renminbi  is  also  conducive  to 
stability in Hong Kong.  
Signs of recovery 
Although the trigger may have been the political pressure on the renminbi, the strengthening of the 
Hong Kong dollar was also attributable to a large inflow of funds into the Hong Kong dollar, which, 
among other things, was reflected in the rise in the Hang Seng Index. Clearly, sentiment towards Hong 
Kong,  and  within  Hong  Kong,  has  improved  in  recent  weeks.  Recent  indicators  suggest  a  gradual 
recovery in the economy following the trauma inflicted on Hong Kong by the SARS crisis. There has 
been  improvement  in  local  consumer  spending  and  a  sharp  revival  in  inbound  tourism.  Exports 
continue to grow, deflation has moderated, and unemployment appears to have peaked. Less easy to 
quantify is the change in mood, although it is, as I have said, shown to some extent in the activities in 
the  markets,  as  well  as  in  consumer  spending.  What  is,  I  think,  clear  to  every  observer,  however 
cynical,  is  that  there  has  been,  among  all  sectors  of  the  community,  a  marked  and  quite  sudden 
turnaround, from pessimism bordering on despair to a cheerful if cautious optimism. This comes as a 
huge relief after the gloom and despondency of the second quarter. 
Important initiatives, such as CEPA and the relaxation of restrictions on individual travellers from the 
Mainland, have undoubtedly helped to stimulate confidence. So too have the general - though by no 
means conclusive - signals that the world economy is also in better shape. It is also very likely that the 
recent surge in markets and the gradual growth in economic activity are part of a longer-term trend, 
going on for at least a year now, in which there have been underlying improvements in the Hong Kong 
economy. Deflation, under the discipline of the Link, has made Hong Kong more competitive: it is now 
a less expensive city in which to do business or take a holiday. The real effective exchange rate for the 
Hong Kong dollar - which is a true measure of the competitiveness of an economy - has declined by 
24% over the past five years. Recent research carried out by the HKMA also points to a much greater 
degree of flexibility in wage adjustments than the official statistics might suggest. 
A key component of our economy - the export of goods and services - has continued to grow strongly 
throughout  the  whole  of  the  last  five  quarters.  In  2002  Hong  Kong  enjoyed  a  balance  of  payments 
surplus in the current account equal to about 11% of our GDP, and this surplus has been sustained 
into  2003:  it  means,  in  dollar  terms,  that  Hong  Kong  as  an  economy  has  been  earning  around 
US$1.5 billion  in  foreign  exchange  every  month.  In  short,  it  appears  that  SARS,  despite  the  large 
human cost, has had only a short-lived and superficial effect on our economic development. Or, to use 
the  language  of  economists,  the  impact  of  SARS  was  a  temporary  demand  shock  rather  than  a 
permanent loss in output.  
Structural issues 
The evidence suggests, then, that Hong Kong is back on the path to broad-based economic recovery. 
Let us hope that this is indeed the case. Since the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis more than six 
years  ago,  we  have  had  much  bad  news  and  very  little  good.  We  are  all  ready  for  a  break,  and, 
equally important, I think we are in a position for making the best of it. But we should not assume that 
all our problems will be solved by economic recovery. Many of them will be, of course, and the others 
will be much reduced. Yet there are structural issues that have to be faced, and dealing with them may 
take  effort,  imagination  and  a  strong will.  One  of  these  issues  is  the  fiscal  deficit.  This  was  around 
HK$62 bn, or 4.9% of GDP in the last fiscal year, and, according to the Government's latest estimates, 
may exceed that figure for the current fiscal year. Economic recovery will undoubtedly help contain or 
reduce the deficit. But the larger, structural questions, such as how to produce a more stable revenue 
base, will still be there, and they will involve difficult choices. As we know, this much-debated question 
is something that the Financial Secretary is actively addressing. 
The  other  great  structural  issue  is  unemployment,  which  reached  its  highest  level  in  recent  history 
during  the  SARS  crisis,  and  which  is  expected  to  remain  high  for  some  time.  Again,  economic 
recovery will help to ease the problem, and sectors of the economy that have been seeing intensified 
growth, such as the tourism industry, will provide further opportunities in many areas of employment. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 3
But a substantial part of the unemployment problem is a structural one, resulting from our transition 
from industrial to post-industrial economy and from the movement of jobs, particularly unskilled jobs, 
out of Hong Kong. On top of this, a substantial part of the growth in one of our best-performing sectors 
- exports - is generated by offshore trade, which by its nature creates fewer jobs domestically than 
does the more traditional entrepot trade, not to mention domestic exports. What this means is that, 
however quickly the recovery penetrates society as a whole, and whatever the efforts made to open 
up new areas of economic activity, a large pool of unemployed may still be left behind. These fellow-
citizens will have a legitimate claim on the community for assistance in one form or another, and how 
to  tackle  this  issue  without  further  compromising  fiscal  discipline  will  be  a  great  challenge.  It  is  a 
challenge  that  many  developed  -  and  not-so-developed  -  economies  have  been  grappling  with  for 
many years. But it is a fairly new and unfamiliar challenge for Hong Kong. 
A  related  issue  is  the  question  of  property  values,  although  how  far  this  should  be  classified  as  a 
structural  or  a  cyclical  issue  is  uncertain.  Hong  Kong's  property  market  is  a  complex  and  volatile 
creature: it is not at all clear how the various factors on the demand and supply sides have contributed 
to the extraordinary collapse we have seen in the market over the past five years. How the market will 
behave in the future is even less clear, though it does seem that there has been some stabilisation in 
prices recently. What is clear is that a very large number of households in Hong Kong (over a hundred 
thousand mortgagors at the end of June) have, as a result of this collapse fallen into negative equity. 
The low interest rate environment has, thankfully, mitigated the problem somewhat. The more stable 
employment prospects that we hope will come with economic recovery should, for many, help dispel 
the terrible spectre of negative equity combined with unemployment, which has probably caused as 
much anxiety in our community as SARS, and over a longer period of time. 
Quite  apart  from  its  effects  on  individuals  and  families,  negative  equity  has  broader  economic 
implications.  It  has  an  enervating  effect  on  spending.  And  it  adds  to  the  pressures  on  the  banking 
system, although it should be added that the delinquency ratio on mortgages continues to be very low. 
This is, I think, attributable partly to the fortitude with which homeowners in negative equity have borne 
the problem, and partly to the willingness of most banks to restructure loans in cases of difficulty. The 
community and the banking sector have coped with this problem extremely well. It is to be hoped that 
stabilisation in property prices will help to contain and gradually reduce negative equity. Nevertheless, 
the problem is likely to be with us for some time to come.  
The role of the HKMA 
The question arises of what is the role of a central bank - or, more specifically, of a central banking 
institution like the HKMA - in an environment such as this. In my view, the role is quite straightforward: 
it is to sustain a monetary and banking environment that is conducive to resolving the economic and 
fiscal  problems  that  face  our  community  -  not  just  in  the  public  sector,  but  also  in  businesses  and 
households. This is not the passive, static role that it may seem, as the maintenance of a rule-based 
monetary system in the form of the Link misleadingly suggests. Indeed, there is the scope - and often 
the need - for an active and imaginative use of financial, supervisory, communication and other skills. 
The  degree  of  openness  and  the  relatively  small  size  of  Hong  Kong's  financial  system,  against  the 
background  of  globalisation,  mean  that  the  maintenance  of  monetary  and  banking  stability  is  a 
particularly difficult task. There is also the requirement, implicit in the Basic Law, to look ahead, and in 
particular,  to  develop  the  financial  infrastructure  that  will  secure  Hong  Kong's  position  as  an 
international  financial  centre  and  provide  it  with  the  means  to  build  on  that  position.  And  there  are 
other important tasks, such as seeking to help the Government in its efforts to contain the fiscal deficit 
by achieving a favourable return on the fiscal reserves deposited with the Exchange Fund - subject 
always to meeting the other investment objectives of the Fund. 
All of these tasks present challenges to keep me and my colleagues busy enough. But there have also 
been suggestions that the HKMA should take further steps to help stimulate growth. I have already 
mentioned the doubtful argument about changing the Link to jump-start the economy, and there have 
been other ideas put forward - all of them well intentioned - for example, that the Government should 
dig further into the foreign reserves to stimulate growth. One very specific suggestion which comes up 
periodically, and which gained currency once again over the summer, is the proposal that the HKMA 
should  relax  the  guideline  that  says  that  banks  should  not  lend  more  than  70%  of  the  value  of  a 
residential property for which a mortgage loan is taken out: this is known as the 70% loan-to-value 
guideline. The idea behind the suggestion was that relaxation of the guideline would make it possible 
for  prospective  homeowners  to  borrow  more  and  that  this  would  help  stimulate  property  purchases 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2003
and thus stabilise the property market. I think the idea has now passed, partly because the property 
market  appears  to  have  stabilised,  but  mainly  because  it  seems  that  public  opinion  accepted  the 
reasoning that we and others put forward for maintaining the guideline. 
Setting  aside  the  question  of  whether  relaxing  the  guideline  would  have  had  any  effect  at  all  on 
demand for property, let us go through this reasoning. It is, in fact, quite simple. The guideline exists to 
prevent  banks  from  excessively  exposing  themselves  to  the  risks  posed  by  an  extremely  volatile 
property market. The guideline was introduced in order to provide a level playing field at a time when 
many banks were already themselves applying this restriction. It continues to have the broad support 
of the banking industry. It has helped maintain banking stability during a period of considerable stress, 
and,  no  less  important,  it  has  helped  limit  the  problem  of  negative  equity.  The  guideline  does  not 
prevent  borrowers  from  obtaining  further  finance  from  other  sources,  and  indeed  there  are  many 
products on the market to enable homeowners to borrow up to 90% of the value of their home, and 
many homeowners who have taken advantage of these products. In other words, the 70% guideline is 
intended to restrict the risk exposure of banks, not to limit the amount of finance that borrowers can 
obtain. 
The  guideline  is  therefore  a  not  a  tactical  tool  for  affecting  property  prices  in  the  short  term  but  a 
strategic measure for maintaining banking stability over the longer term. Anyone who wishes to see 
what  happens  when  there  is  no  such  guideline  in  a  falling  market  can  find  plenty  of  examples 
overseas.  Or  you  can  look  again  at  the  situation  in  Hong  Kong  in  1983,  when  banks  became 
dangerously  exposed,  directly  and  indirectly,  to  a  volatile  property  market  in  which  the  bubble  had 
burst and from which confidence was draining fast: there was, of course, no 70% guideline in those 
days.  
Functions and Responsibilities in Monetary and Financial Affairs 
You  may  have  noticed  here  parallels  with  monetary  policy.  Like  the  70%  guideline,  the  Link  is 
maintained over the longer term for the greater economic well-being of our community, even though it 
might seem tempting from time to time to try to use monetary policy for short-term tactical gains. In 
fact, although the spotlight tends, quite understandably, to be on newsworthy issues - bank rescues, 
intervention in the stock market, the latest Exchange Fund results, the "alarming" strengthening of the 
Hong Kong dollar - much of the work of any central bank has to be focused on the longer term, on the 
implementation of sustainable, consistent, dependable policies on a horizon that lies well beyond the 
daily concerns of most of us. For this reason the general consensus is that a central banking institution 
must be somewhat set apart from the daily workings of government and politics. The HKMA, as Hong 
Kong's central banking institution, has, throughout the 10 years of its existence so far, always had a 
special position as an organisation that is a part of the Government and yet operates at some distance 
from the Government proper. This relationship between the HKMA and the Government has recently 
been set out in a series of documents produced in response to suggestions from within Hong Kong 
and recommendations by the IMF that the roles of various senior officials involved in monetary and 
financial affairs should be set out more clearly. 
The key document as far as the HKMA is concerned is the Exchange of Letters between the Financial 
Secretary and the Monetary Authority on 25 June 2003. Given what was happening in Hong Kong at 
this  time,  it  is  perhaps  not  surprising  that  these  letters  did  not attract  too  much publicity when  they 
were  published  a  few  days  later,  although  they  were  favourably  noticed  in  the  editorials  and 
commentaries. Generally speaking, and with one important addition that I shall describe in a minute, 
the Exchange of Letters introduced no change to existing arrangements. Most of the contents set out 
the  existing  division  of  responsibility  between  the  Financial  Secretary  and  the  Monetary  Authority 
under the main laws governing the work of the HKMA. There is nothing particularly novel in any of this, 
although it is useful to have the division of work spelt out in one place. Anyone interested in knowing 
exactly what the HKMA does and how it connects with the rest of the Government need look no further 
than this for an authoritative statement. 
There are two aspects of the letter that are significant in what they say about the relationship between 
the HKMA and the rest of the Government. The first is the clear distinction between the setting of the 
monetary policy objective on the one hand and the achievement of that objective on the other. The 
former  falls  within  the  province  of  the  Financial  Secretary.  The  latter  is  the  responsibility  of  the 
Monetary Authority, who (to quote from the Exchange of Letters) shall "on his own be responsible for 
achieving the monetary policy objective, including determining the strategy, instrument and operational 
means for doing so." An accompanying letter from the Financial Secretary to the Monetary Authority 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 5
specifies in black and white, for the first time, the monetary policy objective and the structure of the 
monetary system for Hong Kong. In fact, this accompanying letter does nothing more than describe 
the  existing  arrangements,  which  have  been  transparently  clear  to  all  of  us  for  the  past  20  years. 
Nevertheless,  the  clarity  with  which  this  objective  is  now  expressed,  and  the  responsibility  now 
formally given by the Financial Secretary to me, as Monetary Authority, to achieve independently this 
monetary  policy  objective  have  important  things  to  say  about  the  operational  independence  -  and 
accountability - of the HKMA. 
The second aspect of this Exchange of Letters is, in my view, even more important. This involves the 
disclosure,  for  the  first  time,  of  the  details  of  the  delegation  of  statutory  powers  from  the  Financial 
Secretary to the Monetary Authority to enable the Monetary Authority to discharge independently his 
functions  and  responsibilities.  In  making  this  disclosure,  the  Financial  Secretary  commits  himself  to 
explaining publicly, within three months, subject to considerations of market sensitivity, any decision 
by him to override or bypass the Monetary Authority in the exercise of these delegated powers. There 
is  also  an  undertaking  that  any  changes  to  the  content  of  the  letter,  and  any  changes  to  the 
delegations,  shall  be  made  public.  These  commitments  provide  important  safeguards  of  the 
independence of the HKMA in its day-to-day operations. 
I  should  add  here  that  there  has  never  in  the  past  been  any  instance  of  the  Financial  Secretary's 
overriding  or  bypassing  the  Monetary  Authority  in  the  exercise  of  these  delegated  powers.  So  we 
would  not  expect  to  see  disclosures  of  this  kind  very  often.  Nor  would  we  expect  to  see  frequent 
changes to the content of the letter or the form of the delegations, for an important part of operational 
independence is that it should be stable and predictable, and not something that is tinkered with at 
whim. The Exchange of Letters will, I believe, provide a clear basis for the HKMA to continue to carry 
out its work with a high level of autonomy in the years to come.  
Conclusion 
These will, naturally, be years of challenge for Hong Kong: there have been very few times in Hong 
Kong when this was not the case. The HKMA, as Hong Kong's central banking institution, has its part 
to play in helping Hong Kong meet the challenges. It also has its own special challenges. 
The main challenges in central banking are to maintain a monetary and banking environment that is 
optimal for stable and sustainable economic growth, and, particularly in the case of present-day Hong 
Kong, an environment that is conducive to resolving our current problems. In doing this, we should not 
lose sight of two other, related challenges. One is to keep an eye on the longer term, both in applying 
solutions  to  current  problems  and  in  building  the  infrastructure  for  future  needs.  The  other  is  to 
maintain  confidence  in  our  monetary  and  financial  systems.  This  requires,  above  all,  doing  our  job 
effectively through achieving the objectives set for us by the Government. It also requires transparency 
and education. And here, there is, I think, some final observation to be made on recent events. 
We  have,  as  you  know,  placed  great  stress  on  transparency,  to  the  extent  that  our  accounts  and 
operations, at least on the monetary side, are for the most part an open book. We have also paid a lot 
of  attention  to  public  education,  on  our  website,  in  our  publications,  and  through  numerous  special 
events:  our  efforts  here  will  be  boosted  later  in  the  year  with  the  opening  of  a  permanent  HKMA 
Information Centre, which I cordially invite you all to visit. But, despite all this work, it seems, from the 
events  in  the  market  in  the  last  few  weeks,  that  there  is  nothing  as  good  as  real-life  experience  to 
encourage people to learn more about how our system works. This has been brought home to us in 
the HKMA by the quite remarkable surge in visits to the information on our website about the Link and 
the Currency Board system over the past couple of weeks. 
All of this serves, I think, to demonstrate the wisdom of the Open University's approach, which is to 
provide formal education at the time in life when people are getting the most out of their practical, real-
life experience. Alumni Link - and, I believe, occasions such as this - will help to further this approach. 
I thank the Open University for having invited me to give this talk, and I look forward very much to your 
questions and comments.  
6 
 BIS Review 44/2003
