 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Lisbon, 2 October 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Governing Council of the European Central Bank today met for the eighth 
time outside Frankfurt. I would like to thank both Governor Const(cid:226)ncio for his invitation and generous 
hospitality, as well as the staff of the Banco de Portugal for an excellently organised meeting.  
Turning  to  business,  we  have  decided  to  leave  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  basic 
components of our economic and monetary analysis remain in place. In particular, the medium-term 
outlook for price stability continues to be favourable, allowing us to conclude that the historically low 
level of ECB interest rates remains appropriate. This also lends ongoing support to economic activity. 
We will continue to carefully monitor all developments which might affect our assessment.  
The more detailed considerations underlying our decision are as follows: 
Starting with the economic analysis, real GDP growth in the euro area was virtually stagnant in the 
first half of this year. However, the latest data and information are consistent with a moderate pick-up 
in activity in the second half. In particular, there  are signs that economic activity might have firmed 
somewhat in the third quarter, and confidence indicators available up to September generally point to 
some  improvement  in  economic  expectations.  In  line  with  available  forecasts  and  projections,  this 
upturn should gradually strengthen in the course of 2004. Externally, the recovery in world economic 
activity appears to be proceeding. This should support demand for euro area exports, counteracting 
the  effects  of  the  deterioration  in  price  competitiveness.  Domestically,  companies  seem  to  be 
continuing their adjustment efforts to enhance productivity and profitability. This, together with the low 
level  of  interest  rates,  should  contribute  to  a  recovery  in  investment.  Furthermore,  terms-of-trade 
effects stemming from the past appreciation of the euro should positively affect real disposable income 
in the euro area, and thereby private consumption. Developments in financial markets are generally 
consistent with this overall picture. 
The  short-term  risks  to  our  main  scenario  of  a  gradual  recovery  appear  to  be  broadly  balanced. 
However, some risks to the sustainability of economic growth  at the global  level remain. These are 
related  to  the  medium-term  sustainability  of  public  finances  in  major  industrialised  countries  and,  in 
this connection, the adjustment of external imbalances in some regions of the world.  
Turning  to  the  outlook  for  prices,  according  to  Eurostat(cid:146)s  latest  flash  estimate,  HICP  inflation  in 
September was 2.1%. This was unchanged from August. For the remainder of this year, HICP inflation 
should hover at around 2%. Exchange rate developments help to contain short-term upward pressure 
on prices, while higher unprocessed food prices related to the hot and dry weather conditions in some 
euro area countries could imply some limited upward risk over the next few months. For early 2004, 
there  is  still  some  uncertainty  about  the  precise  impact  on  HICP  inflation  of  planned  increases  in 
indirect taxes and administered prices in a number of euro area countries. Looking beyond the short 
term, however, we continue to expect inflation to fall below 2% in 2004 and to remain in line with price 
stability thereafter. This expectation is based on the assumption of moderate wage developments in 
the context of a gradual economic recovery. In this respect, we note that inflation expectations in the 
euro area are anchored at levels below but close to 2% over the medium to long term. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  strong  monetary  growth  over  the  past  two  years  has  been 
fuelled by past portfolio shifts, precautionary saving and the low level of interest rates. The latter factor 
also provided a counterweight to the negative impact of weak economic growth on loan developments. 
In fact, there are signs of a pick-up in the growth rates of loans to the private sector. 
At  the  current  juncture,  the  accumulation  of  excess  liquidity  is  not  a  cause  for  concern  given  the 
subdued  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area.  However,  if  it  were  to  persist  in  conjunction  with  a 
significant  strengthening  of  economic  activity,  it  could  lead  to  inflationary  pressures  in  the  medium 
term.  
Summing  up  and  cross-checking  the  information  from  the  two  pillars,  our  economic  analysis 
continues to confirm the expectation that price pressures will remain subdued in the coming years, in 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 1
 the context of a gradual  economic recovery  and moderate  import price and  wage developments. In 
view  of  the  economic  situation,  the  strong  monetary  expansion  should  not  be  seen  as  adversely 
affecting this outlook for the time being. Overall, therefore, the medium-term outlook for price stability 
remains favourable. 
As regards fiscal policy, we would like to reiterate our serious concerns. There is growing evidence 
that most countries will miss their budgetary targets for 2003 by a significant margin and, in a number 
of cases, budgetary plans for 2004 are not reassuring. While the deterioration of budgetary balances 
mainly reflects the lower-than-anticipated economic growth, it is worrying to see that not all countries 
with  severe  imbalances  have  so  far  introduced  sufficient  consolidation  measures.  It  is  fundamental 
that the credibility of the institutional underpinnings of EMU be maintained.  
In this respect, let me stress that the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact provide an appropriate 
framework  for  maintaining  fiscal  discipline  within  adequate  bounds  of  flexibility.  Far  from  being  a 
mechanical  scheme  to  constrain  fiscal  policies,  the  excessive  deficit  procedure  establishes  a 
sequence  of  incentives  for  countries  to  prevent  and  correct  severe  budgetary  imbalances.  At  each 
instance  of  this  sequence,  a  country(cid:146)s  fiscal  efforts  and  changes  in  the  economic  environment  are 
assessed and taken into account in the design of further steps. Countries are therefore continuously 
made  aware  of  the  risks  and  costs  arising  from  any  delay  in  taking  policy  action  to  preserve  the 
sustainability of public finances. To maintain the credibility of the fiscal policy framework it is essential 
to fully abide by its rules and to implement them in every respect. Doing so and complying with the 
requirements of the ECOFIN Council will lead to positive confidence and growth effects, which can be 
strengthened  if  fiscal  plans  are  part  of  a  comprehensive  and  credible  medium-term  strategy  with 
emphasis on structural expenditure reform. 
Finally,  although  it  might  mean  stating  the  obvious  here  in  Lisbon,  the  Lisbon  Strategy,  which  was 
agreed  upon  back  in  March  2000,  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  the  process  of  implementing 
structural  reforms.  More  reforms  are  urgently  needed  to  reduce  structural  rigidities  in  labour  and 
goods markets so as to address the main economic problem of the euro area, namely the high level of 
structural  unemployment.  At  the  same  time,  current  efforts  to  set  in  motion  important  changes  in 
pension  and  health systems and in other areas in  order to  prepare for the ageing of society  are of 
immense significance in ensuring the sustainability of our social security systems.  
Let me close with a few personal remarks. As you are aware, this will most probably be the last press 
conference following a meeting of the Governing Council that I will chair. From my perspective, these 
press conferences have been a success. Their purpose is to inform the media and the general public 
in detail, and on an almost (cid:147)real-time(cid:148) basis, about the outcome of Governing Council meetings. They 
have allowed us to communicate and clarify our policy decisions in an open and transparent manner. 
Indeed,  in  my  view,  this  practice  makes  the  ECB  one  of  the  most  transparent  central  banks  in  the 
world. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the media for their work over the five-and-a-half 
years in which I have had the privilege of being at the helm of the Governing Council. I wish you all the 
best.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2003
