Jaime Caruana: Coordinating regulation and supervision of banks - Basel II 
and beyond 
Remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the Global Operational Risk Forum of the Risk Management Association, 
Paris, 24 October 2003. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  this  forum  on  operational  risk.  As  the  new 
Chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  it  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  join  you,  the 
members of the Risk Management Association, in a discussion about the latest trends in capital and 
risk management. 
Overview 
Many  of  you  have  travelled  great  distances  to  join  us  here.  Perhaps  part  of  the  attraction  was  the 
chance  to  enjoy  the  charms  of  autumn  in  Paris.  But  the  main  reason  is  that  you  believe  risk 
management  matters.  Indeed,  from  their  first  meetings  in  Philadelphia  almost  90  years  ago,  the 
members of the Risk Management Association have long helped to promote sound risk management, 
offering training, educational resources, and forums such as today’s event to financial professionals. 
Moreover,  for  more  than  80  years  the  RMA  has  emphasised  the  analysis  of  quantitative  data  in 
helping to evaluate risk through its collection and annual publication of financial data and benchmarks. 
Through your efforts, and the efforts of associations similar to the RMA, you are helping to advance 
the  state  of  the  art  in  the  management  of  credit,  market,  and  operational  risk  and  to  encourage 
responsible banking practices. 
On this front, a risk manager and a bank supervisor share similar interests. A risk manager seeks the 
best  risk  measures  and  management  techniques  to  protect  a  bank  against  losses,  to  hone  its 
competitiveness,  and  to  enhance  its  profitability  and  long-term  growth.  Supervisors,  for  their  part, 
advocate  the  use  of  sound  risk  management  practices  to  ensure  the  adequate  capitalisation  and 
prudent management of all banks. This, in turn, strengthens the ability of financial sector to withstand 
periods of distress, to serve as an intermediary of credit through good times and bad, and to contribute 
to more sustainable growth in the economy. 
The Basel Committee’s landmark revision of the international bank capital standard represents one of 
the most important global efforts to encourage the responsible pursuit of risk and rewards and, hence, 
to promote greater financial stability. This represents the outgrowth of trends in many countries to build 
incentives  into  the  regulatory  framework  that  encourage  banks  to  identify  and  understand  the  risks 
they face today, to consider what risks may arise tomorrow, and to respond actively and appropriately 
to  both.  You’ve  been  discussing  this  topic  here  in  Paris  for  two  days  now,  but  all  of  us  have  been 
thinking long and hard about the New Basel Accord for many years. 
That  should  come  as  no  surprise,  as  capital  requirements  are  the  foundation  of  the  regulatory 
framework. Even more importantly, capital is a key ingredient to the health of the banking sector. But 
risk managers know that having adequate levels of capital does not ensure success - or even long-
term survival.  In calm  seas,  everyone  is  a  pilot.  Only  rough waters  prove  the skill  of a ship’s crew. 
Supervisors and risk managers know that a bank’s management and controls make up its first line of 
defence. The New Basel Accord seeks to capture the relationship between capital adequacy and risk 
management, a relationship that is quite apparent in its approach to operational risk. 
I’d like to take this opportunity to discuss the latest news on the New Accord and some of my thoughts 
on the framework for operational risk. I’ll begin with the Committee’s announcement from two weeks 
ago  about  plans  for  finishing  the  New  Accord.  I’ll  then  share  some  thoughts  on  the  treatment  of 
operational risk and the Committee’s motivation for adopting an explicit charge for it. Given the interest 
that  this  proposal  attracted,  I’ll  address  three  important  themes  raised  in  public  comments  that  the 
Committee is currently considering. During that discussion, I’ll offer some thoughts on what lies ahead, 
not just for bankers, but also for supervisors in conducting and coordinating supervision under the New 
Basel Accord. 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 1
Recent developments: the October press release 
First, to the most current news. By now you’ve no doubt read that the Basel Committee agreed two 
weeks ago on a plan to address the final issues raised in public consultations over the summer and to 
complete the new rules. This was no easy task, as the Committee received over 200 comment letters 
from the industry and the broader public on the Third Consultative Paper, or “CP3”. While we might 
have been somewhat surprised by the number of responses that we received, we were not surprised 
by the hard work that was evident in the letters. 
The quality of the responses shows that many banks and industry associations understand the deep 
significance of the proposals. On this note, I would like to offer the Committee’s appreciation to the 
RMA-related  working  groups  and  others  who  devoted  considerable  time  and  resources  during  the 
consultations. You shared important views through comment letters, gathered data for impact studies, 
and  engaged  in  discussions  like  the  ones  that  have  taken  place  here.  If  you’ve  been  following  our 
work  since  the  first  consultative  paper  was  released  in  1999,  you  know  that  the  proposals  have 
evolved  and improved considerably  thanks  to  the  industry’s  honest  responses,  candour,  and  letters 
such as those submitted by the RMA. 
At the Committee’s meeting, all members acknowledged our responsibility to consider carefully your 
concerns and those of the broader industry. At the same time, we recognised the need to resolve the 
open issues and release the New Accord as soon as humanly possible so that banks can continue to 
prepare  for  the  new  rules.  In  a  statement  to  the  press  after  our  meeting,  the  members  of  the 
Committee noted that we expect to take account of the remaining issues and complete the text of the 
New Accord in the coming months and not later than mid-year 2004. This period of time will also allow 
us to take better note of domestic consultations underway in some jurisdictions. 
The comment letters we received covered a wide range of issues. Most of the comments focused on 
credit risk. While this is not a major focus of today’s conference, I would like to call your attention to 
the proposals that the Committee has developed to revise the treatment of credit losses. As you know, 
CP3  calibrated  regulatory  capital  on  the  basis  of  both  unexpected  and  a  portion  of  expected  credit 
losses. This was intended as a practical compromise to account for differences in national accounting 
practices  and  supervisory  authority  regarding  provisioning.  Based  on  views  expressed  by  the  RMA 
and other respondents, and in light of our own continued research, the Committee now intends to align 
regulatory capital more closely to economic capital by calibrating it on the basis of unexpected credit 
losses  alone.  A  supplementary  mechanism  will  help  to  encourage  banks  to  provide  sufficiently  for 
expected  credit  losses.  This  proposal  can  be  found  on  the  website  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, and the Committee has invited public comment through the end of this year. 
Motivation behind the Committee’s proposals 
Beyond  the  advanced  methods  proposed  for  the  treatment  of  credit  risk,  the  inclusion  of  a  capital 
approach for operational risk represents one the New Accord’s most notable innovations, to which I’ll 
now turn. In recent years, banks and supervisors have begun to recognise the need to evaluate and 
seek ways to reduce losses arising from failures in processes, systems, people, or external events. 
Increasingly, supervisors, like many leading institutions, consider the management of operational risk 
to be a comprehensive practice comparable to that of credit or market risk. While operational risk is 
not as readily quantified as these other exposures, the Basel Committee has noted genuine progress 
among  leading  institutions  in  measuring  and  controlling  it.  “Unbundling”  operational  risk  from  other 
risks and then including an explicit capital charge for it was intended to support these private sector 
efforts and to reward firms that develop better measures. 
With  that  motivation,  the  Committee  sought  approaches  to  operational  risk  that  mirror  the  New 
Accord’s three pillars of more risk-sensitive minimum requirements, coordinated supervisory review, 
and enhanced market discipline through greater transparency. Together, the three pillars support the 
development of sophisticated measures of operational risk and offer incentives for banks to enhance 
their relevant controls. 
The Committee recognises that the art of operational risk management is still in its nascence and that 
risk  managers  are  experimenting  with  a  wide  range  of  methodologies.  To  accommodate  various 
stages  of  development  in  thinking  and  risk  modelling,  the  New  Accord  offers  three  approaches  for 
calculating  a  minimum  operational  risk  capital  charge.  Two  approaches  -  the  Basic  Indicator  and 
Standardised  Approaches  -  are,  by  design,  simple  and  so  inevitably  are  somewhat  imprecise 
measures of operational risk. But when combined with the supervisory review process of Pillar Two 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2003
and  the  transparency  requirements  laid  out  in  Pillar  3,  the  Committee  believes  that  they  offer  a 
reasonable point of departure and will spark additional efforts to refine banks’ approaches.  
For  the  most  sophisticated  institutions,  the  “advanced  measurement  approach”  -  or  “AMA”  -  is  the 
ultimate expression of the Committee’s goal to incorporate banks’ own sense of risk into the capital 
framework.  Because the AMA is not subject to supervisory “floors,” the Committee expects it to serve 
as a true catalyst for innovation. We were pleased that the RMA Working Group on the Regulation of 
Operational Risk and others in the industry welcomed the Committee’s decision to allow banks to test 
a great variety of methodologies and measures under the AMA. 
framework  has  become  more  flexible, 
Results of consultations 
From our review of public comments, and from our member agencies’ recent discussions with banks, 
we  have  noted  a  growing  consensus  that  the  revisions  to  the  proposals  have  been  positive.  The 
operational  risk 
to 
accommodate today’s best practices. Moreover, we are confident it is nimble enough to incorporate 
future advances.  Of  the  public  comments  on CP3  that  touched on  the  operational risk proposals,  it 
was  gratifying  that  most  sought  refinement  and  clarifications  of  the  proposals,  and  many 
acknowledged the value of the underlying principles. 
Respondents addressed a range of issues, but the AMA clearly captured the industry’s imagination. 
Three themes have emerged that are especially important to the Committee’s work on the AMA. One 
concerns the qualifying criteria banks will have to fulfil to adopt the AMA. Two others addressed the 
allocation of operational risk capital and consistency in the application of the AMA standards, across 
both banks and jurisdictions. I’d like to spend a few moments to give you a sense of the Committee’s 
deliberations to date on each theme. 
forward-looking,  and  better  able 
Qualifying criteria for AMA 
The first, and perhaps most pressing, of the themes concerns the minimum operational requirements 
that  banks  will  soon  need  to  meet  in  order  to  receive  supervisory  approval  to  use  an  advanced 
measurement  approach.  Many  respondents  felt  that  the  Committee’s  requirements  spell  out  a  tall 
order  for  the  industry,  especially  in  terms  of  the  requirements  to  validate  operational  risk  data  and 
correlation assumptions. 
The  Committee  acknowledges  that  meeting  the  qualifying  criteria  will  be  a  significant  challenge  for 
some  banks.  At  the  same  time,  the  AMA  offers  banks  an  unprecedented  degree  of  freedom  in 
modelling their risk and determining their minimum capital requirements. The Committee considers it 
appropriate to pair this privilege with appropriately demanding standards. We should also remember 
that the qualifying criteria for the AMA focus not just on the quantitative requirements for measuring 
operational  risk,  but  also  on  qualitative  standards  that  demonstrate  banks  have  instituted  a  robust 
control structure. 
Institution-wide capital allocations 
A second theme from the consultations addressed the question of whether the AMA should allocate 
operational risk capital on a consolidated, institution-wide basis or rather on a legal entity basis. Most 
banks,  and  especially  large  and  internationally  active  institutions,  understandably  would  prefer  to 
calculate the relevant capital requirements on a firm-wide basis. 
Banks  shared  a  variety  of  views  on  why  a  firm-wide  allocation  model  would  be  preferable.  Some 
respondents highlighted the technical and logistical constraints on developing an AMA, indicating that 
it is more difficult, from a modelling perspective, to estimate the potential for operational losses at even 
a  medium-sized  entity  because  of  the  need  for  a  large  body  of  data.  Others,  including  the  RMA 
working  group,  noted  the  practical  challenges  that  would  arise  if  they  were  required  to  develop  a 
separate model for each legal entity and seek approval from supervisors in each jurisdiction in which 
they operate. 
But an economic view of risk suggested a different and more fundamental concern. Many banks would 
like  full  recognition  of  the  economic  benefits  they  gain  from  operating  across  a  diversified  mix  of 
business lines and entities. Since it appears unlikely that a large organisation would suffer high losses 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 3
from  operational  failures  in  many  businesses  or  entities  at  once,  some  banks  argue  that  capital 
requirements  for  a  large  and  diversified  firm  as  a  whole  might  be  less  than  the  sum  of  capital 
requirements calculated for each individual entity. 
The Committee acknowledges the technical and practical challenges associated with developing and 
implementing  AMAs  for  large,  diversified  firms.  We  are  working  to  reduce  unnecessary  burdens  on 
banks  adopting  them.  While  we  have  not  made  any  decisions  yet,  this  is  an  issue  that  we  are  still 
discussing actively with the industry. 
But  we  face  even  tougher  questions  if  we  consider  the  allocation  of  capital  across  not  just  legal 
entities, but also across national borders, as some have requested.  This is a very difficult question to 
address  in  the  Basel  context.  The  Committee  must  respect  the  legal  responsibilities  charged  to 
national supervisors in regulating locally chartered banks, branches, or subsidiaries. 
All  bank  supervisors  must  have  access  to  sufficient,  comprehensive  and  detailed  information  on  a 
bank’s operational risk control structure, including its AMA, to evaluate the quality of risk management 
at  banks  they  supervise.  That  may  include  a  need  for  banks  and  other  supervised  entities  to 
demonstrate the adequacy of their capital resources on a stand-alone basis. We are giving significant 
thought to the international implications of this issue, but I should caution that we may not be able to 
find a completely satisfactory solution at the Committee’s level. 
Consistency in application of AMA standards 
The  challenges  of  implementing  the  New  Accord  across  borders  raise  concerns  as  well  about 
consistency  in  the  application  of  AMA  standards.  These  concerns  also  address  more  broadly 
competition between AMA banks, which is the final theme I’d like to mention today. While many banks 
welcome the flexibility to use their own methodologies under the AMA, some are concerned that too 
much flexibility might allow competitors at home or abroad to employ methods that are subject to less 
rigorous supervision.  
Ensuring  the  consistent  application  of  the  New  Accord  in  its  entirety  is  a  critical  concern  for  the 
Committee. The minimum standards were developed to help ensure that global competition in banking 
markets  will be  driven  by each  bank’s strengths,  rather  than  by differences  in  each country’s  rules. 
Moreover, Pillars Two and Three were created to a great degree to promote a more level playing field 
for banks. 
For  example,  incorporating  supervisory  review  -  or  Pillar  Two  -  into  the  international  guidelines 
represents  a  genuine  breakthrough  for  all  of  us.  By  developing  guidelines  for  the  supervisor’s 
evaluation of a bank’s internal capital allocation process, the Committee believes that supervisors and 
banks will engage in more focused, more consistent, and less burdensome discussions of the risks 
that  banks  face  and  the  responses  they  adopt.  National  laws  and  regulations  provide  different 
avenues through which supervisors may conduct such reviews, and consequently Pillar 2 affords each 
jurisdiction the flexibility to accommodate those differences. 
To assist supervisors in developing and applying more consistent standards, the Committee created 
the  Accord  Implementation  Group,  or  “AIG”,  precisely  to  share  experiences  and  encourage  shared 
approaches. This group, which is chaired by Nick Le Pan, the Canadian Superintendent of Financial 
Institutions, has already been long at work and provides a forum for supervisors to compare notes on 
practical matters. As a result, we expect that supervisors will apply the New Accord more consistently 
at home, thereby promoting a more level playing field across countries as well. 
Based on the AIG’s work to date, the Committee published a paper this past August on the “high level 
principles for the cross-border implementation of the New Accord”. In this paper, we reiterate our view 
that  the  traditional  allocation  of  responsibilities  to  home  and  host  supervisors  will  continue. 
Cooperation will be critical to the effective supervision of institutions under the New Accord, especially 
considering the challenges an internationally active bank will face in receiving the initial approval to 
adopt,  and  then  validate,  advanced  approaches  to  credit  and  operational  risk  at  home  and  in  host 
jurisdictions. Similarly, supervisors will need to find practical ways to cooperate in the evaluations of 
capital  adequacy  under  pillar  2  and  ongoing  reviews  of  compliance  with  the  minimum  operational 
requirements of the New Accord. 
At  the  same  time,  Pillar  3  -  market  discipline  -  draws  on  the  power  of  markets  to  help  ensure  that 
banks  do  not  hold  unrealistically  low  amounts  of  capital  for  operational  risk.  More  generally,  by 
emphasising principles in the rules - that an AMA must be credible, that it must adequately capture the 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2003
risk of extreme events, that it must be used by banks in the daily management of their operational risk 
and  not  just  for  regulatory  capital  purposes  -  enhanced  disclosure  and  transparency  may  actually 
result  in  more  consistency  in  the  application  of  advanced  approaches  than  detailed  quantitative 
criteria. 
Conclusion 
The Committee will need to spend the next few months discussing these three themes internally and 
with  the  industry  to  refine  the  qualifying  criteria  for  the  AMA,  to  determine  how  best  to  allocate 
operational  risk  capital,  and  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  in  the  application  of  the  operational  risk 
framework. 
As we conclude today’s conference, I think all of us have a better sense of the work that is ahead for 
both  bankers  and  supervisors.  At  the  same  time,  it’s  clear  from  the  issues  and  themes  that  you’ve 
been discussing at this conference that we’ve moved beyond a discussion of the principles behind the 
rules and to a focus on preparing for their implementation. This seems appropriate, since we expect 
that, given the very good progress that we have noted in banks preparing to adopt the New Accord, 
supervisors  and  the  industry  will  be  ready  to  implement  the  new  rules  by  the  end  of  2006.  Indeed, 
banks that wish to be among the first to adopt the AMA must being collecting the required three years 
of data by the end of this year - but for practical reasons, this process should have begun already. 
Adopting  a  more  risk-sensitive  treatment  of  operational  risk  will  require  significant  work  on  all  our 
parts. What we learn about the factors driving operational failures, and how we can better measure 
and  reduce  our  exposure  to  losses,  means  much  more  to  all  of  us  than  simply  a  more  favourable 
capital requirement. Instead, our efforts on operational risk, combined with advances on the credit and 
market risk fronts, will advance our understanding of the many risks banks face and improve our ability 
to navigate them successfully. For all of us, that offers the reward of a more stable banking system 
that  is  less  susceptible  to  systemic  risks  and  better  able  to  ensure  the  circulation  of  credit  to 
businesses and consumers alike. 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 5
