Bodil Nyboe Andersen: Recent financial and economic developments in 
Denmark 
Speech  by  Mrs  Bodil  Nyboe  Andersen,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 3 December 2003.  
 For  twenty  years  the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  has  been  a  cornerstone  of  economic  policy  in 
Denmark. It has won widespread acceptance from business, organisations, political players and the 
media. 
At the beginning of the 1980s, the Danish economy was caught in a vicious circle with high inflation, 
frequent  devaluations and  long-term  interest  rates  at  around  twenty  per cent. We had  to break  this 
circle  and  did  it  by  getting  public  finances  into  shape,  abolishing  the  cost-of-living  adjustment  and 
implementing a consistent fixed-exchange-rate policy. Later in the 1980s, a tax reform was introduced 
to limit the interest-deduction entitlement. 
These structural reforms were the basis for the stability-oriented economic policy pursued ever since. 
It has served Denmark well, and a virtuous circle has replaced the vicious circle. 
Danes  do  not  question  the  value  of  the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy,  but  analysts  in  other  countries 
sometimes perceive it as old-fashioned. Fixed-exchange-rate regimes are often the target of criticism 
and warnings in reports from international organisations and not least in academic literature. 
The  general  view  in  Denmark  is  that  the  fixed-exchange-rate  regime  has  provided  for  very  smooth 
sailing.  Nevertheless,  the  two  main  points  of  criticism  generally  raised  against  fixed-exchange-rate 
regimes merit a closer look. 
The  first  point  of  criticism  is  that  as  history  has  shown,  a  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  is  difficult  to 
maintain  because  of  its  vulnerability  to  speculative  attacks.  It  may  be  especially  difficult  to  resist 
speculation being built up in anticipation of a devaluation of a currency. 
Globally, there are several examples of how speculative attacks have caused a fixed-exchange-rate 
regime  to  collapse.  The  most  famous  example  is  the  withdrawal  of  sterling  from  the  European 
Monetary System in September 1992. At the beginning of the 1990s Finland and Sweden were also 
forced to float their currencies and thus to abandon the fixed-exchange-rate policy. Finland, however, 
reverted to the fixed-exchange-rate policy in 1996 in preparation for introduction of the euro. 
In the years since the early 1980s, Denmark has experienced a number of currency crises, but the 
fixed-exchange-rate policy has remained intact. The most recent speculation against the Danish krone 
took place more than five years ago, and Denmark’s fixed-exchange-rate policy today enjoys unique 
credibility in the market. 
The present central rate vis-à-vis the euro represents a conversion of the exchange rate between the 
D-mark and Danish krone fixed in January 1987. 
Why could we weather the storms despite all the arguments that the system is so vulnerable? 
The short reply is that we have taken great pains to follow the “rules of the game”. First, we have used 
monetary policy solely to stabilise the exchange rate - whether or not the necessary interest rate was 
appropriate in relation to the domestic economic situation. Monetary policy has been earmarked for 
exchange-rate stabilisation. 
Second,  it  is  just  as  important  that  fiscal  policy  has  “come  through”  -  to  use  a  modern  expression. 
Fiscal policy has been responsible for ensuring stable and credible macroeconomic development in 
the medium term. Adjustments have been made primarily in connection with the annual Finance Acts. 
Nevertheless, in isolated cases specific measures were required. The latest example is the Whitsun 
package of economic measures in 1998. 
The  other  main  point  of  criticism  of  fixed-exchange-rate  regimes  is  that  a  flexible  exchange  rate  is 
necessary  to  shield  the  economy  from  external  shocks.  The  same  argument  is  used  against 
participation in a monetary union. 
The hypothesis is that a flexible exchange rate allows such external disruptions to be reflected in the 
exchange rate.  
BIS Review 56/2003 
 1
Following the EMS crises at the beginning of the 1990s, a number of those countries which had to give 
in to speculative pressure chose to let their currencies float. This enabled them to use monetary policy 
- i.e. the interest rate - to stabilise domestic demand and thus inflation. 
A new inflation-management model was introduced in monetary policy, the so-called inflation targeting 
model. New Zealand and Canada had already applied this approach for some time. However, it was 
the Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank that primarily developed the principles of this policy in 
close cooperation with academia. 
Central banks applying inflation targeting aim at influencing the economy by solely using the interest 
rate to keep inflation two years ahead within a defined interval, typically 2 or 2½ per cent plus/minus 
1 per cent. 
The  interest-rate  decisions  are  taken  by  a  committee  based  on  economic  projections,  model 
calculations and personal assessments.  
The ECB has a clear objective of price stability which is interpreted as an inflation rate below but close 
to two per cent. The ECB’s interest-rate decision is also based on economic projections and on an 
analysis of key economic indicators. The decision-making process is, however, not formalised to the 
same extent as in Sweden and the UK, for example.  
The Federal Reserve System has a broader economic objective where inflation not necessarily takes 
centre stage. 
In 2001 Norway implemented an inflation-targeting regime. This happened gradually after the phasing 
out of the fixed-exchange-rate policy. Denmark is presently the only Nordic country to pursue a fixed-
exchange-rate policy, as Finland now participates in the euro area.  
It  is  worth  examining  whether  this  has  led  to  more  unstable  inflation  and  growth  in  Denmark  and 
Finland in recent years than in Sweden and Norway, which both have floating-exchange-rate regimes. 
To this end Danmarks Nationalbank has compared the development in the four Nordic countries after 
1996. The results are published in an article in our Monetary Review to be published on 4 December. 
The  comparison  shows  the  course  of  inflation  measured  as  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer 
Prices,  HICP,  that  is  a  general  and  comparable  measure  of  price  development.  The  message 
emerging from the comparison is that the variability in both inflation and output has clearly been lower 
in Denmark than in the other countries. 
It  shows  that  our  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  has  not  been  an  obstacle  to  stable  economic 
development. This is contrary to economic theory about this subject. 
The  article  presents  possible  explanations  of  this  apparent  contradiction.  One  explanation is  that  in 
reality,  stability  is  not  jeopardised  by  external  shocks,  but  rather  by  internal  shocks  in  the  form  of 
inappropriate economic-policy changes. 
History is rich in examples of how the wrong economic policy can lead to instability. 
A recent example is the Netherlands. For a long time the country seemed to perform extremely well 
and  was  praised  for  its  strong  economy.  From  the  end  of  the  1990s  until  two  years  ago,  the 
Netherlands experienced very high growth, which drove up inflation.  
As a consequence, government budgets tended to improve, of course. But the Netherlands did not let 
this  trend  prevail  so  that  the  automatic  stabilisers  of  fiscal  policy  could  work  freely.  Instead,  they 
introduced a set of “ground rules” whereby savings on the expenditure side were used for payment of 
other, new expenses, while half the revenue improvement could be used to reduce taxes. At first sight 
these rules looked convincing, but they were clearly procyclical. 
When the reversal came, performance declined rapidly. This year, negative growth of 3/4 per cent is 
expected.  At  the  same  time  the  Netherlands  has  tightened  fiscal  policy  considerably,  including 
significant expenditure cuts. This also reflects a procyclical approach, but the Dutch want to keep the 
budget deficit below three per cent in compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact. If only all euro 
area member states were as determined as the Netherlands. 
This example shows how succumbing to relaxation of fiscal policy in good times can lead to highly 
unstable development. The consequences of activist fiscal policy may be entirely different from what 
was expected. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2003
In Denmark, changing governments have been well aware of the risk that economic policy could go off 
course - precisely because of the potential vulnerability of the fixed-exchange-rate policy. 
Therefore, in Denmark more than in most other countries, the watchword has been “stability-oriented 
economic  policy”.  And  everyone  has  accepted  that  monetary  policy  in  itself  could  not  contribute  to 
domestic stabilisation, as it was earmarked for stabilisation of the exchange rate. As mentioned, this 
increases the responsibility imposed on fiscal policy. Fiscal-policy “activism” has been avoided, and a 
largely neutral fiscal policy has been pursued. The shocks of frequent fiscal-policy changes have thus 
been avoided. 
The internationalisation of the financial sector and the EU’s single market for financial services have 
been  key  issues  for  many  years.  Many  rules  and  regulations  have  been  made  to  facilitate  this 
development. The primary purpose has been to create a level playing field. Another purpose has been 
to facilitate cross-border activities. All this has contributed to making the financial markets more open 
and competitive and giving customers the advantages of a large market. 
In reality, large financial corporations have a national affiliation even if they have foreign ownership. 
They are mainly in contact with national authorities such as a country’s financial supervisory authority, 
central bank, deposit guarantee scheme and ministries. 
However, developments in the Nordic banking market in recent years indicate that we may be headed 
for integration of a magnitude that will significantly change the national relations. 
This will make it more difficult for the authorities to observe the traditional national borders. One very 
specific field where this will be evident in practice is statistics, as it applies the concepts “domestic” 
and “foreign”. 
If a financial group operating in several countries brings together certain activities in one country, it 
may cause strange shifts in the statistical information, which by no means indicate underlying changes 
in  the  transactions  conducted.  The  statistics  may  no  longer  present  an  accurate  picture.  Such 
restructuring within cross-border groups will require a new approach from the statistical authorities. 
It will also pose a new problem to the supervisory authorities if one or more of the largest financial 
institutions become branches of foreign banks.  
The  deposit  guarantee  schemes,  too,  are  fundamentally  national  and  thus  difficult  to  adapt  to 
comprehensive cross-border activities.  
And what is the role of the central bank if a branch of a foreign bank is so large that it has systemic 
importance and perhaps even is the largest retail bank?  
In Financial Stability, published by Danmarks Nationalbank in the spring, we summarised the problem 
as follows: 
“Where a branch is as large as or larger than the home-country entity, or a branch in an individual host 
country is so large that it has systemic importance and could affect the financial stability of the host 
country,  very  close  collaboration  should  be  established  between  the  authorities  across  national 
borders, irrespective of the home-country supervision”.  
These  issues  are  discussed  intensively  by  the  authorities  of  the  Nordic  countries.  In  Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s analyses of financial stability we have focused increasingly on the Nordic groups.  
In practical terms, the Nordic central banks have prepared a Memorandum of Understanding, which is 
available on our website. It describes the arrangements for cooperation in case of a financial crisis in a 
Nordic banking group with subsidiaries in several Nordic countries.  
Financial integration has advanced further in the Nordic countries than in the rest of the EU. Some of 
the features currently observed in the Nordic countries are beginning to show in the EU as well, and 
they will tend to strengthen after the enlargement of the EU with ten new member states. 
Therefore,  the  Nordic  countries  are  spurring  discussion  of  these  issues  at  EU  level.  And  the  other 
countries are indeed very interested in learning more about the Nordic experience. 
Internationalisation  also  has  other  aspects.  So  far,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  issued  government 
bonds  via  the  Copenhagen  Stock  Exchange,  but  trading  in  government  bonds  is  no  longer  a 
predominantly national matter. Danish government bonds are sold in large numbers to international 
investors. 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 3
In  recent  years,  the  international  trading  platform  MTS  has  become  the  standard  for  trading  in 
European  government  bonds.  MTS  is  now  used  by  12  EU  member  states,  and  the  international 
investment banks are using the system. 
To obtain the best possible prices on Danish government bonds we have chosen to move issuance to 
MTS, whereby more international investment banks have become primary dealers and active players 
in the market for Danish government bonds. 
This has intensified competition and at the same time modernised the market for government bonds. 
In  the  1980s,  Denmark  was  one  of  the  first  countries  to  introduce  the  option  of  electronic 
stock-exchange  trading. Nevertheless, government bonds were  traded  mainly  over  the  phone up  to 
the introduction of MTS in November. 
The trading platform is now electronic, and the quality of price information available during the day has 
increased considerably. 
To  consider  the  interests  of  small  investors,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  concluded  a  special 
agreement  with  a  number  of  Danish  banks  on  quoting  prices  for  small  trades  on  the  Copenhagen 
Stock  Exchange.  This  agreement  entered  into  force  recently  and  has  given  small  investors  the 
possibility to have their trades in government bonds executed directly on the Stock Exchange. 
As mentioned, the EU has for many years facilitated progress towards financial integration in order to 
create a single market for financial services. 
Recent years have shown that this development is well underway. However, the EU cannot plan such 
a development. Financial integration is driven by the markets. It is up to the authorities to respond to 
this development and if necessary adapt the rules to facilitate it.  
4 
 BIS Review 56/2003
