Willem F Duisenberg: Time to say goodbye 
Address  delivered  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the 
occasion of a special ECOFIN dinner to pay tribute to his leadership of the European Central Bank, 
Venice, 29 October 2003. 
 It is time to say goodbye. After more than five years of steering the ECB through the high seas, it is 
time for me to return to port and drop my anchor in more tranquil waters. 
Over the past few weeks, a lot of people have asked me how I feel about retiring. I have told them that 
my feelings are mixed. Half of me, Wim Duisenberg the private man, wishes that I had gone already. 
As you know, I had announced my intention to retire already last July. But for the other half of me, 
Wim Duisenberg the central banker, it will be more difficult letting go.  
Without a doubt, the last five years have been the pinnacle of my career. It has been an honour and a 
privilege to be the first President of the European Central Bank; to be bestowed the task of rearing, 
nurturing,  and  then  guarding  Europe’s  young  currency.  Europe  has  made  history  and  I  have  been 
given a place at the heart of it. I couldn’t ask for more than that. In years to come, history will be the 
judge of our success, or our failure. I hope that history will be kind.  
 The last few years have already been littered with outstanding achievements.  
It was not so long ago that most people doubted that the single currency would ever see the light of 
day. Then, when they saw that it would, they speculated that only a few countries would be able to 
join.  But  they  underestimated  the  resolve  of  European  governments  to  be  part  of  this  great  step 
forward in Europe’s history.  
Since then, we have witnessed the two changeovers; the introduction of the euro in book-entry form 
and then in the form of banknotes and coins. Both went smoothly, not because they were easy, but 
because  of  the  hard  work  of  all  involved.  And  of  course,  for  nearly  five  years  now,  we  have  had a 
single monetary policy conducted by the European Central Bank for the euro area. 
During  this  time,  the  Bank  has  not  been  without  its  critics.  I  have  not  been  without  my  critics.  The 
nature of that criticism depended on which newspapers you read. If you read the Anglo-Saxon press, 
then  we  paid  too  much  attention  to  monetary  growth.  It  seems  that  money  shouldn’t  matter  for 
monetary  policy.  If  you  read  the  German  press,  well  the  story  was  different.  Some  said  we 
communicated  too  little.  Others  said  we  communicated  too  much.  When  you  are  flanked  on  both 
sides, then you must be somewhere in the middle of the park. I conclude from this that we must have 
positioned  ourselves  more  or  less  right.  Indeed  over  time,  I  think  that  the  “ECB  watchers”  have 
increasingly come to understand and to respect our monetary policy. We have also become better at 
explaining it. It is an ongoing process. But things are on the right track.  
Most importantly, we have done our duty. We have maintained price stability. And we have done it in a 
pragmatic fashion, with a steady hand. There were many who feared that in the early years of EMU, 
the euro area economy might be a sacrificial lamb on the altar of credibility. According to this view, the 
ECB would raise interest rates unnecessarily to prove its anti-inflation credentials. The facts do not 
bear this out. A number of shocks have hit the euro area economy over the past few years. But we did 
not over-react. We held our nerve. Even in its infancy, the ECB showed itself to be a mature central 
bank. I am proud to have been its President these past five years. 
 I do not retire without some regret. There is a lot that I shall miss. I shall miss my colleagues in the 
Executive Board. I shall miss my colleagues in the Governing Council. I shall certainly miss the regular 
meetings and contacts I have with many of you, especially in the Eurogroup. 
I  have  to  say  that  I  was  touched  when  I  received  your  invitation  to  this  special  dinner.  And  I  am 
touched that so many of you have taken the trouble to travel to Venice to say goodbye. Since this is 
the first time that a President of the European Central Bank has retired, I have no way of knowing if 
this is just standard protocol, or if it is something more. I hope it is not just that you are eager, as you 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 1
said in your invitation, to “facilitate my departure”. I prefer to think that it reflects the warm relationship 
that has been built up among us during the past few years.  
I remember when it was first proposed to establish a Eurogroup, or “Euro-X” as it was then called. And 
I  remember  that  some  people  said  that  such  a  group  would  be  a  threat  to  the  ECB  and  its 
independence. Frankly speaking, I also had some doubts. I was proved wrong. As I have since said in 
public  on  various  occasions,  the  Eurogroup  meetings  represent  a  “golden  opportunity”;  a  golden 
opportunity for dialogue; a golden opportunity to be open, to be frank, to be honest, to criticise, and to 
listen. If you liken EMU to a house, then we are its family, and the Eurogroup is the dinner table. It is 
where the family members get together to tell each other what they are doing, to listen to each others 
advice, and learn to live together, as they must do, responsibly.  
Each member who joined this family did so on the understanding that his new house would be built on 
two stable pillars; not just a sound monetary policy, but also sound economic policies. They signed up 
to a package, a clear set of rules, including a Pact. This is a contract not just among governments but 
a contract with every single citizen of the euro area. It is on the basis of this contract that they have 
accepted the loss of their monetary sovereignty. And it is on this contract that the confidence in our 
new currency, not just of European citizens, but also of markets and of those on the outside looking in, 
is based. If you break this contract, this confidence will be lost.  
I acknowledge that these are not easy times, that conditions are adverse. But the difficulties that some 
of  you  now  face  were  not  entirely  unforeseen.  Not  unforeseen  when  the  Pact  was  signed.  Not 
unforeseen  when  the  conditions  were  more  favourable.  You  were  warned.  The  rules  were  not 
designed just for the good times, but also for the bad. The difficulties that some of you now face do not 
provide grounds for tinkering with the rules. They call for their implementation. The rules are there to 
help  not  to  hinder  efforts  to  put  the  house  in  order.  They  should  be  allowed  to  do  what  they  were 
designed  for.  Otherwise  I  fear  the  Pact  will  unravel,  the  contract  with  the  people  will  be  broken. 
Without the right foundations, you cannot build a stable house. 
I hear some of you say that the house needs more than stability. It also needs growth. Of course you 
are right. Stability and growth go hand in hand. But for growth there is also a strategy, a good one, 
agreed  in  Lisbon.  I  welcome  the  efforts  that  have  already  been  made  and  that  are  being  made  to 
implement this strategy. There has been some progress. I do not need to tell you that there is a lot still 
to be done. You have said so yourselves many times. These good words must be transformed into 
actions, and soon, because time is running out. It is no good having the right diagnosis if you don’t 
apply the medicine and cure the disease. 
 The challenges for EMU over the next five years are every bit as great as those already faced. I am 
fortunate enough not to have to deal with them. I have done my bit, as well as I could. This is where I 
“pass the buck”. Europe is making history. It now falls to my successor, Jean-Claude Trichet, and to 
you  to  do  your  best  to  make  sure  that  in  the  end  history  judges  our  new,  shared  currency  to  be  a 
success. I wish Jean-Claude well. I wish you well. I raise my glass to your success. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2003
