David Dodge: Low and predictable inflation and the performance of Canadian 
labour markets1 
Lecture  by  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Memorial  University  of 
Newfoundland, St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, 20 November 2003. 
The  references  can  be  found  at  the  end  of  the  speech  on  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  website: 
www.bankofcanada.ca. 
 The goal of Canadian monetary policy is to contribute to solid economic performance and rising living 
standards. The best way we can do this is by keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. This has 
important implications for labour market performance. 
Although inflation is now low, stable, and predictable, this has not always been the case. Indeed, in 
the  1970s,  inflation  was  high,  unstable,  and  unpredictable.  This  led  to  the  establishment  of  the 
Anti-Inflation Board (AIB) in 1975, where I worked as Research Director. 
Tonight, I would like to reflect on what we have learned since the AIB closed its doors almost 25 years 
ago to the day. I’ll begin with a brief discussion of the theoretical foundation for the role that inflation 
expectations play. Expectations are important for both price- and wage-setting, but I will concentrate 
on  the  wage-setting  aspects.  I  would  next  like  to  discuss  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  inflation-targeting 
framework, which serves to anchor inflation expectations. I will also address the issue that our inflation 
target  may  be  too  low  because  nominal  wages  are  downwardly  rigid.  And  I  will  discuss  Canada’s 
labour  market  performance  and  how  it  has  improved  substantially  with  the  change  in  our  monetary 
policy  framework  since  1991.  Finally,  I  will  say  a  few  words  about  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
today, and offer some brief concluding remarks. 
Inflation and the role of inflation expectations 
1. 
Let me begin by going back to the 1970s. When we started that decade, the inflation rate was around 
3 per cent. But it quickly rose to over 12 per cent in the span of three years. Not only was inflation 
rising, it had become more variable, creating uncertainty over the future rate of inflation.2 This made it 
difficult  for  workers  and  employers  to  decide  on  the  appropriate  rate  of  inflation  to  incorporate  into 
wage  settlements.  In  this  environment,  it  was  not  surprising  that  some  workers  demanded  wage 
increases,  both  as  compensation  for  past  inflation  and  as  a  precaution  against  future  inflation.  And 
many employers granted them. When they did not, workers often went on strike. On average, in the 
1970s, over seven million person-days were lost to strikes each year. This was an enormous loss of 
output.  High  and  variable  inflation  also  triggered  large  wage  settlements.  This  fuelled  inflation 
expectations and contributed to both a wage-price spiral and a wage-wage spiral.3 
In  the  economics  literature  of  the  day,  there  was  a  lot  of  confusion  over  the  role  that  inflation 
expectations  play  in  the  wage-formation  process.  The  literature  stressed  that  workers  and  unions 
sought  to  catch  up  with  inflation  that  had  already  occurred.  But  against  this  background,  Milton 
Friedman  argued  that  forward-looking  expectations  were  more  important  in  wage  bargaining  than 
catching  up  with  past  inflation.  In  particular,  he  stressed  that  workers  bargain  over  real,  and  not 
nominal, wages. When signing a new contract, workers demand higher wages if they expect prices to 
increase over the life of the contract so as to preserve their real wages. 
                                                      
1 
The oral presentation by Governor Dodge at Memorial University is an abridged version of this paper. The Governor would like to 
thank Robert Fay, Assistant Chief, Research Department, Bank of Canada, for his contribution to this paper. 
2  Variability is measured as the standard deviation. 
3  At the time, workers and unions were pushing for wage increases to compensate them for the risk of higher inflation over the life of 
their contracts. But employers in some sectors were also willing to offer high wage increases. The public sector, for example, saw 
larger revenues with rising inflation. And some firms in the private sector experienced a boost in profits generated by inflation and 
were therefore willing to grant relatively large wage increases. In some cases, this led workers and unions to demand similarly large 
wage increases, irrespective of the conditions in their particular sector. 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 1
Thus, he argued that it is not the recently observed rate of inflation, but rather the expected rate of 
inflation  that  plays  a  prominent  role  in  wage-setting.  But  with  inflation  rising  and  becoming  more 
variable, there was considerable uncertainty over what the future rate of inflation would be. Indeed, 
high and variable inflation meant that there was no anchor for inflation expectations, and this lack of 
an anchor led to considerable turbulence in wage-setting.4 
Although contractionary macroeconomic policies were required to lower the double-digit inflation rate, 
such policies operate with a lag and would have resulted in higher levels of unemployment during the 
transition period. One train of thought in the early to mid-1970s was that temporary wage and price 
controls could alleviate the negative impact on unemployment by ensuring that, over a period of time, 
wage- and price-setting behaviour would become consistent with the more restrictive macroeconomic 
policies. 
The Anti-Inflation Board was therefore established to try to anchor inflation expectations through wage 
and price controls. The objective was to ensure that wage growth was in line with a set of targets for 
inflation of 8, 6, and 4 per cent over a 3-year period. This was done with the assumption that monetary 
and fiscal policy would be set to be consistent with such a result.5 
The imposition of wage and price controls was very controversial, to say the least. One well-known 
academic even described them as “how to do a lot of harm by trying to do a little good.”6 There were 
three principal arguments against the use of controls. The first was that they would create distortions 
in  the  economy  and  that  the  longer  the  controls  were  in  place,  the  greater  these  distortions  would 
grow. The second was that controls are very difficult and costly to administer. Third, there was doubt 
as to whether the controls could really engineer a permanent reduction in inflation. In particular, would 
policy-makers place too much emphasis on controls and not enough on supporting macroeconomic 
and structural policies? 
The empirical evidence that followed suggested that the controls were responsible for a reduction of 
about 2 to 3 percentage points in wage increases.7 Ultimately, however, neither monetary nor fiscal 
policy  was  restrictive  enough  to  maintain  a  lower  rate  of  inflation,  although,  at  the  time,  monetary 
policy was thought to be sufficiently tight. Subsequent research at the Bank, however, showed that the 
links between movements in the narrow monetary aggregate M1 and changes in prices were not as 
close in the short run as had been expected. And the size of the short-run changes in interest rates 
required to keep the money stock within its target band were not enough to have much of an impact 
on real output or prices.8 
The fact that the link between any monetary aggregate and inflation did not prove to be very tight over 
time led the Bank to suggest in 1988 that it should focus directly on price stability as the anchor for 
monetary  policy.9  This  led  to  the  introduction  of  the  inflation-targeting  framework  in  1991,  one 
important objective of which is the anchoring of inflation expectations. 
We did this because we had learned that, once inflation expectations are anchored, they contribute to 
more stable output and employment growth, allowing for more durable gains in real income over time. 
Inflation targeting and the behaviour of inflation 
2. 
In February 1991, the Bank and the Government of Canada jointly announced a series of inflation-
reduction targets. 
                                                      
4 
In addition, the economy was buffeted by shocks that had not been seen before. For example, the economy was hit by adverse 
oil-price shocks that fed directly into inflation expectations in the absence of a clear nominal anchor for monetary policy. And these 
shocks, combined with other structural changes, made it difficult for workers and employers to judge how to respond. 
For an overview of the causes of inflation, as well as the goals of the AIB, see Dodge (1976). 
Lipsey (1977). 
Thiessen (2000). In other words, the interest rate elasticity of M1 demand was too high. In the second half of the 1970s, the nominal 
anchor  for  monetary  policy  was  a  series  of  target  ranges  for  growth  in  M1.  These  were  abandoned  in  the  early  1980s  as  the 
relationship between movements in the narrow money aggregate and changes in nominal spending broke down. Another problem 
with  using  the  monetary  aggregate  M1  as  the  target  for  monetary  policy  was  the uncertain  impact  of  financial  innovation,  which 
weakened the relationship between M1 and other macroeconomic variables. 
9  Crow (1988). 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2003
5 
6 
7  Auld et al (1979). 
8 
These targets were aimed at gradually bringing the 12-month rate of inflation down to 2 per cent, the 
midpoint  of  the  inflation-control  target  range,  by  December  1995.  Given  the  empirical  evidence  for 
Canada, which showed that the appropriate horizon for aiming at an inflation target was about 1½ to 
2 years, the first formal target was set for December 1992 at a rate of 3 per cent (plus or minus 1 per 
cent). Since that initial agreement, the inflation target has been extended three times, with the latest 
agreement covering the period to the end of 2006. In each case, the midpoint of the inflation-control 
target range has been maintained at 2 per cent. 
The measure of prices chosen for the target was the consumer price index (CPI). This index is well 
understood  by  workers,  unions,  and  employers,  partly  because  of  its  use  in  cost-of-living  (COLA) 
agreements. The operational guide for the Bank, however, is core inflation.10 The reason for using a 
core inflation measure is to focus on the underlying trend in inflation on which monetary policy can 
have an effect. Given the lags between monetary policy actions and their impact on inflation, shocks 
that are expected to dissipate within that time frame are generally outside the scope of central bank 
action, unless such shocks have an impact on inflation expectations. 
Since the adoption of inflation targeting, the inflation rate has fallen significantly. Indeed, by January 
1992, inflation was already close to 2 per cent, down from its average of over 5 per cent between 1988 
and 1991. Although at times it has approached the boundaries of the range, and exceeded it earlier 
this year, over the medium term, the average inflation rate has remained around 2 per cent. Indeed, 
over the six-year period from 1996 to 2002, it was just under 2 per cent. Moreover, not only has the 
inflation rate fallen, it has become more stable. In other words, movements away from the target have 
not been persistent. When inflation has moved away from the midpoint, it has shifted back towards 
2 per cent as the shocks have worn off. 
Not surprisingly, the Bank has undertaken considerable research to better understand the dynamics of 
inflation. One strand of this research has examined the persistence of inflation by allowing for potential 
changes in inflation regimes.11 The results show that the inflation process in Canada can be divided 
into three distinct regimes: one with extremely high persistence and high inflation rates, one with fairly 
low persistence and moderate inflation rates, and one with low persistence and low inflation rates. In 
the first regime, which prevailed in the 1970s and early 1980s, when inflation moved up, it tended to 
stay  up.  Since  that  time,  the  economy  has  moved  into  the  second  and  third  regimes,  with  inflation 
becoming much less persistent. Indeed, persistence fell considerably over the 1980s and essentially 
disappeared in the late 1990s.12 
This decline in the persistence of inflation was the result of the change in the monetary policy regime 
that  has  fostered  more  forward-looking  inflation  expectations.  Traditional  analysis  of  the  inflation-
unemployment trade-off using the Phillips curve, however, has typically modelled inflation expectations 
as the weighted sum of past lags of inflation.13 More recent research has therefore moved towards 
embedding  forward-looking  expectations  in  this  analysis.  Cross-country  analysis  covering  OECD 
inflation-targeting countries indicates that, since the adoption of the targets, inflation expectations have 
become  more  forward-looking,  and  that  they  are  anchored  around  the  official  targets.14  In  our  own 
empirical  research  for  Canada,  we  have  also  found  that  expectations  have  become  more  forward 
looking.15 
                                                      
10  When the targets were first introduced, core inflation was defined as the CPI excluding food and energy prices and the effects of 
changes in indirect taxes on the remaining CPI components. We now have a more refined measure that excludes only the eight 
most volatile elements of the index as well as the effects of changes in indirect taxes on the remaining components. One reason for 
moving to the new measure of core inflation was that it is a better predictor of future inflation than the previous measure (Macklem 
2001). 
11  Ricketts and Rose (1995), Demers (2003). 
12  St-Amant and Tessier (1998) find that this has also been the case in other major inflation-targeting and non-targeting countries. 
13  The  restriction  that  these  lags  sum  to  one  is  usually  imposed  so  that  there  is  no  long-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and 
unemployment. 
14  Clifton, Leon and Wong (2001). 
15  Khalaf and Kichian (2003). Because traditional Phillips curves are reduced-form equations, changes in the monetary policy regime 
can undermine their use for policy purposes (the Lucas Critique). Research at the Bank has therefore also examined whether the 
New Keynesian Phillips curve adequately represents inflation dynamics in Canada. Guay, Luger and Zhu (2002) have found that this 
is not the case, although their work highlights the importance of including forward-looking expectations in the analysis. Work has 
also been undertaken on estimating the so-called sticky information Phillips curve based on the premise that firms change prices 
slowly because of the costs of acquiring new information relevant to that decision. See Khan and Zhu (2002). 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 3
Another fact about the inflation process in Canada is that inflation has become less uncertain - in other 
words,  more  predictable.  After  the  oil-price  shocks  of  the  1970s,  inflation  variability  rose  sharply. 
Although it fell during the years when the AIB was in operation, it rose again in the 1980s. However, 
between  the  1980s  and  the  latter  part  of  the  1990s  it  dropped  almost  fourfold.16  This  reduction  in 
inflation variability linked to the low-inflation environment allows people to take a longer-term view with 
respect to their planning, which leads to a better allocation of economic and financial resources. 
In  Canada,  policy  credibility  has  clearly  increased  over  time.  Work  carried  out  using  data  to  the 
mid-1990s suggested that, while central bank credibility had improved in inflation-targeting countries, it 
was  difficult  to  say  whether  explicit  inflation  targets  had  made  any  additional  contribution  to  that 
credibility.17 More recent evidence suggests that the inflation target has, in fact, played an important 
role in enhancing credibility. For example, since the mid-1990s, long-term inflation expectations have 
fallen close to the midpoint of the target range, which is also close to the mean of inflation.18 
In Canada, expectations of forecasters and businesses began to fall in line with the targets soon after 
they  were  introduced.19  At  first,  this  was  for  expectations  at  the  2-year  horizon.  Gradually,  this 
lengthened  to  6  to  10  years.  By  1997,  long-term  expectations  of  inflation  in  financial  markets,  as 
expressed  by  the  difference  between  30-year  yields  on  conventional  and  index-linked  bonds,  had 
fallen in line with the 2 per cent target midpoint. They have been firmly anchored at that level ever 
since, despite the various shocks that have hit the Canadian economy. This is in strong contrast to 
earlier  periods  in  our  history  when  future  expectations  had  been  fairly  tightly  linked  to  recently 
observed  inflation  rates.20  And  this  change  in  behaviour  is  not  because  there  have  been  fewer 
economic shocks. In fact, over the past few years, we have witnessed economic crises in Asia and 
Russia, oil-price shocks, and the tragic events of 11 September 2001 in the United States. Despite all 
of  this,  inflation  expectations  have  remained  well  anchored.  This  is  in  absolute  contrast  to  earlier 
periods.  And  it  points  to  the  important  role  that  monetary  policy  plays  in  anchoring  inflation 
expectations. 
In  general,  there  is  real  evidence  to  support  the  argument  that,  with  the  inflation  target  becoming 
increasingly credible, the whole nature of the inflation process has changed. The short-run response of 
inflation  to  measures  of  excess  demand  and  supply  appears  to  have  fallen.  And  similarly,  the 
response of inflation to relative price shocks, such as changes in the exchange rate and energy prices, 
also  seems  to  have  declined.  These  changes  have  had  the  effect  of  reinforcing  the  stability  of  the 
inflation  process  and,  therefore,  of  inflation  itself.  And  this,  in  turn,  has  produced  a  more  stable 
macroeconomic environment. 
Moreover, by keeping average rates of inflation close to the inflation target, and by indicating that the 
Bank will act symmetrically to shocks that drive inflation away from the target in either direction, we 
have  been  able  to  contain  inflation  expectations.  Indeed,  under  a  credible  monetary  regime,  there 
should be fewer forecasting errors in the bargaining process, since uncertainty about inflation is low. 
Thus,  there  is  less  need  for  workers  to  demand  additional  wage  increases  to  protect  themselves 
against the risk of unexpectedly high future inflation - increases that can contribute to a wage-price 
spiral. Nor are employers as likely to offer such increases. Similarly, both employers and workers can 
look through periods when inflation is below the target. Thus, wage-setting becomes focused on actual 
developments in the particular sector. And workers and unions are able to place greater emphasis on 
real factors, such as productivity, that will help to boost income and living standards. 
Inflation targeting: is the target set too low? 
3. 
Now I would like to turn to concerns by some analysts that the level of the inflation target is set too 
low. 
                                                      
16  This is measured by the standard deviation of inflation, which fell from about 3 in the 1980s to 0.7 in the last part of the 1990s. 
17  Johnson (1997). 
18 
In addition, long-term inflation expectations would appear to be better anchored in Canada than in the United States. See Kozicki 
and Tinsley (2002). 
19  Perrier and Amano (2000). 
20  Dodge (2002a). 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2003
Inflation targets, whether in Canada or elsewhere, have typically not been set at zero. One argument 
for excluding zero is that there is downward rigidity in nominal wages. More specifically, it says that a 
little  inflation  is  needed  to  “grease  the  wheels”  of  the  labour  market  because  nominal  wages  are 
downwardly rigid. Thus, it is argued that the target for the inflation rate should be in the 2 to 4 per cent 
range to facilitate adjustments in the real wage.21 You will recall that, in Canada, the target range is set 
at 1 to 3 per cent. 
One reason behind this argument is the belief that inflation allows firms to provide real wage increases 
to  workers  whose  productivity  is  rising,  while  reducing  real  wages  to  less-productive  staff  without 
having to cut nominal wages.22 Therefore, for firms to achieve the desired adjustment in real wages in 
the face of adverse demand shocks, inflation would have to be above zero. Otherwise, unemployment 
would rise, perhaps at an increasing rate, as inflation approaches zero, because firms would have to 
resort to layoffs to keep wage bills at their desired level. 
Why might nominal wages be downwardly rigid? This could result from money illusion - for example, 
workers  refusing  to  accept  nominal  wage  cuts  when,  in  fact,  they  may  have  suffered  a  similar 
reduction in real wages in the past because of inflation. Firms might also be reluctant to cut nominal 
wages because of notions of fairness. They might also have concerns that such cuts would adversely 
affect the quality of candidates they seek to attract, or lead to higher quit rates. 
On the face of it, downward nominal wage rigidity would seem to have little relevance for Canada.23 As 
I will discuss in more detail later, in the late 1990s, the unemployment rate fell sharply even though 
inflation had stabilized around 2 per cent. 
The question is, how far above zero should the inflation target be set? This is an empirical question 
about how important downward nominal wage rigidity is in practice. Is there evidence that there is so 
much resistance to nominal wage cuts in Canada that our inflation target of 2 per cent is too low? 
In  the  period  leading  up  to  the  May  2001  renewal  of  the  latest  inflation  target,  the  Bank  undertook 
considerable research using a variety of tools and addressing a number of hypotheses to determine 
the extent of nominal wage rigidity in Canada.24 
One way to examine the likely impact of downward nominal wage rigidity is to estimate what the wage 
distribution would look like in the absence of rigidity. On balance, this line of research demonstrates 
that  downward  nominal  wage  rigidity  has  not  been  an  important  feature  of  the  Canadian  labour 
market.  Relatively  more  wage  freezes  do  occur  at  low  inflation  rates,  but  this  would  be  expected 
anyway, since the mean of the wage-change distribution varies with the rate of inflation. Econometric 
estimates suggest that the net effect of downward nominal wage rigidity on wage growth was in the 
range of only 0.07 to 0.18 per cent in the unionized private sector in the 1990s.25 
It is important to note that what might appear to be downward nominal wage rigidity could also be a 
form of menu costs. By this, I mean the fixed costs associated with changing pay scales, a task that 
firms may be reluctant to undertake unless a large wage adjustment is required.26 The estimates of 
rigidity that I just mentioned incorporate these effects. 
Another strand of research has examined the employment effects of downward nominal wage rigidity 
in Canada. There are relatively few papers on this subject. Moreover, estimates of the employment 
impact tend to be sensitive to model specifications, which are typically reduced-form equations linking 
changes  in  employment growth  to changes  in  output  growth  and  to a  variable  that  measures wage 
cuts or freezes. On balance, however, these studies do not support a significant employment impact.27 
                                                      
21  Fortin (1996), Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (1996), Fortin, Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (2002). 
22  Tobin (1972). 
23  Thiessen (1996). 
24  See  Technical  Background  Document  1  from  the  renewal  of  the  inflation-control  target  (May  2001).  This  can  be  found  at 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/press/annexe1.pdf. 
25  Crawford (2001), Crawford and Wright (2001). 
26 
27  Simpson, Cameron and Hum (1998) find relatively large effects, but Farès and Hogan (2000) and Faruqui (2000) show that, 
In addition, there are few small wage changes (up or down) in the data. 
once their model is adjusted for possible endogeneity between wage freezes and output growth, the impact is insignificant. 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 5
Most  of  the  data  used  in  the  research  I  have  cited  come  from  wage  settlements  in  the  unionized 
sector, which begs the question as to whether the results would hold more generally for all workers in 
the  economy.  Evidence  suggests  that  the  wage-settlements  data  tend  to  overstate  the  amount  of 
nominal wage rigidity in the economy, since base wage rates for workers outside the unionized sector 
are typically more flexible.28 For example, small firms tend to have more flexible pay practices, while 
variable  compensation,  including  adjustments  to  non-wage  benefits,  also  allows  for  more  nominal 
wage flexibility. 
In addition to using micro-level data to examine downward nominal wage rigidity, aggregate data can 
also be used to examine the effect of unemployment or the output gap on inflation - in other words, the 
slope  of  the  Phillips  curve.  If  downward  nominal  wage  rigidity  exists,  then  the  slope  of  the  Phillips 
curve should have become flatter in the period of excess supply during the low-inflation period of the 
1990s. Evidence from this research, however, does not support this hypothesis.29 
Another line of argument that has been tested using aggregate data has been referred to as “near-
rational” wage setting. It suggests that workers and firms might not worry as much about inflation when 
it is at low levels and, therefore, do not fully incorporate small changes in inflation into their inflation 
expectations.30 Supporters of this line of reasoning argue that unemployment can be sustained below 
the equilibrium rate over a range of low and moderate rates of inflation. Thus, there is some positive 
inflation rate that should be chosen as the target. 
One problem with this argument is that it is difficult to imagine why agents would continuously ignore 
the  negative  impact  of  low  inflation.31  Although  the  cost  might  be  small  in  a  single  period,  it  would 
clearly accumulate over time, which should induce them to become fully rational in their wage- and 
price-setting.  There  is  little  Canadian  evidence  in  this  area.  That  which  exists,  however,  suggests 
implausibly high estimates of near-rational behaviour when inflation is at 3 per cent.32 
In  summary,  there  is  little  substantive  evidence  to  suggest  that  downward  nominal  wage  rigidity  or 
near-rationality in wage-setting impedes appropriate adjustment at our currently targeted inflation rate 
of 2 per cent. But equally, there is little substantive evidence to suggest that a target lower than 2 per 
cent  would  lead  to  a  measurable  improvement  in  economic  behaviour.  Thus,  because  inflation 
expectations have become well anchored around 2 per cent, maintaining the 2 per cent target was 
judged to be appropriate.33 
Canadian labour market performance 
4. 
In this part of my lecture, I would like to discuss how the labour market functions better than it did a 
decade ago and, indeed, better than when the AIB was wrapped up in 1978. 
First: As I said, inflation has become low, stable, and predictable. The impact of this development can 
be seen in the path of nominal wages.34 Indeed, the growth in nominal wages has also slowed, along 
with  falling  inflation.  Since  the  introduction  of  the  inflation  target, average  annual  growth  in  nominal 
wages has been about 4 per cent, down from the approximately 14 per cent average growth recorded 
in the 1970s and the 8 per cent witnessed in the 1980s.35 
                                                      
28  Crawford and Harrison (1997). 
29  Farès and Lemieux (2000). 
30  Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (2000). 
31  O’Reilly (1998). 
32  Fortin and Dumont (2001). Their results imply that less than 50 per cent of agents take inflation into account when it is near 3 per 
cent. 
33  See Technical Background Document 1 from the renewal of the inflation-control target (May 2001). 
34  The relationship between movements in nominal wages and prices leads inevitably to the question of the direction of causality. The 
nature of these dynamics has been a source of debate over the years. In the 1970s, the prevailing view was that nominal wage 
inflation led to price inflation, largely because of wage “catch up”; i.e., workers and unions demanding additional wage increases to 
compensate them for unexpected inflation and to match settlements in other sectors of the economy, such as the public sector. In 
this context, the setting of wage guidelines by the Anti-Inflation Board was seen as instrumental in controlling inflation. Since then, 
our research suggests that causality tends to run - at least primarily - from prices to wages, and not the reverse. See Cozier (1992). 
35  These numbers refer to average annual growth in nominal wages, salaries, and supplementary labour income from the System of 
National Accounts over the periods 1971-1980, 1981-1990, and 1991-2000. 
6 
 BIS Review 51/2003
In addition, the distribution of wage changes has narrowed as inflation has become more predictable. 
There  are  at  least  a  couple  of  reasons  why  this  might  be  the  case.  First,  research  points  to  a 
significant  link  between  higher  inflation  and  greater  inflation  uncertainty.  Where  there  is  increased 
uncertainty  about  inflation,  firms  and  workers  may  set  inflation  adjustments  incorrectly,  creating 
relatively  more  dispersion  in  wage  changes.36  Thus,  as  uncertainty  about  inflation  falls  in  line  with 
declining inflation, so should the dispersion around average wage changes. I will have more to say on 
inflation uncertainty in a few moments. Second, a lower cross-sectional variation in wage settlements 
could  arise  because  downward  nominal  wage  rigidity  would  impose  a  floor  on  the  distribution.  As  I 
have already discussed, this seems unlikely to have had a significant impact in Canada. 
By contrast, others have argued that the variability of relative wage changes decreases when inflation 
rates accelerate. Essentially, the argument here is that higher inflation leads to a greater demand for 
indexed wage contracts - either explicitly through COLA clauses or implicitly when setting wages with 
employers - to protect workers from unexpected increases in inflation.37 
Clearly,  what  actually  happens  to  the  dispersion  of  wage  settlements  when  inflation  and  inflation 
uncertainty decline is an empirical proposition. A stylized fact of the Canadian economy is that, in the 
unionized  private  sector,  the  variance  in  wage  settlements  fell  by  about  two-thirds  as  inflation 
declined.38 Although some have suggested that this could be because of greater downward nominal 
wage rigidity, this is not the case. We know this because the variability of wage changes above the 
median  has  also  fallen  significantly.  Moreover,  it  has  become  apparent  that  wages  no  longer  react 
quickly  to  large  changes  in  relative  prices  such  as  those  generated  by  oil-price  shocks  or,  more 
recently,  by  auto  insurance  premiums.  This  is  a  very  important  contribution  to  labour  market 
performance  in  Canada  because  it  suggests  that  relative  wages  tend  to  better  reflect  demand  and 
supply conditions in particular markets. There is, however, very little research in this area, and it is one 
where more in-depth analysis would be useful. 
Second: Another development in the 1990s was the relatively sharp increase in the average duration 
of  labour  contracts  in  the  private  unionized  sector  of  the  economy.  Compared  with  the  1980s,  the 
average duration increased by almost 10 months.39 
Reduced inflation uncertainty is one explanation for this. As the variability of inflation has fallen, this 
has likely lowered the amount of uncertainty in the economy and has led to labour contracts that are 
longer in duration. Theoretical work in the late 1970s and early 1980s showed that lower uncertainty 
about inflation should result in longer contracts.40 Empirical evidence for Canada gathered in the early 
1980s was consistent with this theoretical work.41 
Using several measures of inflation uncertainty, researchers at the Bank of Canada have confirmed a 
robust  negative  relationship  between  inflation  uncertainty  and  the  duration  of union contracts  in  the 
private  sector.42  In  other  words,  as  uncertainty  about  inflation  has  fallen,  the  duration  of  labour 
contracts  has  lengthened.  Indeed,  it  has  been  estimated  that  each  percentage  point  decrease  in 
inflation  uncertainty  increases  contract  length  by  about  two  months.43  One  positive  implication  of 
                                                      
36  Groshen and Schweitzer (1999). 
37  Hammermesh (1986). 
38  Crawford (2001). In the early 1980s, the annual standard deviation of wage settlements in the private sector was just over 3 per 
cent.  This  fell  to  about  1  per  cent  in  the  year  2000.  The  data  are  drawn  from  a  database  maintained  by  Human  Resources 
Development Canada, which contains information on agreements signed in the unionized sector of the economy. Note that wage 
settlements  in  the  public  sector  are  excluded  from  the  numbers  presented  in  the  text.  Data  in  this  sector  are  distorted  by  wage 
freezes in the 1990s as governments at various levels sought to control budget deficits. 
In 1980, average duration across all contracts in the private sector was approximately 27 months. In 2001, it was about 36 months. 
39 
40  Gray (1978), Canzoneri (1980). 
41  Since  then,  advances  in  econometric  techniques  have  allowed  researchers  to  better  specify  and  construct  uncertainty 
variables and thus to measure the impact of inflation uncertainty on contract duration. For example, early empirical work by 
Christofides and Wilton (1983) used a rolling regression technique to calculate inflation uncertainty. New techniques, such 
as  autoregressive  conditional  heteroscedasticity  (ARCH)  models,  now  allow  researchers  to  better  construct  uncertainty 
variables. 
42  Fay and Lavoie (2002). 
43  This refers to the uncertainty measure derived from an ARCH model, and expressed in terms of the standard deviation of 
inflation uncertainty. Other measures of inflation uncertainty give different results. 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 7
longer labour contracts is a savings in the resources dedicated to negotiation, or in other words, lower 
transactions costs. 
Another interesting finding is that the proportion of COLA clauses in private sector contracts has not 
changed  much  over  the  last  decade,  even  though  contract  duration  has  increased.44  Once  unions 
have  bargained  for  such  clauses,  they  appear  reluctant  to  give  them  up,  even  if  they  are  seldom 
triggered. 
Unions, of course, bargain for more than just wages and cost-of-living agreements. In the early 1990s, 
they  became  more  preoccupied  with  job  security  for  their  members  in  the  face  of  weak  aggregate 
demand, increased contracting out, and the move towards hiring temporary staff as employers sought 
to contain costs.45 Thus, uncertainty over developments in the real side of the economy - which I shall 
refer  to  as  real  uncertainty  -  may  have  become  more  prominent  at  that  time.  Work  at  the  Bank, 
however,  finds  no  empirical  support  for  the  proposition  that  this  type  of  uncertainty  affects  contract 
length.46 
Third: Another concrete benefit of low, stable, and predictable inflation has been less disagreement 
over  future  inflation,  leading  to  fewer  strikes  and,  therefore,  lower  output  losses.  The  number  of 
person-days lost to strikes peaked in the early to mid-1970s when inflation was at double-digit levels 
and uncertainty was high. Since then, the number of days lost has trended down. Between the 1970s 
and 1980s, the number of days lost to strikes fell by about one-third. In the 1990s, it declined again by 
over 50 per cent relative to the previous decade. This represents a clear gain for workers and, indeed, 
for all Canadians. 
Fourth,  and  very  importantly:  greater  stability  has  also  been  observed  in  output  growth.47  Several 
reasons  have  been  put  forward  for  this,  including  better  inventory  management.  The  conduct  of 
monetary policy has certainly been an important factor. By responding promptly and symmetrically to 
demand shocks, and by focusing on the underlying trend of inflation - thus ignoring temporary inflation 
shocks unless they feed into inflation expectations - monetary policy will produce greater stability in 
output growth. 
Alongside greater stability in output growth, there has been more stable employment growth and less 
volatility in the unemployment rate.48 On the margin, other factors may have been at play as well. For 
example, there is evidence that the use of variable forms of compensation has increased over time.49 
Variable compensation programs allow firms to adjust pay in the face of adverse shocks, rather than 
resorting  to  layoffs.  This  contributes  to  greater  employment  stability.  It  is  also  worth  noting  that 
changes in compensation practices that link individual performance to that of the firm also move in the 
direction of bolstering productivity growth.50 
Greater  stability  in  output  growth  has  paved  the  way  for  a  labour  market  with  rising  labour  force 
participation rates, higher employment/population ratios and lower unemployment rates. Indeed, both 
Canada’s  participation  rate  and  the  employment/population  ratio  hit  record  high  levels  this  year. 
Moreover, this rising employment/population ratio has helped to boost our standard of living, and is a 
reflection of just how well the labour market is functioning. Newfoundland has also seen its aggregate 
                                                      
44 
In the 1980s, on average, 32 per cent of private sector contracts contained COLA clauses. This fell to an average of 25 per cent 
over the 1990s. In contrast to the private sector, the incidence of COLA clauses in public sector agreements fell substantially in the 
early part of the 1990s, after which it levelled off in the 1 to 7 per cent range. 
45  One indicator of the importance of labour unions is union density - the number of workers who are union members. This measure 
suggests that the importance of unions has not changed substantially. Trade union density over the 1980s averaged about 36 per 
cent in Canada. The average over the 1990s was only slightly lower, although it did begin to fall after 1997, closing the decade at 
around 33 per cent. 
46  Fay and Lavoie (2002). See also Murphy (2000), Rich and Tracy (2000), and Wallace (2001) for evidence in the United States. 
47  Debs (2001). 
48  This is measured as the standard deviation of each variable in the 1980s and 1990s. 
49  Crawford  and  Harrison  (1997).  The  Conference  Board  of  Canada  (2002)  also  notes  that  while  base  pay  represents  the  main 
element of compensation, it has made up a smaller percentage of total compensation over the past few years. In fact, 87 per cent of 
Canadian organizations had one or more types of variable pay plans in place in 2002, with cash bonuses being the most common 
type of short-term incentive plan. Stock options were the most common type of long-term incentive. 
50  Lebow et al (1999). 
8 
 BIS Review 51/2003
labour force participation rate and employment/population ratio rise to record levels, although they still 
remain below the national average. 
The current situation is in contrast to that of the late 1980s and early 1990s when Canada faced a 
number of  economic challenges  that  required  painful  policy  action  and  difficult adjustments. Among 
these, inflation had to be lowered and public sector deficits had to be tamed. I discussed the linkages 
between monetary and fiscal policy elsewhere.51 Overall, an extraordinary effort was made to get the 
macroeconomic framework - that is, both monetary and fiscal policies - right, and we are now reaping 
the benefits of those efforts. 
To be sure, a number of other difficult policy choices have also contributed to better labour market 
performance,  although  it  is  difficult  to  isolate  the  specific  contribution  of  each  one  of  them.  For 
example,  there  were  reforms  to  labour  market  institutions  such  as  changes  to  the  Unemployment 
Insurance  program.  Trade  has  also  been  opened  up  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  markets,  namely 
through the FTA and NAFTA. The main point here is that all of these policies have worked in the same 
direction - towards improved labour market performance. 
Now  let  me  turn  to  prospects  for  income  growth.52  An  important  determinant  of  aggregate  income 
growth is labour-productivity growth. On an economy-wide basis, productivity growth averaged about 
1.4  per  cent  between  1970  and  1997.  It  then  picked  up,  accelerating  to  1.8  per  cent,  on  average, 
between  1997  and  2002.  This  is still  well  below  that  in  the  United  States,  but  the  acceleration  is  a 
promising  sign. 
in 
communications technologies in the late 1990s, combined with sound economic policies, will likely see 
productivity gains remain strong in the near and medium term. Furthermore, as I discussed earlier, the 
Bank of Canada plays an important role here by keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable, which is 
conducive to innovation, risk-taking, and investment.53 
in  machinery  and  equipment  as  well  as 
increased  investment 
Indeed, 
The conduct of monetary policy 
5. 
But keeping inflation at the 2 per cent target is not an easy task. And there are times when inflation 
temporarily moves away from  the  target  because of  unexpected  developments  and shocks.  Recent 
experience provides a case in point. 
In early 2003, inflation was well above the 2 per cent target, and short-term inflation expectations had 
edged up. Although inflation was being pushed up by special factors, such as sharply higher oil prices 
and  auto  insurance  premiums,  there  were  also  signs  that  strong  domestic  demand  was  working  to 
broaden price pressures. Since then, however, the economy has weakened more than expected, and 
core  inflation  has  fallen  to  1.8  per  cent.  And  virtually  all  measures  of  inflation  expectations  have 
decreased.  Although  we  at  the  Bank  had  expected  core  inflation  to  ease,  several  unforeseen 
developments have caused this to occur sooner, and to be more pronounced, than we projected last 
April. These have included a slightly faster easing in pressures from insurance premiums and price 
discounting  in  certain  service  industries  because  of  SARS.  As  well,  the  U.S.  dollar  has  fallen 
substantially,  adding  to  the  recent  weakness  in  goods  prices  in  Canada.  The  average  value  of  the 
Canadian  dollar  in  terms  of  the  U.S.  currency  in  recent  months  represents  a  sharp  increase  from 
69 cents in April. 
Clearly,  the  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  is  an  important  factor  that  we  at  the  Bank  are 
considering carefully as we evaluate the economic situation and the risks attached to our outlook. At 
the  same  time,  we  continue  to  assess  other  developments,  notably  a  somewhat  stronger-than-
expected recovery in world demand. 
                                                      
51  Dodge (1998, 2002b). 
52  One  way  to  approach  this  topic  is  to  examine  the  share  of  labour  in  national  income.  Since  the  late  1970s,  it  has  shown  no 
observable trend, hovering around 64 per cent. The labour share of income rose sharply in the early 1990s when profits fell during 
the recession and payroll taxes rose. After this period, profits rose, and the labour share declined. When the share of labour income 
in GDP is unchanged, we would expect growth in labour income to be close to the projected growth in nominal GDP. A general rule 
of thumb would be for nominal GDP to increase by roughly 5 per cent per year, on average, over the medium term - 2 per cent from 
inflation and 3 per cent from average potential output growth. This 5 per cent growth in labour income can be roughly divided into 
1 per cent growth in labour input (person-hours) and 4 per cent growth in labour compensation per person-hour. See Longworth 
(2003). 
53  Dodge (2002c). 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 9
In this context, if it looked as though the appreciation of the Canadian dollar would more than offset 
the effects of stronger world demand, or that world demand was weakening, we would act to stimulate 
domestic  demand  with  the  intent  of  returning  inflation  to  the  2  per  cent  target  over  the  next  18  to 
24 months. Such action would take the form of lowering interest rates. As I said in my recent testimony 
before  the  Senate  Banking,  Trade  and  Commerce  Committee,  the  Bank  continues  to  assess  the 
implications of all past developments - domestic and external - for output and inflation in Canada. 
This kind of analysis and the typically difficult assessment of future developments are what we at the 
Bank have to consider at each monetary policy decision date. 
Concluding thoughts 
6. 
Let  me  now  conclude.  Changes  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  as  well  as  increased 
emphasis on structural policies, have worked together to produce a better-functioning labour market in 
Canada. 
The Bank’s particular contribution has been to anchor inflation expectations at the 2 per cent target. 
Because our monetary policy framework reduces uncertainty about inflation, it helps both firms and 
workers  make  better  planning  decisions.  Thus,  wage  bargaining  can  be  concluded  by  focusing  on 
factors  that  are  relevant  to  wage-setting,  such  as  productivity  growth,  without  the  noise  of  variable 
inflation. This, in turn, leads to a more efficient bargaining process with lower transactions costs and 
less loss of output,54 as well as to a more productive allocation of labour in the economy. 
This  has  contributed  to  an  economic  environment  where  there  are  rising  employment/population 
ratios, higher participation rates, and lower unemployment rates. 
                                                     
 
54  Longworth (2002). 
10 
 BIS Review 51/2003
