 M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: The Bank of Thailand’s new Data Management 
System 
Speech  by  Mr  M  R  Pridiyathorn  Devakula,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  inauguration 
ceremony of The Financial Institutions Electronic Data Submission for the Data Management System 
Project (DMS), Bangkok, 1 October 2003. 
 The Deputy Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance  
Managers from financial institutions  
The Managing Director of IBM (Thailand) Company Limited  
Bank of Thailand(cid:146)s executives  
All staff of the Data Management System Project  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is an honor for me to have such a great opportunity for today(cid:146)s inauguration ceremony for the Data 
Management  System,  or  the  DMS.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  has  thus  far  developed  the  system  upon 
early  stage  of  the  project,  with  full  implementation  of  latest  information  technology  advancement  to 
enhance the efficiency of data management system. Major objectives include the reduction of burden 
borne  by  data  compilers,  excessive  data  quantity  and  redundancy  in  the  system,  improved 
management on data collection and compilation procedures to obtain more complete and up-to-date 
information.  
In order to achieve such ultimate objectives, the Bank of Thailand therefore has deemed it appropriate 
to revise the organization  structure; that  is,  with complete transfers of all data  management related 
operations  pertaining  to  all  various  departments  toward  a  single  control  center  under  the  Data 
Management  Group.  Data  management  system  development  project  was  then  initiated,  in  order  to 
ensure that all Bank of Thailand(cid:146)s data management routines are well consistent and in accordance 
with normal standard. With this regard, the Data Management Group would act as the owner of the 
project.  In  addition,  as  the  project  itself  is  very  crucial,  which  could  create  some  wide  impacts 
throughout  the  organization,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  realizes  its  significance  and  hence  assigning  a 
group  of  high-ranking  officials  in  forms  of  the  Steering  Committee  to  closely  monitor  the  progress 
along the way. The committee panel is led by the Assistant Governor, Information System while I also 
serve as the project sponsor to ensure that the data management system project could well progress 
in accordance with the pre-scheduled plan.  
As for the roles of financial institutions which are major providers for a good deal of financial data in 
the system, most institutions have to bear high burden, both human labor resources as well as other 
expenses for data submission under the current system. With the implementation of the new system, 
most institutions unanimously provide great cooperation - to create comprehensive data transmission 
network  that  could  accommodate  all  data  transfer  demands  in  time.  Today(cid:146)s  opening  ceremony 
presents the first phase of the financial institution electronic data submission project.  
From today onwards, financial institutions(cid:146) submission of over 200 hard copy and CRF reports would 
be substituted by merely 41 data sets. Consequently, this would more or less lessen the burden and 
make it more convenient for financial institutions to report data to the Bank of Thailand.  
The second phase of the project, which is scheduled to start on 2nd January 2004, would involve the 
implementation  of  the  electronic  data  submission  on  financial  institutions(cid:146)  foreign  exchange 
transactions. Whether the project could meet the setforth schedule very much depends upon continual 
support from every participating financial institutions.  
The third phase of the project involves the economic data system and is scheduled to commence its 
operation on 2nd July 2004. Each set of economic statistics would be compiled by its corresponding 
official organizations while the degree of success of the electronic data transfer and submission would 
mostly depend on the readiness of the government agencies. At present, there are quite a number of 
project  initiatives  which  have  already  been  implemented;  for  instance,  the  EMIS  project,  which  is  a 
joint  project  in  conjunction  with  the  Fiscal  Policy  Office,  Ministry  of  Finance.  The  project  would  link 
databases of 4 participating agencies; namely, the Fiscal Policy Office, the National Budget Bureau, 
the Bank of Thailand and the National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB). With this 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 1
 regard,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  would  inform  about  the  data  linkages  with  the  Fiscal  Policy  Office, 
accordingly.  
And finally, I hereby would like to take this opportunity to thank all financial institutions, the Bank of 
Thailand  executives,  all  staff  in  the  DMS  project,  the  IBM  (Thailand)  Company  Limited  including  all 
related officials who greatly help push this project along the way throughout its first phase. I also hope 
to see this type of mutual cooperation continue until the project becomes fully completed.  
Now, it(cid:146)s the right moment, I hereby would officially commence the financial institution data submission 
and transfer under the data management system.  
2 
 BIS Review 43/2003
