Jaime Caruana: The importance of transparency and market discipline 
approaches in the New Capital Accord  
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Jaime  Caruana,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain  and  Chairman  of  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Market  Discipline  Conference,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Chicago and BIS, Chicago, 1 November 2003. 
 Overview 
Good morning. I would like to thank President Moskow, Malcolm Knight, and the staff of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Chicago and of the Bank for International Settlements for organising and hosting this 
timely conference. It is a pleasure for me to join your discussion in Chicago today. I can think of few 
venues better situated to talk about markets and to explore the links between transparency, corporate 
governance, and the role markets can play to encourage prudent risk taking. 
Bank regulators in recent years have begun to view markets as an ally to our system of supervision. 
We have consequently sought to incorporate market discipline directly into the supervisory framework. 
Markets  value  well  capitalised  and  well  managed  institutions  as  much  as  supervisors  do,  and  can 
create  rewards  for  banks  that  manage  their  risks  appropriately.  Yet  banks  can  be  very  complex 
institutions and no market discipline is possible without widespread public access to timely, accurate, 
and  comprehensive  information  on  a  bank’s  exposures,  its  risk  management  processes,  and  its 
outlook for the future. 
I’d  like  to  discuss  this  morning  why  the  Basel  Committee  believes  that  applying  transparency  and 
market discipline approaches in the New Capital Accord will help us achieve our objectives to reinforce 
the safety and soundness of the banking system.  
My  first  point  will  be  that,  despite  its  name,  the  New  Capital  Accord  is  about  much  more  than  just 
capital. It is also about maintaining a level playing field and about strengthening incentives to foster 
sound  risk  management  through  three  pillars:  risk  sensitive  minimum  capital  requirements, 
coordinated  supervisory  review  and  -  importantly,  given  the  theme  of  this  conference  -  enhanced 
market  discipline 
therefore  much  more 
comprehensive than its 1988 forerunner.  
Second,  I’ll  comment  on  the  rationale  behind  the  compound  approach  followed  by  the  Basel 
Committee that blends rules, discretion, and market-based incentives. It could be viewed as a portfolio 
of  different  policy  approaches  that  allow  supervisors  to  achieve  or  at  least  draw  close  to  a  kind  of 
efficient frontier. 
Third,  I’ll  share  with  you  key  issues  that  the  Committee  faced  in  drafting  the  market  discipline 
component of the New Accord and, specifically, I will mention some of the concerns that arose in our 
public consultations. Mainly: 
• 
• 
• 
Finally, I will review the present status of the Accord, the significant progress made in our last meeting 
in Madrid and I will outline the next steps in its rapid finalisation, as well as our plans for keeping it fit 
for the future.  
Proprietary versus public information 
Principles versus Rules 
Consistency of Accounting Standards and the New Basel Accord 
transparency.  The  New  Accord 
through  greater 
is 
Basel II: a new, comprehensive approach to achieve greater financial stability 
To  begin,  I  would  like  to  re-emphasise  the  importance  of  market  discipline  to  banking  supervision, 
especially in a rapidly changing environment. Supervisors seek improvements in the public’s access to 
information  on  a  bank’s  condition  precisely  to  bolster  the  ability  of  rating  agencies,  of  business 
counterparties, and even of investors or depositors to evaluate the profile of a bank’s risks and the 
quality  of  its  controls.  Yet  as  safety  and  soundness  regulators,  we  wish  to  fortify  the  stability  and 
resilience of the financial system. In our view this goal requires not just greater transparency, but also 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 1
significant advances in the state of the art of risk management and adequate capital when unexpected 
losses materialise. 
For the first time, the Capital Accord will include not only explicit economic incentives expressed in the 
minimum  capital  requirements  but  also  implicit  incentives  built  into  the  processes  for  supervisory 
review and market disclosure.  
I think it is helpful to recall why so many central banks, regulatory agencies, and commercial banks 
have devoted their best resources to ensuring the success of the New Accord. The existing Accord, as 
you know, was already considered a milestone in banking regulation. It offered the first internationally 
accepted  “yardstick”  for  capital  adequacy  and  a  simple  measure  of  risk.  It  had  received  praise  for 
reversing  a  downward  trend  in  bank  capital  levels  and  for  serving  as  a  benchmark  measure  of  a 
bank’s financial health around the world.  
But the 1988 Accord was a blunt instrument that quickly fell behind the times. Advances in technology, 
in  banking  products,  and  in  risk  management  changed  the  way  that  leading  banks  measure  and 
manage  their  risks.  By  the  mid-1990’s, bankers and supervisors  agreed  that  the  original  Accord  no 
longer offered the largest and most sophisticated organisations a meaningful measure of risk. 
Under the leadership of William McDonough, former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York and my predecessor as chairman of the Basel Committee, the Committee seized the opportunity 
to achieve more than a simple update of the capital requirements. Bill brought tireless energy to the 
project and convinced industry leaders, bank supervisors, and central bankers that we should pursue 
a far greater objective that would incorporate market discipline and also encourage advances in risk 
management across the industry.  
While  he  has  moved  on  to  new  challenges  as  head  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight 
Board  in  Washington,  the  U.S.  delegation  to  the  Basel  Committee  remains  in  excellent  hands.  The 
hard work of leaders such as Roger Ferguson, the Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve, and Jerry 
Hawke, the U.S. Comptroller of the Currency, and of other U.S. supervisors in the negotiations, has 
strengthened the quality of the capital rules. They have helped ensure that the New Accord will be 
flexible, forward-looking, and fit for the service of twenty-first century banking. 
Basel II: a blend of reinforcing policy approaches 
The  long-term  objective  of  fostering  greater  financial  stability  led  to  our  decision  to  supplement  the 
revised  minimum  capital  requirements,  which  constitute  the  first  pillar  of  the  New  Accord,  with  two 
equally important pillars.  
Although  this  may  be  an  oversimplification,  one  could  argue  that  each  of  the  three  pillars  can  be 
viewed as representing a different policy approach for a regulatory/supervisory framework. The first 
pillar emphasises the adoption of uniform rules. The second pillar relies more on the use of discretion 
in setting requirements for individual banks. And the third pillar can be expressive of a market-based 
approach.  
Each of these choices individually considered has its merits, but also certain downsides. The point I 
want to make is that the risk/reward features of each of the three options - rules, discretion and market 
discipline - have their own particularities and are not totally correlated. From a portfolio theory point of 
view it could be argued that the optimum result is achieved through using a combination of all three 
approaches, and that this combination is far better than any of the individual options alone. 
Rules constitute a very direct approach and one that offers the greatest clarity to institutions on what 
supervisors  expect  from  banks,  thereby  leading  to  a  higher  level  of  transparency  from  both  the 
perspective of the banks and the supervisors, and promoting comparability between institutions. 
However,  adopting  a  rules-based  option  alone,  even  if  they  are  market  friendly,  entails  certain 
disadvantages. It tends to be inflexible and therefore might preclude innovation. It could also fail to 
take account of bank or business line specificities. 
This is why the Committee decided to complement the minimum capital requirements with the second 
pillar, known as supervisory review. This allows a discretionary approach according to the situation of 
specific banks or types of business - very much like the principles-based policy approach. The benefits 
of  such  an  approach  are  flexibility  and  adaptability  to  specific  needs,  both  now  and  over  time  as 
situations and responses change.  
2 
 BIS Review 47/2003
But this approach alone would also have its shortcomings. Market participants could find it difficult to 
compare  banks.  The  lack  of  a  common  standard  across  institutions  might  actually  reduce 
transparency,  since  markets  might  not  know  or  understand  why  supervisors  established  particular 
requirements for certain banks but not for others. This approach alone could also raise competitive 
equality problems, making it more difficult to ensure a level playing field, one of the key objectives of 
the Basel Accord. 
The  third  option  would  be  a  market-driven  solution.  As  I  have  already  said,  the  Committee  has 
recognised the importance of market discipline in the third pillar of the New Accord. It draws on the 
power of markets to create strong incentives for banks, incentives to help ensure that banks manage 
their risks properly and do not hold unrealistically low amounts of capital for their risk.  
There is a lot of merit in this approach, yet all of us know that markets sometimes behave inefficiently. 
They can overreact to certain minor events yet still overlook significant indicators of risk in the short 
run. Likewise, markets are not always able to capture some externalities on their own, such as the 
interests of the broader public. They sometimes focus on the immediate needs of direct participants 
rather than those of depositors or customers or they can be too short-sighted in their time horizon. I 
think  the  thoughtful  comments  made by  Malcolm  D.  Knight  yesterday  about  gaps and  limitations of 
market discipline clarify these kinds of issues most constructively.  
So  it  is  clear  that  no  single  one  of  these  three  options  provides  all  of  the  benefits  that  supervisors 
seek. We want rules to provide clarity and strong incentives. We want the ability to use discretion to 
manage  diversity,  to  tailor  requirements  to  the  specific  businesses  of  each  bank.  Finally,  we  want 
markets  to  provide  economic  incentives  for  institutions  to  improve  bank  management  and  disclose 
information that is relevant to end-users’ needs.  
What I am saying is that the “efficient frontier” can best be achieved through a combination of the three 
pillars,  given  the  reinforcing/diversification  effects  of  each.  Each  pillar  provides  something  that  the 
other cannot and is essential to achieving our overall objective of financial stability.  
I  realise  that  this  presentation  of  the  three  pillars  as  items  of  a  portfolio  of  policy  options  is  an 
oversimplification, but I think it helps us visualise why we think that the most “efficient frontier” involves 
a mixture of minimum rules, tempered by supervisory discretion, and supplemented by market-based 
incentives.  
Current industry practices and issues that arose in consultations 
Let me now move to current industry practices and how transparency is incorporated into the Basel 
framework.  
In  deciding  to  revise  the  1988  Accord,  the  Basel  Committee  thought  carefully  about  what 
improvements to banks’ public reporting would mirror the New Accord’s incentives-based approach to 
foster  improvements  in  risk  management.  In  recent  years,  the  Committee  has  noted  some 
improvements in the quality of bank reporting worldwide. Annual surveys conducted by the Committee 
suggest that the extent of banks’ public disclosures has increased markedly in some areas.  
Still, important deficiencies remain. For example, in 2001 - the most recent date for which comparative 
global information is available - the most prevalent disclosures covered accounting and presentation 
policies, on a bank’s capital structure and its measures of capital adequacy, and, for those that had 
them, on the kind of market risk models the bank used. Few banks disclosed much about their credit 
risk models, the types of credit risk mitigation techniques that they employed, or even the external or 
internal ratings assigned to their credit exposures.  
The relative paucity of data available publicly on a typical bank’s credit risk profile appears inconsistent 
with  the  fact  that,  for  most  banks,  credit  risk  remains  the  single  most  important  source  of  potential 
losses.  At  present,  market  participants  seem  to  know  only  little  about  the  extent  of  most  banks’ 
exposure to credit risk. One could conclude that it seems unrealistic today to assume that they have 
enough knowledge of a bank’s position to exercise properly a benign influence on its handling of credit 
risk. Disclosure practices do not seem to have kept pace with the very rapid evolution in the ways that 
banks take on, measure, and ultimately manage their risk positions.  
BIS Review 47/2003 
 3
Incorporating Market Discipline into the New Basel Accord 
To  improve  the  ability  of  markets  to  contribute  to  greater  stability  in  the  banking  sector,  the  New 
Accord  will  contain  a  series  of  disclosure  requirements.  The  Committee  views  Pillar  3  as  a  further 
refinement  of  accounting  standards  requirements  as  they  should  apply  to  banks  in  the  light  of  the 
specific risks they face. Some of the requirements may furthermore be tied to a bank’s eligibility for 
adopting an advanced approach to credit or operational risk or for recognising the benefits of particular 
instruments and transactions in mitigating risks. 
 We based our decisions on the information that should be disclosed on the following principles: that 
market  participants  require  an  understanding  of  how  the  capital  requirements  apply  to  the 
consolidated banking organisation; that they should know what risks banks face, to what degree, and 
how they assess those risks; and that they should have details on what capital they hold.  
More generally, by emphasising principles in the disclosure rules - that banks should have a formal 
disclosure policy approved by the board, that internal measurement tools must be credible, that they 
must adequately capture risk, and that they must be used by banks in the daily management of their 
operations  and  not  just  for  regulatory  capital  purposes  -  transparency  may  actually  result  in  more 
consistency in the application of advanced approaches than detailed quantitative criteria.   
Issues That Arose in Consultation:  
The  process  for  transcribing  these  principles  into  rules  for  the  New  Accord  has  involved  extensive 
discussion among supervisors, representatives of the accounting profession, and financial institutions. 
This  past  summer  alone,  for  example,  the  Committee  received  over  200  public  comments  on  the 
proposals  set  out  in  our  third  consultative  paper,  or  “CP3”  as  we  call  it.  The  third  pillar  attracted  a 
degree of controversy among many banks mainly in earlier drafts of the rules, but thanks to the very 
positive discussions that the Committee had with the industry and with accounting standards-setting 
bodies, all the pillars of CP3 now enjoy broad support. This brings me to the next part of my address, 
in which I’ll cover the key concerns that arose during consultations. 
Proprietary versus public information 
Certainly, an early concern about the market discipline component of the New Accord was that the 
required  disclosures  appeared  to  go  far  beyond  what  banks  traditionally  reported  publicly.  In  some 
institutions’  opinion,  the  Committee  was  seeking  to  require  the  disclosure  of  information  previously 
considered confidential. While the Committee is mindful of the concern that some information should 
remain  private,  we  believe  that  concepts  of  public  versus  proprietary  information  require  some 
reflection. In order to determine whether information should be disclosed, consideration should also be 
given  to  end-users’  needs.  For  example,  in  order  for  shareholders,  creditors,  and  counterparties  to 
appreciate the risks of their own exposures to a bank, they must understand that bank’s appetite for 
risk and its approach to, and methodologies for, managing risk. What should drive this debate is what 
a  bank  itself  would  want  to  know  before  making  an  investment  or  credit  decision,  rather  than  the 
concerns that some have about what had formerly been considered secret.  
The  Committee  believes  it  has  struck  an  appropriate  balance  between  meaningful  disclosure  and 
protection of proprietary and confidential information. 
Principles versus Rules 
A second concern that arose in consultations was the Committee’s decision to adopt specific rules for 
disclosure, rather than articulate broad principles for transparency. But on this point, many institutions 
seem  caught  up  in  a  contradiction.  On  the  one  hand,  banks  suggest  that  we  avoid  overly  detailed 
guidance on public reporting that might create burdensome and inflexible rules. On the other, nearly 
all banks have urged the Committee to provide clarity to ensure the consistent application of the New 
Accord  across  jurisdictions.  Understandably,  some  banks  are  concerned  that,  in  the  absence  of 
specific rules, competitors in other countries might be subject to less scrutiny than they are.  
We recognise that a principles-based approach offers benefits, especially in terms of simplicity and 
flexibility. But our main intention is to offer markets a clearer picture of a bank’s risk profile, regardless 
of what jurisdiction that bank may call home. To promote both greater insight into a bank’s true risks 
and a more level playing field for all banks, we advocate disclosure rules based on principles rather 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2003
than looser principles that might be subject to local interpretation. Likewise, the Committee rejected 
proposals for supplemental disclosures that would be optional under the New Accord.  
This  has  admittedly  resulted  in  disclosure  requirements  that  are  more  detailed  and  perhaps  less 
elegant  than  a  simple  expression  of  principles  might  be.  But  perhaps  supervisors  can  take  some 
comfort from the physicist who recommended that “if you are out to describe the truth, leave elegance 
to the tailor.”  
Consistency of Accounting Standards and the New Basel Accord 
One  cannot  discuss  transparency  and  market  discipline  without  considering  the  mechanics  through 
which financial data are recorded and reported. And this brings me to a final key observation raised in 
comment  letters,  namely  the  industry’s  position  that  if  we  are  to  leverage  market  discipline  through 
better  reporting,  the  Committee  should  clarify  the  differences  between  accounting  standards  and 
supervisory objectives.  
Numerous  institutions  have  called  on  the  Committee  to  continue  to  align  the  regulatory  framework 
more closely with the converging standards in accounting worldwide. Many industry representatives 
have noted quite correctly that a greater degree of accordance is warranted especially now that the 
New Basel Accord includes explicit disclosure requirements intended to promote greater insight into a 
bank’s  risk  profile.  Likewise,  the  Basel  Committee’s  treatment  of  provisions  and  the  valuation  of 
financial instruments must keep pace with changes in the relevant accounting standards.  
We have made a considerable effort to see that the narrower focus of Pillar 3 does not conflict with the 
broader accounting requirements, and we have liaised closely with our colleagues in the International 
Accounting  Standards  Board  in  pursuit  of  this  objective.  In  fact,  the  Committee  views  Pillar  3  as  a 
further refinement of the accounting standards requirements as they should apply to banks in the light 
of  the  specific  risks  that  they  face.  The  Committee  is  convinced  that  such  specificity  is  both 
appropriate and necessary for prudential reasons.  
Market  discipline,  and  hence  financial  stability,  is  strengthened  when  accounting  and  disclosure 
requirements reflect sound risk management principles and represent the control practices that banks 
adopt.  Consequently,  we  recognise  our  responsibility  to  participate  actively  in  the  development  of 
national  and  international  accounting  standards.  When  designing  standards  for  the  disclosure  of 
components of capital, for loan reporting, and for other topics of mutual concern, we have sought out 
the views of accounting standards-setting bodies. This dialogue will continue. 
Where regulatory and accounting principles may not yet be fully consistent, we have sought to align 
our  requirements  as  best  as  possible  with  international  accounting  standards  and  to  resolve  other 
matters  reasonably  and  based  on  our  understanding  of  the  potential  direction  that  accounting 
standards might take in the future. Because we recognise that there is still much to be done in this 
area we will continue to monitor pillar 3 in the light of accounting and market developments. I should 
add  that  we  are  seeking  new  opportunities  for  discussion  with  accounting  standards-setting  bodies 
and private sector accounting professionals. 
The Status of the New Accord  
The  Committee  is  currently  reviewing  carefully  these  responses  and  other  issues  that  the  industry 
raised. In relation to pillar 3, we are evaluating closely what should be reported publicly, versus what 
can remain confidential. We are refining the rules so that they will help secure a more level playing 
field  without  being  overly  burdensome.  We  are  aligning  our  reporting  requirements  with  those 
emerging from accounting standards.  
In terms of the way forward, as you may know, in mid-October the Committee reached an important 
agreement on a work plan for taking these and other issues into account, and significant progress was 
made on major issues. What is most important to the Committee is the quality and consistency of the 
new Accord. At the same time, we recognised the need to provide banks with as much certainty as 
possible while they plan and prepare for the adoption of the new rules. In our last meeting in Madrid, 
the members of the Committee agreed on the importance of finalising the New Accord expeditiously 
and in a manner that is technically and prudentially sound.  
We noted in a statement to the press that we expect to address the remaining issues and complete 
the text of the New Accord in the coming months and no later than mid-year 2004. This period of time 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 5
will  also  allow  us  to  take  careful  note  of  valuable  information  coming  from  domestic  consultations 
under  way  in  some  jurisdictions,  including  the  process  for  the  Advance  Notice  of  Proposed 
Rulemaking in the United States.  
The  Committee  also  discussed  the  importance  of  ensuring  that  the  calibration  of  the  New  Accord 
achieves its objectives. Accordingly, prior to implementation, a further review of the calibration will be 
conducted  on  the  basis  of  additional  information,  such  as  further  impact  assessments  in  some 
jurisdictions and the monitoring of banks’ parallel calculations. 
In  terms  of  specific  issues,  a  number  of  areas  were  identified  where  major  improvements  were 
possible:  the  expected  versus  unexpected  losses  calibration  issue,  securitisation,  credit  cards 
commitments and risk mitigation techniques. At present, we have offered for public review a proposal 
to  resolve  a  fundamental  concern  raised  by  the  industry  on  the  treatment  of  expected  versus 
unexpected losses. I would encourage those interested to read the statement outlining our proposed 
revision on our website and to share any thoughts you may have by the end of this year. We have also 
simplified  the  proposals  for  securitisation  exposures,  as  we  decided  to  replace  the  “Supervisory 
Formula” approach to unrated tranches with a simpler rule.  
Also, as we draw closer to finalisation, the Committee has intensified its efforts to facilitate a consistent 
implementation  of  the  New  Accord.  A  set  of  principles  has  been  outlined  for  the  cross-border 
application  of  the  New  Accord  to  promote  closer  practical  co-operation  and  information  exchange 
among supervisors. These implementation issues are very important to promote consistency and to 
reduce the burden on internationally active banks. 
There  are,  however,  other  areas  that  we  can  already  identify  as  part  of  our  future  work  plan  to 
advance  risk  management,  to  promote  greater  transparency,  and  to  strengthen  the  stability  of  the 
financial  sector.  Given  that  I  have  mentioned  in  this  presentation  the  benefits  of  utilising  the 
diversification effects of different approaches in the search for an efficient frontier, I’d like to conclude 
with  just  one  of  the  potential  items  on  our  agenda  for  future  work  once  the  New  Accord  is 
implemented.  
This  item  would  be  to  consider  the  benefits  of  full  credit  risk  models  in  the  calculation  of  minimum 
capital requirements. In theory, a bank’s capital requirements would then reflect to the greatest degree 
the economic benefits of diversification in its balance sheet. In fact, the Committee did at one point 
evaluate whether advanced banks should be permitted to estimate the degree to which their assets 
might behave similarly or default together in the New Basel Accord.  
As  you  know,  we  decided  that  we  are  not  quite  there  yet.  We  know  that  some  banks  are  making 
commendable progress in thinking about ways to estimate the value of diversification. Nonetheless, 
we remain concerned about the degree of confidence one might have in those estimates, given the 
relative lack of data available. Likewise, we have not yet seen evidence that there is a critical mass of 
banks that would today consistently meet the “use” test spelled out in the New Accord. In the coming 
years, and we can start very soon, we look forward to continuing this dialogue with banks, banking 
associations, and researchers to find ways to move Basel in the direction of full credit risk models. 
Although  banks  and  supervisors  have  much  to  do  in  the  years  ahead,  we  are  confident  that  the 
development of an incentives-based capital framework, accompanied by more consistent and focused 
supervisory review and a concurrent enhancement of market discipline, will improve the management 
of  risk  across  the  industry,  promote  broader  financial  stability  and  resilience,  and  ensure  that  the 
banking system is better able to promote sustainable growth in the economy.  
6 
 BIS Review 47/2003
