K J Udeshi: India’s potential in the banking and financial sector 
Inaugural  address  by  Ms  K  J  Udeshi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Conference on Banking and Trade Finance, organised by the International Chamber of Commerce, 
New Delhi, 9 December 2003. 
 Mr. Kanwar, Mr. Kiefer, and distinguished participants in the conference, 
I am indeed privileged to be invited to inaugurate this conference and especially so, as this is the first 
time  that  the  International  Chamber  of  Commerce  Banking  Commission  Meeting  is  taking  place  in 
India.  The  contribution  made  by  ICC  in  standardization  is  well-known  but  perhaps  what  is  not  so 
well-known is that the ICC also contributes to making business policy by publishing policy statements 
and reports and laying down guidelines, goals and rules. This conference would, therefore, provide a 
forum for interaction between Indian bankers and corporates and their counterparts from other parts of 
the  world.  It  is  also  an  excellent  opportunity  to  project  India’s  potential  in  the  banking  and  financial 
sector. Kudos to Mr. Kanwar for having arranged this conference in India. 
The  Indian  financial  sector  reforms  launched  a  decade  ago  have  transformed  the  operating 
environment  of  the  financial  sector  from  an  administered  regime  to  a  competitive  market  based 
system. The reforms are an on-going process. There is increasing evidence of strong inter-linkages 
between markets. In the macro economic and financial spheres, inflation has been contained, external 
debt indicators have vastly improved, the exchange rate is flexible and the country is free of financial 
repression.  The  trade  account  is  open and  India has become  much  more  integrated  with the  world 
economy. The economy has also become more resilient to shocks, both domestic and external.  
The Indian economy has emerged as one of the fastest growing emerging market economies and the 
Indian  banking  sector  is  perceived,  as  being  the  best  performer  in  Asia.  The  RBI  has  been  at  the 
forefront of upgrading the risk systems of the Indian banking system. It is, in fact, heartening to report 
that  the  risk  capabilities  of  our  banks  have  improved  systematically  over  the  past  decade.  The 
robustness of the banking sector is witnessed by a consistent rise in Return on Equity, strong earnings 
momentum, improved loan book quality and unrealized gains on treasury portfolios. There are some 
structural  factors  that  could  drive  credit  growth,  namely,  the  emergence  of  consumer  loans,  the 
shrinking of spreads on alternate assets and a higher risk appetite because of stronger foreclosure 
norms and statutory support for enforcement of creditor rights.  
The Reserve Bank has initiated a host of measures for the creation of a competitive environment and 
improve efficiency in the process of financial intermediation.  
It  is  important  that  banks  continue  to  adequately  finance  activities  that  are  of  crucial  importance  to 
growth. The fostering of entrepreneurship in new industrial activities, in the emerging services sector 
and other non traditional activities, will all require proactive financing. 
It  may  be  of  interest  to  the  ICC  Banking  Commission  that  India  has  been  closely  associated  with 
various standard setting bodies and has been taking active part in the work of several key international 
institutions devoted to the task of developing and promoting implementation of financial standards and 
codes.  Although  we  are  not  a  member  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF),  we  were  one  of  the 
countries  specially  requested  to  help  its  Task  Force  on  the  Implementation  of  Standards  and 
subsequently, the Follow Up Group on Incentives for Implementation of Standards.  
The Reserve Bank’s Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes (Chairman: 
Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy)  has  assessed  Indian  regulations  against  international  best  practices  in  order  to 
facilitate  positioning  of  international  financial  standards  and  codes  in  relevant  areas  of  the  financial 
system in India and to guide the overall process of implementation of appropriate changes in respect 
of various segments of the financial system. India is one of the countries that has sought participation 
in the joint IMF-World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP). As part of the Reports 
on Observances of Standards and Codes (ROSCs), India’s compliance in respect of standards and 
codes  has  already  been  assessed  in  respect  of  six  codes,  viz.,  Monetary  and  Financial  Policy 
Transparency, Fiscal Transparency, Banking Supervision, Securities Market Regulation, Payment and 
Settlement  System  and  Corporate  Governance.  Currently,  assessment  is  being  undertaken  with 
regard to Special Data Dissemination Standards. 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 1
The Narasimham Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (1998) had observed that a legal framework 
that clearly defines the rights and liabilities of parties to contracts and provides for speedy resolution of 
dispute  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  efficient  trade  and  commerce,  especially  for  financial  intermediation. 
Several legislative initiatives have been undertaken in the banking and financial sector.  
The bills introduced in Parliament for amendment of the Banking Regulation Act will encourage foreign 
banks to set up subsidiaries and attract foreign investors. Historically, foreign banks have always been 
allowed to operate in India and have enjoyed national treatment and a level-playing field. With a view 
to developing trade and payment relationship, we have encouraged foreign banks from other countries 
which did not have historic links to establish branches in India. I may add that the WTO commitments 
on banking services has been fulfilled.  
A critical issue of increasing international concern is the question of money laundering. The impact of 
money  laundering  is  now  beginning  to  extend  from  economic  crimes  to  international  terrorism.  As 
financial transactions grow more complex, it becomes more difficult for banks to maintain a customer 
profile. The challenge, therefore, is to ensure that banks know their customers without hindering the 
smooth flow of financial transactions.  
The  Reserve  Bank  has  issued  several  guidelines  to  banks and non-banking financial  companies  to 
implement the `Know Your Customer’ principle. The basic aim is to prevent banks being unwittingly 
used as the channel of funds derived from criminal activity or financing terrorism. The guidelines relate 
to  identification  of  depositors  and  institution  of  systems  and  procedures  to  control  financial  frauds, 
identify  money  laundering  and  suspicious  activities  and  scrutinize  /  monitor  large-value  cash 
transactions. 
In India, recognizing the paramount role of exports in the overall growth process of the economy, the 
Government  of  India  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  have,  over  time,  taken  several  measures  to 
ensure  adequate  flow  of  credit  towards  export  related  activities.  The  important  measures  include 
rationalisation and liberalization of export credit interest rates, flexibility in repayment/pre-payment of 
pre-shipment  credit,  simplification  of  procedures  relating  to  exports  (like  direct  dispatch  of  shipping 
documents and enhancement in normal period for realization of export proceeds), flexibility to banks to 
source foreign currency funds for granting pre-shipment credit in foreign currency (PCFC) and export 
bill rediscounting (EBR), scheme and introduction of a transparent reporting system for export credit 
interest rates. 
At  present,  exporters  have  the  option  to  avail  of  pre-shipment  and  post-shipment  credit  in  foreign 
currency from banks in India. In order to encourage competition among banks and also to increase 
flow  of  credit  to  the  export  sector,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  liberalized  interest  rates  on  local 
currency  export  credit  effective  May  1,  2003  for  pre-shipment  credit  above  180  days  and  post-
shipment credit above 90 days. In the context of globalization, however, what one needs to keep in 
mind is that even though finance is a critical ingredient of production, what matters even more is the 
demand for the product and its competitiveness on quality considerations. Finance can only act as a 
facilitator when these two preconditions are satisfied. This is vindicated by the recent surge in growth 
of exports of automotive components and C.D. Roms. 
The  initiative  with  regard  to  the  setting  up  of  an  Electronic  Data  Interchange  (EDI)  in  the  banking 
sector for the benefit of the exporters and importers bears mentioning. EDI provides several benefits to 
the corporates such as operational efficiencies and cost savings by elimination of paperwork, logistical 
benefits  by  better  scheduling  and  reduced  stockholding  etc.,  and  strategic  benefits  through 
competitive  and  advantage  and  access  to  new  markets.  Under  the  EDI  project,  one  of  the  major 
benefits  for  the  exporters  is  that  the  RBI  has  abolished  GR  forms  for  export  transactions.  The 
exporters can now fill up a common Statutory Declaration Form (SDF) for the customs from where the 
data  relevant  to  the  banks  and  the  RBI  can  be  extracted.  Presently,  EDI  is  working  at  23  ports 
covering 80 per cent of exports. Under the EDI project, bank branches at 114 export intensive centers 
identified by the Ministry of Commerce are to be provided connectivity with the customs authorities.  
The Reserve Bank has provided the enabling conditions for promotion of trade and investment, both 
domestic  and  international,  by  ensuring  adequate  liquidity,  a  competitive  interest  rate  regime 
measures  to  encourage  decentralized  decision  making  and  ease  procedures  in  the  credit  delivery 
systems and most importantly financial stability in the midst of a world economy beset by uncertainty 
and  recessionary  trends.  It  is  now  necessary  for  market  participants  to  have  enough  confidence  to 
make investment decisions.  
2 
 BIS Review 56/2003
The Reserve Bank, on its part, would continue to ensure financial stability, strengthening of prudential 
norms  with  the  strategy  of  convergence  of  international  best  practice,  consistent  with  our  specific 
needs, as also progressive strengthening of the supervisory framework. Accordingly, the focus of our 
policy  initiatives  would  be  on  streamlining  banking  operations  in  order  to  reduce  transaction  costs, 
infusing  flexibility  into  the  system,  upgrading  risk  management  systems,  enhancing  the  level  of 
compliance  by  banks  with  accounting  standards,  operationalising  consolidated  accounting  practices 
and last and most important of all, providing the public with a financial system they can trust. 
While there is substantial progress in the financial sector reforms initiated in 1991, the accent at the 
present  time  is  an  implementation  of  the  reforms  at  the  grass  roots  level.  In  this  context,  the 
endeavour  is  to  facilitate  ease  of  transactions  by  the  common  persons,  further  broadening  of  the 
consultative process and continued emphasis on the institutional capacity to support growth consistent 
with stability. Furthermore, the credit delivery system is being strengthened to ensure that financing 
gaps do not constrain the acceleration of growth.  
Governor, Dr. Y.V.Reddy, as part of the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for the Year 
2003-04 has announced a number of initiatives to bring about a significant and enduring improvement 
in the functioning of the financial system. The financial Sector now takes increasing challenges and 
complexities  in  the  context  of  globalization  and  risk  management.  A  Standing  Technical  Advisory 
Committee on Financial Regulation has been set up by the Governor which, through a consultative 
process, will endeavour to simplify and rationalize the regulatory regime to move towards a clear and 
unambiguous framework. 
In another initiative, Standing Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services 
provided by the RBI is being set up to bench mark the current level of service and to enhance the 
timeliness  and  quality  of  these  services.  The  Committee  will  also  coordinate  with  the  Ad  hoc 
Committee on Customer Services being set up by each bank. These initiatives would, it is expected, 
bring about a significant improvement in customer service in the financial sector. 
The  central  objective  of  financial  reforms  is  to  attain  a  significant  improvement  in  the  efficiency  of 
financial intermediation and the endeavour of the RBI would be to provide a regulatory framework in 
which economic agents can perform their activities in an optimal manner. In this endeavour, the RBI 
would approach issues in a collaborative manner, and in this, seek the hand of market participants.  
I wish your deliberations all success. 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 3
